Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L59 (upload2)-final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.650418
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 59                           Date: 29th May 2012


We have been talking about generating the mind generation  (also  translated
as “mind of enlightenment” in the root text) and assuming  the  aspirational
mind generation that comes with the commitment. On top of that, one  has  to
train  in  the  deeds  of  the  bodhisattvas  in  order  to   achieve   full
enlightenment. You must practise  the  path  that  is  both  unmistaken  and
complete.

The text discusses this wrong concept: there are  people  who  believe  that
enlightenment has to be achieved by placing the mind  in  a  state  that  is
devoid of all thoughts. They believe that, once you  start  to  think  -  it
doesn’t matter what kind of thoughts you may have - thoughts  are  obstacles
to achieving full enlightenment. It is through the practice of placing  your
mind in a state that is devoid of thoughts that one achieves  enlightenment.
This is a wrong concept that we must refute.

Many pages in the text are devoted to refuting  this  wrong  concept.  After
reading and analysing these pages, the end result should be that you are  be
able to realise and convince yourself how placing your mind in such a  state
will never be a cause for full enlightenment.

This is also the position of those opponents who assert that  one  does  not
need to train in the deeds of the bodhisattvas  in  order  to  achieve  full
enlightenment. All one needs to do is to place one’s mind in the state  that
lacks any kind of thought.

Our own system refutes this position. We assert that  in  order  to  achieve
full enlightenment, we need  to  practise  the  combination  of  method  and
wisdom. In order  to  achieve  full  enlightenment,  i.e.,  the  non-abiding
nirvana, we need compassion to eliminate the extreme of nirvana  and  wisdom
to eliminate the extreme of samsara.

You need to  understand  how  compassion  and  wisdom  eliminate  these  two
extremes. But you should not only leave it at that. You  have  to  ascertain
this for yourself. This has to come from investigating  and  thinking  about
this topic again and again until an ascertainment is  achieved.  You  should
be able to explain how:
 • compassion eliminates the extreme of nirvana
 • wisdom eliminates the extreme of samsara

In the text, the opponents bring up another wrong  conception.   They  claim
that as long as your  understanding  or  realisation  of  emptiness  is  not
stable, you need to practise the deeds of the bodhisattvas.  Once  you  have
stabilised your realisation of emptiness, you do not need  the  practice  of
the deeds of the bodhisattvas anymore.

Our reply: That is wrong. Even bodhisattvas on the eighth ground still  have
to practise the deeds of the bodhisattvas.

         A  The presentation in[/based on] the sutras

It also says in the sutras:

         Strong adherence to the six, generosity and so forth, is the action
         of Mara.”
          [?*no verse]
In the [Sutra of the] Three Heaps [?]iit also explains:

         Giving  gifts  falling  into  observing,  guarding   one’s   ethics
         considering it  supreme  ethics  and  so  forth;  these  should  be
         confessed individually.


Also from [the Sutra] Requested by Brahma:

         However much conduct exists, all of it is conceptual. Thorough non-
         conceptuality is enlightenment.
You should not be mistaken with respect to these  statements  (Pages  170  –
171).

The opponents then cite certain scriptural  quotations  that,  according  to
them, assert that one need not practise deeds  such  as  generosity  and  so
forth. They quote, “It also says in the sutras:  ‘Strong  adherence  to  the
six, generosity and so forth, is the action of Mara.” They also  quote  from
the Sutra of the Three Heaps and the Sutra Requested by Brahma.

This section actually gives an  overview  of  the  entire  Buddhadharma.  It
shows the importance of knowing many texts  as  well  as  what  is  said  in
general. It is insufficient to focus on and study  one  text  alone.  It  is
possible then that one may misunderstand the teachings.


         B  The contradiction to the way in which the first passage is
         explained (page 171)


Our position on the first quotation that is cited by the opponents,  “Strong
adherence to the six, generosity and so forth, is the action  of  Mara,”  is
that this statement has to be understood in the correct way. This  statement
does not mean that all forms of generosity are actions of Mara  (or  demonic
activities), but rather instances of generosity that are  motivated  by  the
apprehension of the self of persons and/or the apprehension of the  self  of
phenomena are demonic activities  because  they  become  impure  generosity.
Because it is impure generosity, therefore it is referred to as  the  action
of Mara or a demonic activity.


         C  The contradiction to grasping the words of the second passage
         since, because it actually says: “falling into observing”

Otherwise you would have to say “Giving  should  be  confessed  in  general”
without the need to fall  into  observing  saying  “Bestowing  gifts  having
fallen into observing.” Therefore it follows [/makes sense]  that  this  has
not been taught like that[/in this manner]. In [Kamalashila’s]  Last  Stages
of Meditation it becomes a very crucial  point  [for  Kamalashila]  to  give
this kind of answer, for if this is misunderstood, one will  hold  to  signs
[/characteristics] of a self of persons or phenomena and assert  the  entire
side of conduct to be with signs (Page 171).

For the second quotation,  Lama  Tsongkhapa  says  that  demonic  activities
refer to the practice of generosity and ethics that  are  motivated  by  the
adherence to the self of persons or the self of phenomena. That  has  to  be
case: “Otherwise you would have  to  say  “Giving  should  be  confessed  in
general” without the need to fall into observing[1] saying “Bestowing  gifts
having fallen into observing.” Therefore  it  follows  [/makes  sense]  that
this has not been taught like that[/in this manner].”

In [Kamalashila’s] Last Stages of  Meditation  it  becomes  a  very  crucial
point [for Kamalashila] to  give  this  kind  of  answer,  for  if  this  is
misunderstood, one will hold  to  signs  [/characteristics]  of  a  self  of
persons or phenomena and assert the  entire  side  of  conduct  to  be  with
signs.

    2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4A  It contradicts the teachings that one should rely on
    abandoning negativities and so forth

If the mind of giving  that  thinks  [/thinking]  “I  will  give  away  this
substance” and the mind of restraint that thinks  “I  will  restrain  myself
from[?] this faulty conduct” and all such [?]v   virtuous  conceptions  were
conceptions of a self of phenomena apprehending the three spheres, it  would
make sense for those who have found the view of  selflessness  of  phenomena
{203} to cease them in every way just like hatred, pride, etc. and it  would
be inappropriate to rely on them for that purpose (Page 171).

The  opponents  seem  to  be  saying  that  all  kinds   of   thoughts   are
apprehensions of signs of a self. This  is  not  the  case,  i.e.,  not  all
thoughts are apprehension of signs. Therefore it is incorrect  to  say  that
the virtuous thought, “I shall give away this thing,” and  the  attitude  of
restraint thinking, "I shall refrain from this wrongdoing," are  necessarily
the apprehensions of a self.


    2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4B  The fault that this [assertion] contradicts all
    reasonings and makes it impossible to gain certainty with respect to
    anything

If any conception[?] that thinks “This is this”  were  considered  to  be  a
conception of a self of phenomena that conceives  the  three  spheres,  then
thinking about the good qualities of a[/the] spiritual  teacher,  the  great
significance of the leisures and  endowments,[?]  etc.,  remembering  death,
thinking about the sufferings of the bad migrations, going for  refuge,  and
contemplating that from this action arises that result,  training  in  love,
compassion, and the mind of enlightenment, and training in the trainings  of
the engaging mind of enlightenment  would  be  thoughts  thinking  “This  is
this”, “From  this  that  arises”,  “This  has  these  qualities  and  those
disadvantages”. Since that would  necessarily  just  induce  certainty,  the
conception of a self  of  phenomena  would  increase  more  and  more[?]  as
certainty  with  respect  to  those  [above-mentioned   topics]   increases.
Moreover, the certainty with respect  to  those  paths  would  decrease,  as
certainty with respect to the selflessness of  phenomena  is  nurtured  more
and more. Thereby, the side of conduct and the side of view having  come  to
contradict  each  other[?]  like  hot  and  cold,  a   strong   ascertaining
consciousness with respect to both them could  not  be  generated  for  long
(Page 172)[???].

Therefore it is incorrect to say that  all  thoughts  are  apprehensions  of
true existence. If this was the case, then  when  virtuous  thoughts  become
stronger, that will also imply that one’s  apprehension  of  true  existence
will also  become  stronger.  Conversely,  when  one’s  realisation  of  the
selflessness of persons or phenomena become stronger, then the certainty  of
a virtuous thought, such as the reflection on death and  impermanence,  will
become weaker. In  that  case,  method  and  wisdom  would  become  mutually
exclusive like hot and cold. One will not be beneficial for the other.

         1  Method and wisdom are not contradictory like hot and cold (Page
         172)


Method and wisdom do not contradict one another in this way. When  you  look
at the final object of attainment, the final fruit (result) of the  path  is
the Buddha’s embodiment of form (form body) and embodiment of  truth  (truth
body).  Just as there is no contradiction between these two  bodies  at  the
time of the result, therefore during  the  time  of  the  path,  method  and
wisdom do not contradict one another.


         2  How the two valid cognitions that posit the two truths assist
         one another


         How the two valid cognitions that posit the two truths assist one
         another (Page 172)


The fact is that at the time of  the  result,  these  two  embodiments,  the
embodiment of form and the embodiment of truth, do not contradict  nor  harm
one another. Therefore the causes for achieving  these  two  bodies  at  the
time of the path must be posited to be non-contradictory. The minds  at  the
time of the path that are the causes for achieving the two  bodies  are  the
minds that realise emptiness and dependent-arising.
 • The mind realising emptiness is the cause for the Buddha’s embodiment  of
   truth (or truth body, the dharmakaya).
 • The mind realising  dependent-arising  is  the  cause  for  the  Buddha’s
   embodiment of form (or form body, the rupakaya).

When you understand that dependent-arising is the meaning of  emptiness  and
emptiness is the meaning of dependent-arising, you can see  that  these  two
are not contradictory. You will then find the  intent  of  the  Buddha.  You
have to gain certain knowledge of how these two are  not  contradictory  and
how by bringing them together, one achieves enlightenment.

In order to understand how dependent-arising is the  meaning  of  emptiness,
you must have a good understanding of  the  four  Buddhist  tenets  (or  the
philosophical  schools),  especially  their  presentation   of   the   view.
Therefore it is important to learn the view of the four Buddhist tenets.

Basically there are two positions with regard to the meaning of emptiness:
1. According to the  Consequence  Middle  Way  School  (CMWS),  the  highest
school with the final view, they assert that  all  phenomena  do  not  exist
inherently, that phenomena are inherently empty.

For them, precisely because phenomena do  not  exist  inherently,  therefore
one can talk about the Four Noble  Truths.  The  presentation  of  the  Four
Noble Truths works because phenomena do not inherently exist.  This  is  the
viewpoint of the highest school.

For  the  highest  school,  because  phenomena  do  not  exist   inherently,
therefore they  exist  as  dependently  originated.  Because  phenomena  are
dependently originated, therefore you can posit the Four Noble Truths.  Once
you  can  posit  the  Four  Noble  Truths,  then  you  can  talk  about  the
presentation of the Three Jewels: the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.

2. All the other Buddhist tenets believe that if phenomena are indeed  empty
of existing inherently, the Four Noble Truths will not be able to  work.  If
that is the case, then the Three Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  will
become non-existent. This is the view of the other Buddhist tenets.

These are two completely different positions:
 • The  CMWS  asserts  that  because  phenomena  do  not  exist  inherently,
   therefore things can function. Therefore you  can  talk  about  the  Four
   Noble Truths and the Three Jewels.
 • All other Buddhist tenets assert that if phenomena are empty of  existing
   inherently, then things cannot function.
The final view  is  that  of  the  CMWS:  because  phenomena  do  not  exist
inherently, therefore they exist as dependently originated.
One needs to think deeply on  the  meaning  of  the  emptiness  of  inherent
existence. It does not mean non-existence. It means phenomena do  not  exist
inherently. If phenomena do not exist inherently,  they  have  to  exist  as
dependently originated. When one  has  a  good  understanding  of  dependent
origination, this will induce an understanding of how  everything  is  empty
of existing inherently.  Therefore  it  is  said  that  it  is  possible  to
understand that the meaning of emptiness is dependent- arising and that  the
meaning of dependent-arising is emptiness.

Regarding the quotation from the Sutra Requested by  Brahma,  “However  much
conduct exists, all of  it  is  conceptual.  Thorough  non-conceptuality  is
enlightenment,”  it  is  simply  saying  that  ultimately,   there   is   no
generosity.

Next the text refutes the  assertion  that  enlightenment  can  be  achieved
without  focusing  on  anything  at  all.  In  fact  in  order  to   achieve
enlightenment, you need to focus on different observed objects.


         B  It contradicts the sutras since omniscience does not arise when
         there is no observed object

In the [Sutra of] Inconceivable Secrets it says:

         Son of the lineage, it is like this. For instance, a fire burns due
         to a cause; if the cause is absent it  will  subside.  Likewise,  a
         mind blazes due to an observed object; if the  observed  object  is
         absent, it will subside (Pages 172 – 173)
         .
 This sutra is using an analogy and saying that, in order for  the  mind  to
improve, you must observe certain objects. If you were to think of  nothing,
your mind will not improve.


    2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-6   [Clarification of the position that applies equally
    to sutra and tantra]

         A  [The object of rejection by Kamalashila]

The way in which Master Kamalashila  refuted  mental  inattention  does  not
refute meditation where [the mind] is placed into the view that has  settled
the meaning of the manner of  being  and  placed  single-pointedly  on  that
without mentally attending to anything else. However, it  does  refute  that
the mere placement that places the mind in not conceiving  anything  without
placing it on the  meaning  settled  by  the  view,  the  manner  of  being,
constitutes meditation on emptiness (Page 173)[/emptiness meditation].

The text is saying that Kamalashila is not objecting to  the  meditation  on
emptiness. Let’s say that you have ascertained  the  meaning  of  emptiness.
You then meditate on the meaning of the view that you have ascertained   and
place your  mind  in  meditative  equipoise.  That  kind  of  meditation  on
emptiness is not refuted by Kamalashila.

What Kamalashila is refuting is “the mere placement that places the mind  in
not conceiving anything without placing it on the  meaning  settled  by  the
view, the manner of being,” and thinking that is meditating on the  mode  of
abidance of all phenomena. That is what Kamalashila is refuting.

We don’t have time to go through everything. The  key  points  you  need  to
think about and understand are:
 • Why thought in general is not an obstacle to enlightenment?
 • Why thoughts are not necessarily apprehensions of true existence?
 • Why settling the mind in a state that is devoid  of  thought  will  never
   become the cause for enlightenment?
 • Why we need both method and wisdom to achieve enlightenment?
 • How method and wisdom are complementary?

Please read these sections on your own and think about them. We  don’t  have
time to cover the six perfections but if we find the time in the future,  we
will do so. If not, you have to study them on your own.

Khen Rinpoche: Be your own teacher!

                              ****************
Advice on the exam
I would like to talk a little bit about the exam.

In the section where the qualities of the student were discussed, the  three
qualities that the student should possess are:
1. Diligence
2. To be non-partisan
3. Intelligence

Among these three defining characteristics that the student should  have,  I
think diligence is the most important because  diligence  is  the  condition
for developing intelligence. When one is diligent, there is hope for one  to
become intelligent. When  one  is  intelligent,  one  is  able  to  be  non-
partisan, i.e., to be able to discriminate.

Khen Rinpoche: When that happens, you are going to take the exam.

As I mentioned before, we are all the same. When  it  comes  to  exam  time,
when we do not push ourselves to study or when there is no  pressure  on  us
to study, we will do nothing. You need to understand that the  exam  is  the
condition for you to learn. You should not think mistakenly  that  the  exam
is the cause of suffering!

In the previous Basic Program,  the  students  were  enthusiastic  and  took
their exams quite seriously.  They studied and then  took  the  exams.  They
tried their best and it turned out well. So I would like to thank  those  of
you from the previous Basic Program who did your best and turned out well.

When it comes to studying the teachings of the Buddha, it is  an  individual
choice, i.e., it is something that we take upon  ourselves  voluntarily.  It
is not forced on us. But  having  the  thought  to  do  something  does  not
necessarily mean you will do it. There is no point making promises when  you
do not fulfil them. You have to act in your own interest.

Yes, learning the teachings of the Buddha is challenging. It  is  not  easy.
In my own case, I studied for 20 years. I worked hard at it.  But  even  now
when I read certain philosophical texts or the  lam-rim,  there  are  always
things that I still don’t understand.

But not understanding does not become a cause for me  to  feel  discouraged.
Instead it makes me want to learn more and to find out  more.  I  don’t  let
things remain as they are when I don’t  understand  something.  I  have  the
interest to try to find the answer. Either I read more or I  ask  around.  I
do try to resolve whatever doubts I may have but sometimes I  may  not  find
anyone to ask. Even when I do get  to  pose  my  question  to  someone,  the
answer is not clear. In the case of my own teacher, he is old. It is not  as
if I can ask questions easily and frequently.

It is actually the rule of the Basic Program that anyone who enrols for  the
Program must take the exams. I do hope that you will come for and  take  the
exam. You need to understand that the exam is a way to help you to study.

Sometimes you may feel that you did not understand anything at  all  despite
having studied or listened to the  teachings  for  months.  When  you  think
about it, this is not the case. It is incorrect to think that you  have  not
learnt anything despite having studied or  listened  to  the  teachings  for
months. Definitely you learned something. I  guess  you  don’t  really  know
what you have learnt.

Khen Rinpoche: That is the problem. Actually you know a lot  but  you  don’t
know that you know a lot. That is the main problem for us.

I remember my own story. When I was young, I studied for six years from  the
age of 12 to 18 in Kopan. I studied Tibetan,  English,  and  philosophy  for
six years. At the end of the six years,  I  always  thought  that  I  hadn’t
learnt anything. My brother also thought that  I  had  not  learnt  anything
because I couldn’t speak or read Tibetan well. I also thought that.

At the age of 18, I moved to Sera. I then realised how much I had learnt  in
Kopan because when I was there, I could write and speak a little English.  I
could also  do  some  painting  and  I  even  understood  a  little  bit  of
philosophy. At that time I had many classmates but none of them was good  in
English. I was the best!

When I was in Kopan for six years, I had to go for debate. When the  teacher
taught philosophy in class, he read  the  text  but  we  didn’t   understand
anything. Nothing. We would then fall asleep. In the  early  days,  Rinpoche
would teach us basic philosophy but we didn’t understand anything  he  said.
We would fall asleep and sometimes he would hit our heads with his  mala  to
wake us up. He didn’t hit very hard.

During those six years, I didn’t have any interest  in  studying  philosophy
because we had zero knowledge. We just repeated every word that the  teacher
taught. We didn’t know the meaning of  the  words.  Tibetan  was  my  second
language. It was very hard and quite discouraging.

When I moved to Sera, they taught philosophy. In the first six  months  when
I went to debate, my classmates did very well. I was just sitting  there.  I
did not know what they were debating about. I just went there and sat  down.
When I listened to philosophy from my teacher, I didn’t  know  what  he  was
talking about. It was very difficult.

But after one year, I could understand a little bit here and there.  Once  I
began to understand a little bit, I had some  interest  to  do  more.  After
that I put in the effort. As I had mentioned before, I  am  not  intelligent
compared to you all but I am hardworking. I had to wake  up  at  4.30am  and
sleep at 1.00am. We had to study from morning till night.

It was also not easy with the room, the water, and food.  Living  there  was
difficult. I had a good classmate, Yangsi Rinpoche, who  was  brilliant.  He
was very quick. But at the end of day, we became  the  same.  Whether  there
was wisdom or not in the first place, at the end of the  day,  through  your
own effort, you can increase your wisdom.

I am not saying that I am good. What I am saying is that by putting  in  the
effort, you can achieve and you can learn something.  Everyone  can  be  the
same. When you study and think, then you are able  to  learn  something  and
leave some imprints. Later you can teach other people.

When you complete the Basic Program, you go  somewhere  and  talk  to  other
people. You will then realise how much you know.  When  you  are  here,  you
think that you don’t know anything but I think you are learning a lot.

This is really not easy. For my case, I was studying full-time but  you  are
doing this part-time. One week, two days and for the two days,  it  is  just
one hour. It is not easy to study Buddhist philosophy in one  hour.  I  know
you have busy lives and are working. You come to classes whenever  you  have
time. I really appreciate that. In the monastery we studied full-time.  Even
then not everyone studied well.

You must encourage yourself to study and to see the point of doing so.  Read
up and take the exam.

I made the previous exams difficult. I did mention to some  people  why  the
exam had to be difficult. It is because the questions can be seen  not  only
by you but also other people. They may think, “If it is so  simple,  why  is
there a need to study. I also know the answers without having to go  to  the
Basic Program.”

If I were to give  you  simple  questions  such  as,  “What  are  the  Three
Jewels?” people may think, “What is ABC teaching  here?  They  do  not  even
know what are the Three Jewels?” That is not correct.

That was why I made the exams difficult.  It  involved  some  writing,  some
memorisation, some quotations to be remembered.   Also  the  last  batch  of
Basic Program students was  different  from  this  present  group  of  Basic
Program students. Many of you are beginners to Buddhism. The last  batch  of
students was long-time Buddhists. They thought they knew a lot so their  ego
had to be challenged! So now they have completed the Basic Program  with  an
ego mind. I am just joking.

I see that most of you here are new  to  Buddhism  and  new  to  the  class.
Sometimes you may find it difficult and feel discouraged. This does  happen.
But if you really want to study and to learn, there is  no  other  way.  You
must put in the effort and not  be  discouraged.  If  you  don’t  understand
anything within these six years, then we can go on for  another  six  years.
So don’t worry.

The exam this time is not so difficult. Last time I use  to  give  tips  for
the exam. This time there are no tips. You don’t have to write anything  for
the exam this time. You just sit, read the exam script, and  tick  what  you
think is correct. It is pretty simple.

Last time I saw some students flipping a coin. Unfortunately the  coin  fell
onto the floor and everyone knew about it. The whole point here is that  you
do not need to flip a coin. Don’t do that as there is no  point.  Just  read
and if you think it is “True,” then tick “True”  and  if  you  think  it  is
“False,” then tick “False.” Take your time. It  is  easy.  I  am  giving  1½
hours for the exam. The exam is on Sunday from 1.30pm to 3pm.  I  think  you
should finish within half an hour or an hour.

It is not so difficult so you don’t  have  to  worry.  Your  marks  will  be
confidential so you don’t have to worry about your  marks.  You  just  think
then tick. This is to learn. When you get back your  paper,  check  why  you
are wrong and why you are right. Then  you  can  have  more  discussion  and
learn from there. The exam is for you to check your own understanding.

Those who cannot take the exam this Sunday, please  contact  Benny  for  the
arrangement to do so on another day.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------
[1] The quotation from the [Sutra of the] Three Heaps says that the
apprehending and grasping at a self (translated here in the root text as
“falling into observing”) makes the practice of generosity impure (Page 12,
Lesson 58).

