Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L55 (upload2).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.131882
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 55                       Date: 15th May 2012


You should always remember how fortunate you are to have an  opportunity  to
come to class.

In the beginning of the class,  we  do  prayers  by  recalling  the  Buddha,
generating faith in him, and reciting  the  Praises  to  Shakyamuni  Buddha.
Simply being able to do  this  shows  how  fortunate  we  are.  Having  some
confidence and faith in the Buddha, even a little  faith,  is  not  an  easy
thing. Having some faith in the Buddha makes our human life precious.

On top of our faith in the Buddha, we now have the opportunity and  interest
to learn and to reflect on the  teachings  of  the  Buddha.  That  is  truly
amazing.

Sometimes it is possible that people may think that it is not so special  to
be able to listen to the teachings of the Buddha. Some people may listen  to
and study the Buddha’s teachings but they do  not  put  them  into  practice
because they think that there is no point in doing so.

It is not like that. Just to have the opportunity to listen to the  Buddha’s
teaching is really amazing. Great transformation  has  already  occurred  by
studying the Buddha’s teaching. For example, we heard the teachings  on  the
effects of committing the ten non-virtuous actions. From this, we have  some
idea of the fruitional effects and the kind of suffering  that  ensues  from
committing the ten non-virtuous actions.

Having heard these teachings, when we are about to engage in these ten  non-
virtuous actions,  there  is  a  chance  that  we  will  hesitate  and  stop
ourselves from committing these actions. When we are able to stop  ourselves
from committing such actions, don’t you think that that  is  the  result  of
having heard the teachings on the ten non-virtuous actions?

We have also heard the instructions for cultivating love and compassion  and
its benefits, and the disadvantages  of  generating  anger.  Merely  hearing
such instructions do have an impact on us. They help us deal with our  anger
when it arises. When we think of what we have heard, at least there is  some
relief in our mind and we can do something about our anger.

Because of having heard the teachings on love and compassion,  it  helps  us
to reinforce our feelings of love for others and to develop  a  good  heart.
We definitely experience some transformation and change by just hearing  the
teachings.

Ideally, on top of hearing the teachings, we should reflect and  familiarise
ourselves with the teachings by meditating on them.  Then  definitely  there
will be some transformation.

Without leaving it at just the level of mere  belief  or  faith,  we  should
seize the opportunity  to  learn,  analyse,  and  reflect  on  the  Buddha’s
teachings. We should constantly remind ourselves of how fortunate we are  to
be able to do this, to have the opportunity and the ability  to  learn,  and
to have the interest in doing so.

Our life is still stable and we are not tormented  by  serious  illness.  We
are  really  fortunate  to  be  able  to  do  all  this,   to   have   these
opportunities. We have to remind ourselves of this.

As I mentioned in the section on refuge, we go for  refuge  to  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha. We go for refuge in the Buddha and  have  faith  in  him.
After having done that, I think the best commitment that we can make to  the
Buddha is the pledge to learn and reflect on his teachings  as  much  as  we
can.

You all know that the Dharma is the actual refuge.  Therefore  after  having
taken refuge in the Dharma, we can make the commitment to try  our  best  to
keep our mind as far as possible in a positive state. The whole  purpose  of
taking refuge in the Dharma is to carry out our promise of keeping our  mind
in a virtuous state as much as possible.

In order for us to increase our virtuous state of mind, we  need  help  from
those around us who are able to encourage us in virtue and  to  act  as  the
condition for us to further develop our virtuous state of mind. We  need  to
have consideration and respect for those fellow practitioners who  are  able
to perform this function.

In our context here where everyone are  gathered  together  in  class,  with
regard to the people with whom you are going to associate with or with  whom
you have been closely associating for some  time,  there  should  be  mutual
respect for one another. As much as possible, we should reduce any  feelings
of  hostility  and  unhappiness  with  one  another  and  to  increase   our
consideration for and care towards one another.

We are now at the section on “Removing obstacles to it.”

    2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B  Removing obstacles to it [/for it?]

When training in [/practice] this mind, there two obstacles.


         1  Removing the obstacle of considering oneself and others as
         distinct individuals
         2  [Removing the obstacle of thinking: ‘As the suffering of others
         does not harm me, I need not make an effort to remove it’]


    2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B1 Removing the obstacle of considering oneself and
    others as distinct individuals

         A  The actual [topic]

Separating the two, oneself and others – the basis of one’s own and  others’
happiness and suffering – into distinct entities, like blue and yellow,  you
hold them to be established  [in  this  way].  Then,  with  respect  to  the
happiness and suffering based on them, you think:  “Since  it  is  mine,  it
should be accomplished [?] or removed. Since it is someone else’s, it is  to
be neglected” (Page 149).

This is one of the two obstacles. This is a  mind  that  feels  one  has  no
connection with others whatsoever. The self and the other do  not  exist  in
dependence on one  another.  Based  on  this  idea,  we  do  not  engage  in
eliminating the suffering of others and we do not engage  in  achieving  the
happiness of others. The remedy for this attitude follows:

Therefore, as an antidote to  this  [think]:  “Myself  and  others  are  not
inherently distinct. Rather, as we look at  one  another  the  mind  “other”
arises in me, whereas the mind “I” arises in the other  [person]  like  with
“this mountain” and “that mountain over there”. For instance, although  from
this perspective the mind “the mountain over there” arises with  respect  to
the mountain over there, when [/if?] you go to the mountain over there,  the
mind “this mountain here” arises. Therefore this {177} is not  the  same  as
[with] the colour blue: a mind of blueness will arise in  whoever  looks  at
it, whereas a mind of another colour will not (Pages 149 – 150).

The text is  pointing  out  that  just  like  the  nearby  and  the  distant
mountains, oneself and others are also relative to one another.

         B  The scriptural sources

In this manner, the Compendium of All Trainings (Shiksasamuccaya)  [?]  also
teaches that [self and other] are not established by their own  nature,  but
merely posited in dependence on the point of view:
         Through familiarity with the equality
          Of other and self bodhicitta grows stable.
         ‘Self’ and ‘other’ are related;
         As fictitious as ‘that side’ and ‘this side’.


         That mountain is not ‘that side’ by itself.
         Depending on where it becomes ‘this side’,
         The ‘self’ in itself is not established.
         Depending on who it becomes ‘other’ (Page 150).


We have to think how the self and others do not exist as their own  entities

but rather are posited in dependence upon one another.

Another obstacle in training the mind in the  attitude  of  exchanging  self
and others is this:

    2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B2 [Removing the obstacle of thinking: “As the
    suffering of others does not harm me, I need not make an effort to
    remove it”]

Removing the obstacle of thinking: “As the  suffering  of  others  does  not
harm me, I need not make an effort to remove it”.

         A  Refutation in terms of the actions of a youth and an elderly
         person [?]

If this were the case, there would be no  need  to  accumulate  wealth  when
young out of concern for the sufferings of old age,  as  the  sufferings  of
the elderly person would not harm the youth (Page 150).

This obstacle is the thought that  the  suffering  of  others  is  not  your
concern. As long as their suffering does not affect or harm you in any  way,
they can continue to suffer. The text is saying that thinking  in  this  way
is like saying that there is no need to save for your old age or  retirement
because the suffering that you may have when you are old  do  not  harm  you
now.

         B  Refutation in terms of different parts of the body and different
         times

It is said: “Likewise, the hand would  not  remove  the  sufferings  of  the
foot, because they are other.” This is a mere illustration and  should  also
be applied to  [the  sufferings  of][?]  the  morning  and  [those  of]  the
evening, and so forth (Page 150).

When there is pain in your foot, it  does  not  affect  your  hand.  Yet  in
reality your hand will do something  to  relieve  the  pain  in  your  foot.
Since your foot has nothing to do with your hand, why does your hand try  to
do something for your foot?

Then there is a qualm:

         C  Abandoning the doubt that these [analogies] are not the same as
         ‘self’ and ‘other’ since they deal with [/refer to] the same
         continuum or collection

If you think: “The two, self and other, are not the same since  the  elderly
[person] and the youth are the same continuum, while  [/and]  the  hand  and
the  foot  are  the  same  collection.”  ‘Continuum’  and  ‘collection’  are
designated on many instants and a  combination  of  many  parts;  they  lack
[/lack] an autonomous essence. Since your own self and others’ self must  be
posited on that continuum or collection, they are not established by way  of
an own essence, that would not just be self and other  posited  in  relation
(Page 150).

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Can you explain the response to the qualm?

The qualm is that you cannot talk about self and others in the same  context
as old age and youth, which are of the same continuum or the hand and  foot,
which are parts of the same collection.

The response to the qualm is that whether you are talking about a  continuum
or a collection, a continuum does not exist as a continuum  by  way  of  its
own entity. Similarly, a collection does not exist as a  collection  by  way
of its own entity. The thing to be established is how the continuum  or  the
collection does not exist by way of its own entity.

When you talk about your own collection or continuum, they cannot  exist  by
way of their own entities. Similarly, when you talk about the  continuum  of
others or collection of others, you cannot talk about them existing  by  way
of their own entities either.

The self is imputed on the basis of the continuum. One’s collection is  also
imputed in dependence on one’s collection. It is the same  for  others.  The
other person is likewise designated or imputed on his  own  continuum.  This
shows that whether one is referring to oneself or others, neither exists  by
way of their own entities.  Therefore, both are similar in  the  sense  that
they do not exist by way of their own entities.

The reason we are unable to develop love and  compassion  for  others  comes
down to our feeling that one’s self  and  others  are  inherently  separate,
that the self and others are established  by  way  of  their  own  entities.
Based on this, we make the distinction between self and  others.  From  this
comes anger and so forth. Due to this feeling that oneself  and  others  are
established by way of their  own  entities  comes  the  distinction  between
oneself and others. Because one makes this kind of  distinction,  anger  and
attachment arise.

It is trying to establish here how self and others are  established  by  way
of their own entities on the basis of establishing that one’s  continuum  or
collection and the continuum or collection of others do not exist by way  of
their own entities.

It is extremely important that you think about this response  to  the  qualm
over and over again. You have to think  about  this  and  then  discuss  it.
Sometimes, just by looking at the answer, you may  be  stuck  and  not  know
what it is trying to say. Sometimes when we look at  the  answer,  it  seems
that we understand it but when we look at  it  again,  we  may  end  up  not
knowing what it is talking about. So it is important to think about it  over
and over again and discuss it until it becomes clearer.

Next the text states that it is possible to exchange self and others if  one
is accustomed to this way of thinking. It is a matter of familiarisation.

         D  Since this is so by the power of familiarization, [the mind]
         cherishing[[the mind] cherishing] others can also develop

{178}  Yet  your  own  suffering  is  unbearable  due  to   the   power   of
familiarization, from beginningless time, with  self-cherishing.  Therefore,
if you familiarize yourself with cherishing  others,  their  suffering  will
also become unbearable (Page 150).
Next is the actual way of exchanging self and others.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2   The actual way to meditate

         A  Thinking about the disadvantages of cherishing oneself and the
         advantages of cherishing others (Page 150)

The actual way of meditating on exchanging self and others is that,  in  the
beginning, one has to think thoroughly about the faults  of  self-cherishing
and the advantages of cherishing others. We had discussed this before.

We  have  to  realise  for   ourselves   how   self-cherishing   have   many
disadvantages while cherishing others has many benefits. In  particular,  we
have to realise for  ourselves  how  self-cherishing  is  the  door  to  all
suffering and the root of all our problems and how cherishing others is  the
source of all happiness. It is important that we should be able to  see  how
the real enemy is our self-cherishing.

As mentioned in the sevenfold cause and effect  instructions,  remember  the
kindness of all sentient beings, how they were our mothers,  how  they  were
kind to us, and so forth. By remembering the kindness  of  sentient  beings,
we try to develop a sense of closeness to them without feeling distant  from
anyone. From our own side, by realising how there isn’t anyone who  has  not
been our close friend or loved one, one seeks  to  develop  equal  love  and
compassion for all.

Sometimes we believe that there are very few people helping us  while  there
are many people who are harming us. As for  the  vast  majority  of  people,
they neither help nor harm us. Sometimes we think that  we  are  indifferent
to the majority of people because, from our perspective, they  are  neutral.
In that sense, it becomes difficult for us to have love and  compassion  for
them. But, in reality, everyone is precious.

As mentioned before, we have seen how every sentient being is the source  of
our happiness, starting from the happiness that  comes  from  getting  food,
clothing, and reputation. All these have come  from  and  in  dependence  on
others. Even achieving a good rebirth as a human being or a celestial  being
in the future comes from sentient beings.

When we think of the practices of love and  compassion,  I  think  they  can
only be developed because sentient  beings  exist.  In  the  same  way,  the
arising of mind generation is said to  have  skies  of  benefit.  That  mind
generation is generated in dependence on sentient beings. There  isn’t  such
a thing as love, compassion, or mind generation that  is  generated  without
depending on sentient beings. In this  sense,  love,  compassion,  and  mind
generation can only be realised in dependence  on  sentient  beings.  If  we
leave out even one sentient being, there is no way for us  to  develop  real
love and compassion. Then, of course, there is no  way  for  us  to  develop
mind generation.

Therefore, in order to develop mind generation, we need every living  being.
From this, we can see how everyone is  equal  and  precious.  In  order  for
one’s realisation of love, compassion, and mind generation to increase  more
and more and also for one to actualise all the  realisations  of  the  paths
and grounds up to the achievement of enlightenment, all  these  realisations
and qualities come about by depending on sentient beings.

When we analyse and think about this, we see how  every  sentient  being  is
precious, how every sentient being matters. When we  think  about  this,  it
becomes obvious that there isn’t a  sentient  being  who  does  not  matter.
Everyone is equally precious and have benefited us in some way. By  thinking
along these lines, we have to develop love  and  compassion  without  making
any distinctions between sentient beings.

Another way of equalising  our  love  and  compassion  for  everyone  is  to
remember impermanence. Just as we ourselves are impermanent, so is  everyone
else. We are all the same in being impermanent. For that  reason,  there  is
no real justification for being so attached to one person and  to  be  angry
at another. This way of thinking helps us to equalise our  feeling  of  love
and compassion towards all sentient beings.

When we think  about  this  from  the  perspective  of  others,  as  in  the
quotation from Kamalashila’s Middling Stages of Meditation, others  are  the
same in wanting happiness and not  wanting  suffering,  i.e.,  every  living
being wants to be happy and does not want to suffer. They are all  the  same
in being deprived of happiness and  being  tormented  by  suffering.  So  it
makes no sense to love some people and not others. It  also  does  not  make
sense to only want to work for some and not to work for others.

When we think about others, whether the person is a loved one or  an  enemy,
we also have to realise that their  status  of  being  friend  or  enemy  is
impermanent because that status does change. Like the near and  the  distant
mountains, friends and foes are relative to one  another  as  they  are  not
established by way of their own entities. Due to  the  slightest  change  in
condition, an enemy can  become  a  friend.  Likewise,  due  to  some  small
condition, a friend can become an enemy. So the whole concept of friend  and
enemy is like the near mountain and the distant mountain. They are  relative
and they are not established from their own sides. In that sense,  they  are
equal.

With the help of such reflections, we try to develop a sense of  equanimity.
  The instructions of  exchanging  self  and  others  are  instructions  for
developing this even-minded attitude with regard to  love,  compassion,  and
the wish to benefit sentient beings towards everyone.


         D  How to meditate remembering the teachings of earlier holy beings

{179} Jowo [Atisha] said: “The Tibetans know bodhisattvas who  do  not  know
how to train in love and compassion. Well  then,  how  do  you  do  it?  You
should do it having trained sequentially from the beginning.”
      Langri Thangpa said: “Shawopa and I have eighteen  human  methods  and
one horse method, nineteen altogether.  The  method  of  humans  is,  having
generated the mind of supreme enlightenment, to train in doing whatever  one
does for the welfare of sentient beings. The method of horses is  the  self-
cherishing that does not allow  the  mind  of  enlightenment  that  has  not
arisen  to  arise  and  that  which  has  arisen  to  remain  and  increase.
Therefore, you train in whatever harms it,  [this]  having  been  taught  in
passing. As for sentient  beings,  you  train  in  whatever  benefits  them,
[this] having been taught as the fundamental point.”
         Khamlungpa    said:    “Since    we    act    deviously[/idly][/are
lazy/idle/slothful] towards our brethren  sentient  beings[/brothers],  they
will do the same towards us” (Page 151).

Who are considered to be the loved ones towards whom the  bodhisattvas  have
developed bodhicitta? The  loved  ones  of  the  bodhisattvas  are  sentient
beings. In order to help numberless sentient beings,  numberless  strategies
are needed.

The text here mentions the eighteen  human  strategies  and  the  one  horse
strategy. The eighteen human strategies are just a number. What it means  is
that   as   there   are   numberless   sentient   beings   with   numberless
characteristics, so numberless strategies are required. In some  texts,  the
eighteen human strategies are listed out.

For the one horse strategy, the bodhisattvas  have  only  one  enemy,  i.e.,
self-cherishing.


         E  The appropriateness of putting effort by many approaches into
         the methods for[?] generating the mind of enlightenment

It is good if a habit  develops  that  constantly  checks  [/checks  at  all
times?] to what extent this mind has been generated, since everything  stems
from [/depends on?] it: whether or not the root of  the  Mahayana  has  been
planted and whether or not one is included among  Mahayanists.  Even  if  it
does not develop, do not  leave  it  at  that  but[?]  rely  on  a  virtuous
spiritual friend who teaches it and always be accompanied by  the  companion
that is mind training. This and thereby make the companion of mind  training
your  steady  friend.  Read  the  scriptures  of  the  Teacher   and   their
commentaries.  As  its  cause,  accumulate  the   collections   and   purify
obscurations. Since it is certain that if you train your mind in  this  way,
the seed will be fully planted, the[se] actions are of no little  importance
and a reason for joy. It is as the great Jowo [Atisha] said:

         For those who wish to enter the gate of
         Mahayana Dharma it’s worth an eon
         Of effort for bodhicitta to grow
         Which like the sun and moon eliminate
         Darkness  and  pacify   scorching   heat   (Pages   151   –   152).


This paragraph talks about the conditions and what we need to  do  in  order
to move our mind towards developing bodhicitta:
 • First, always rely on a teacher who gives this kind of teachings.
 • If that is insufficient, always associate with friends who  are  training
   their minds in this way.
 • If that is still insufficient, constantly look at the scriptures and  the
   commentaries that explain these teachings.
 • If that again  is  not  enough,  amass  the  collections  as  causes  for
   bodhicitta to arise and to clear away the obstructions  that  prevent  it
   from arising.

We have to accumulate merit and purify the mind of obscurations. We have  to
constantly  go  back  to  the  teachings  and  texts  that   explain   these
instructions. We have to rely on liked-minded  trainees  as  companions  and
rely on the virtuous  friend.  When  we  gather  all  these  conditions  and
familiarise our mind with these instructions, at the very least, we will  be
able to leave very strong imprints on the mind.

This is the end of the section on exchanging self and others.

Question: Is bodhicitta a mental factor or a main mind?

Answer: Bodhicitta should be a main mind. Don’t worry about  the  difference
between mind generation and bodhicitta.  In  essence,  they  are  both  main
minds. They are differentiated on their  basis.  Bodhicitta  exists  in  the
continuum of the bodhisattva.

Question: There are two types of bodhicitta, aspirational and engaged,  both
of which exist up to the end of the continua of sentient beings. Then  there
is mind generation  that  exists  up  to  the  buddha  ground.  I  have  the
impression that mind generation and bodhicitta are the same.

Answer: At the beginning of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions,  it
is translated in the Middle Length Lam-Rim as  the  mind  of  enlightenment,
which we generally refer to as bodhicitta.

We won’t be discussing this further. If we want to  be  specific,  we  would
have to bring in Buddhist philosophy. The actual  term  should  be  Mahayana
mind generation but it is not translated in this way.

Mind generation is developing a very expansive mind and is  essentially  the
thought that  comes  after  the  generation  of  wholehearted  resolve  that
thinks, “I am  going  to  achieve  enlightenment  for  the  benefit  of  all
sentient beings.”

When we look at the division of this mind generation with  the  thought,  “I
am going to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all  sentient  beings,”
this mind does exist in the continuum of a bodhisattva.  It  exists  in  the
continuum of the Buddha. Because this mind exists in the  continuum  of  the
bodhisattva, it is called bodhicitta.

Question: When one achieves buddhahood, what do you call this mind?

Khen Rinpoche: You call it mind generation. You  don’t  call  it  bodhicitta
any more.

Question: In the bodhisattva’s continuum, we can call it bodhicitta or  mind
generation.  However,  once  buddhahood  is  achieved,  we  call   it   mind
generation. Is that correct?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

Question: What is a Mahayana main knower?

Answer: This will be covered in the next module on Lorig.

Exam Advice

It seems that there are some people who are stressed about the  exam.  Don’t
worry as it is not going  to  be  difficult.  Worrying  about  the  exam  is
pointless.

This exam is not for ranking purposes. We  are  not  interested  in  ranking
people, who is first, who is second, or who has how many marks. The  purpose
of the exam is to allow yourself to  see  how  much  you  have  learnt  from
coming to class, from reading, and so forth. This is to  allow  yourself  to
know where you are and how much you have learnt.

The exam will be easy. You  won’t  need  to  write  a  lot.  The  exam  only
requires you to think. You don’t have to write.  You  just  need  to  answer
“True” or “False.” This is to check your ability to think.

No one will know how well you have done or your mark.  Only  you  will  know
it. Most of the time people are stressed  because  they  worry  about  other
people knowing how they have done. You don’t have to worry as  no  one  will
know how well you have done.

Khen Rinpoche: Only you will know. I think you won’t  worry  about  yourself
knowing. If you know yourself, are you worried? If other  people  know  your
mark, then you may worry. If only you know your own mark, you  will  not  be
so worried.

That why when you have a good mark, don’t show it to other  people.  If  you
have a bad mark, don’t show it to other people either. Keep it to  yourself.
Then you have no worries.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong


