Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L20 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.631355
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 20                   Date: 25th August 2011


We are now at the outline, “How to take the essence” which has two parts:

    2B4B-2 How to take the essence: the three beings’ mode of applying the
    path

         A  Generating certainty with regard to the general presentation of
         the path
         B  The actual way of taking its essence (Page 43)

We will base our discussion on the chart given (see below).

    2B4B-2A      Generating certainty with regard to the general
    presentation of the path

         1  How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the paths of the
         three [types of] beings
         2  Giving reasons for gradual guidance from the point of view of
         the three [types of] beings


    2B4B-2A1     How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the paths
    of the three [types of] beings

         A  How the meaning of all the excellent teachings [of the Buddha]
         is subsumed under the accomplishment of two objectives (Page 43)

The Buddha gave a variety of teachings. While he was on the path, he  worked
hard to accumulate the collections of merit  and  wisdom  for  a  very  long
period of time, three great countless eons. Why did he do that? Who  was  he
doing this for? He accumulated the collections  of  merit  for  us  sentient
beings in order to achieve full enlightenment for our benefit.

How does the Buddha benefit sentient beings? Remember  the  statement,  “The
Buddha  liberates  by  teaching  suchness”?   He  benefits  sentient  beings
primarily by giving teachings. All the Buddha’s teachings  are  included  in
the paths of the three types of persons.

The goals of sentient beings can be categorised into:  (1)  the  provisional
goal and (2) the final goal. The provisional (or  temporary)  goal  is  high
status, i.e., a good rebirth. The final (or ultimate) goal is  the  definite
goodness  of  liberation  and  full  enlightenment.   Therefore   when   the
provisional and final goals are elaborated, there are three goals.

All the Buddha’s teachings are meant for sentient beings to  achieve  either
the goals of high status, liberation or full enlightenment.  These  are  the
three goals that are achievable. As such, in terms of the persons  achieving
these goals, it can be categorised into three types of persons:
   1. The person of small capacity
   2. The person of medium capacity
   3. The person of great capacity

         B  How lesser beings attain high status (Page 43)

In general, the person of small capacity refers to:
1. those seeking only the happiness of this life
2. those seeking the happiness of future lives.
In this context, the person of small capacity is not referring to the  first
type, those seeking only the happiness of this life.  The  person  of  small
capacity referred to here is the person of genuine small capacity, which  is
the second type, those seeking the happiness of future lives.

In order to be a person of small capacity, you need to have the interest  in
seeking the happiness of future lives. But that  alone  is  not  enough.  In
order to be a person of small  capacity,  you  must  also  have  entered  an
unmistaken path that will help  you  to  achieve  the  happiness  of  future
lives.

A person of genuine small capacity is someone who is strongly  motivated  to
achieve the goal of high status, good rebirth, and  also  actively  creating
the causes to achieve that goal. Although the path of the person of  genuine
small capacity involves many practices, the primary practices are:
1. Going for refuge to the Three Jewels
2. Practising the morality or ethics of intentionally avoiding the ten  non-
   virtuous actions
These practices also have to be done by a person of  great  capacity.  These
practices then are the  path  that  is  shared  with  the  person  of  small
capacity.

What then is the unshared path? The path of a person of  great  capacity  is
the path that is unshared.

Question to students: Is there an unshared path[1]  of  a  person  of  small
capacity?

(Various answers from students)

Student: Yes. The aspiration to only achieve a good future rebirth.

Khen Rinpoche: Good. You say that, by practising the ethics of avoiding  the
ten non-virtues with  the  specific  intention  of  only  achieving  a  good
rebirth, that is the unshared path of the person of  small  capacity?   Yes,
it is.

Why? This is because  the  persons  of  medium  or  great  capacity  do  not
practise such a path to  achieve  a  good  rebirth  alone.  In  the  earlier
section of the greatnesses of the Lam-Rim teachings, it  is  mentioned  that
the person of great capacity who is practising the Mahayana path  must  also
practise the Hinayana path but  need  not  necessarily  practise  everything
that is included in the Hinayana path. What  is  the  illustration  that  is
given in the text?

Student: The aspiration for liberation alone

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.  From  this  you  can  see  that  you  should  not  feel
satisfied, thinking that you know the subject after having just studied  the
subject matter once. If you think like this, that is a mistake.  You  should
not be satisfied just looking at the text once but you should read  it  over
and over again because there will be always be things that you have not  yet
fully understood. In order to highlight this point, that is why I am  asking
questions in class. These questions are aimed at those who have  studied  in
the past and are not directed at those who have not done the Basic  Program.


A person of genuine small capacity has a very  strong  interest  to  achieve
the high status of a good rebirth. He engages in  an  unmistaken  method  to
achieve this goal. This method is primarily going for refuge  to  the  Three
Jewels and living an ethical way of life,  intentionally  avoiding  the  ten
non-virtuous actions. What is the  result  of  his  practices?  It  is  high
status, a good rebirth.

         C  How intermediate beings achieve the certain goodness of
         liberation (Page 43)

Next, we look at the person of medium capacity who  only  seeks  to  achieve
liberation from cyclic existence. He is someone  who  is  disenchanted  with
cyclic existence and has the feeling of definitely wanting  to  get  out  of
it. With this motivation, this person engages in the method that  will  lead
him to achieve liberation from cyclic existence.

What does he need to do in order to achieve this goal? First,  he  needs  to
generate renunciation, the determination to be freed from samsara.  On  that
basis, he needs  to  practise  the  three  higher  trainings.  This  is  the
training of a person of genuine medium capacity.

Generating the thought of  renunciation  and  practising  the  three  higher
trainings also constitute the path that is shared with a  person  of  medium
capacity. This is something that a person of great capacity would also  need
to practise. Therefore it is shared.

If there is a path that is shared with the person of medium  capacity,  then
there must be also an unshared path of the person of  medium  capacity.  The
unshared  path  would  be  generating  the  thought  of   renunciation   and
practising the three higher trainings with the intention of  achieving  only
liberation from cyclic  existence.  By  putting  these  into  practice,  the
person of medium capacity will achieve liberation from cyclic existence.

The Hinayana path can be divided into two: (1) the path of the  hearers  and
(2) the path of the solitary realisers. With regard to the  liberation  that
is  achieved,  you  can  also  posit  two  Hinayana  liberations:  (1)   the
liberation that is achieved by the hearers and (2) the  liberation  that  is
achieved by the solitary realisers.

The details of the  Hinayana  path,  the  hearers’  path  and  the  solitary
realisers’ path and their differences will  be  covered  in  future  modules
such as Buddhist tenets.

         D  How great beings attain omniscience (Page 44)

Next, we look at  a  person  of  great  capacity  who,  motivated  by  great
compassion and concern for sentient beings and being unable  to  bear  their
suffering, wishes to free them  all  from  their  sufferings.  In  order  to
achieve that, this person aims to achieve the state of  full  enlightenment,
buddhahood.

In order to achieve this goal of full enlightenment,  the  person  of  great
capacity cultivates the Mahayana path, the method for  achieving  the  state
of full enlightenment and engages in the practice  of  the  six  perfections
and the yoga of the two stages.

The Mahayana path can be divided into two:
   1. the Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana)
   2. the Mantra Vehicle (Vajrayana)
In order to achieve full enlightenment,  you  need  to  enter  the  Mahayana
Path. From the chart, you can see that there are  three  different  Mahayana
Paths:
   1. the path of the Perfection Vehicle
   2. the path of the three lower tantras
   3. the path of Highest Yoga Tantra
These are the three different Mahayana approaches.

Let us look at the person who is on the path of the Perfection Vehicle.

What does he practise?
1. First, he develops bodhicitta, the altruistic intention.
2. Then he generates the wish to achieve enlightenment  that  comes  with  a
   commitment.
3. He then takes on the engaged bodhisattva vows.
4. He trains in the six perfections
These are the stages of a person who  is  on  the  path  of  the  Perfection
Vehicle. By depending on the union of method and wisdom,  this  person  will
achieve full enlightenment. The Perfection Vehicle is a  method  to  achieve
full enlightenment but it is a path that requires the  accumulation  of  the
collections of merit and  wisdom  over,  generally  speaking,  a  very  long
period of time, three great countless eons.

The Mahayana path of the three lower tantras  is  also  a  path  to  achieve
enlightenment. The main practice of the Mahayana path  of  the  three  lower
tantras is to cultivate the two yogas: (1) the yoga with signs and  (2)  the
yoga without signs.

In order to be able to do these practices,  that  person  must  receive  the
great initiation of the relevant  class  of  tantra.  Before  receiving  the
initiation, the person must take the bodhisattva vows.

In the three lower tantras, there is no mention of  achieving  enlightenment
in one lifetime in one body.  Nevertheless,  it  is  a  path  that  is  much
quicker than the Perfection Vehicle. While on the path of  the  three  lower
tantras, you need not take  three  great  countless  eons  to  complete  the
accumulation of the collections  of  merit  and  wisdom  because  there  are
special methods that speed this up.

Then you have the path of Highest Yoga Tantra that is also a way to  achieve
enlightenment. In order to  enter  and  practise  this  path,  you  have  to
receive the relevant initiation and take and abide by the  bodhisattva  vows
and the tantric vows. On that basis, you engage in the practices of the  two
stages:
   1. the generation stage
   2. the completion stage
Through these practices, you then achieve full enlightenment.

The path of Highest Yoga Tantra is a method to  achieve  enlightenment  that
is much quicker than the path of the three lower tantras. It  is  said  that
you can achieve the state of full enlightenment in one lifetime and  in  one
body by depending on the path of the Highest Yoga Tantra.  In  the  path  of
the Highest Yoga  Tantra  there  are  special  methods  on  how  to  quickly
accumulate the collections of merit and wisdom.

I am giving you this short explanation because we are now  at  the  outline,
“Generating certainty  with  regard  to  the  general  presentation  of  the
path(Page 43).” This is to give you  a  rough  understanding  of  the  whole
scheme of things. In order to be able to go into the details of what I  have
just explained, you need to finish the entire Basic Program!

Question: Can someone who has entered the path of the  three  lower  tantras
switch to another path?

Answer:  When you do not have an overall understanding of all the  treatises
and you hear this explanation,  you  may  run  into  some  difficulties.  In
response to your question, we can say that after you have entered  the  path
of the three lower tantras, you can switch over to the path of  the  Highest
Yoga Tantra and achieve enlightenment. It is definitely possible.

The path of the Perfection Vehicle is a Mahayana Path that can lead  you  to
enlightenment. You can achieve enlightenment by depending on  this  Vehicle.
But from the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra, by depending  on  the  path
of the Perfection Vehicle alone, you cannot achieve enlightenment. You  must
practice tantra and, within the four classes of tantra, you must  definitely
practise Highest Yoga Tantra.

When you do not have  an  overview  of  the  entire  framework  of  all  the
different scriptures that may be difficult to  understand.  You  may  think,
“How can that be?”

This is something that you will  come  to  ascertain  slowly.  You  need  to
continue to study the different modules of the  Basic  Program  and  through
studying, discussing, analysing and investigating them, only then  will  you
be able to arrive at some kind of conclusion or ascertainment.

Question: How does renunciation of the present life fit into the path  of  a
person of small capacity who intends to achieve high status?

Answer: The primary goal of the person of small capacity  is  the  happiness
of future lives as he considers that more important than  the  happiness  of
this life. Comparing the happiness of this life and the happiness of  future
life, he emphasises the happiness of future  lives  because  he  is  seeking
another good rebirth.  As  such  the  person  of  small  capacity  does  not
renounce the happiness  of  this  life  completely.  He  does  consider  the
happiness of this life as important but he does not place as  much  emphasis
on this as he is focusing on achieving the happiness of future lives.

Question: The Tibetan masters talked  about  renouncing  the  eight  worldly
concerns. How does this fit into the picture for someone who  is  intent  on
cultivating the high status?

Answer: Yes, the practice of reversing the attraction to this  life  is  the
practice of a person of small capacity because he  is  primarily  interested
in the  happiness  of  future  lives.  He  places  more  importance  on  the
happiness of future lives than the happiness of this life.

But what interferes with putting more emphasis on the  happiness  of  future
lives? They are the eight worldly concerns. Therefore in order  to  be  able
to place more emphasis on the happiness of  future  lives  you  have  to  do
something about the eight worldly concerns. That falls  under  the  practice
of reversing the attraction to this life. There are  different  methods  for
doing that.

Question: Can I say that it is subsumed under going for refuge to the  Three
Jewels? By having  this  mind  set,  automatically  you  are  reversing  the
attraction to the current life?

Answer: Yes, you  have  to  reverse  the  attraction,  to  get  rid  of  the
preoccupation with the happiness of this  life  alone.  There  are  ways  to
overcome that and you need to strive in those methods.  You  are  afraid  of
the sufferings of the three lower  realms.  You  have  the  faith  that  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha can protect you from the sufferings of  the  lower
realms. This is  what  constitutes  the  refuge  for  the  person  of  small
capacity.

In order to have refuge, you need to be afraid of suffering.  As  you  don’t
want to suffer in the lower realms, the fear of the lower  realm  means  you
want a good rebirth. Isn’t the goal of a person of  small  capacity  a  good
rebirth? So in order to be able to achieve that good  rebirth,  that  person
must first weaken his current preoccupation with the happiness of this  life
alone. If he does not do that, then there is no way for him to achieve  that
good rebirth.

It is in this context, therefore,  that  there  is  a  need  to  reduce  the
preoccupation with the happiness of this life alone. It is for  this  reason
that there is the meditation on death and impermanence.

When you start the actual practice of the Lam-Rim, one  of  the  very  first
meditations is the reflection on death and impermanence. That is the  method
to reduce the current preoccupation with the affairs and happiness  of  this
life alone.

One of the main reasons why there is such a strong  preoccupation  with  the
happiness  of  this  life  alone  is  basically  the  innate  feeling   that
everything will remain constant and will not  change.  This  is  called  the
apprehension of  permanence.  In  order  to  overcome  this,  there  is  the
meditation on death and impermanence.

Question: Is there any difference between:
   • the higher training in ethics and the perfection of ethics,
   • the higher training in concentration and perfection of  concentration,
     and
   • the higher training in wisdom and perfection of wisdom?

Answer: Yes, there is. Just having the wisdom  realising  emptiness  doesn’t
make it a perfection of wisdom. In order  for  it  to  be  a  perfection  of
wisdom, it must be conjoined with bodhicitta whereas the higher training  in
wisdom need not necessarily be conjoined with bodhicitta.

Question: In one of the ten endowments, being born  in  the  central  region
means that one is born in an area where the  four  types  of  followers  are
active. Who are they?

Answer: What is the criterion for saying that the Buddha’s  teachings  exist
in the world? There  are  three  scriptural  collections:  the  vinaya,  the
sutras and the Abidharma. The Buddha’s teachings are said to exist  in  this
world if the higher training in ethics exists. Whether the  teachings  exist
in the world or not depend on whether the higher training in  ethics  exists
or not.
In order for  the  higher  training  in  ethics  to  exist,  there  must  be
practitioners who practise it.  The  main  practitioners  are  the  ordained
persons. I think that the four types of person refer to the  fully  ordained
monk, the fully ordained nun, the novice monk and the novice nun.

Question: When does a practitioner acquire the name of a  person  of  medium
capacity and when does he acquire the name of a person  of  great  capacity?
Is it when he enters the respective paths or  is  it  right  from  the  very
beginning when he starts to practise?

Answer: When he develops the uncontrived aspiration for liberation.

Question: Will that be the point when  there  is  the  wisdom  arising  from
reflection, when ascertainment of that (aspiration for liberation) arise?

Answer: In order to be a  person  of  medium  capacity,  you  need  to  have
developed  an  uncontrived  aspiration  for  liberation.  This   uncontrived
aspiration for liberation must  be  preceded  by  hearing,  reflection,  and
meditation.

Student: In that case, you can’t call  him  a  person  of  medium  or  great
capacity from the outset.

Answer: I think in order to be a person of medium capacity, you  would  have
developed an uncontrived aspiration for liberation. If you are a  person  of
great capacity, you would have developed uncontrived bodhicitta. That  means
you would have the relevant realisations.

Otherwise,  when  you  call  yourself  a  person  of  one  of  these   three
capacities, I am not exactly sure whether that works or not.  You  are  here
to study, to reflect and to  meditate  with  the  intention  of  wanting  to
achieve full enlightenment. I guess you can call yourself someone  belonging
to the type of person of great capacity but  I  don’t  think  you  can  call
yourself a person of great capacity. I  don’t  know.  You  can  think  about
this. I am not sure.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh
[pic]



-----------------------
[1] Shared and unshared paths are also translated  as  common  and  uncommon
paths respectively.

