Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/LamrimChenmo/Chapter 13 Karma -Pabongka Rinpoche.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:46.731260
================================================================================

1Do not think a small virtue
Will not return in your future lives.Just as falling drops of waterWill fill a large container,The little virtuesThe steadfast accumulateWill completely overwhelm them."
The Buddha"KARMA
2
3DEVELOPING BELIEVING FAITH IN THE LAW OF CAUSE AND EFFECT - THE ROOT OF ALL
HEALTH AND HAPPINESS........................................................................................................... .................5
THINKING ABOUT CAUSE AND EFFECT IN GENERAL ...........................................................................7
THINKING ABOUT CAUSE AND EFFECT IN A TRULY GENERAL WAY..........................................7
HOW KARMA IS FIXED............................................................................................................. ..........7
KARMA SHOWS GREAT INCREASE .................................................................................................8ONE DOES NOT MEET WITH SOMETHING IF ONE HAS NOT CREATED THE KARMA FOR IT
TO HAPPEN...................................................................................................................... ..................11
KARMA ONCE CREATED WILL NOT DISAPPEAR OF ITS OWN ACCORD ..............................12
THINKING ABOUT SOME OF THE SPECIFICS OF CAUSE AND EFFECT......................................14
THINKING ABOUT THE BLACK SIDE OF CAUSE AND EFFECT................................................14
THE ACTUAL BLACK KARMIC PROCESS ................................................................................14
KILLING ............................................................................................................................... ........15
TAKING WHAT IS NOT GIVEN ................................................................................................17SEXUAL MISCONDUCT ...........................................................................................................18LYING............................................................................................................................... ...........18
DIVISIVE SPEECH ................................................................................................................ .....19
INSULTING WORDS ................................................................................................................ ..19
IDLE GOSSIP.................................................................................................................... ...........19
COVETOUSNESS ................................................................................................................... ....20
HARMFUL INTENT................................................................................................................. ...20
WRONG VIEWS.................................................................................................................... ......21
THE DIFFERENCES THAT MAKE FOR HEAVY OR LIGHT KARMA ......................................21
HEAVY BY NATURE................................................................................................................ ..21
HEAVY BECAUSE OF THE INTENTION.................................................................................22HEAVY BECAUSE OF THE DEED ...........................................................................................22HEAVY BECAUSE OF THE BASIS...........................................................................................22HEAVY BECAUSE OF ALWAYS BEING DONE......................................................................22HEAVY BECAUSE NO ANTIDOTE HAS BEEN APPLIED.....................................................22
TEACHING WHAT THE RESULTS OF THESE KARMAS ARE .................................................22
THINKING ABOUT THE WHITE SIDE OF CAUSE AND EFFECT ................................................24
TEACHING THE ACTUAL WHITE KARMIC PROCESS ............................................................24TEACHING ITS RESULTS........................................................................................................... ...25
THE RIPENED RESULT ............................................................................................................. 25
RESULTS CONGRUENT WITH THE CAUSE..........................................................................25ENVIRONMENTAL RESULTS ..................................................................................................25
TEACHING ABOUT THE DOORS THAT UNINTENTIONALLY LEAD TO POWERFUL KARMA 25
POWERFUL OWING TO THE FIELD............................................................................................26POWERFUL BECAUSE ONE HAD BEEN A CANDIDATE FOR VOWS ...................................26POWERFUL BECAUSE OF THE THINGS BEING DONE...........................................................28POWERFUL BECAUSE OF THE INTENTION .............................................................................28
THINKING ABOUT SOME OF THE SPECIFICS ..................................................................................29
THE RIPENED QUALITIES.......................................................................................................... ......30
THE FUNCTIONS OF THE RIPENED QUALITIES..........................................................................30THE CAUSES FOR ACHIEVING THESE RIPENED QUALITIES...................................................31
AFTER THINKING ABOUT THESE THINGS, THE WAY TO MODIFY YOUR ACTIONS ...............33
THE GENERAL TEACHING ........................................................................................................... ...33
IN PARTICULAR, HOW TO PURIFY ONESELF WITH THE FOUR POWERS..............................34CONTENTS
4LIBERATION IN THE PALM OF YOUR HAND
 A Lam Rim Discourse by Pabongka Rinpoche
Pabongka Rinpoche quoted from Tsongkapa, that great Dharmaraja:
You have no assurance that you will not go
To the lower realms after death....
After this short introduction, he restated the headings already covered, and
reviewed the first subsection of the heading ‘Teaching the Means for Happinessin Your Next Rebirth.’ This first subsection deals with taking refuge. He thenbriefly taught how to pursue this practice:
When people give oral discourses there are separate headings for contemplating
the sufferings of the lower realms and for taking refuge. However, when one istaking a ‘practical teaching,’ one must meditate on a combination of these twoheadings, as explained below.
This is how it is done. After you petition [the visualisation of] your guru above
the crown of your head, he emanates from his heart a complete refuge visualisation,for example the merit field, and this stands before you in space. Then, think deeplyabout the individual sufferings of each of the hells and the sufferings of animalsand hungry ghosts; as you become terrified of each lower realm, take refuge. Thisis the integration. An illustration: if in this world a petty criminal gets the supportof an influential official, it sets the criminal’s mind at rest and he thinks, ‘I cannotdo much by myself, but I have the backing of a great official.’ That is why he soughthis support. Similarly, if you are terrified of the lower realms you will want to takerefuge and take confidence from the thought: ‘I have come under the protection ofthe Three Jewels, a refuge that won’t prove deceptive.’
If you are taking refuge a number of times, it is enough to repeat the beginning
of the preparatory rites. However, in this section of the Lam-rim you shouldcombine three Lam-rim meditation topics together, although it is still all right torepeat only ‘I take refuge in the guru, the tutelary deities, and the Three Jewels’ anumber of times. Let us take the section on thinking about the suffering of the Hellof Continual Resurrection as an example. The three meditation topics would go asfollows.
First, once you have insight into being reborn in this hell, you think how it would
be impossible to endure it. At this point you will have the thought: ‘I have not nowbeen reborn there.’
5The second meditation topic comes in at this point. Think that though you have
not taken rebirth in this hell now, you have accumulated very powerful karma tobe born there; this karma has not declined [in strength] and you will not be able topurify it before you die. And as you cannot purify it you are certain to be born there.This should terrify you.
Then comes the third meditation topic. You think: ‘The refuge to protect me
from this lower realm should have immeasurable numbers of good qualities -omniscience, love, ability and so forth. How lucky I am to have found such arefuge!’ And then take refuge.
Follow the same process for the other lower realms.
After giving three excellent versions of the teachings on taking refuge - an
elaborate version, a medium length and a short version - Rinpoche continued.
DEVELOPING BELIEVING FAITH IN THE LAW OF CAUSE AND
EFFECT - THE ROOT OF ALL HEALTH AND HAPPINESS
Because you have taken refuge in the Three Jewels you can be sure that you have
prevented one or two rebirths in the lower realms, but not that you will be free ofthe lower realms forever.
If you want to be confident of never again going to the lower realms you must
try to follow the advice that goes with taking refuge. Here is an illustration of whathappens when you do not. When a criminal seeks the protection of an influentialofficial, the official may tell him: ‘From now on, you should do this and not dothat.’ If the criminal does not listen and instead only commits more crimes, thereis no way that even that official can protect him: the criminal will again run foulof the law.
Similarly, if we do not keep the advice that accompanies taking refuge, there
is nothing the Three Jewels can do for us. This is why our Teacher taught thatDharma is the one true refuge to protect us from the lower realms. Dharma itselfis the act of modifying our behaviour according to the law of cause and effect.
If you do not develop believing faith in the law of cause and effect you will only
want to practise a little virtue and to abandon a little non-virtue. As long as you donot properly modify your actions according to the law of cause and effect, youcould still go to hell, despite being well-versed in the three baskets or being a greatadept and yogi. Once Guru Avadhutipa looked back at Atisha while they werecrossing a bridge, and said: ‘Until you abandon grasping at a self and while you stillplace little value on the law of cause and effect [always] remember that scholar so-
6and-so and yogi such-and-such were reborn in hell.’ They say that even great Ra
the translator had to spend a few moments in hell.
A yogi in the Yamantaka tantra was reborn as an evil hungry ghost that
physically resembled this tutelary deity; the ghost travelled from India to Tibet.Great Atisha said, ‘If it remains here, Tibet will be harmed,’ so he dedicated ritualcakes to the ghost and made it go away.
Devadatta knew a great deal of Dharma, but this did not help him, as he was
reborn in the Even Hotter Hell. A brahmin named Chanakya had achieved visionsof Yamantaka and had killed many people through his paranormal powers. Theysay he was reborn in the Hell Without Respite.
If you do not keep to the law of cause and effect, doing a tantric retreat will not
be of any help. A yogi in the Yamantaka tantra from Lower Paenpo was also rebornas a hungry ghost, taking the form of the tutelary deity. Some of his fellowpractitioners were performing a burnt offering for the dead; this yogi went to it tobeg for food.
Kyabje Pabongka Rinpoche told how an elder of Vikramashila Monastery was
reborn as a hungry ghost with a deformed hand.
So, if you are unable to modify your behaviour out of a belief in the law of cause
and effect, being a scholar or adept will be of no help at all. And it is said: ‘Karmaripens in inconceivable ways - even lords of love are born as animals.’ In otherwords, they say that even mahatma Bodhisattvas have taken rebirth in the lowerrealms when they ignored the law of cause and effect. This is why setting one’smotivation is the start of all meditations, why the optimum human rebirth is thestart of the Lam-rim, and why the law of cause and effect is the start of putting theDharma into practice. The law of cause and effect has even been called ‘the correctview for worldly people.’ Here ‘worldly people’ is taken to mean ordinary beings;the whole phrase means that ordinary beings should, above all, act according tothese laws. A great many people these days pretend to esteem the view highly, butyou must first develop believing faith in the law of cause and effect and then modifyyour behaviour accordingly. If you do not do this you may mumble your recitationsand pretend you are recalling the Dharma, or work hard at imitating meditativeabsorption and pretend that this is meditating on the view, but these are just signsthat you do not know what ‘Dharma’ entails.
Some people commit sins all day and night and even order others, servants and
pupils, to carry out many sinful actions all over the place. These people may gothrough the motions of getting up early and going to bed late after doing theirrecitations, but this is the wrong way to go about a practice.
7So you must think about the law of cause and effect in order to develop this
believing faith in it. There are three sections here: (1) thinking about cause andeffect in general; (2) thinking about the specifics; (3) after thinking about thesethings, the way to modify your actions.
THINKING ABOUT CAUSE AND EFFECT IN GENERAL
This has two subsections: (1) thinking about cause and effect in a truly general way;
and (2) thinking about some specific points.
THINKING ABOUT CAUSE AND EFFECT IN A TRULY GENERAL
WAY
This has four subheadings: (1) how karma is fixed; (2) karma shows great increase;
(3) one does not meet with something if one has not created the karma for it tohappen; (4) karma once created will not disappear of its own accord. The Bhagavanhimself spoke of karma in these four ways, so they are most vital.
HOW KARMA IS FIXED
The Transmission of the Vinaya  says: ‘Whatever karma is created will bring a
corresponding result.’ In other words, the result of some virtuous action - the cause- can only be happiness; this cause does not bring suffering. The result of some non-virtuous action - the cause - can only be suffering; this cause does not bringhappiness. This is the fixed [aspect] of cause and effect. For example, it is fixedthat from the seed of a hot-tasting plant comes hot-tasting fruit. From the seed ofa bitter plant comes bitter fruit; from a sweet plant’s seed, sweet fruit. Now is thetime that we create karmic causes so we must exercise care, for it is impossible toput things right once the cause has produced its results.
When we get sick, for instance, having rituals performed may sometimes not
help; the ritual and the illness go their individual ways. If you plant the seed of ahot-tasting plant, chili for example, and then once it has started to grow you plantgrapes and peaches, say, around the chili as a way of making it turn sweet, the plantswill only grow as individuals [and not have the effect you want].
Cause and effect is extremely subtle, because any cause one accumulates will
bring its corresponding result. The monk Priyabhadra had an extremely ugly bodyand an extremely sweet voice. Both of these were caused by the following. In a pastlife he had been born a coolie when a certain king was building a huge stupa. Thestupa was so enormous that he said, ‘Why are they building this stupa so big? It will
8never get finished.’ Later, when the stupa was completed, he offered it a bell to
expiate what he had said.
While Atisha was in Tibet a Tibetan man was unconcerned when he committed
some trivial sin in front of him. This proved too much for Atisha who said, ‘Alas,you should not be so brazen. Cause and effect is subtle! Cause and effect is deep!’.
Once a monk spilt some grease over a cushion used by the Sangha in public
ceremonies. In his next life he was reborn as a man with a black back.
Another time, when a monk was dyeing his robes, they turned into pieces of
calf’s flesh; he was accused of stealing a calf and had to spend six months in prison.This was said to be the result of the following. In a past life he had accused aninnocent Pratyekabuddha of stealing a calf. The Pratyekabuddha was thrown intothe king’s prison for six days.
Sagama, mother of Mrgaradhara, a minister of the city of Shravasti, had thirty-
two sons, all wrestlers. Another minister of King Prasenajit caused them to fall outof favour; the king had all the sons put to death and the pile of their heads takento their mother. This resulted from thirty-two thieves in the past stealing a bull andkilling it. Sagama herself had been the thieves’ landlady when they killed the bull.
Kyabje Pabongka told these stories in more detail.This is how karma is fixed.
KARMA SHOWS GREAT INCREASE
Internal causes produce much greater effects than external causes. Even so, here
is an example of an external cause and its results: a great tree grows from but asingle tiny peach stone, and every year the tree yields hundreds of thousands ofthings - leaves and fruit. Though this is a big increase, internal causes yield evenbigger results.
When the Bhagavan visited the city of Nyagrodhika, a woman gave him a
handful of sweetmeats made of sesame, called ‘ladus.’ The Buddha predicted thatin a future life the woman would be reborn as a Buddha called Susvasti. Herhusband irreverently said, ‘Please don’t say such a thing just because she offeredyou some food, Buddha.’ The Buddha gave the illustration of the seed of the pipaltree, which is only the size of a mustard-seed, yet from it grows such a huge treethat it’s shadow falls over five hundred chariots, placed so that they do not toucheach other. Buddha then said that small karmic actions have great results. And so,the husband came to believe.
9Once a monk told some people, ‘Your voice is like a dog’s bark,’ or ‘like a frog’s
croak,’ or ‘like a monkey’s chatter.’ That monk had to take five hundredcorresponding rebirths for each insult.
In China, a man once wrote, ‘Scholars these days are like snakes,’ so his book
was called The Snake Simile Treatise. This author’s body later became racked withpain; his legs and arm shrank into his body, which turned into a snake’s. A snake’shead then worked its way out of a crack in his head. In that rebirth the author wasactually transformed into a snake.
In India, five hundred fishermen once caught a huge fish-like animal with
eighteen heads. The Buddha said this was the result of the following. The animalhad once been Manavagaura, and his mother had encouraged him to say tomembers of the Sangha, ‘You are like a dog,’ and so on. But when the Bhagavanarrived to give this pronouncement on the causes for the creature’s karma he wascriticised by Tirthikas who said, ‘Gautama the holy man is fond of vulgarspectacles.’ I have already told you this in greater detail in the preparatory ritessection.
These things arose from trivial insults - not from, say, killing a man and making
off with his horse. Before the nun Utpalavarna became ordained she had two sons.One of them was drowned, the other was eaten by a wolf. Her husband was killedby a snake. Her parents and their household perished in a fire. She then married apriest. While she was giving birth to a son her husband got drunk with another man.He then came home, killed her son and made her eat its flesh. She ran away andcame upon another householder whose wife had died. The householder tookUtpala as his wife but he, too, died and she was buried alive with his corpse, as wasthe local custom. A grave-robber dug her up and she became his wife. Later the kingkilled this husband [who was also] a bandit chief; she was yet again buried withthe corpse. It is said that she underwent these miseries as a result of the following.In a former rebirth, Utpala had been a king’s chief concubine. She had killed thequeen’s son but sworn many oaths denying it.
There are very many such stories. Cause and effect is even subtler and more
obscure than emptiness: Shravaka and Pratyekabuddha Arhats can understand andteach the subtle details of emptiness but the subtleties of cause and effect comeunder the jurisdiction of Buddhas alone and one must assess it solely through theirauthentic pronouncements. This law, in fact, is so subtle that one should avoid eventhe smallest sin. From The Sayings of the Buddha :
Do not think a small sin
Will not return in your future lives.Just as falling drops of water
10Will fill a large container,
The little sinsA churl accumulatesWill completely overwhelm him.
A trivial virtue will also grow into a good result. The universal emperor Mabhvata
ruled over the four continents, celestial realms and all. They say this was the resultof his having thrown a handful of lentils [as an offering to] Buddha Vipashyin. Fourof the lentils landed in Vipashyin’s begging bowl and one stuck to his crownprotrusion.
Once, while Buddha was still alive, there was a brahmin named Survanavasu.
Gold coins would come out of his hands. There was an inexhaustible supply ofcoins, said to be a result from a past life when he had been a timber merchant, whenhe had once received a gold coin in payment for some wood and offered it, droppedin a clay pot full of water, to Buddha Kashyapa.
Kanakavatsa was an Elder of the Sangha. At the time of his birth seven golden
elephants appeared spontaneously in his family’s treasure-vaults. All the elephants’droppings and urine were gold, so Kanakavatsa was well provided for. Seven timesKing Ajatashatru had the elephants stolen, but this did not succeed because theelephants would sink into the ground [and return to their owner]. This was said tohave been the result of a past life when Kanakavatsa had restored and gilded a claystatue of Buddha Kanakamuni’s elephant mount.
When the nun Shukla was born from her mother’s womb she was already
wearing clothes of fine linen. When she was ordained, the clothes were transformedinto robes. These are said to have been results from a past life when she had beena beggar, and she and her husband had had only one garment between them and hadto take turns going outside. Yet they offered this garment to Buddha Kanakamuni,though it could have meant their deaths. The act ripened into a tangible result forboth of them in that very life: the king and his concubines gave them clothes.
One must not belittle the practice of even small virtues. From The Sayings of
the Buddha :
Do not think a small virtue
Will not return in your future lives.Just as falling drops of waterWill fill a large container,The little virtuesThe steadfast accumulateWill completely overwhelm them.
11These two sections on how karma is fixed and on how it increases make one decide
that one should definitely practise virtue and abandon sin, and that one shouldpractise even the smallest virtue and abandon even the smallest sin.
ONE DOES NOT MEET WITH SOMETHING IF ONE HAS NOT
CREATED THE KARMA FOR IT TO HAPPEN
When there is a war or other conflict, some people claim, ‘I had no talisman against
weapons, yet when people fired many guns I came to no harm.’ You might take thisto be something amazing, but it is a case of their not meeting with something forwhich they had not created the karma.
Some people are at first unscathed by weapons but later get killed. Some will
say, ‘Their talisman must have weakened,’ but this indicates that they do notunderstand cause and effect. It was nothing of the sort: initially these people hadnot met with [a situation created by their] karma. Later on, they did. When one doesnot meet with [a situation created by one’s] karma, one will not die, despite beingburnt in a fire. Once the householder Agnibhu was burnt in a fire together with hismother’s corpse, but he did not die and later gained arhatship. Ajatashatru stole[Kanakavatsa’s] golden elephants seven times but he derived no benefit, becausethe elephants sank into the ground each time.
King Udayana’s concubine Shyamavati had achieved the results of a Never
Returner [and so could fly]. Her retinue of five hundred ladies had seen the truth[that is, gained the path of seeing]. Yet when Akala the brahmin set fire to herapartments, [because in a previous life they had burnt down a brahmin’s hut] theycould only fly a small distance away. Shyamavati said, ‘Who rules us but our ownkarma, that we ourselves created and accumulated?’ They all dived into the fire likemoths into a flame and were burned. There was also a woman servant namedKubjottara, who had not achieved any magic powers [but did not share this karma].She escaped from the fire by fleeing into a ditch full of water.
When Virudhaka waged war against the Shakyas, all seventy-seven thousand
of them were Stream Enterers, but this did not save them from being killed. A fewwho had not created the appropriate karma fled far away and escaped, while thegreat name of Shakya was brought low.
The city of Ravana was buried under a rain of earth. The king, his ministers and
subjects were all buried, but two ministers escaped.
These are some of the examples of people not meeting with something because
of not possessing the karma for it.
12KARMA ONCE CREATED WILL NOT DISAPPEAR OF ITS OWN
ACCORD
As a sutra tells us:
The karma of embodied beings
Does not vanish over hundreds of aeons.If the prerequisites and the time are right,Karma will ripen to results.
Karma does not grow stale after a long time, nor does it lessen, become non-
existent, and so on. It will sooner or later ripen into a result, as in the story of AryaVibhudatta, who had achieved arhatship yet could not obtain alms, or if he did, thealms would vanish for some reason. His dying words were, ‘The soup of ashes.’Then he left his body.
The householder Shrijata had in his mind-stream so few and such small root
virtues to contribute to his liberation that an Arhat [Shariputra] could not see them.He had received these root merits in the following way. Shrijata had taken rebirthas a fly in a past life. He had followed the scent of a dry animal-dropping in a drain,had landed on it, and by accident had circumambulated a stupa when the droppingwas swept away by some water.
A pig was once chased around a stupa by a dog; it was reborn as a god after its
death.
When King Virudhaka was persecuting the Shakyas, the Bhagavan Buddha
himself had, to common appearances, a back ailment. Once, in a past life as a child,a number of fishermen had caught two huge fish to eat and he had rejoiced over this.The back ailment was the result. The story goes that Virudhaka himself was burntto death in a fire, despite living completely surrounded by water.
The Buddha predicted that a Jain named Duhkhitaka would die from ill-
digested food. The Jain went on a fast, but died anyway from undigested water andsugar cane.
Nagarjuna had gained knowledge of immortality, but in a past life he had sliced
through an ant’s neck while cutting grass, and because of that karma he died bylosing his head.
The Shravaka Maudgalyayana was the best at working miracles, yet some
priests, whose heads were shaven, except for the small lank of hair at the crown,managed to beat him with their staffs. Maudgalyayana’s whole body resembled abent bulrush. ‘His flesh and bones were beaten to a pulp.’ Shariputra asked himwhy he had not shown them his miraculous powers. Maudgalyayana replied that
13he had been completely under the power of his karma; how could he create a
miracle if he was not even able to bluff his way out? In a past life he had saidsomething insulting to his mother; the karma had not disappeared of its own, andthis was the result.
As for the results of evil karma, if you cannot purify the evil karma itself through
the four powers of confession and restraint, it will not let you go, even in your lastlife [as a Bodhisattva]. As The Sutra on the Wise and Foolish , The One Hundred
Verses from the Sutras , The One Hundred Life-stories , The Transmission of the
Vinaya, and so forth tell, after you have accumulated either a sin or a virtue, the
result will not disappear. It is impossible for the karma to become non-existent,which is why they say you must modify your actions even on the subtlest level.
The next two sections are a discussion of sin and a contemplation of techniques to
ensure that your virtue will not be destroyed by anger. In any case you must decideto modify your behaviour properly according to the law of cause and effect. Theabove four headings were mainly to promote faith in cause and effect. When youwant to modify your behaviour according to cause and effect because of your faith,you should think about the ten-fold path of karma - a rough overall schemedescribing virtue and sin - because this makes the task of modifying your behavioureasier. From Engaging in the Middle Way :
Apart from ethics, there is no cause
Of high rebirth or definite excellence:[Not] for ordinary beings, [for the Shravakas]Produced by enlightened speech,For beings certain to gainEnlightenment by themselves,Or for Children of the Victors.
In other words, the ten-fold path of karma is the foundation of high rebirths for
people who have entered the path; it is the foundation for the sort of enlightenmentenjoyed by people inclined towards being Shravakas and Pratyekabuddhas; and itis the foundation for the supreme, full enlightenment of Bodhisattvas. It istherefore vital for ordinary beings initially, in this Small Scope section, to keep theethics of modifying their behaviour according to the black and white sides of causeand effect.
14THINKING ABOUT SOME OF THE SPECIFICS OF CAUSE AND
EFFECT
This has three sections: (1) thinking about the black side of cause and effect; (2)
thinking about the white side of cause and effect; (3) teaching about the doors thatunintentionally lead to powerful karma.
THINKING ABOUT THE BLACK SIDE OF CAUSE AND EFFECT
This itself has three sections: (1) the actual black karmic process; (2) the
differences that make for heavy or light karma; (3) teaching what the results ofthese karmas are.
THE ACTUAL BLACK KARMIC PROCESS
If the law of cause and effect is so important even on a very subtle level, what then
is the basis for modifying one’s behaviour? The Treasury of Metaphysics  tells us:
The ten-fold process of karma,
Be it black, be it white,Was taught to serveAs an overall summary of karma.
This says that virtue or non-virtue can be summarised under ten types. Even the
ordained, not just ordinary lay people, must modify their behaviour. That is whyLongdoel Lama Rinpoche was so punctilious about letting people know about anyof the ten non-virtues he had committed - in fact, he would draw attention to them.
Engaging in the Deeds of Bodhisattvas  says:
Though you think you want to avoid suffering,
You actually hasten on to suffering.You may want happinessBut through benightednessYou destroy happiness like an enemy.
In other words, we may desire happiness but we don’t understand how to create
virtue, the cause for our having happiness. We may not want suffering but we don’tunderstand that we must abandon sin, the cause of suffering. So, we defeathappiness - the very thing we want - as if it were our enemy. We modify ourbehaviour the wrong way round.
15Some people who think at a low level might feel, ‘I do not know what the ten
non-virtues are.’ But if we can learn twenty or thirty songs it is impossible that wecannot know the ten non-virtues after hearing about them. We will go to the lowerrealms not because we don’t know the Dharma or haven’t studied it, but becausewe know the Dharma but do not put it into practice. It is vital to put Dharma intopractice.
The ten non-virtues, the things to abandon, are:
Karma of the body has three aspects,
That of speech has four, and mind, three.Expiate each of these ten non-virtues.
In other words, killing, taking things not given to you , and sexual misconduct  are
the three non-virtues of body. Lying, divisive speech , insulting words , and idle
gossip are the four of speech. The three of mind are covetousness , harmful intent ,
and wrong views.
Each of these non-virtues has four components: the basis, intention, deed, and
final step.
KILLING
The basis of killing involves another being, quite distinct from oneselves, that is
to be killed - a sheep for example. The intention itself has three parts: the
recognition , motive, and delusion. Here, recognition  is to recognise unmistakenly
that a thing is what it is. The motive is wanting to kill. The delusion is any of the
three delusions. An example of killing out of hostility would be getting angry at,say, an enemy and striking him with a weapon. An example of killing out ofattachment is killing a sheep because one is attached to its meat, hide, and so forth.An instance of killing out of benighted ignorance is the killing of a sentient beingby a Tirthika or any such person to make an offering of its meat and blood, withthe thought or claim that this is not a misdeed. The deed is carrying out the killing
using poison, one of the five types of weapons, or whatever else may be used.Killing need not be something obvious like stabbing with a knife: it could also be
done through black magic, mantras, and so forth. The final step is the other being’s
death.
When there is a full set of all these, the karmic process of killing has been
completed. Ordering someone else to do the killing is no different from doing ityourself A Tresury of Metaphysics  says: ‘It is all one for armies and so forth: all
of them have equally done the deed.’ That is, if eight people kill a sheep, each ofthem does not receive a share of the sin: each one receives the full sin of killing a
16sheep. When a general sends out many soldiers to the slaughter and a thousand men
are killed, each soldier commits the sin of killing as many men as an individualsoldier is capable of doing; the general, however, gets the full sin of killing all onethousand men.
We may set a good example here in the Central Province, but everywhere in
Tibet I believe ordained people are making others slaughter cattle for them,claiming, ‘They are our serfs.’ But the slaughterer and the person who made himdo it each commits the sin of taking a life. If the monk had done the killing withhis own hands, only one person would have committed the sin. How much betterif he had not asked the other person to assist and had instead done the killinghimself - the other person would not have acquired the additional sin. We may thinkthat we do not acquire the sin of actually killing a living being but we do because
it is also a great sin to make others kill for us.
Once, some monks and novices herded a goat, a sheep, and a bull into a pen.
When the animals were about to be slaughtered, the goat said to the other two:‘They want to kill us.’
‘But they take refuge every day,’ said the bull. ‘They fold their hands together,
shut their eyes and say, “May all sentient beings have happiness and its cause.”They will not kill us!’
‘They are disciples of the Buddha,’ the sheep said. ‘When they embarked on the
teachings, they promised to keep the advice that goes with taking refuge. The mainadvice is not to harm sentient beings. Surely they will not harm us!’
The animals talked among themselves a great deal. Then, early that morning the
lay butcher went to the monks’ home. The animals saw him and listened.
‘I’m busy today,’ the butcher said with some heat. ‘Could you ask somebody
else to help you?’
‘I’ve run out of things for lunch,’ one monk insisted. ‘Help me out by butchering
these three today.’
The butcher had to promise to do it.The three animals heard that they were certain to die. The two who had said this
would not happen were crying helplessly. Just then, the monk came, telling thebeads on his rosary, taking refuge, and reciting om mani padme hum ; he had come
to see if the goat, sheep, and bull were fat enough.
The three said that it was not right for monks to kill sentient beings, or to get
others to do so. ‘It would be best if we were not killed. If we die, monk, you yourselfwill be killing us.’
The monk did nothing. The butcher returned and bound the legs of the three
animals with a rope. He knocked the bull unconscious with a mallet, thrust a sharp
17sword into the goat’s and sheep’s ribs up to the hilt, and used sharp hooks to cut
their main blood vessels. Thus the animals went through inconceivable suffering.The bull cried out in a pathetic voice: ‘Hear me, all the Buddhas of the tendirections. I have evil tidings. The monks of this land are only pale reflections ofmonks, for they have sentient beings killed - sentient beings who were once theirmothers.’ The victory standard of the Dharma was lowered, and the standard of thedemons raised on high; all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas were saddened.
This was the dialogue between the monk, goat, sheep, and bull - and all for the
sake of lunch for a few monks! A Clear Mirror  gives a longer version.
Such things detract from the teachings; it is vital to avoid killing living beings.
My own guru, my refuge and protector, was especially good at making othersrepent and give up killing other beings. And when I went to Kham I was able to putan end to the mass slaughtering of animals that Sog Tsaendaen and othermonasteries used to carry out to raise funds. I thought this was the best thing I coulddo in this life for the Dharma.
TAKING WHAT IS NOT GIVENThe basis is another person’s possession. The intention is made up of three parts:
the recognition  should be unmistaken; the motive is wanting to take the thing
because it will not be given to you; the delusion is one of the three poisons. An
example of anger would be stealing property from an enemy. An example ofattachment is being attracted to someone else’s property and stealing it throughsubterfuge. An example of benighted ignorance is the tradition among non-Buddhists that ‘When a brahmin’s fortunes decline, we claim it is Dharma for himto steal.’ In other words, they do not count it as a misdeed.
The deed need not be skulking around at night, for example. Taking what is not
given could be an ordained person’s abuse of charity, an official’s meting out ofan undeserved punishment, the sort of practice of generosity that gives away apenny in the hope of receiving a pound, and so on. When a monk breaks themonastic rules he is made to do prostrations and the like; the point of doing theseis so that none of the above misdeeds will occur.
To sum up: you want to obtain a particular piece of property, even though the
other person does not want to part with it. You obtain it through various deceitfulmeans, making that person powerless to withhold it from you. Not only are we ingreat danger of committing this sort of theft but we are also thieves if we do anyof the following. We could let someone have another person’s property orpossessions, even if these are worth only a few zho. Or we could be lent something,
18and much later take possession when its owner has forgotten about it. Or we could
think, ‘Wouldn’t it be good if he has forgotten,’ and find out that he has.
The final step comes when you think you have received the thing - you are then
a thief. If you are a novice, it is tantamount to breaking a major vow; if a fullyordained monk, you break a major vow.
SEXUAL MISCONDUCTFor lay people the basis is: any wrong orifice, or, all orifices except the vagina; any
wrong time, such as when the woman is pregnant or during one-day vows; at anyimproper place, such as before one’s guru or near a stupa; any wrong partner, suchas one’s own mother [or father].
For ordained people, all sexual activity becomes sexual misconduct.The recognition  is: one must be in no doubt that the act is sexual misconduct;
but when you break a major monk’s vow of celibacy, they say it does not matterif you are mistaken or not.
The delusion is one of the three poisons. The motive is wanting to be perverse.
The deed is the two organs coming into contact, and so forth. The final step  is
completed when one experiences orgasm.
LYING
One can lie about eight things: (1) something one has seen with one’s eye-
consciousness, heard with one’s ear-consciousness, or sensed with one’s nose,tongue, or body-consciousnesses individually; (2) something one has seen withone’s eye-consciousness, etc., collectively; (3) something one has not seen withone’s eye-consciousness, etc., individually; (4) something one has not seen withone’s eye-consciousness, etc., collectively; (5) something one has experiencedwith one’s mental consciousness; (6) something one has not experienced withone’s mental consciousness; (7) something one knows; (8) something one does notknow.
You must be speaking to a being that is going to understand what you are saying
in human speech. The components of the intention are as follows. The recognition
is recognising that you are, for example, saying you did not see something, whenyou in fact did. The motive is wanting to say such a thing. The delusion is one of
the three poisons.
The deed is speaking lying words, or lying by some movement of your head
without saying anything, for example. The final step  is when the other person
understands what you mean.
19It would not be right, however, to give an honest answer if some potential killers
ask you, ‘Where has our victim gone?’ However, those who still have somemisgivings over this must do the following. When asked, ‘Did the man go thisway?’ You should say something irrelevant to throw them off, like: ‘I’m goinground to see what’s-his-name tonight.’
DIVISIVE SPEECHThe basis can be either people who get along, or those who do not. The recognition
should be unmistaken; the motive is wanting to cause division; the delusion is one
of the three poisons. The deed is as follows. You wish to divide people who get
along, or not to effect a reconciliation between those who do not; it makes nodifference if your divisive speech is the truth or lies. Some people consider doingthese things to be a good quality, but they are not. Divisive speech causes greatharm and so can’t be right.
The final step is when people understand the meaning of your words. Even so,
the karma is still not complete if the divisive words you say have the oppositeeffect. The karma is not that of divisive speech if your words do not divide people- people not getting along with each other, and so forth - because the words werenot understood.
INSULTING WORDS
The basis of insulting words could be either a sentient being that serves as the basis
for development of harmful intentions, or an inanimate object such as a thorn.
The recognition  should be unmistaken. The delusion is one of the three poisons.
The motive is wanting to say such words. The deed is speaking about faults in
another person’s ethics, race, body, and so on. You could tell the truth or lies; forexample, you could say, ‘You’re blind’ to either a blind person or to someone notblind. When you talk about faults in the other person’s ethics, race, body, and soforth, even if you say it pleasantly, you have committed the misdeed of insultingwords if the other person’s feelings are hurt.
The final step is when the meaning of the words is understood. The words must
be understood; the karmic process is therefore incomplete if you say them toinanimate objects.
IDLE GOSSIPThe basis is something frivolous. The recognition  is recognising that the thing you
want to talk about is frivolous. The subject of idle gossip may or may not be a
20famous king; anything can serve as the actual basis of the idle gossip. The motive
is wanting to talk. The delusion is one of the three poisons. The deed is talking
about the king, the army, or whatever.
These days we monks discuss many things when a large group of us gets
together in the monastery grounds: the government, China, India, and so on. Thisis idle gossip. Idle gossip is the least of the ten non-virtues, but it is the best wayto waste our human lives. The evil of idle gossip bedevils public [religious]ceremonies and monks continually get together in their rooms and spend theirlunchtime making too much conversation. Atisha said: ‘When in company, checkyour speech; when alone, check your mind.’ In other words, you must be carefuleven if you have only one friend.
Stories and discussions on non-Buddhist treatises are idle gossip.Although you can get other people to do six of the non-virtues of body and
speech for you, except for sexual misconduct, you yourself are also involved in thekarmic process.
COVETOUSNESSThe basis is another’s property or possessions. Suppose you go to the market, see
an attractive piece of merchandise and think, ‘If only I had that!’ and are almostsick with desire.
The recognition  is recognising the particular object serving as the basis of your
covetousness as being that particular object.
The motive, deed, and final step must be assumed to be functions of the one
thought. The motive is thinking, ‘If only this or that valuable thing were mine. The
delusion is one of the three poisons. The deed is when the thought becomes
stronger: ‘I will make it mine.’ The final step is when the thought becomes stronger
still and you decide that you will employ some means of making the valuable objectyour own.
You can even covet your own possessions.When we go to the markets in Lhasa, for example, we develop covetousness
hundreds of thousands of times, because anything we do there we do withoutremembrance. We should apply the antidote to covetousness and think how theseillusory goods are without essence.
HARMFUL INTENT
The basis, delusions , and so on, of harmful intentions are the same as those of
insulting words. The motive is either wanting to inflict harm by, for example,
beating and killing the basis of the harmful intentions, or wishing things like,
21‘Wouldn’t it be good if that other person were ruined.’ The deed is putting more
effort [into the thought]. The final step is deciding [to harm that person].
We perform the tantric activities of peace, increase, power, and wrath; if we do
not do these with stable, good motives or solely for the sake of sentient beings, thereis a danger that they can become forms of covetousness, harmful intent, and so on.We must therefore be careful.
WRONG VIEWSThe basis must be something that exists: cause and effect, the four truths, the Three
Jewels, and so on. A wrong view is to view these things as non-existent; denyingthese things, for example, is saying they do not exist.
The Tirthika Rshi Akshipada lusted after his own daughter and wanted to sleep
with her, so he composed The Hundred Thousand Verses  in which he claimed that
there were no other rebirths than this one. Other examples are the sixteen evil,fabricated, wrong views, and so forth.
The recognition  is like the other nine forms of recognition except that one does
not recognise that the thing being denied is in fact true. The deed is the intention
to deny the thing serving as the basis. The final step is to decide that it does not exist.
There is little chance that we would actually [hold wrong views], but there is
a danger that we could be swayed into doing so by bad company, that is, people withonly small amounts of merit.
Now that we can identify these ten properly, it is vital that we scrupulously avoid
doing them.
THE DIFFERENCES THAT MAKE FOR HEAVY OR LIGHT KARMA
There are six of these:HEAVY BY NATUREThe seven karmic actions of body and speech range from the heaviest first, killing,
to the lightest last of all. The reason is that the order reflects the amount of sufferingthat other beings will have. An illustration: no matter how different we may be fromeach other, none of us cherishes our possessions as much as we do our lives. Killingtherefore causes more suffering to another person than taking something not given.However, with the three non-virtues of the mind, the lightest is first and theheaviest last of all.
22HEAVY BECAUSE OF THE INTENTION
When the intention is due to a very strong delusion but the non-virtue, using
insulting words, for example, is by nature light, as when one says ‘You mangy olddog’ out of very great anger, this act then becomes heavy.
HEAVY BECAUSE OF THE DEEDAn example of this is killing sadistically. Also, killing an elephant, for example,
is a heavier sin than killing an insect.
Killing animals with huge bodies or with great physical strength is a bigger sin
because they experience greater suffering. In some lands they burn live frogs,poultry, and insects; these acts are heavy both because of their nature and becauseof the deeds themselves.
HEAVY BECAUSE OF THE BASIS
It is a heavy sin, for example, to cast dirty looks at karmically potent beings such
as one’s guru, ordination master, Bodhisattvas, members of the Sangha, parents,and so forth.
HEAVY BECAUSE OF ALWAYS BEING DONEIdle gossip, for example, is heavy because one is always doing it.HEAVY BECAUSE NO ANTIDOTE HAS BEEN APPLIEDThe sins in the mind-stream of a person who never performs a single virtue are
extremely heavy.
There are one-to-six types of heaviness [in any action]. Two examples of types
of heaviness are: casting a dirty look at a Bodhisattva when one is very angry, orkilling an animal sadistically. Singing and dancing out of great attachment is anexample of only one type of heaviness. All six types of heaviness are present if abutcher, say, who always sins and never does anything virtuous, gets very angrywith his parents and kills them sadistically.
No matter how light our sins may be, we are always adding to their heaviness.
TEACHING WHAT THE RESULTS OF THESE KARMAS ARE
There are three types: ripened results, results congruent with the cause, and
environmental results.
23When one commits any of the ten non-virtues, one has to undergo four results
instead of three, because results congruent with the cause are subdivided into twotypes: experiences congruent with the cause, and action congruent with the cause.
Great non-virtues will lead to rebirth in hell; medium non-virtues to rebirth as
a hungry ghost; small ones to rebirth as an animal. Let us take killing as an example.The ripened result could be rebirth in hell. Later one gets free of the hells and isreborn as a human being, but one’s life is short, with much sickness: theexperiences congruent with the cause. One may also have liked killing ever sincechildhood: the action congruent with the cause. The environmental results occurin the environment: food, drink, medicine, and so on, have little power. After wehave been born in hell and lived with our bodies indistinguishable from the firesthere, we could then be born as a human being who likes to kill. Our killingperpetuates this process and we are again thrown into the lower realms. The mostdisheartening results of all are the actions congruent with the cause; that is whythey say we must work hard at the means to prevent actions congruent with non-virtuous causes from occurring, and to promote the actions congruent withvirtuous causes.
Now, we will deal with the other non-virtues - taking things not given, and so
on - in their order. Experiences congruent with the cause are: [for stealing] you willlack possessions, or have to share them with others; [for sexual misconduct] youwill be unable to keep your followers, servants, or spouses; [for lying] others willnot believe you; [for divisive speech] you will have few friends, be withoutfollowers, servants, and so forth; [for insulting words] others will speak ill of you;[for idle gossip] your words will carry little weight because others will think littleof what you say; [for covetousness] you will not achieve your aims; [for harmfulintent] your surroundings will be terrifying; and [for wrong views] you will beblind to the right view.
Some sinners have long lives in which all goes well for them; some Dharma
practitioners have illness, short lives, and so on. There are many causes for this:the causes for these effects lie in past lives. When something undesirable happensto us in this rebirth, we think that other more immediate circumstances areresponsible, but this is not so. Normally these things are created by karma from pastlives.
Actions congruent with the cause are as follows. In this life there are those who,
since childhood, have liked stealing things; this comes from their having takenthings not given to them in past lives. There are children skilled at making otherchildren steal; such children like to indulge in stealing. Other actions congruentwith the cause are analogous and easy to understand. The actions congruent with
24the causes of covetousness, harmful intent and wrong views are an increase in
attachment, hostility, and benightedness.
The environmental conditions due to taking things not given are: few crops and
fruit; bitter frosts, hails, and so on; little milk or curds etc. [Due to sexualmisconduct] you have to live in places that are muddy or filthy, for example; [dueto lying] there will be many cheats about; [from divisive speech] you will have tolive in places where the ground is uneven; [from insulting words] you will be bornin a place where there are many tree-stumps and brambles; [due to idle gossip] thecrops will fail and it will rain at the wrong times; [due to covetousness] all yourpleasures will be overshadowed; [due to harmful intent] there will be much war,sickness, and famine; [due to wrong views] your sources of water and preciousthings will dry up.
So, if you have studied and know what happens through the results of non-virtue
and yet still indulge in them knowingly, it is like jumping off a cliff with your eyeswide open.
The ground was once quite good; now it is no good at all, it has become infertile,
and so on. Karma did this. Earlier in this fortunate aeon the ground was magnificentbut it has gradually declined, and is now eroded with gullies and ravines.
THINKING ABOUT THE WHITE SIDE OF CAUSE AND EFFECT
This has two sections: (1) teaching the actual white karmic process; (2) teaching
its results.
TEACHING THE ACTUAL WHITE KARMIC PROCESS
Merely refraining from committing the ten non-virtues will not complete the white
karmic process. The complete process is assumed to be: identifying the ten non-virtues, refraining from doing them after seeing their drawbacks, and then havingthe thought of abandoning them, the ultimate form of restraint. The virtue of notkilling, for example, has four parts: the basis, intention, deed, and final step. Takethe white karmic action of not killing a sheep. The sheep is the basis of the karma.
You see the drawbacks of killing the sheep and want not to kill it, thinking, ‘Itwould not be right.’ This is the motive. When this thought becomes even stronger
and you see that killing the sheep would be a misdeed, you try to entirely refrainfrom killing it; this attempt is the deed of the white karma of foregoing killing the
sheep. The karmic process is complete when you are quite definite that you willnot kill it: you see the drawbacks of killing the sheep and think you will completely
25refrain from killing it - this is [equivalent to] a karmic action of the body. This is
the final step to the white karma of not killing a sheep.
When you are going to steal something not given, for example, the motive for
not taking it would be the thought: ‘This valuable thing is the basis for my sufferingand degradation; this evil action will be the cause of my going to the lower realms,so to do it would not be right.’ The deed is your attempt to give up this karmic
action. The karmic process is complete when you are quite definite aboutabandoning [the deed]. Apply the same principles to the other non-virtues, such assexual misconduct.
TEACHING ITS RESULTS
This has three sections.
THE RIPENED RESULT
You take rebirth as a god of the higher realms [that is, in the Form and Formless
Realms] because of highly virtuous karma; as a Desire Realm god owing tomedium virtuous karma; and as a human being owing to small virtuous karma.
RESULTS CONGRUENT WITH THE CAUSEThere are two types of these. Experiences congruent with the cause are : long life,
great wealth, harmony with your spouse, people heeding what you say, harmonywith your friends, and so on.
Examples of actions congruent with the cause  appear in some people -
reincarnations of saints, for example - who right from birth develop renunciationand compassion on their own.
ENVIRONMENTAL RESULTS
These are easy to understand: they are the opposites of the above environmental
results for the ten non-virtues - food, drink, medicine with great power, and so on.
TEACHING ABOUT THE DOORS THAT UNINTENTIONALLY LEAD
TO POWERFUL KARMA
This has four sections.
26POWERFUL OWING TO THE FIELD
Generosity becomes more and more powerful when practised towards ordinary
people, one’s parents, practitioners of virtue, lay or ordained Bodhisattvas,Buddhas, and one’s gurus respectively. It is a much greater sin to give aBodhisattva a scornful look than to throw all the sentient beings of the three realmsinto prison and pluck out their eyes. It is more beneficial to fold one’s hands outof faith as a sign of respect for a Bodhisattva than to release all those sentient beingsfrom prison and give them eyes. Similarly, if a monk kills an animal, he breaks onlya minor vow. If he kills a human being, he breaks a major vow.
POWERFUL BECAUSE ONE HAD BEEN A CANDIDATE FOR VOWS
A sutra says one’s virtue is more extensive if one has taken vows than if one has
not. And the same holds for non-virtues: it is a heavier sin for someone ordainedto commit a trivial misdeed than for a lay person to indulge in the ten non-virtues.This is why it is so heavy when people who hold bodhichitta and tantric vowscommit misdeeds. Some might claim, ‘It is a great sin to take vows,’ and avoidthem, but this need not be so. From Engaging in the Middle Way : ‘There is no cause
for high rebirth other than ethics.’ That is, in order to gain a human rebirth in afuture life you must definitely take and keep vows. If you do not, and merelypractise generosity, say, you may be reborn as an animal, a naga, for instance.
If you take a vow you will receive virtue continuously. And if you take an
unvirtuous vow you will continuously receive non-virtue: a butcher and a womanwho serves alcohol are examples of people who have taken unvirtuous vows andtheir sins will continually increase, even while they are sleeping or relaxing.
Two people may live together, and one of them may have taken a vow not to
kill while the other has not. Both of them may equally not kill the whole time, butthe person without the vows does not receive the virtue that comes from abandoningkilling, whereas the virtue of the person with the vow will increase every day.Similarly, people with lay, novice, or full ordination vows may not make anyspecial effort to create root virtues but at the very least they still see an increase infive, thirty-six, or two hundred and fifty-three types of virtue respectively, evenwhen they sleep. And this applies to an incalculable degree, more than for any ofthe above, for people holding the bodhichitta vow. As Engaging in the Deeds of
Bodhisattvas  says:
Thereafter, even in their sleep,
Or in unguarded moments,
27Their merit will have much power.
Much merit comes to them continuallyAnd will become as enormous as space itself
People with tantric vows see one hundred thousand times more increase than even
this. Thus, someone who has not taken any vows does not create these special rootvirtues; contrast this with someone holding vows who every day sees an increasein virtue and so profits greatly. The narrow-minded should therefore not havewrong views: even lay people must be encouraged to take one-day vows, one-dayfasting vows, and bodhichitta vows.
There are two types of prohibitions: natural and declared prohibitions.
Prohibitions of the first type are assumed to be as follows. One of their features istheir cause: one’s actual motives are non-virtuous ones. Another feature is theirnature: their natures are sinful and they embody non-virtue. Yet another feature istheir result: a part of their nature is that they are capable of ripening into anunpleasant result. No matter whether someone has taken vows or not, if thesebasics are present that person will generate a prohibited sin.
The second, the declared prohibition, is any karmic action or [resulting]
obscuration that goes against a ruling made by the Buddha. They are assumed tobe as follows. One of their features is the cause: one’s actual motives are virtuousor neutral thoughts. Their nature is another feature: they embody a neutral nature.Another feature is their result: part of their nature is that they are not capable ofripening into unpleasant results.
If you break a minor vow and the cause, that is your motivation, is linked to
something non-virtuous - thoughts of ignoring your vows, and the like - you willthen commit a sin and break a minor vow: that is a natural prohibition and adeclared prohibition. If you break the minor vow with a neutral motive, you breakthe minor vow by going against a ruling of the Buddha but you do not commit thesin - the natural prohibition. If a monk kills an animal he commits a sin - the naturalprohibition of killing an animal - and breaks a minor vow - the declared prohibition,for killing an animal is a minor transgression of the monk’s vow.
Such sins and broken minor vows may have the same nature but they are still
restricted to being separate things. No matter how much one applies some antidote,such as the four powers, to the broken [minor] vow, and although one may be ableto completely purify the sin having the same nature, doing this still does notproperly restore the broken [minor] vow that has the same nature as the sin. Also,even though one may properly restore the broken [minor] vow, if one does notexpiate the sin through the four powers one has still not purified it.
28One takes pratimoksha vows from one’s abbot, ordination master, and members
of the Sangha; one must therefore restore these vows in the presence of monks ormembers of the Sangha. Misdeeds against the bodhichitta vows must be confessedand purified before one’s gurus, the Victorious Ones, and their Children; misdeedsagainst tantric vows must be confessed and purified in the presence of the set ofdeities of the particular mandala.
It is much more beneficial to hold, at least, Mahayana one-day vows when
creating great root virtues by, for example, making offerings or building up our[merit] collection.
POWERFUL BECAUSE OF THE THINGS BEING DONE
Generosity with Dharma is better than generosity with material things; offering
one’s practice is better than offering material things; and so forth.
POWERFUL BECAUSE OF THE INTENTION
If in conjunction with bodhichitta one makes a single prayer to Tara or offers a
single butter lamp, one’s virtue will become very powerful, even more thanoffering one hundred thousand butter lamps without bodhichitta.
These headings teach the things you must in general avoid - non-virtue - and the
things you must practise - virtue.
If you are to become skilled at doing a practice you must know how to build up
a huge amount of virtue without much trouble and how to reduce your non-virtue.If a monk, for example, performs, the preparatory rites once in conjunction withbodhichitta thoughts, it is powerful in all four ways owing to the field, his havingbeen a candidate for vows, the thing being done, and the intention.
There is also a difference between throwing and completing  karma. Throwing
karma is either virtue that [causes] one to be born in the upper realms, or non-virtuethat [causes] one to be born in the lower realms. Completing karma is not as fixed:one can have virtuous throwing karma and the completing karma be either virtuousor non-virtuous. Or the throwing karma can be non-virtuous and the completingkarma either virtuous or non-virtuous. So there are four possibilities.
For a happy human rebirth, for example, rebirth as a universal emperor, both
types of karma must be virtuous. A human rebirth marred by unpleasantness andhardship, rebirth as a beggar, for example, is a case of virtuous throwing karma andnon-virtuous completing karma. Rebirth in hell is an example of non-virtuousthrowing and completing karma. And examples of non-virtuous throwing karma
29and virtuous completing karma are being the horse or mule of the Dalai Lama or
Panchen Lama, or being their pet dogs.
A single karmic action can throw one into many bodies in succession, for
example, insulting someone once with the words ‘You’re like a frog’ can result intaking five hundred rebirths as a frog; or many karmic actions can result in onetaking a single body; and so on.
There are other types of karma: karma one is obliged to undergo, karma one is
not obliged to undergo, karma one has accumulated through some action, actionsdone that accumulated no karma, karma that one accumulated without doinganything.
The results of karma that one is certain to undergo can occur in three different
time periods. With tangible results: owing to some special motive or merit field oneexperiences the results during the same life that the karma was accumulated.  Withkarma to be undergone after rebirth, one experiences the results of a karmic actionin the next rebirth. With karma to be undergone in a number of rebirths’ time, oneundergoes the results of a karmic action in the rebirth after next or in subsequentrebirths. You should refer to such works as [Tsongkapa’s] Great or Medium Stages
of the Path  to understand these in more detail.
THINKING ABOUT SOME OF THE SPECIFICS
We should therefore fear the results of non-virtue and keep the ethics of abandoning
the ten non-virtues. If we practise the ten virtues properly we will not fall into thelower realms, and instead achieve a rebirth as a human being or god. Yet this aloneis insufficient for us to achieve liberation and omniscience. If we could gain thespecial high rebirth that has the eight ripened qualities, however, we could covermore ground on the path than would otherwise be possible. We must thereforeachieve such a rebirth with these eight ripened qualities. Great Tsongkapa said:
You will not cover much ground
Until you achieve a rebirthWith all the characteristicsFor practising the supreme path.Train yourself to have causesFor them all.
There are three headings here: (1) the ripened qualities; (2) their functions; (3) the
causes to achieve them.
30THE RIPENED QUALITIES
There are eight of these qualities: long life; a handsome body; high family; great
wealth; trustworthy speech; great power and fame; being a male; being strong inmind and body. In this world, good fruits in a field come from good seed.
Make no mistake: our wealth, the fact that we have such a sound high rebirth,
and so on, similarly all come from karmic actions in our past lives. And merelyhaving the fruits of this year’s harvest is not much help; one must make an effortto plant the seed for next year’s. Similarly, it is not helpful to have no curiosityabout one’s future rebirths, or to think about them and then get terrified. One willget nothing at all if one simply achieves the cause for an ordinary high rebirth; onemust achieve the cause to obtain a special type of rebirth suitable for the practiceof Dharma. Even more, one must have the eight ripened qualities - long life, ahandsome body, and so forth.
THE FUNCTIONS OF THE RIPENED QUALITIES
The first of these eight qualities [long life] will allow you to progress in the Dharma
because you can spend a lot of time creating root virtues for your own and forothers’ sakes.
Because of the second [a handsome body], you will attract disciples merely
through your looks. Atisha was an example of this.
The third [a high family] will make others pay proper heed to your orders.The fourth is great wealth. Because you will have great resources and a large
retinue, you will firstly attract sentient beings through your material possessions,then you will ripen them with Dharma. So this quality gives great impetus to yourwork for others’ sakes.
The fifth [trustworthy speech] enables others to apprehend the truth [emptiness].The sixth [great power and fame] makes others follow your orders quickly and
not disobey them, as if they were the king’s command.
The seventh [being a male] means that you will not be afraid in a crowd and that
when you live in deserted places you will have few hindrances in practisingDharma, and so on.
The eighth [being strong of mind and body] has these functions. You need a
strong body to practise great austerities as Milarepa did; you can then practiseDharma during adversity. With a strong mind you will not despair, no matter whatmay be involved in benefiting yourself and others - you will always be most happyto do whatever necessary. You will gain powerful conceptualising [wisdom] andthis will act as cause for your rapidly gaining clairvoyant Powers.
31THE CAUSES FOR ACHIEVING THESE RIPENED QUALITIES
Although it is good for Dharma practitioners to receive these eight, you may
wonder, ‘Will I receive them?’ You definitely will; it is like farmers planting seedin spring knowing that they will get the fruit in autumn. If in this rebirth we createthe cause for our receiving the eight ripened qualities and make pure prayers thatcarry over into future lives, we will get these eight as a result in future lives. Thisis because results happen when a full set of causes has been assembled.
Let us go through the eight qualities. The causes for the first, long life, are giving
up killing or harmful intention towards sentient beings; saving a life; sparing thelife and ending the suffering of, for example, minnows whose pond is drying up;giving food; relieving a monk of heavy work; giving medicine to the sick or nursingthem; and so on.
The main cause for having a handsome body is practising patience. However,
there are other causes: offering bright butter-lamps to images; erecting new objectsto represent the enlightened body, speech and mind; restoring these objects whenthey fall into disrepair; renewing their gilt and decorations; providing them withnew cloth coverings; giving other people new clothes and jewellery; and so on.
One cause for being born into a high family is not having an inflated opinion
of yourself - no matter whether you are a lay person or ordained - or of your goodqualities, race, ethics, wisdom, retinue, clothes, etc. Other causes are acting withhumility and abandoning all pride or feelings of superiority; and showing greatrespect to karmically potent beings such as your guru, ordination master, abbot,and members of the Sangha. Ordained people should respect anyone more learnedor older than themselves. Scholars must also accept the service or prostrations thatthe young pay them out of respect for the learning in their mind-streams; and whena young man is about to receive monk’s vows, he should be treated as an equal. Itmay be the custom to pay respect to practitioners or to the reincarnations of lamas,but you should do things like respecting scholars and the old; such things must bedone as properly as they were in Buddha’s time.
The Tibetan government, the Government of the Tushita Palace, uses the
sixteen unsullied laws of gods and humans that contain many extremely importantthings: the young should respect the old; one should esteem people with goodqualities or people who have been most kind to oneself, for example, one’s parents;one should help people brought low by sickness or poverty; and so on. If these arefollowed it will help the general happiness of the land. A story is told in The
Transmission of the Vinaya  of four animal friends who respected each other
according to their ages. Because of these animals’ ethical behaviour, the people ofKashi [near Benares] enjoyed great happiness. These four friends were animals,
32and yet this is what happened when the younger animals respected the older ones;
need I say that we practitioners of Dharma, ordained people, and so on, should alsodo the same - it will bring even greater happiness!
The causes for being wealthy are presenting the symbols of enlightened body,
speech and mind with new coverings or repainting them; giving clothes, food,drink, jewellery, and so on to people asking for them; helping people who do notask for help; and making offerings or practising generosity as much as you can topeople with good qualities or to those tormented by suffering.
Causes for having trustworthy speech are being punctilious in one’s speech and
taking pains to abandon non-virtue.
The causes for having great power are: being respectful and making offerings
to karmically potent beings such as one’s abbot, ordination master, the ThreeJewels, one’s parents, people older than oneself, and so on; making prayers toreceive these various qualities; and so on.
Causes for being born a male are preferring the male rebirth; not liking the
female state because one can see enough drawbacks to repudiate such a state andfeel it is not good to take such a rebirth; stopping oneself from wishing to have adesirable female body. Another cause is to invoke the names of great Bodhisattvas,as in the verse:
I pay respect and homage
To Jnanaguru, Prabhaketu, Pranidhanamati,Shantindriya, and Manjushri.
Other causes are not speaking ill of people censuring one, saving beings from being
castrated; and so on.
The causes for being strong of mind and body are performing chores that others
are too busy to do, or are physically, mentally or otherwise incapable of doing;helping others; not beating or whipping others; giving others food and drink; andso on.
If you make prayers that your rebirth with these eight ripened qualities may also
become an instrument of virtue, you could become like Atisha or the Dharmarajasof old. If you don’t make these noble prayers your rebirth could be non-virtuous:though you obtain a physical state that has the eight ripened qualities, you mightbecome a great force working for non-virtue - a king of some remote region, forexample. it is therefore vital to make strong prayers for this not to happen, so thatone may not have such a non-virtuous rebirth.
33Although the Dharma teachings on impermanence are important first, last, and
in the meantime, the fundamental practice in this section of the Small Scope is thatof modifying one’s behaviour according to the laws of cause and effect.
AFTER THINKING ABOUT THESE THINGS, THE WAY TO MODIFY
YOUR ACTIONS
This is in two parts: (1) the general teaching; (2) in particular, how to purify oneself
with the four powers.
THE GENERAL TEACHING
During your meditations you should repeatedly think over the discussions on
virtue and sin. In between sessions you should vigilantly and scrupulously modifyyour behaviour. Geshe Baen Gung-gyael used to count up his virtuous actions andhis sins [at the end of each day] with white and black pebbles; he then modified hisbehaviour accordingly. You must do the same.
From Engaging in the Deeds of Bodhisattvas :
How right for me to think diligently
All the time, both day and night:‘From non-virtue comes suffering; how, then,To be free of non-virtue?’...The Muni said that beliefIs the root of all things virtuous.The root of belief has always beenMeditation on [karmic] ripening effects.
In other words when you come to know the white and black sides of cause and
effect, you will always cultivate vigilance and scrupulousness. When you are indanger of taking a life, of lying, or whatever, you will immediately draw the line.
If you purify yourself of your small sins, expiate yourself of them and refrain
from doing them again, then, as we find in Nagarjuna’s Letter:
Whoever was once reckless,
May later become scrupulous;They are then as comelyAs the cloudless moon,Just like Nanda, Angulimala,Ajatashatru and Shankara.
34I have already discussed this verse in the preparatory rites section. Nanda was
dominated by lust, Angulimala killed nine hundred and ninety-nine men, Ajatashatrukilled his father who was a Non-returner, and Shankara killed his own mother, yetthey purified these sins. Your previously accumulated sins will also be purified,so it is vital to combine expiation of these sins with refraining from repeating them.
To sum up, in this Small Scope section you should place high value on the law
of cause and effect by putting the main points into practice. Even great Atisha madehimself skilled at doing this.
Once in Paenpo there was a man who used to recite The Seal of Pangkong  and
a man who had pawned a copy of The Thousand Verse Perfection of Wisdom Sutra .
Immediately after their deaths Yama’s minions led them under the ground andbrought them into his presence. The second man lied, but to no avail: he was shownYama’s mirror. The mirror revealed who had sold the sutra, who had bought it, thelentils the man had bought with the proceeds and even the child who picked up thelentils when they were spilt. The man was thrown into a giant cauldron. The manwho used to recite The Seal of Pangkong  took refuge and so returned from the dead.
Geshe Potowa told him: ‘Tell your story to others!’
You might think, ‘In my next rebirth the sins I’ve accumulated will not harm
me because my abbot, ordination master, and so forth, don’t know about them.’ ButThe King of Single-pointed Concentrations Sutra  says:
The stars, moon and all, may fall,
The earth, its mountains, its cities may perish,Space itself may be transformed into something else,But you [Buddha] will not speak words untrue.
In other words, Buddha’s discussion of the law of cause and effect is the truth and
will never deceive.
Not even the smallest virtue or sin will disappear of its own accord; you should
therefore modify your behaviour properly. Even so, because of your excessivefamiliarity with every small sin since beginningless time, you have been tarnishedby them and should therefore expiate and refrain from these sins by using the fouropponent powers.
IN PARTICULAR, HOW TO PURIFY ONESELF WITH THE FOUR
POWERS
Although I have already covered this in the above section on the preparatory rites,
it is so important that I shall go over these same headings again.
35The first is the power of repudiation ; this means having strong regret for one’s
sins of the past. This is the most important of the four powers, for if one has it theothers will follow of their own accord. This power is the result of having faith incause and effect.
The power of applying all antidotes , as I have already told you, has six types,
all of which were mentioned in Shantideva’s Compendium of Instruction . All the
same, any virtuous practice done to purify the sin becomes an example of thispower.
The power of refraining from the misdeed  involves firmly resolving to refrain
from it and thinking, ‘Even at the cost of my life, from now on I will not do it again.’It will be difficult at first to be able to abandon all your misdeeds for good, but therewill be some things that you can abandon from the root. For the things that youcannot abandon in this way you should cultivate a resolve to refrain from doingthem; think, ‘I will not do them today,’ and repeat this every day.
The power of the basis  is taking refuge and developing bodhichitta. This is the
point of having these two prayers at the beginning of meditations on Vajrasattvaand recitations of his mantra or of The Confession of Transgressions , and so on.
We have accumulated every sort of sin since beginningless time; our collection
of sins is like the treasure-hoard of a king. Even so, as I have already mentionedin the preparatory rites section, if we vigorously expiate them by means of the fourpowers, and refrain from repeating them, we will be able to purify even karmawhose consequences we would otherwise be certain to undergo. It is best to do thisusing Akashagarbha’s Confession , The Confession of Transgressions , combined
with full prostrations; or Suvarnabhasottama’s Confession Sutra , as discussed in
the volume of miscellaneous works in Tsongkapa’s Collected Works ; and the like.
They say that the process of purification is most effective if, at the conclusion
of the expiation, one feels each and every sin has been purified and if one visualisesunfocussed emptiness as much as one can.
It is not helpful to be either indifferent to one’s sins or to remain afraid of them.
It is vital that we beginners expiate them and that we do so vigorously for a longtime, until the signs that we have purified ourselves mentioned in The Spell of
Kandakari  appear repeatedly. As I said, ordinary monks will purify sins by
attending public ceremonies or debating practice, by pursuing their studies andcontemplations, and even by participating in a series of debating tournamentsbetween the various houses of their college - if such things are done with the aimof accumulating merit and as a self-purification. The actions would then build uptheir accumulations. Analysing the contents of the scriptures is also a form ofanalytic meditation: ‘meditation’ need not mean retiring to some cave with our
36bodies set in a certain posture. However, if we study merely as an intellectual
exercise, or to defeat others in debate, this is not Dharma.
When we debate, we should not take it as merely siding against the person being
examined; we should take it as a sign that we also have to take sides against ourown mind-streams. This means that we who are ordained could be practisingDharma the whole time; if we think in this way, these things will become Dharma,and we don’t necessarily need to go off on our own or do anything else to becomeDharma practitioners. On the other hand, worldly people must direct some specialeffort towards the Dharma. However, the ten virtues are a particularly difficultpractice for lay people.
My own precious guru said, ‘The parts of the Lam-Rim to follow, the Medium
Scope and so on, are an extension of the practices related to the law of cause andeffect.’
Here is how to take up this practice. Abandon what little sins you can. When about
to kill a louse, for example, even as your fingernail is poised over it, abandon theaction with the thought, ‘It would not be right.’ When you intend to tell a lie,remember to hold your tongue. You must gradually build up your practice of virtue.
Some people think that committing trivial sins does no harm, for sins can
readily be expiated. But there is an enormous difference between not committinga sin in the first place and expiating it after it has been committed: as great adifference as between not breaking a leg and mending it after it has been broken.In other words, one distances oneself from gaining the higher stages on the path,even though one need not experience the ripening effects of the sins if one purifiesthem by refraining from them and by strenuous expiation; so one still circles [insamsara] for aeons. Sinning, therefore, does great damage.
This ends the discussion. In the past you regarded this life as paramount, and
had no yearning at all for a good rebirth. Now you have studied Dharma about theoptimum human rebirth, impermanence, the sufferings of the lower realms, takingrefuge, and cause and effect. If you now feel, ‘I must work only for my futurerebirths,’ yearn for good rebirths only, and lose interest in this life’s trivia, you havedeveloped your first type of realisation into the Small Scope of the Lam-rim. Evenif you develop this you must still meditate repeatedly, as Je Tsongkapa said: ‘Youmust still stabilise this; you should still work hard and train yourself, despitealready having this [realisation].’ This is why I have worked towards yourdeveloping the first type of realisation into the Lam-rim during this teaching.
Then Kyabje Pabongka Rinpoche taught this material at medium length. Next he
taught how to pursue the practice.
37First perform the preparatory rites. Then petition your guru, visualised sitting
above the crown of your head. Then think over the generalities and particulars ofcause and effect as laid out in the headings. Modifying your behaviour, however,is a practice you should do all the time; it need not therefore be pursued as ameditation topic.
Between sessions, you must repeatedly refer to discussions that teach about
cause and effect: The Sutra on the Wise and Foolish , The One Hundred Verses on
Karma, The One Hundred Life-stories , The Sutra On Having Much Remembrance ,
the set of four texts that make up The Transmission of the Vinaya , and so on, for
I have given you only a short teaching on this.
This text has been taken from:
Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand"
A Concise Discourse on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
Pabongka Rinpoche
Edited in the Tibetan by Trijang Rinpoche
Translated into English by Michael Richards
Wisdom Publications - Boston
This book is recommended for further reading on all aspects of the Lam Rim.
38
39
40LAM RIM BUDDHIST CENTRE
SOUTH AFRICA
Spiritual Director
Ven. Geshe Damcho Yonten
1 Kite Street, corner 1st Street, Vrededorp, Johannesburg. Tel: (011) 837 9000