Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Discussion_break.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.249134
================================================================================


1.  How  does  an  understanding  of  the  Lam-Rim  enable  one  to  refrain
automatically from the great wrongdoing of abandoning the teachings?
2. Explain the analogy of the three faults of a vessel. If  one  is  like  a
filthy vessel, why is there no benefit in listening to the teachings?
3. What are the six ideas we must rely on when listening to  the  teachings?
How can we generate the idea that we are a sick  person  when  listening  to
the teachings?
4. If we see faults in our guru due to an overabundance of afflictions or  a
lack of conscientiousness, what should we do?
1. There are four greatness of the teaching
   1. The greatness of recognising all teachings as non-contradictory
   2. The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings being useful
      instructions
   3. The greatness of easily enabling you to find the Buddha’s intended
      meaning
   4. The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself
By studying the Lamrim, you will understand how all the teachings of Buddha
are methods for reaching enlightenment. The teachings of the Buddha can be
divided into;
1. Scriptural teaching
2. Realizational teaching
-Scriptural teachings -those scriptures that contain the information  as  to
how or what we should put into practice.
-Realizational teachings - those teachings or methods that we  are  supposed
to put them into practice.
-The realizational teachings are the three higher trainings:
   (1) Higher training in ethics
   (2) Higher training in concentration
   (3) Higher training in wisdom
On the basis of possessing  the  three  higher  trainings  in  one’s  mental
continuum,  on  the  basis  of  one’s  realization  and  then  spread  those
teachings to others, one preserve and uphold  the  realizational  teachings.
When one is able to see all  the  scriptures  and  the  great  treatises  as
instructions for practice, then one will not create  the  grave  misdeed  of
abandoning the Dharma.
What does it means by abandoning the Dharma?
The Lotus Sutra and the Chapter of the Truth Speaker explain that all of
the Buddha's words directly or indirectly teach methods for becoming a
buddha. There are those with misunderstanding who hold that some teachings
are methods for becoming a buddha and some teachings are obstacles to
becoming a buddha. They then differentiate the words of the Buddha into
good and bad, reasonable and unreasonable, and great and small vehicles.
Finally, they hold that some teachings are to be cast aside, saying, "A
bodhisattva should train in this and should not train in that." Thus, they
abandon the teachings
The Sutra Gathering All the Threads says: Manjusri, the karmic obstruction
of abandoning the excellent teaching is subtle. Manjusri, whoever
distinguishes some of the words spoken by the Tathagata as good and some as
bad abandons the teaching. One who abandons the teaching, by having
abandoned it, deprecates the Tathagata and speaks badly of the community.
If you say, "This is reasonable; this is unreasonable," you abandon the
teaching.
If you say, "This was set forth for the sake of bodhisattvas; this was set
forth for the sake of sravakas," you abandon the teaching. If you say,
"This was set forth for the sake of pratyekabuddhas," you abandon the
teaching.
If you say, "This is not a training of bodhisattvas," you abandon the
teaching.
How serious it is to abandon the Dharma?
The fault of having abandoned the teaching is very grave. The King of
Concentrations Sutra says:
The wrongdoing of one who abandons the collections of sutras is far greater
than that of one who causes the destruction of all of the stupas here in
Jambudvipa.
The wrongdoing of one who abandons the collections of sutras is far greater
than that of one who kills arhats equal in number to the sands of the
Ganges.
Since you overcome abandonment by merely gaining certain knowledge of the
first two greatnesses as indicated above, you automatically are kept from
wrongdoing.
(BP Lesson 6): By abandoning the Buddhadharma, you end up criticizing and
putting down the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. The negative karma has to be
very heavy
-When you criticize the Dharma by thinking that these are not the teachings
of the Buddha and are useless, you are denigrating and criticizing the
Dharma Jewel.
-When you criticize the Dharma Jewel, it also means that you are actually
criticizing the Buddha Jewel because the Buddha is the one who taught the
Dharma.
-Likewise, it also means that you are saying that those people particularly
arya beings who practice those teachings are wrong. Then, you are also
criticising and putting down the Sangha Jewel.
2. The three faults of a vessel
|Three faults of |even though a rainfall   |even though you are staying in a   |
|a vessel        |from clouds assembled by |place where the teachings are being|
|                |the deities falls on it, |explained, there is no great       |
|                |the rain will            |purpose in your hearing the        |
|                |                         |teachings if you                   |
|turning upside  |not go inside            |do not pay attention               |
|down            |                         |                                   |
|though held     |go inside, but be unable |though paying attention,           |
|right side up,  |to fulfill its           |misunderstand what is heard or     |
|being  dirty    |function—to be drunk,    |listen with a bad motivation such  |
|                |etc.—because it is       |as attachment                      |
|                |contaminated by filth    |                                   |
|though clean,   |not be polluted by filth,|though lacking these faults, do not|
|having a leaky  |yet not remain inside and|solidify the words and meanings    |
|bottom          |drain away               |taken in at the time of hearing but|
|                |                         |let them fade due to forgetting    |
|                |                         |them and so forth                  |

(Lesson 7) Relates to our own experiences, when listening to the teaching:
-May not be paying attention to what is being said. Your mind is somewhere
else even though you may be sitting here physically.
-May not have the proper motivation for listening to the teachings such as
having no intention of putting the instructions into practice but only
being curious or may have some other bad intentions.
--even listening to the teaching attentively with a positive motivation,
pay not much attention to what was said after the teachings and even forget
about the teaching.
When you listen to the teachings with these faults, then listening to the
Dharma serves little purpose.
What are the remedies for these three faults?
As indicated in the sutras in three phrases: "Listen well, thoroughly, and
hold it in mind!"
|Remedies    |Antidote to the fault of       |Means that you should              |
|Listen well |being a dirty vessel           |listen to the teachings with a     |
|            |                               |proper motivation by thinking, “I  |
|            |                               |am here to listen to the teachings |
|            |                               |to:                                |
|            |                               |-subdue my mind or                 |
|            |                               |-so that I can benefit others or   |
|            |                               |-so that I can put them into       |
|            |                               |practice.”                         |
|Listen      |being an upturned vessel       |pay full attention to what is being|
|thoroughly  |                               |said                               |
|Hold it in  |being a leaky vessel           |listen intensely by paying         |
|mind        |                               |attention to whatever is said and  |
|            |                               |try different means to ensure that |
|            |                               |you do not forget what was said    |
|            |                               |during the teachings.              |


3. Six ideas we must rely on when listening to the teachings
   1. Think of yourself as a sick person.
   2. Think of the instructor as a doctor.
   3. Think of the instructor’s explications as medicine
   4. Think of earnest practice as the way to cure your disease.
   5. Think of the Tathagatas as excellent beings.
   6. Wish that the teaching will endure for a long time
Think of yourself as a sick person: Shantideva’s Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds says:
   Since you must follow a doctor's advice,
   Even when stricken by ordinary illness,
   What need is there to mention those who are constantly stricken
   With the illness of so many faults, attachment and the like?
As Shantideva says, you have been sick for a long time with the illness  of
the afflictions such  as  attachment  -an  illness  that  is  long-lasting,
intractable, and causes strong suffering.  Therefore,  you  must  recognize
this to be your situation. Kamarpa said that if we were not in  fact  sick,
then meditating on our sick condition would be misguided. However, stricken
with  the  virulent  and  chronic  disease  of  the  three  mental  poisons
[attachment, hostility, and ignorance], we are extremely sick, but  we  are
completely unaware that we are ill.
Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that we have been stricken with illness - the
three mental poisons: attachment, anger, ignorance: for a very long time,
it is very difficult to cure and it brings about great suffering.
You have had this illness since beginningless rebirths. It has always been
there and no matter what you do, it is still there, bringing about all the
undesirable experiences of this life. It will also bring about all the
undesirable experiences in future lives. Therefore, it is very important
that you recognize that you are in such a situation.
4. As in the Tantra Bestowing the Initiation of Vajrapani:
   Keep the masters' good qualities in mind
   Never seize upon their faults.
   Keeping their good qualities in mind, you will reach attainments.
   Seizing upon their faults, you will not.
Your guru might have good qualities for the most part, and have only slight
faults. If you examine your guru for those faults, this will block your own
attainments. Whereas, even in the case of a guru who mostly has faults, you
will give rise to your own attainments if you train in faith by focusing on
the good qualities while not looking for the faults. Therefore, once
someone is your guru, whether he has small or great faults, contemplate the
disadvantages of examining for his faults. Repeatedly think about
eliminating that tendency, and then stop it.
-The advice is to always keep the good qualities of the guru in your mind
and not to seize upon his faults. Whether the guru is a buddha in reality
or not, when you focus on his good qualities, you will achieve
realizations. On the other hand, even when the guru is a buddha in reality,
but you do not look at him as a buddha, you will not achieve realizations.
How should we view our guru?  As in the Tantra Bestowing the Initiation  of
Vajrapani says:
   If you would ask, O Lord of Secrets, how disciples should view masters,
   then I would answer that they should view them just as they view the
   Bhagavan.
   If the disciples view their masters in this way,
   They will always cultivate virtues.
   They will become buddhas
   And benefit the entire world.
In the Mahayana sutras as well it is taught that you must think of the guru
as being the Buddha. The texts on discipline state this as well.  When  you
recognize someone to be a buddha, you  will  not  discern  faults  in  that
person, and you will  pay  attention  to  his  good  qualities.   Likewise,
completely cast aside your conception of faults  in  the  guru,  and  train
yourself to discern the guru's good qualities.
(Lesson 12) When you conceive faults in the guru, at that time, it is
important to stop the arising of such conception. You should focus on the
good qualities of the guru constantly because the more you focus on the
good qualities, the conception of faults will weaken.
-Another method: when you see faults, ask yourself, “Is this really a fault
from the side of the guru or am I seeing this fault, due to my own impure
mind?” Is everything that you see necessarily the only truth?
-Another method: You should understand how much obscurations you have
accumulated. Your obscurations are so thick that even if all the buddhas
were appear in front of you, complete with all the major marks and signs,
you will not be able to see them in those pure aspects. The Buddha would
not appear in a manner other than the way in which your guru is appearing
to you now. You do not have the fortune to be able to see the Buddha in his
pure aspect due to your obscurations. Thinking in such a way will help you
to weaken the conception of faults in the guru.
-Also you should understand the buddhas can only work for sentient beings
by depending on an ordinary aspect that you are familiar and can associate
with. The buddhas cannot work for you by appearing in their pure aspect,
with all the marks and signs because you just don’t have the fortune to see
them that way. So when you see faults, think, “This is what ‘ordinary
aspect’ means. The Buddha has to work for me through this ordinary aspect.
An ordinary aspect means having faults and making mistakes. When you are
able to think in this way, in relation to your guru, then seeing him in his
ordinary aspect does not become a condition for you to lose faith but
instead your faith will increase. -Another method is to recall the good
qualities of the guru all the time and to remember his kindness. When you
are able to do this constantly and even when the conception of faults in
the guru arises in your mind that does not affect your faith in him.




1. What are the six  preparatory  practices?  Do  we  need  to  set  up  the
representations of the Buddha’s body, speech and mind when we do a  retreat?
If yes, why?
2. Do we need to include the gurus of  the  lineage  of  profound  view  and
extensive deeds, all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, etc.  when  we  visualize
the field of merit? Is it ok just to visualize the Buddha alone?
3. The seven branches of worship can be included  in  the  following  three:
accumulation, purification, and bringing about an expansion and  a  lack  of
dissipation of their virtuous effects. Explain.
4. What is the meaning of meditation? What are the faults of not  meditating
correctly? What is the proper way of sustaining a meditation?

1.  Six  preparatory  practices  for  meditation  (are  the  activities   of
  Serlingpa)
Purpose: To establish a  good  frame  of  mind  with  which  to  engage  the
meditation object
  1. Cleaning the room and setting up representations of body, speech and
     mind of the Buddha
  2. Making offerings that are beautifully arranged and obtained without
     deception
  3. With a comfortable seat, sitting in the 7-point posture of Vairocana
     with virtuous mind, taking refuge, developing bodhicitta and so forth.


  4. Visualizing the merit field
  5. Accumulation of merit through offering the 7-limb prayer and
     purification of negativities
  6. Mandala offering and request the merit field for blessings
Cleaning both the environment externally and the mind  internally  (thinking
that the external dirt represent our  afflictions  and  with  each  cleaning
action, we are purifying whatever afflictions in our mind).
-We receive helps and supports from the celestial beings on the white side
with clean environment.
-Accumulation of merits when setting up representation of Buddha body,
speech and mind in a clean place.
-As we are inviting our gurus, Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and merit fields, we
should prepare clean environment.
Set up the representations of the Buddha's body, speech, and mind during
retreat is not a must but is good to have:
 -help in your visualization in the meditation
 -more likely to make offerings, make prostration and so forth,
accumulating merits and purification
- induces us to engage in such virtuous activities.
-Offerings should not be obtained through deceit i.e. obtained through non-
virtuous means such as stealing, cheating, and fooling others. Recite the
Offering Cloud Dharani so that numerous Buddhas will receive the skies of
offerings.
7-point posture of Vairocana
   1. Sit in the full or half-lotus position.
   2. Back is straight.
   3. Hands on the lap in the meditation posture.
   4. Leave the mouth and tongue in a natural position.
   5. Keep the eyes slightly opened so the gaze falls in the direction of
      the tip of the nose.
   6. Tilt your head slightly forward
   7. The two shoulders should be at an equal level.
Purpose: So you will be able to do your practice session for a long time
without any difficulties. While sitting in other positions, it may be
comfortable temporarily but will not be able to sustain those postures for
a long time.
-Also will make the body serviceable and helps to generate a clear mind.
Field of merit consists primarily of the gurus of the vast and profound
lineages, countless Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, Solitary Realizers, Hearers
and Dharma protectors.
Visualization of the merit field:
    -visualize Guru Shakyamuni Buddha at the center
    -to his right are the lineage gurus of the extensive deeds or vast
conduct
    -to his left are the lineage gurus of the profound view.
    -surrounding them are all the meditational deities, Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas, Solitary Realizers, Hearers, dakas, dakinis, and Dharma
protectors.
Purpose: to accumulate the collection of merit and purification as
cooperative conditions for developing the realization.
The substantial or main cause for developing the realizations is sustaining
the relevant meditations of the path.
Seven-limb practice
1. Prostration
  With proper motivation, bring to mind all the numberless Buddhas of all
  the ten directions and the three times and while visualizing emanating
  countless duplicates of our body in a number equal to the atoms of the
  world we prostrate. This way it will helps to accumulate immeasurable
  amount of merit.
2. Offering
  Surpassable offerings made by worldly beings
  Unsurpassable offerings are offerings such as wish- fulfilling jewels,
  wish-granting tree, and great treasure vase created through the power of
  the bodhisattvas. Generating bodhicitta, the altruistic intention to
  achieve enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings, generating
  great compassion in our mind, and transforming our roots of virtue into
  the aspect of offering substances are also unsurpassable offerings.
3. Confession
  See the faults of the negativities when engaging confession. Then
  generate regret for the negativities that you had accumulated in the past
  and restraint towards future wrongdoings. To completely purify all
  negative actions, the practice of confession has to be conjoined with the
  four opponent powers - the power of regret, the power of the support (or
  refuge), the power of the remedy, and the power of restraint.
4. Rejoicing
  Understanding the Buddhas’ merit and qualities, understanding the
  Bodhisattvas’ paths, practices and their qualities they gained through
  the entire path, understanding the Solitary Realizers and Hearers
  qualities and their merits, then rejoice happily and taking delight in
  virtue.
  When you rejoice in the merit of:
  -someone with less qualities than you, you accumulate more merit than
  that person,
  -someone who is equal to you in qualities, you accumulate the same amount
  of merit, and
  -someone who has more qualities than you, you accumulate an amount of
  merit that is commensurate with the level of your mind.
  Why should you train in rejoicing? You accumulate merit when you rejoice
  in the virtue. When you don’t rejoice, absence of rejoicing you get
  upset, feel jealous, negative sense of competition.  You feel unhappy
  inside and the mind is disturbed.  There is no peace.
5. Requesting the Buddhas and gurus to teach the dharma
  Purpose: to create the cause to have the good fortune to be able to hear
  and practice the teachings of the Buddha from life to life
6. Beseeching the Buddhas and gurus not to pass away (becomes a condition
  for them to remain in the world)
7. Dedication - dedicate it as the cause for yourself and all sentient
  beings to achieve full enlightenment
Making request for the three great purposes:
1. to stop quickly all the flawed states of mind from not respecting the
   teacher and so forth
2. to grant blessings be able to generate easily all the realizations of
   the path from correctly devoting to the virtuous friend,
3. to grant blessings so that all inner and outer hindrances and obstacles
   are pacified.
By making request to the merit field, you create the cause for the
blessings to enter your mind in order to generate all the realizations of
the paths quickly within your mental continuum.

Q2. Lineage of profound view ( true nature of all phenomena (emptiness)
Pith instructions from Buddha ( Manjushri (Nagarjuna
Lineage of extensive deeds ( altruistic intentions to achieve enlightenment
for the sake of all sentient beings
Pith instructions from Buddha  ( Maitreya ( Asanga.
Merit field include the gurus of the lineage of profound view & extensive
deeds, all the Buddhas & Bodhisattvas, deities, dharma protectors, dakinis
and so forth.
Purpose of visualizing the merit field: to receive blessings of the lineage
masters  and accumulating the collections of merit and sublime wisdom.
Visualizing Buddha as the principle figure as the four inseparable bodies
of:
Lama Lozang  Tubwang Dorje Chang
Lama – our own guru
Lozang –Lama Tsongkhapa ‘s ordination name is Lozang Drapa
Tubwang – Shakyamuni Buddha
Dorje Chang – Buddha Vajradhara
 
3. The seven branches of worship can be included  in  the  following  three:
accumulation, purification, and bringing about an expansion and  a  lack  of
dissipation of their virtuous effects. Explain.
|accumulation            |Prostration               |
|                        |Offering                  |
|                        |Rejoicing in others’      |
|                        |virtue (develop fresh     |
|                        |merit)                    |
|                        |Requesting                |
|                        |Beseeching the Buddha to  |
|                        |remain                    |
|purification            |Confession                |
|bringing about an       |Rejoicing in one’s own    |
|expansion and a lack of |merit (will increase your |
|dissipation of their    |root of virtues i.e.      |
|virtuous effects        |increase your old merit   |
|                        |Dedication                |

4. Meditation is familiarizing our  mind  with  what  we  have  ascertained.
After listening obscurational truth the teaching, we should reflect on  what
we have heard so as to induce ascertainment. We should then meditate on  the
very same knowledge that we have gained a thorough ascertainment of what  we
have heard.
-Two types of meditation:
 1. Analytical meditation: by using the wisdom of  discernment  to  analyze
    with what we have ascertained.
 2. Stabilizing meditation: must familiar with the object of meditation and
    already ascertained it well. Placement meditation  is  that  you  place
    your mind on the object of meditation without being distracted.
 3. -Object of meditation can be placed in two categories:
    (1) That has the aspect of the object, those apprehended by the mind
    (2) That has the aspect  of  the  consciousness,  those  which  are  the
states of mind to be cultivated
-Two main obstacles preventing the mind from remaining single-pointed on
object are excitement and laxity.
Laxity: due to the mind has lost a little of its energy and so has relaxed
the strength of its hold on the object of meditation.
Laxity hinders with the development of clarity.
-Coarse laxity: your mind is able to abide on the chosen object of
meditation and the object is stable but does not appear clearly. There is a
factor of stability but there is no factor of clarity.
-Subtle laxity: your mind is able to abide on the chosen object of
meditation for some time and you have both factor of clarity and the factor
of stability but the factor of clarity is not intense.
-To prevent laxity, uplift the mind by familiarizing with the qualities of
the Three Jewels.
Excitement happens when the mind is distracted to a desirable/ attractive
object.
Excitement hinders with the development of the factor of stability. When
there is stability, the mind is abiding on the object of meditation.
To withdraw from excitement, contemplate on impermanence and the faults
cyclic existence.
So an ideal meditation should have these two factors: the factor of
stability and the factor of clarity.
Aims of meditation: to bring this mind, which gives rise to all faults and
flaws, under control and then it aims to make it serviceable.
Serviceability means that you can direct your mind as you wish toward a
virtuous object of meditation.
Faults of not meditating correctly - you might try to sustain your
meditation by jumping to this and that object of meditation. You may
consider setting up according to your wish a variety of virtuous objects of
meditation in no specific order. Though you may do this, you will not be
able to take up your object of meditation with this method. Consequently,
you will greatly hinder your mind's ability to be directed as you wish
toward a virtuous object of meditation. If you have made this a habit from
the start, the virtuous practice of your whole lifetime will be flawed.
Proper  way  of  sustaining  a  meditation  -  From  the  beginning,  firmly
determine  the  definite  order  and  enumeration  of  whatever  objects  of
meditation you wish to sustain. Then, strengthen  your  will  by  repeatedly
thinking, "I will not set up something that is different from  what  I  have
determined."  Without  exceeding  or  falling  short  of   what   you   have
determined, sustain your meditation with mindfulness and vigilance.





















Q1:What are the four preconditions that are the causes that readily  produce
the paths of calm-abiding and special insight? How do  they  assist  in  the
production of the paths of calm-abiding and special insight?
1. The four preconditions, which are causes that readily produce the paths
of calm-abiding (serenity) and special insight:
   a) restraining the sensory faculties
   b) acting vigilantly
   c) appropriate diet
   d) striving to practice without sleeping at the wrong time, and acting
      properly at the time of sleep.
Restraining the sensory faculties with:
1. Maintaining your mindfulness - practice your mindfulness repeatedly
   without forgetting the teachings about restraining the sensory faculties
   as well as the other 3 preconditions.
2. Continuously persisting at mindfulness - practice your mindfulness
   continuously and with respect.
What are you restraining the 6 sensory faculties from?  6 attractive
objects give rise to attachment and 6 unattractive objects give rise to
hostility (anger).
When there is a contact between the sense object and the respective  sensory
faculty, sensory consciousness is generated.
How to restrain the sensory faculties?
1. Guarding the sensory faculties: protecting your mind against attachment
and hostility i.e. neither to take note of the 6 sensory objects nor to
imagine them.
“Take note of" refers to perceiving and paying attention to the intentional
or unintentional appearance of sensory objects such as forms that you
should not look at.
"Imagining" refer to the mental consciousness's apprehension of sensory
objects that produce attachment, hostility, and ignorance, after the 6
consciousnesses have perceived them.
2. Practicing restraint with the 6 sensory faculties is actually stopping
the sensory faculties. For instance, you don't let them engage those
sensory objects that will produce afflictions when looked at. Restraining
means protecting the mind from being afflicted, and then setting it on
something that is ethically neutral or virtuous.
Acting with vigilance
1. Be mindful of whatever behaviors may take place in the night or day.
2. Understand which are to be done and which not to be done.
Acting vigilantly and restraining the sensory faculties in accordance with
the Asanga's citations of sutras and the subsequent commentaries.
Appropriate diet  has four attributes:
1. Not eating too little: you will be hungry and become weak, leaving no
  strength for virtuous activities.
2. Not eating too much: your body will be heavy.  Sleepiness and lethargy
  will increase.
3. Eating digestible and wholesome food: to eliminate old feelings of
  suffering related to food and you do not create new ones.
4. Eating appropriate food which does not produce afflictions: do not
  create misdeeds, and stay happy.
Shantideva’s Compendium of Trainings : to eat while reflecting that
(1) you are benefiting the giver;
(2) whereas now you are assembling micro-organisms in your body through the
material gift of food, in the future you will gather these beings together
through the teachings;
(3) you will accomplish the welfare of all living beings
How should you sleep? During the day and in the first of the three portions
of the night, spend your time doing virtuous activities; then sleep when
the middle portion arrives.
Sleeping will enhance those elements of the body which are benefited by
sleep. The body will be most serviceable.
Sleeping like a lion: How? Lying on your right side, place your left leg
upon the right. Why? Among all animals it is the lion that uses superior
capacity, confidence, and fortitude to subdue its opponents.  Your sleep
will be light; not heavy.
Sleeping on your right side like a lion means that your body naturally does
not become limp. Even when you have fallen asleep, you do not lose your
mindfulness. Your sleep does not become heavy. You do not have bad or
sinful dreams.
Four kinds of thoughts with which to fall asleep:
(1) The idea of illumination: First apprehend an image of light, and then
sleep while imagining light so when you fall asleep, darkness will not
arise in your mind.
(2) Mindfulness: Having heard, thought, and meditated on meaningful,
virtuous teachings, pursue this practice until you have fallen asleep so
that even when you are asleep, your mind will continue to engage the
teachings. Sustain your virtuous practice even when you are asleep.
(3) Vigilance: If any of the afflictions could arise, you notice it and
eliminate it.
(4) Idea of rising
   -Sleep very lightly like a deer, with a mind imbued with joyous
perseverance. This will prevent heavy sleep, and you will be able to awaken
without oversleeping.
   -Think, "Ah, I will always practice staying awake as the Buddha taught,"
so your sleep will not deviate from the sleep of a lion, which the Buddha
permitted.
   -Think, "Just as I joyously persevered at cultivating virtue and not
sleeping today, I will do the same tomorrow as well." This will prevent
breaking the continuity of your aspiration to cultivate virtue. Even if you
forget your aspiration, always work to make it stronger.
Q2: Since our lifetime cannot be extended and constantly diminishes,  do  we
actually live longer through doing long-life practices and  seeking  medical
treatment?
Our lifespan is predetermined by one of our past actions. Example, in the
past you have accumulated the cause with the action that you will live for
a hundred years, that is the maximum. You may die earlier:
  - if you meet with obstacles along the way
  -if your merits run low along the way and the merit to sustain your life
is not there
Our lifespan cannot be extended and there is nothing you can do to add on
to that.
Q3: At the time of death, nothing helps except  the  Dharma.  What  is  this
Dharma or religious practice that we need  to  engage  in?  Do  we  need  to
engage in the Dharma ourselves or can it be  done  on  our  behalf?  How  do
pujas and prayers benefit people who have passed away?
Cultivate the mindfulness of death by meditating by way of the 3 roots, 9
reasonings and 3 conclusions.
We need to engage in the dharma ourselves and cannot be done on our behalf.

Cultivation mindfulness of death:
  -will develop a sincere practice of death
  -have interest in virtue and our virtues will be strong
  -accumulate less wrongdoing
Q4: Why is the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha objects of  our  refuge?  Is  there
another object of refuge other than the  Three  Jewels?  How  do  the  Three
Jewels protect us?
 There are two causes of going for refuge:
     i) The fear of the sufferings of the lower realms
    ii) A faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ ability to protect you
        from that fear

[pic]


























-

1. What is faith? How many kinds of faith are there? Why is faith  important
   for our practice?
   Refer to discussion 2
2. What are physical, verbal, and mental prostrations?  Are  they  virtuous,
   neutral or non-virtuous by nature?
   Geshe Loden: The real purpose of prostration is to train  the  mind  with
   devotional attitudes.
   Physical prostration:
   Verbal prostration: Praising  the  merit  field  and  speaking  of  their
   qualities.
   Mental prostration: Holding an attitude of respect,  faith  and  devotion
   and reflecting on the good qualities  of  the  Buddhas,  gurus  and  holy
   objects
3. Does the cultivation of the mindfulness of  death  by  the  nine  reasons
   necessarily precede the realization of it?
   Refer to discussion 13.09.11
4.  Of  the  ten  non-virtuous  actions,  how  many  require  an  unmistaken
   perception before it can become a complete path of action?
5. Is the act of telling a white lie a virtuous  action  or  a  non-virtuous
   action (e.g. lying to a hunter about the whereabouts  of  a  deer  he  is
   hunting)?
Lying – one of the four non-virtues of speech.
Basis – another person who can hear
Intention :
  -discrimination: intending to tell a lie to a specific person or  about  a
specific subject matter
  -motivation : the wish to deceive
Course of action: verbal or subtle through gesture
Completion of the action: the other person understand the lie
For this case, the white lies is a non-virtuous action
Pabongka Rinpoche page 447: It will  not  be  right,  however,  to  give  an
honest answer. However, those who still have some misgivings over this  must
do the following. You should say something irrelevant  to  throw  them  off,
than it is an idle talk.
























