Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Discussion Two (28 Aug 2011).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.062688
================================================================================


Questions for discussion on Sunday, 28th August 2011
1. What is faith and why is it so important?
2. What is meditation and what is the purpose of meditation?
3. What is the most important thing to do in between the meditation
   sessions?
4. What is the difference between analytical  and  stabilization  meditation
   and is it correct for a single individual to engage in both?

What is faith and why is it so important?
Faith is a mental factor which, when observing the Three Jewels, the law  of
cause and effect etc. generates a joyful state of mind that is  without  the
agitation of delusions. It has the function of serving as the basis  perfect
aspiration.
There are three kinds of faith:
1. clear faith: cultivate in relation to our guru through  seeing  his  good
  qualities. The mind becomes clear and filled with joy.
2. faith of conviction: arise through a sense of  belief  e.g.  by  thinking
  about dependent origination or the law  of  cause  and  effect,  you  are
  convinced about them and develop faith
3. wishing / aspiring faith: arises due to  wishing  to  attain  the  result
  such as enlightenment and liberation. Another example, by  analyzing  the
  Four Noble Truths correctly, you understand that  the  first  two  truths
  -True Sufferings and True Origins- are the objects to be  abandoned.  You
  also realize that True Cessations and True Paths are  to  be  cultivated.
  You then develop this wishing faith, aspiring to actualize True Paths and
  True Cessations.
-In order to generate faith in the guru, you must first  stop  the  mind  of
non-faith (lack of faith) -the conditions that obstruct the  development  of
such faith- in the guru. Non-faith arise due to the  conception  of  faults;
the mind that looks for and believes in faults in the guru.
-Faith is having the firm belief that your teacher is a Buddha. It is the
foundation of all realizations. Without faith, even if you spend your life
with a guru who is actually a Buddha you will not be able to see his
infinite qualities, but only project faults and thus sustain a loss. If we
focus our attention on our guru’s extensive qualities, even if only able to
recognize a small part of them, our faith will be strengthened. This
stronger faith will then overcome any tendencies we may have to dwell on
the small faults that we see in him.
The Formulae of the Three Jewels' Blaze states:
   Faith is the prerequisite of all good qualities -
   A procreator of them, like a mother
   Who then protects and increases them.
- Faith is the basis of all good qualities. Faith gives birth to positive
qualities that have not yet arisen and once they come into existence, faith
sustains and increases them.
-In order to have that faith of conviction, you must see the benefits for
yourself. When you are convinced of the benefits, you will be inspired to
pursue your goal. The interest then leads to effort will arise to actualize
your goal.
-Faith is regarded as the most supreme of all vehicles, as it leads us  from
the  very  beginning  of  the  path  all  the  way  to  the  attainment   of
enlightenment. It is faith that introduces us to  the  spiritual  path  i.e.
faith helps us to develop on  the  spiritual  path  and  it  is  faith  that
completes the fruits of the path. Of all  of  our  listening,  understanding
and meditation, faith is what empowers the teachings to become an  antidote.
Without faith, the teachings are totally ineffective. As  a  seed  that  has
been burned cannot become a flower, a  mind  without  faith  will  not  bear
fruit. From this, you can see how faith is the basis of all good qualities.

What is meditation and what is the purpose of meditation?
Meditation refers to the act of repeatedly familiarizing your  mind  with  a
virtuous object of meditation that you have ascertained.
-Object of meditation can be placed in two categories:
    (1) That has the aspect of the object, those apprehended by the mind
    (2) That has the aspect  of  the  consciousness,  those  which  are  the
states of mind to be cultivated
Objects  to  be  apprehended  by  the  mind  such  as  impermanence,  karma,
emptiness, True Suffering
-To meditate on  impermanence:  object  of  meditation  is  the  meaning  of
impermanence
-Familiarizing your mind with the  meaning  of  impermanence  by  repeatedly
focusing your mind on it. This process should  bring  about  a  very  strong
feeling for impermanence.
Objects that are states of mind to be cultivated such as  compassion,  great
love, patience
-To meditate on compassion, object of meditation is not compassion. You  try
to transform the entity of your mind into compassion.
Purpose of meditation is to bring your mind under your control.
. Once you are able to control your own mind, your mind is serviceable  i.e.
you can  direct  your  mind  as  you  wish  towards  a  virtuous  object  of
meditation for as long as you want.
-When the mind is uncontrolled, it means that you will be under the  control
of your mind and that mind is controlled by the afflictions.  When  you  let
your mind come under the control of the afflictions, that will give rise  to
all the faults and mistakes  that  lead  to  the  accumulation  of  negative
actions.

What is the most important thing to do in between the meditation sessions?
Remain mindful of the meditation object during in-between  session  and  not
allowing oneself to become distracted. You can read texts on the  meditation
subject to remind you of the meditation object. This will help  you  to  re-
enter the meditation session. Otherwise, you  may  completely  forget  about
the object of meditation.

What is the difference between analytical and stabilization meditation? Is
it correct for a single individual to engage in both?
From hearing the teaching, the wisdom arising from hearing is developed.
From reflection, the wisdom arising from reflection is developed.
Whatever object that you have ascertained through reflection is the object
of meditation. Then familiarize your mind by meditating on the object of
meditation until you achieve realization.
From meditation, the wisdom arising from meditation is developed.
1. Analytical meditation: by using the wisdom of discernment to analyze
  with what we have ascertained.
2. Stabilizing meditation: do not engage in analysis with respect to the
  object of meditation.
Analytical meditation is done for the following topics: cultivating faith
in the virtuous friends, the human life of freedoms and endowments and the
difficulties of obtaining such a human life, death and impermanence, karma
and its effects, the faults of cyclic existence and the generation of
bodhichitta (altruistic intention).
Stabilizing meditation is done to achieve calm abiding/ meditative
serenity.
Two main obstacles preventing the  mind  from  remaining  single-pointed  on
object are excitement and laxity.
Laxity hinders with the development of clarity.
  -Coarse laxity: your mind is able  to  abide  on  the  chosen  object  of
  meditation but the object is stable but does not appear clearly. There is
  a factor of stability but there is no factor of clarity.
  -Subtle laxity: your mind is able  to  abide  on  the  chosen  object  of
  meditation for some time and you have both  factor  of  clarity  and  the
  factor of stability but the factor of clarity is not intense.
When there is laxity in the mind,  the  factor  of  clarity  is  not  really
there, although there is a factor of stability. To  prevent  laxity,  uplift
the mind by familiarizing with the qualities of the Three Jewels.
Excitement happens when the mind is distracted to  a  desirable/  attractive
object. Excitement hinders with the development of the factor of  stability.
When there is stability, the mind is abiding on the  object  of  meditation.
To withdraw from excitement, contemplate  on  impermanence  and  the  faults
cyclic existence.
So an ideal  meditation  should  have  these  two  factors:  the  factor  of
stability and the factor of clarity.
In order to achieve calm abiding, the mind must be made serviceable. The
way to make the mind serviceable is to engage in analytical meditation.
This is because with analytical meditation, the mind is made serviceable in
such a way that it is not so influenced by excitement and laxity. So,
analytical meditation is done prior to achieving calm abiding. Therefore
analytical meditation is necessary for the development of stabilizing
meditation as it helps to overcome excitement and stability.
Single individual to engage in both analytical meditation and stabilizing
meditation: Scholars also need to achieve calm abiding so they need to do
placement meditation. The yogi, on the other hand, need to do analytical
meditation because they need, for example, to develop faith in the virtuous
spiritual friend.

Comments  by  Khen  Rinpoche  on  analytical  meditation   and   stabilizing
meditation.
There is a difference between stabilizing meditation and calm  abiding.  The
topic of calm abiding comes towards the  end  of  the  Lamrim  text  and  is
treated separately because there are a lot of details in it.
The two main obstacles  for  developing  calm  abiding  are  excitement  and
laxity (both course and subtle forms). In order  to  achieve  calm  abiding,
you have to go through the nine mental stages.
Calm abiding refers to the ability to focus the mind on  any  chosen  object
not influence by laxity and excitement and able to stay  on  the  object  as
long as one want. As mentioned in the text, there is one measure in term  of
time, you are able to do that for at least four hours.  This  is  what  calm
abiding is.
When you have achieved  calm  abiding  you  gain  the  physical  and  mental
pliancy where the body and mind become serviceable.  You  also  achieve  the
special blissful feeling which is called the bliss of physical  pliancy  and
the bliss of mental pliancy. For us, when we engage in virtue, we get  tired
because our body gets tired and exhausted. However, when you  have  achieved
calm  abiding  you  do  not  feel  that  kind  of  tiredness  and  are  very
serviceable for virtue.
In the stabilizing meditation (also  translated  as  placement  meditation),
you must be familiar with the object of  meditation  and  you  have  already
ascertained it well. Placement meditation is that you  place  your  mind  on
the object of meditation without being distracted.
Regarding the  obstacles  to  the  meditation,  are  laxity  and  excitement
necessary obstacles for developing calm abiding or are  they  also  obstacle
for any form of meditation? You need to think about this.
When you are engaging in analytical meditation, if excitement creeps in,  is
it helpful or harmful with your analytical  meditation?  Is  excitement  and
laxity harmful for analytical meditation?
You say it is harmful? But when you engage  in  analysis,  it  brings  about
distraction as you need to think a lot of things from  the  various  angles.
At that time you mind is  excited.  Is  your  mind  moving  during  analysis
helpful for the meditation? As it is said that  laxity  and  excitement  are
harmful for meditation, are  they  harmful  for  analytical  meditation?  Is
analytical meditation necessarily preceding stabilizing meditation?
In order to do stabilizing meditation,  you  have  to  know  the  object  of
meditation well. In order to be clear of the object of meditation, you  must
have thought about it. Therefore before you do stabilizing  meditation,  you
already thought about things and that is analysis.
We  are  not  saying  that  analytical   meditation   necessarily   precedes
stabilizing meditation. At times the answer is not that important but it  is
the thinking and reasoning process. You don’t have worry about  whether  the
answer is  correct  or  wrong  but  the  process  of  critical  analysis  is
important. There are always things that are left unsettled  or  without  any
conclusion. Not every discussion will end up with a  conclusion.  Even  many
great masters and scholars also left  many  things  that  are  undecided  or
unsettled. So we don’t have to worry about these. That is the reason why  we
need more questions and more doubts.  With  more  doubts,  then  there  will
improvement. That is the only ways we  can  improve.  If  you  think  it  is
alright not to have any doubts or questions, then there  is  no  benefit  at
all. It doesn’t mean that if you don’t ask any question and you don’t  think
about it, you can be more sharp or more intelligent. That is  not  necessary
the case. The more you ask, the more you  think  and  the  more  doubts  you
have, the greater will be your wisdom.
Student 1: In any  one  meditation  session,  can  you  do  both  analytical
meditation and stabilizing meditation?
Khen Rinpoche:  You  can  do  both  analytical  meditation  and  stabilizing
meditation in one session but they cannot be done at any one time. You  need
to alternate them i.e. you do analytical meditation and after having  gained
an ascertainment then you switch to stabilizing meditation. You  place  your
mind on what you have ascertained. At that  time  you  don’t  do  analytical
meditation. Also at the time when you do analytical meditation, you  do  not
do stabilizing meditation. You  alternate  them.  Both  meditations  do  not
occur at the same time. By alternating  between  analytical  meditation  and
stabilizing meditation, they assist one another.
(Path  to  Enlightenment  by  Geshe  Loden)   Calm  abiding  is  a   special
concentration possessing the bliss of pliancy that arises in  dependence  on
the nine stages of mental abiding and has  the  faculty  of  being  able  to
direct the mind to an object as wished.
Concentration is a general term for focusing the mind on an object,  whereas
calm abiding is a particular type of concentration. With the realization  of
calm abiding you have a very deep concentration, not  obstructed  by  laxity
and excitement, that is accomplished by a special tranquility,  or  blissful
pliancy, of body and mind.



