Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Reference Material/HHDL on Reincarnation.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:46.743975
================================================================================



   Statement of His Holiness the Fourteenth Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso, on
   the Issue of His Reincarnation


24  September 2011

Introduction

My fellow Tibetans, both in and outside Tibet, all those who follow the
Tibetan Buddhist tradition, and everyone who has a connection to Tibet and
Tibetans: due to the foresight of our ancient kings, ministers and scholar-
adepts, the complete teaching of the Buddha, comprising the scriptural and
experiential teachings of the Three Vehicles and the Four Sets of Tantra
and their related subjects and disciplines flourished widely in the Land of
Snow. Tibet has served as a source of Buddhist and related cultural
traditions for the world. In particular, it has contributed significantly
to the happiness of countless beings in Asia, including those in China,
Tibet and Mongolia.

In the course of upholding the Buddhist tradition in Tibet, we evolved a
unique Tibetan tradition of recognizing the reincarnations of scholar-
adepts that has been of immense help to both the Dharma and sentient
beings, particularly to the monastic community.

Since the omniscient Gedun Gyatso was recognized and confirmed as the
reincarnation of Gedun Drub in the fifteenth century and the Gaden Phodrang
Labrang (the Dalai Lama’s institution) was established, successive
reincarnations have been recognized. The third in the line, Sonam Gyatso,
was given the title of the Dalai Lama. The Fifth Dalai Lama, Ngawang
Lobsang Gyatso, established the Gaden Phodrang Government in 1642, becoming
the spiritual and political head of Tibet. For more than 600 years since
Gedun Drub, a series of unmistaken reincarnations has been recognised in
the lineage of the Dalai Lama. 

The Dalai Lamas have functioned as both the political and spiritual leaders
of Tibet for 369 years since 1642. I have now voluntarily brought this to
an end, proud and satisfied that we can pursue the kind of democratic
system of government flourishing elsewhere in the world. In fact, as far
back as 1969, I made clear that concerned people should decide whether the
Dalai Lama’s reincarnations should continue in the future. However, in the
absence of clear guidelines, should the concerned public express a strong
wish for the Dalai Lamas to continue, there is an obvious risk of vested
political interests misusing the reincarnation system to fulfil their own
political agenda. Therefore, while I remain physically and mentally fit, it
seems important to me that we draw up clear guidelines to recognise the
next Dalai Lama, so that there is no room for doubt or deception. For these
guidelines to be fully comprehensible, it is essential to understand the
system of Tulku recognition and the basic concepts behind it. Therefore, I
shall briefly explain them below.

Past and future lives

In order to accept reincarnation or the reality of Tulkus, we need to
accept the existence of past and future lives. Sentient beings come to this
present life from their previous lives and take rebirth again after death.
This kind of continuous rebirth is accepted by all the ancient Indian
spiritual traditions and schools of philosophy, except the Charvakas, who
were a materialist movement. Some modern thinkers deny past and future
lives on the premise that we cannot see them. Others do not draw such clear
cut conclusions on this basis.

Although many religious traditions accept rebirth, they differ in their
views of what it is that is reborn, how it is reborn, and how it passes
through the transitional period between two lives. Some religious
traditions accept the prospect of future life, but reject the idea of past
lives.

Generally, Buddhists believe that there is no beginning to birth and that
once we achieve liberation from the cycle of existence by overcoming our
karma and destructive emotions, we will not be reborn under the sway of
these conditions. Therefore, Buddhists believe that there is an end to
being reborn as a result of karma and destructive emotions, but most
Buddhist philosophical schools do not accept that the mind-stream comes to
an end. To reject past and future rebirth would contradict the Buddhist
concept of the ground, path and result, which must be explained on the
basis of the disciplined or undisciplined mind. If we accept this argument,
logically, we would also have to accept that the world and its inhabitants
come about without causes and conditions. Therefore, as long as you are a
Buddhist, it is necessary to accept past and future rebirth.

For those who remember their past lives, rebirth is a clear experience.
However, most ordinary beings forget their past lives as they go through
the process of death, intermediate state and rebirth. As past and future
rebirths are slightly obscure to them, we need to use evidence-based logic
to prove past and future rebirths to them.
 
There are many different logical arguments given in the words of the Buddha
and subsequent commentaries to prove the existence of past and future
lives. In brief, they come down to four points: the logic that things are
preceded by things of a similar type, the logic that things are preceded by
a substantial cause, the logic that the mind has gained familiarity with
things in the past, and the logic of having gained experience of things in
the past.

Ultimately all these arguments are based on the idea that the nature of the
mind, its clarity and awareness, must have clarity and awareness as its
substantial cause. It cannot have any other entity such as an inanimate
object as its substantial cause. This is self-evident. Through logical
analysis we infer that a new stream of clarity and awareness cannot come
about without causes or from unrelated causes. While we observe that mind
cannot be produced in a laboratory, we also infer that nothing can
eliminate the continuity of subtle clarity and awareness.

 As far as I know, no modern psychologist, physicist, or neuroscientist has
been able to observe or predict the production of mind either from matter
or without cause.

There are people who can remember their immediate past life or even many
past lives, as well as being able to recognise places and relatives from
those lives. This is not just something that happened in the past. Even
today there are many people in the East and West, who can recall incidents
and experiences from their past lives. Denying this is not an honest and
impartial way of doing research, because it runs counter to this evidence.
The Tibetan system of recognising reincarnations is an authentic mode of
investigation based on people’s recollection of their past lives.

How rebirth takes place

There are two ways in which someone can take rebirth after death: rebirth
under the sway of karma and destructive emotions and rebirth through the
power of compassion and prayer. Regarding the first, due to ignorance
negative and positive karma are created and their imprints remain on the
consciousness. These are reactivated through craving and grasping,
propelling us into the next life. We then take rebirth involuntarily in
higher or lower realms. This is the way ordinary beings circle incessantly
through existence like the turning of a wheel. Even under such
circumstances ordinary beings can engage diligently with a positive
aspiration in virtuous practices in their day-to-day lives. They
familiarise themselves with virtue that at the time of death can be
reactivated providing the means for them to take rebirth in a higher realm
of existence. On the other hand, superior Bodhisattvas, who have attained
the path of seeing, are not reborn through the force of their karma and
destructive emotions, but due to the power of their compassion for sentient
beings and based on their prayers to benefit others. They are able to
choose their place and time of birth as well as their future parents. Such
a rebirth, which is solely for the benefit of others, is rebirth through
the force of compassion and prayer.

The meaning of Tulku

It seems the Tibetan custom of applying the epithet ‘Tulku’ (Buddha’s
Emanation Body) to recognized reincarnations began when devotees used it as
an honorary title, but it has since become a common expression. In general,
the term Tulku refers to a particular aspect of the Buddha, one of the
three or four described in the Sutra Vehicle. According to this explanation
of these aspects of the Buddha, a person who is totally bound by
destructive emotions and karma has the potential to achieve the Truth Body
(Dharmakaya), comprising the Wisdom Truth Body and Nature Truth Body. The
former refers to the enlightened mind of a Buddha, which sees everything
directly and precisely, as it is, in an instant. It has been cleared of all
destructive emotions, as well as their imprints, through the accumulation
of merit and wisdom over a long period of time. The latter, the Nature
Truth Body, refers to the empty nature of that all-knowing enlightened
mind. These two together are aspects of the Buddhas for themselves.
However, as they are not directly accessible to others, but only amongst
the Buddhas themselves, it is imperative that the Buddhas manifest in
physical forms that are accessible to sentient beings in order to help
them. Hence, the ultimate physical aspect of a Buddha is the Body of
Complete Enjoyment (Sambhogakaya), which is accessible to superior
Bodhisattvas, and has five definite qualifications such as residing in the
Akanishta Heaven. And from the Body of Complete Enjoyment are manifested
the myriad Emanation Bodies or Tulkus (Nirmanakaya), of the Buddhas, which
appear as gods or humans and are accessible even to ordinary beings. These
two physical aspects of the Buddha are termed Form Bodies, which are meant
for others.

The Emanation Body is three-fold: a) the Supreme Emanation Body like
Shakyamuni Buddha, the historical Buddha, who manifested the twelve deeds
of a Buddha such as being born in the place he chose and so forth; b) the
Artistic Emanation Body which serves others by appearing as craftsmen,
artists and so on; and c) the Incarnate Emanation Body, according to which
Buddhas appear in various forms such as human beings, deities, rivers,
bridges, medicinal plants, and trees to help sentient beings. Of these
three types of Emanation Body, the reincarnations of spiritual masters
recognized and known as ‘Tulkus’ in Tibet come under the third category.
Among these Tulkus there may be many who are truly qualified Incarnate
Emanation Bodies of the Buddhas, but this does not necessarily apply to all
of them. Amongst the Tulkus of Tibet there may be those who are
reincarnations of superior Bodhisattvas, Bodhisattvas on the paths of
accumulation and preparation, as well as masters who are evidently yet to
enter these Bodhisattva paths. Therefore, the title of Tulku is given to
reincarnate Lamas either on the grounds of their resembling enlightened
beings or through their connection to certain qualities of enlightened
beings.

As Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo said:


“Reincarnation is what happens when someone takes rebirth after the
predecessor’s passing away; emanation is when manifestations take place
without the source’s passing away.”

Recognition of Reincarnations

The practice of recognizing who is who by identifying someone’s previous
life occurred even when Shakyamuni Buddha himself was alive. Many accounts
are found in the four Agama Sections of the Vinaya Pitaka, the Jataka
Stories, the Sutra of the Wise and Foolish, the Sutra of One Hundred Karmas
and so on, in which the Tathagata revealed the workings of karma,
recounting innumerable stories about how the effects of certain karmas
created in a past life are experienced by a person in his or her present
life. Also, in the life stories of Indian masters, who lived after the
Buddha, many reveal their previous places of birth. There are many such
stories, but the system of recognizing and numbering their reincarnations
did not occur in India.

The system of recognizing reincarnations in Tibet

Past and future lives were asserted in the indigenous Tibetan Bon tradition
before the arrival of Buddhism. And since the spread of Buddhism in Tibet,
virtually all Tibetans have believed in past and future lives.
Investigating the reincarnations of many spiritual masters who upheld the
Dharma, as well as the custom of praying devotedly to them, flourished
everywhere in Tibet. Many authentic scriptures, indigenous Tibetan books
such as the Mani Kabum and the Fivefold Kathang Teachings and others like
the The Books of Kadam Disciples and the Jewel Garland: Responses to
Queries, which were recounted by the glorious, incomparable Indian master
Dipankara Atisha in the 11th century in Tibet, tell stories of the
reincarnations of Arya Avalokiteshvara, the Bodhisattva of compassion.
However, the present tradition of formally recognizing the reincarnations
of masters first began in the early 13th century with the recognition of
Karmapa Pagshi as the reincarnation of Karmapa Dusum Khyenpa by his
disciples in accordance with his prediction. Since then, there have been
seventeen Karmapa incarnations over more than nine hundred years.
Similarly, since the recognition of Kunga Sangmo as the reincarnation of
Khandro Choekyi Dronme in the 15th century there have been more than ten
incarnations of Samding Dorje Phagmo. So, among the Tulkus recognized in
Tibet there are monastics and lay tantric practitioners, male and female.
This system of recognizing the reincarnations gradually spread to other
Tibetan Buddhist traditions, and Bon, in Tibet. Today, there are recognized
Tulkus in all the Tibetan Buddhist traditions, the Sakya, Geluk, Kagyu and
Nyingma, as well as Jonang and Bodong, who serve the Dharma. It is also
evident that amongst these Tulkus some are a disgrace.

The omniscient Gedun Drub, who was a direct disciple of Je Tsongkhapa,
founded Tashi Lhunpo Monastery in Tsang and took care of his students. He
passed away in 1474 at the age of 84. Although initially no efforts were
made to identify his reincarnation, people were obliged to recognize a
child named Sangye Chophel, who had been born in Tanak, Tsang (1476),
because of what he had to say about his amazing and flawless recollections
of his past life. Since then, a tradition began of searching for and
recognizing the successive reincarnations of the Dalai Lamas by the Gaden
Phodrang Labrang and later the Gaden Phodrang Government.

The ways of recognizing reincarnations

After the system of recognizing Tulkus came into being, various procedures
for going about it began to develop and grow. Among these some of the most
important involve the predecessor’s predictive letter and other
instructions and indications that might occur; the reincarnation’s reliably
recounting his previous life and speaking about it; identifying possessions
belonging to the predecessor and recognizing people who had been close to
him. Apart from these, additional methods include asking reliable spiritual
masters for their divination as well as seeking the predictions of mundane
oracles, who appear through mediums in trance, and observing the visions
that manifest in sacred lakes of protectors like Lhamoi Latso, a sacred
lake south of Lhasa.

When there happens to be more than one prospective candidate for
recognition as a Tulku, and it becomes difficult to decide, there is a
practice of making the final decision by divination employing the dough-
ball method (zen tak) before a sacred image while calling upon the power of
truth.

Emanation before the passing away of the predecessor (ma-dhey tulku)

Usually a reincarnation has to be someone’s taking rebirth as a human being
after previously passing away. Ordinary sentient beings generally cannot
manifest an emanation before death (ma-dhey tulku), but superior
Bodhisattvas, who can manifest themselves in hundreds or thousands of
bodies simultaneously, can manifest an emanation before death. Within the
Tibetan system of recognizing Tulkus there are emanations who belong to the
same mind-stream as the predecessor, emanations who are connected to others
through the power of karma and prayers, and emanations who come as a result
of blessings and appointment.

The main purpose of the appearance of a reincarnation is to continue the
predecessor’s unfinished work to serve Dharma and beings. In the case of a
Lama who is an ordinary being, instead of having a reincarnation belonging
to the same mind-stream, someone else with connections to that Lama through
pure karma and prayers may be recognized as his or her emanation.
Alternatively it is possible for the Lama to appoint a successor who is
either his disciple or someone young who is to be recognized as his
emanation. Since these options are possible in the case of an ordinary
being, an emanation before death that is not of the same mind-stream is
feasible. In some cases one high Lama may have several reincarnations
simultaneously, such as incarnations of body, speech and mind and so on. In
recent times, there have been well-known emanations before death such as
Dudjom Jigdral Yeshe Dorje and Chogye Trichen Ngawang Khyenrab.

Using the Golden Urn

As the degenerate age gets worse, and as more reincarnations of high Lamas
are being recognized, some of them for political motives, increasing
numbers have been recognized through inappropriate and questionable means,
as a result of which huge damage has been done to the Dharma.

During the conflict between Tibet and the Gurkhas (1791-93) the Tibetan
Government had to call on Manchu military support. Consequently the Gurkha
military was expelled from Tibet, but afterwards Manchu officials made a 29-
point proposal on the pretext of making the Tibetan Government’s
administration more efficient. This proposal included the suggestion of
picking lots from a Golden Urn to decide on the recognition of the
reincarnations of the Dalai Lamas, Panchen Lamas and Hutuktus, a Mongolian
title given to high Lamas. Therefore, this procedure was followed in the
case of recognizing some reincarnations of the Dalai Lama, Panchen Lama and
other high Lamas. The ritual to be followed was written by the Eighth Dalai
Lama Jampel Gyatso.  Even after such a system had been introduced, this
procedure was dispensed with for the Ninth, Thirteenth and myself, the
Fourteenth Dalai Lama.

Even in the case of the Tenth Dalai Lama, the authentic reincarnation had
already been found and in reality this procedure was not followed, but in
order to humour the Manchus it was merely announced that this procedure had
been observed.

The Golden Urn system was actually used only in the cases of the Eleventh
and Twelfth Dalai Lamas. However, the Twelfth Dalai Lama had already been
recognized before the procedure was employed. Therefore, there has only
been one occasion when a Dalai Lama was recognized by using this method.
Likewise, among the reincarnations of the Panchen Lama, apart from the
Eighth and the Ninth, there have been no instances of this method being
employed. This system was imposed by the Manchus, but Tibetans had no faith
in it because it lacked any spiritual quality. However, if it were to be
used honestly, it seems that we could consider it as similar to the manner
of divination employing the dough-ball method (zen tak).

In 1880, during the recognition of the Thirteenth Dalai Lama as the
reincarnation of the Twelfth, traces of the Priest-Patron relationship
between Tibet and the Manchus still existed. He was recognized as the
unmistaken reincarnation by the Eighth Panchen Lama, the predictions of the
Nechung and Samye oracles and by observing visions that appeared in Lhamoi
Latso, therefore the Golden Urn procedure was not followed. This can be
clearly understood from the Thirteenth Dalai Lama’s final testament of the
Water-Monkey Year (1933) in which he states:

“As you all know, I was selected not in the customary way of picking lots
from the golden urn, but my selection was foretold and divined. In
accordance with these divinations and prophecies I was recognized as the
reincarnation of the Dalai Lama and enthroned.”

When I was recognized as the Fourteenth incarnation of the Dalai Lama in
1939, the Priest-Patron relationship between Tibet and China had already
come to an end. Therefore, there was no question of any need to confirm the
reincarnation by employing the Golden Urn. It is well-known that the then
Regent of Tibet and the Tibetan National Assembly had followed the
procedure for recognizing the Dalai Lama’s reincarnation taking account of
the predictions of high Lamas, oracles and the visions seen in Lhamoi
Latso; the Chinese had no involvement in it whatever. Nevertheless, some
concerned officials of the Guomintang later cunningly spread lies in the
newspapers claiming that they had agreed to forego the use of the Golden
Urn and that Wu Chung-tsin presided over my enthronement, and so on. This
lie  was exposed by Ngabo Ngawang Jigme, the Vice-Chairman of the Standing
Committee of the National People’s Congress, who the People’s Republic of
China considered to be a most progressive person, at the Second Session of
the Fifth People’s Congress of the Tibet Autonomous Region (31st July
1989). This is clear, when, at the end of his speech, in which he gave a
detailed explanation of events and presented documentary evidence, he
demanded:

“What need is there for the Communist Party to follow suit and continue the
lies of the Guomintang?”

Deceptive strategy and false hopes

In the recent past, there have been cases of irresponsible managers of
wealthy Lama-estates who indulged in improper methods to recognize
reincarnations, which have undermined the Dharma, the monastic community
and our society. Moreover, since the Manchu era Chinese political
authorities repeatedly engaged in various deceitful means using Buddhism,
Buddhist masters and Tulkus as tools to fulfil their political ends as they
involved themselves in Tibetan and Mongolian affairs. Today, the
authoritarian rulers of the People’s Republic of China, who as communists
reject religion, but still involve themselves in religious affairs, have
imposed a so-called re-education campaign and declared the so-called Order
No. Five, concerning the control and recognition of reincarnations, which
came into force on 1st September 2007. This is outrageous and disgraceful.
The enforcement of various inappropriate methods for recognizing
reincarnations to eradicate our unique Tibetan cultural traditions is doing
damage that will be difficult to repair.

Moreover, they say they are waiting for my death and will recognize a
Fifteenth Dalai Lama of their choice. It is clear from their recent rules
and regulations and subsequent declarations that they have a detailed
strategy to deceive Tibetans, followers of the Tibetan Buddhist tradition
and the world community. Therefore, as I have a responsibility to protect
the Dharma and sentient beings and counter such detrimental schemes, I make
the following declaration.

The next incarnation of the Dalai Lama

As I mentioned earlier, reincarnation is a phenomenon which should take
place either through the voluntary choice of the concerned person or at
least on the strength of his or her karma, merit and prayers. Therefore,
the person who reincarnates has sole legitimate authority over where and
how he or she takes rebirth and how that reincarnation is to be recognized.
It is a reality that no one else can force the person concerned, or
manipulate him or her. It is particularly inappropriate for Chinese
communists, who explicitly reject even the idea of past and future lives,
let alone the concept of reincarnate Tulkus, to meddle in the system of
reincarnation and especially the reincarnations of the Dalai Lamas and
Panchen Lamas. Such brazen meddling contradicts their own political
ideology and reveals their double standards. Should this situation continue
in the future, it will be impossible for Tibetans and those who follow the
Tibetan Buddhist tradition to acknowledge or accept it.

When I am about ninety I will consult the high Lamas of the Tibetan
Buddhist traditions, the Tibetan public, and other concerned people who
follow Tibetan Buddhism, and re-evaluate whether the institution of the
Dalai Lama should continue or not. On that basis we will take a decision.
If it is decided that the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama should continue
and there is a need for the Fifteenth Dalai Lama to be recognized,
responsibility for doing so will primarily rest on the concerned officers
of the Dalai Lama’s Gaden Phodrang Trust. They should consult the various
heads of the Tibetan Buddhist traditions and the reliable oath-bound Dharma
Protectors who are linked inseparably to the lineage of the Dalai Lamas.
They should seek advice and direction from these concerned beings and carry
out the procedures of search and recognition in accordance with past
tradition. I shall leave clear written instructions about this. Bear in
mind that, apart from the reincarnation recognized through such legitimate
methods, no recognition or acceptance should be given to a candidate chosen
for political ends by anyone, including those in the People’s Republic of
China.


The Dalai Lama
Dharamsala


