Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Reference Material/Karma_chart.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:47.194161
================================================================================

ILTK Basic Program                                           Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                          Karma Chart 1 
 
 1of 2  The Consequences of the Ten Non-Virtuous Actions 
 A complete action brings about three types of results: 
 1 A fruitional result (the fully ripened effect)  2 A result similar to the cause (the effect in conformity  with the cause):   A habit that corresponds to the cause 
       An experience that corresponds to the cause 
 3 An environmental result (the conditioning effect)  In the case of non-virtuous actions the fruitional result is a rebirth in one of the three lower realms, the result similar to the cause as a habit is a 
natural inclination to perform the same type  of action again, whereas the result simi lar to the cause as an experience and the environmental 
result are as follows: 
 
Action Result similar to the cause  
as an experience Environmental result 
Killing When one is again reborn in the 
human realm, one will experience a short life and many illnesses. One will have many problems and lack success in one’s activities. One will be reborn in a violent place with many problems such as wars; the environment and the things that surround one will be ho stile, dangerous, and uncomfortable. Food, 
drink, medicine, and other necessities will be difficult to find and once found they will have little beneficial effect in sustaining the body. Food will be difficult to digest and will 
induce illnesses.  
Stealing One will lack wealth and resources. What one earns will be stolen, borrowed, or lost.  One will be reborn in barren places, where cr ops and fruit don’t grow or where they are 
destroyed, and where all one’s endeavors fail.  
Sexual misconduct Inability to sustain a relationship. One will quickly be separated from one’s partners, friends, family, and workers. One will experience loneliness.  One will live in a dirty place that causes dise ases, where there is urine, excrement, filth, 
unpleasant odors, and misery.  
Lying Others won’t believe what one says whether or not one speaks the truth, people won’t listen to one’s advice.  One will live among cheaters and thieves where one finds no one to rely on. One’s 
endeavors will bear fruit and there will be di sharmony among workers. One will be fearful 
and there will be many causes for fear.  
ILTK Basic Program                                           Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                          Karma Chart 1 
 
 2 of 2  Action Result similar to the cause  
as an experience Environmental result 
 Slander One will be lonely and have few 
friends, retinue, or workers. One will have difficulties in establishing harmonious relationships.  One will live in a barren, inhospitable plac e with uneven areas that are difficult to 
traverse, where communication is difficult, and where there are few means of transportation so that one must carr y heavy loads for long distances.  
Harsh Words  Others will be offensive and speak negatively about one. Even if one tries to be kind to others, one will be interpreted negatively.  One will live in unappealing environments, full  of broken bricks, sharp rocks, and thorns 
that cut one’s flesh when one moves. There are no waterfalls, lakes, or ponds, the place is 
rough, drab, arid, salty, barren, and vile, an d inhabited by dangerous animals. One will 
have many causes to be afraid.  
Idle Talk Others will not take one’s words seriously and will not listen to what we say. One will be considered ridiculous. 
 One will live in a place where trees do not bear  fruit, or bear their fruit at the wrong time 
and do not bear fruit at the proper time. Rain  will not come at the proper time and one’s 
activities will not successful. There will not be  comforts such as parks, groves, and lakes 
and one will have many causes to be fearful.  
Covetousness One will not realize one’s aims and will not have what one desires.  One will be reborn in a place where the harves ts are poor and material resources are easily 
destroyed or lost. One’s physical strength and beauty will easily degenerate.  
Malice One will have unreasoned fear and will easily panic. One will be reborn in a place devastated by war and terrifying epidemics, where there are continuous conflicts and disput es, as well as tigers, lions, poisonous snakes, scorpions, 
harmful spirits, and thieves.  
Wrong view One will be stubbornly ignorant and will have difficulties obtaining realizations and developing knowledge. One will experience great confusion.  One will be reborn in a place where, for example, the water will dry up when one goes to a well, when one plants seed the crops will fail, where the unclean appears to be utterly 
clean and suffering appears to be happiness, where one will not have a house, protection, 
or refuge, where nothing precious exists, where there is no artwork, scriptures, or spiritual 
guides  
   
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 2 
 
 Sources: Middle Lam Rim & Great Lam Rim and Commen taries by Pabongka Rinpoche & Geshe Tashi Tsering 1 of 4  How the Ten Non-Virtuous Path s of Actions are Completed 
 
 BASIS ATTITUDE PERFORMANCE COMPLETION KILLING A sentient being other than oneself. Discrimination 
1. Discriminating a sentient being to be a 
sentient being (unmistaken). 2. Discriminating a sentient being not to be a 
sentient being (mistaken). 
3. Discriminating what is not a sentient being not to be a sentient being 
(unmistaken). 
4. Discriminating what is not a sentient 
being to be a sentient being (mistaken). 
¾ Discrimination of the basis needs to be 
unmistaken and the motivation can be either 
specific or general. 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to kill. Performer 
It is the same whether you do it yourself or 
cause someone else to do it. 
Entity of the performance 
To do it by means of a weapon, poison, 
mantra, etc. ¾ The death of the other being, 
before your own death in dependence upon the condition of your performance. 
 
(Brought to completion by hatred.) STEALING Anything that someone else owns. Discrimination 
To have an unmistaken discrimination of 
something as belonging to someone else. 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to take something from another 
person without it having been given. 
 
  
 Performer 
It is the same whether you do it yourself or 
cause someone else to do it. 
Entity of the performance 
1. It is the same whether you take 
something by force or by stealth. 
2. Also applies to being deceitful with 
respect to a debt or trust as well as any 
fraudulent means of stealing. 
3. And whether done for your own or another’s purpose. ¾ The arisal of the thought that one 
has obtained it, or the arisal of that 
thought in someone you made steal. 
 (Brought to completion by 
attachment.) 
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 2 
 
 Sources: Middle Lam Rim & Great Lam Rim and Commen taries by Pabongka Rinpoche & Geshe Tashi Tsering 2 of 4   
 BASIS ATTITUDE PERFORMANCE COMPLETION SEXUAL MISCONDUCT Inappropriate persons  (5) 
1. Your mother & close female relatives,  
2. women under the care of their mothers,  
3. all men, 4. eunuchs, & 5. ordained 
women. 
Inappropriate body parts 
All those other than the vagina. 
Inappropriate places 
In the vicinity of gurus, stupas, etc. 
Inappropriate times 
Pregnancy, one-day vows, etc. Discrimination 
1. Unmistaken discrimination is necessary 
(Compendium ). 
2. Discrimination can be either unmistaken 
or mistaken for a defeat of impure conduct 
(Vinaya). 
3. Excludes discriminating someone else’s 
wife as your own; discriminating another’s wife as someone else’s wife may or may not 
be sexual misconduct ( Commentary on the 
Treasury ) 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish for intercourse. Consists in endeavoring for this purpose. ¾ The union of the two body parts. 
 
(Brought to completion by attachment.) LYING Basis of expression  (8) 
That which one has: 1. seen, 2. heard, 3. discerned by the nose, tongue, or body, 4. become fully aware of (cognised); 
as well as their four opposites (e.g., the not 
seen and so forth). 
Object that comprehends 
The other person who understands the 
meaning. Discrimination 
Making something that has been seen, into 
something that has not been seen, etc. 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to say something through changing 
the discrimination. The actual performance  (3) 
Indicating something by: 1. saying it, 
2. intentionally not saying anything, and 3. through body language. 
Clearing up doubts 
¾ It is the same whether you say it for 
your own or someone else’s purposes. 
¾ It can also be done by making others do 
it (Treatise on the Grounds & Treasury ). 
¾ You yourself must speak (Vinaya). The actual completion  
The other person understands what 
has been said. 
Clearing up doubts 
If it is not understood, it becomes 
merely idle talk ( Treasury ). 
 
(Brought to completion by any of 
the mental poisons.) DIVISIVE SPEECH Sentient beings who are in agreement or 
disagreement with each other. Discrimination 
Should be unmistaken (knowing what will 
divide them or keep them apart). 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
1. The wish to divide those who are in 
agreement; or 
2. for those in disagreement not to be reconciled. ¾ The expression of subject matter that 
may be either pleasant or unpleasant and may be either true or false. ¾ It can also be done by making others do 
it (Treatise on the Grounds & Treasury ). 
¾ You yourself must speak (Vinaya). The actual completion  
The other person understands what 
has been said. 
Clearing up doubts 
If it is not understood, it becomes 
merely idle talk ( Treasury ). 
 
(Brought to completion by any of 
the mental poisons.) 
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 2 
 
 Sources: Middle Lam Rim & Great Lam Rim and Commen taries by Pabongka Rinpoche & Geshe Tashi Tsering 3 of 4   
 BASIS ATTITUDE PERFORMANCE COMPLETION HARSH WORDS A sentient being who has become the basis 
for the arisal of a hostile attitude. Discrimination 
Should be unmistaken (knowing what will 
harm the being). 
Mental Affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to speak with harsh speech. ¾ Saying whatever unp leasant truths or 
untruths about a person’s: 
     1) lineage,       2) body, 
     3) morality, 
     4) behavior. 
¾ It can also be done by making others do 
it (Treatise on the Grounds & Treasury ). 
¾ You yourself must speak (Vinaya). The actual completion  
The other person understands what 
has been said. 
Clearing up doubts 
If it is not understood, it becomes 
merely idle talk ( Treasury ). 
 
(Brought to completion by hatred.) IDLE TALK A meaningless topic. Discrimination 
¾ Discriminating the topic that one wishes 
do express. 
¾ There is no need for someone to 
understand. 
Mental Affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to talk disconnectedly and 
randomly. ¾ Uttering idle talk. 
¾ It can also be done by making others do 
it (Treasury ). 
¾ You yourself must speak (Vinaya). 
   ¾ To finish uttering the idle talk. 
 (Brought to completion by any of the mental poisons.) COVETOUSNESS An object owned by someone else. Discrimination 
Discriminating that basis as that.  
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to make it one’s own. 
 
 
 
 Mentally making an effort to obtain the object. ¾ The thought “May that object 
become mine.” (When our thoughts 
become even stronger and we resolve to take some action that will 
enable us to acquire the object.) 
 (Brought to completion by 
attachment.) HARMFUL 
INTENT A sentient being who has become the basis 
for the arisal of a hostile attitude. Discrimination 
Should be unmistaken (knowing what will 
harm the being). 
Mental Affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to harm someone, etc., to see them 
harmed etc., for their resources to decline, etc. Application to this thought. ¾ The decision to carry out the 
harm that one contemplated. 
 
(Brought to completion by hatred.)
 
     1. Speaking of disputes, divisions, faultfinding; 
2. Speaking about news of nations, thieves, etc; 
3. Speaking of laughter, play, entertainment; 
4. Speaking like a drunkard or lunatic; 
5. Expressions of helplessness such as wailing; 
6. The talk of one who maintains a wrong livelihood.  
7. Reciting the texts of non-Buddhists while 
delighting in them;      
LRCM p224  
Attitudes required for completion  LRCMp224  
1. Grasping at one’s own things. 
2. Attached – wanting more things. 
3. Longing for others’ possessions. 4. Envy for others’ possessions. 
5. Not wanting to let go of this kind of mind. 
Attitudes Required for Completion    LRCM p225 
1. An attitude of hostility; 
2. An impatient attitude; 
3. A resentful attitude; 
4. An envious attitude thinking “how nice it 
would be if my enemies were harmed.”; 5. An attitude dominated by a lack of shame.  
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 2 
 
 Sources: Middle Lam Rim & Great Lam Rim and Commen taries by Pabongka Rinpoche & Geshe Tashi Tsering 4 of 4   BASIS ATTITUDE PERFORMANCE COMPLETION WRONG VIEWS An object that exists. Discrimination 
Discriminating the denial of an object that 
exists as true. 
Mental Affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to deny the existence of an object 
that exists.  The actual performance 
Applying oneself to such a thought. 
Divisions 
1. Denying causes (“Excellent conduct and 
faulty conduct do not exist”) 
2. Denying results (“Fully ripened effects 
of the two do not exist.”) 
3. Denying activities 
   a) the mistaken denial of the activities of planting and retaining seeds (“There is no 
planting of a seed by the father and no 
retaining of a seed by the mother)    b) the mistaken denial of the activities of 
going and coming (“There is no coming 
from a former existence to this one and no 
going from this to a future one.”) 
   c) the mistaken denial of the activity of 
being born (“There is no intermediate state miraculously born sentient beings.”) 
4. Denying existent things (“Arhats and so 
forth do not exist.”) ¾ Certainty with respect to one’s 
denial. 
 
(Brought to completion by ignorance.) 
 
  
 
Characteristics Applying to all Ten Non-Virtuous Actions 
D Discrimination of the basis needs to be unmistaken and the motiva tion can be either specific or general (presented in the conte xt of Killing). 
D Five qualities that are required to make an action, word, or though t complete (presented in the context of Covetousness LRCM p2 24): 
1) Having a mind that is exceedingly attached to your own resources; 
2) Having a mind of attachment that  wants to accumulate resources; 
3) Having a mind of longing due to comprehending or experiencing the good things of others – their wealth and so forth; 
4) Having an envious mind, thinking that whatever is another’s should be your own; 
5) Having a mind that is overcome, due to covetousness, by shamelessness and an obliviousness about the determination to be free f rom the faults of covetousness. Attitudes required for completion    LRCM p226 
1. An attitude of confusion due to not 
knowing the objects of knowledge correctly; 
2. A violent attitude due to delighting in non-
virtue; 
3. An attitude that continuously operates in the wrong way because of pondering 
improper teachings; 
4. An attitude that is impaired because of a mistaken deni al that thinks that  things such as 
gifts, offerings, and right conduct do not 
exist; 
5. An attitude that is dominated by shamelessness and obliviousness about the 
determination to be free of its fau lts.
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 3 
 
“These are methods, which if practised skilfully, will enable us  to collect extensive merit with little effort and to lessen th e number of non-virtues that we collect. Therefore we must learn them well.” Kyabje Pabongka Rinpoche 
 Distinctions of Weight/Gravity 
 
Weighty due to: Weighty due to: Karma that is heavy because of its: Strength in terms of: 
1. Intensive Action / Conditioning          c 
Acts motivated by the presence or absence of 
intense forms of the three mental poisons. 1. Attitude                                                c 
Acts motivated by intense forms of the three mental poisons.  1. Essential Nature                                  e 
Of the seven actions of body & speech, each preceding misdeed is heavie r than the ones following 
them. And of the three mental actions, the latter are 
heavier than the former.  1. Field / Recipient  
Acts directed towards the guru, Buddha, 
Dharma, Sangha, bodhisattvas & parents.  
2. Habituation                                          d 
Frequently doing or familiarity with a type of action.  2. Performance  
a) Taking pleasure in the activity; b)  Engaging in the activity yourself or causing others 
to engage in it, and praising it; 
c) Doing it after prolonged premeditation; 
d) Being constant and diligent; e) Performing preceding ac tivities like torture; 
f) First inducing your vict im to perform inappropriate 
actions; g) Taking advantage of another’s weakness, 
suffering, impoverishment, etc.
 2. Mental Component                              c 
When an act is carried out with a very intense mental 
affliction.  2. Support / Agent  
The strength of acts is greatly increased / 
decreased by: A – Skillful: Those who apply the four 
opponent powers; 
A – Unskillful: Deliberately fail to purify; B – Strength of keeping vows; 
C – Strength of breaking vows, but still 
receiving offerings intended for the sangha.  
3. Entity                                                      e 
Of the seven actions of body & speech, each 
preceding misdeed is weightier than the ones 
following them. And of the three mental actions, the 
latter are weightier than the former.  3. Absence of an Antidote  
a) Not taking precepts on a daily basis; 
b) Not performing virt uous activities, even only 
occasionally; 
c) Not even occasionally being ashamed, 
embarrassed, or having a predisposition towards 
contrition; d) Having reached neither a state free of worldly 
attachment or clear knowledge of the teaching.
 3. Preliminary Action  
e.g. Torturing someone before killing them.  3. Objects  
Superior to the offering of material objects: 
– Offering of Dharma to sentient beings. 
– Offering of realizations to the buddhas.  
4. Basis                                                    f 
Acts relating to the guru, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, 
etc. 
 
 4. Clinging to the Perverse  
Done in reliance on a wrong view – e.g. animal 
sacrifice.  4. Basis                                                    f 
Acts performed in relation to the guru, a Bodhisattva, 
the Sangha, our parents, etc.  
 
  
 4. Attitude / Mental Disposition  
– Attitude (e.g. focussing on superior or 
inferior goals, or for your own benefit or for others, etc.). 
– Intensity & Duration. 
– Anger towards monks/nuns is particularly strong and towards bodhisattvas is even 
stronger.  
5. Fixation on the discordant side           g 
This applies to someone who never performs 
virtuous acts.  5. Basis                                                    f 
Acts relating to the guru, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, your family, etc. Also killing a human, or killing a 
large animal as opposed to a small animal.
 5. Always Being Performed                    d 
e.g. Idle speech that is continually uttered.   
6. Elimination of the discordant side       h 
Having eliminated non-virtue, you become free from attachment and train only in virtuous actions.
  6. Absence of Any Antidote                    g 
This applies to someone who never performs virtuous acts.
  
Middle Lam-Rim (MLR) p79 & LRCM p230 LRCM p227 Pabongka 2 p254 MLR p79 & LRCM p231 &  
Pabongka 2 p260 
 
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 4 
 
 MIDDLE LAM RIM P82 &  GREAT LAM RIM P236 & PABONGKA 2 P256 1 of 2  Results of Non-Virtuous Karma 
 
  Completing Karma 
 Throwing/Projecting Karma Result Similar to the Cause Habitual Tendencies Environmental Results 
Killing Our life will be short and we will suffer from 
many illnesses. We will take pleasure in killing and delight in others killing. Food, drink, medicine, harvests, and the like will have little power to maintain life, and will cause illness. 
Stealing We will be devoid of property and what we have will be owned in common with others. We will steal and delight in the devious activities of others. We will live in a place where the harvest of crops and fruit will be poor; where frost, 
hail, floods, droughts, etc. occur often; and 
where the yield is small. 
Sexual 
Misconduct We will be unable to keep a wife, servants, or a following. We will commit sexual misconduct and delight in similar activities by others. We will live in misery and discomfort and in a place with putrid sw amps, mud, and other 
filth. 
Lying Others will not consider us to be truthful and there will be much slander and deceit. We will lie and delight in similar words by others. We will live where deceitful people abound and have many reasons to be afraid. Field work and work to do with boats will not 
succeed. 
Divisive Speech We will have few friends and will lose our retinue and servants. Our helpers will be disharmonious etc. We will utter divisive speech and delight in similar words by others. We will live where deceitful people abound and have many reasons to be afraid, and in places where the ground is bumpy and uneven, etc. 
Harsh Words Others will speak to us in an unpleasant manner. We will utter harsh words and delight in similar words by others. We will live where deceitful people abound and have many reasons to be afraid, in places full of logs, brambles, rocks, pebbles, 
dangerous animals, etc. 
Idle Talk  
Asanga’s Levels of Yogic Deeds : A great 
non-virtuous deed causes us to be born in the hells, a moderate on e as a hungry ghost, 
and a small one causes us to be born as an 
animal. 
  
 
 Sutra on the Ten Levels : A great non-
virtuous deed causes us to be born in the 
hells, a moderate one as an animal, and a 
small one causes us to be born as a hungry 
ghost. 
 
Our words will carry no authority and others 
will place no value on them and our 
confidence will be weak. We will engage in idle talk and delight in such talk by others. We will live where deceitful people abound and have many reasons to be afraid, and where the ground is uneven or filled with broken trees and thorny bushes, and without fruit. 
 
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 4 
 
 MIDDLE LAM RIM P82 &  GREAT LAM RIM P236 & PABONGKA 2 P256 2 of 2   
 
  Completing Karma 
 Throwing/Projecting Karma Result Similar to the Cause Habitual Tendencies Environmental Results 
Covetousness We will not attain our goals and will have 
great attachment and no contentment. Desire will increase. We will live in a place where bountiful things 
are scarce, where war, disputes, robbers and contagious diseas es are widespread, 
where the sources of water and precious 
gems disappear, and where everything 
excellent deteriorates. 
Harmful Intent We will be easily frightened. We will seek the unbeneficial or not seek the beneficial. We will harm others, or they will harm us. Hatred will increase. We will live in a place where bountiful things 
are scarce, where wars and disputes, contagious diseases  and injuries, are 
widespread, and where the sources of water 
and precious gems disappear. 
Wrong Views Asanga’s Levels of Yogic Deeds : A great 
non-virtuous deed causes us to be born in 
the hells, a moderate on e as a hungry ghost, 
and a small one causes us to be born as an 
animal. 
  
 Sutra on the Ten Levels : A great non-
virtuous deed causes us to be born in the 
hells, a moderate one as an animal, and a 
small one causes us to be born as a hungry 
ghost. We will remain ignorant of the correct view 
and be deceitful. Ignorance will increase. We will live in a place where bountiful things 
are scarce, where war and contagious diseases are widespread, where the sources 
of water and precious gems disappear, 
where the best resources decline, where unclean things appear to  be pure and misery 
appears to be bliss. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 