Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Reference Material/Lam Rim Charts - Medium and Great Scopes.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:18.278210
================================================================================

1) The Eight types of (True) Suffering
Identifying the mind  
intent on liberation –  Liberation means freedom from being bound in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions, chiefly, ignorance.
Therefore, the mind intent on liberation means: an enduring desire to be freed from being bound in cyclic existence due to karma and  
afflictions, chiefly, the desire to free the suchness of one's own mind from the ignorance grasping at a self.
Reflecting on the 
truth of suffering, 
the faults of cyclic 
existenceShowing the 
significance of 
the Buddha's 
asserting the 
truth of suffering 
as the first of the 
four truthsTrue suffering: The contaminated appropriated physical and mental aggregates within one's continuum. 
The truth of suffering was taught first as this is vital for practice. If one does not understand that one's contaminated  
appropriated  physical and mental aggregates are not in the nature of happiness but suffering, one would fail to  
develop a proper determination to liberate oneself from them and thereby sever the very root of liberation.
The four noble truths are therefore taught in this order: True suffering, true origin, true cessation and true path in order  
that disciples can practice properly.
Reflection on 
the eight types 
of sufferingThe seven suffering of: birth, old age, illness, death, encountering what is unpleasant, separation from what is pleasant  
and not getting what you want.
The eighth suffering of  
the five appropriated  
aggregates: it is the nature  
of the five aggregates  
appropriated by karma  
and the afflictions to be  
vessels for - Future suffering – Due to being in possession of one's contaminated body and mind, one  
still possesses the afflictions. Due to that, one accumulates projecting karma, which will  
cause  one  to  appropriate  another  set  of  contaminated  aggregates  and  continue  to  
experience suffering.
Suffering based on what presently exists – If one does not possess one's contaminated  
body and mind, then there will be no way to experience illness, old age and so on.
The suffering of pain -  Due to one's contaminated body and mind being linked  
with dysfunctional tendencies, one possesses the seeds to  
experience the sufferings of pain and change.The suffering of change -
The suffering of conditionality – the very existence of one's contaminated body and mind  
constitute the very nature of the suffering of conditionality.
Advice to recognize one's  
own contaminated 
appropriated physical and  
mental aggregates as in  
the nature of sufferingIf you do not cultivate a genuine sense of disenchantment with cyclic existence, the nature  
of which is the appropriated aggregates, you will have no chance to develop a genuine  
mind intent on liberation, and there will be no way for you to develop great compassion  
for living beings wandering through cyclic existence. Hence this reflection is extremely  
important, regardless of which vehicle, Mahayana or Hinayana, you enter.
2) The Six types of (True) Suffering
The faults of: uncertainty,  insatiability, casting off bodies repeatedly, repeated rebirth,  repeatedly descending from high to low, having no companions.
In cyclic existence, there is no  
secure basis that you can count on.  
There is no security - On obtaining a body, for you discard bodies repeatedly – the fault of casting off bodies repeatedly.
In agents of help or harm, for they are not certain – the fault of uncertainty.
In attaining a wonderful condition, for what is high becomes low – the fault of repeated rebirth.
In companions, for at death you go without companions – the fault of having no companions.
However much you may indulge  
in its pleasures, they will not bring  
satisfaction in the end.– the fault of insatiability.
You have been caught in cyclic  
existence from beginningless time.– the fault of repeatedly descending from high to low.
3) The Three types of (True) Suffering and the Sufferings of the Higher Realms
By depending on the three types 
of suffering, 
one develops the three types of 
feelings, based on that, 
one develops the three types of 
mental poisons The  suffering of change  – means experiencing one's contaminated  pleasurable feelings . While it is in the nature of  
suffering, one grasps onto it as happiness. Attachment increases when pleasant feeling arises.
The suffering of pain – means experiencing painful feelings. Hostility increases when painful feeling arises.
The  suffering of conditionality  – means experiencing contaminated  neutral feelings.  Ignorance increases when one  
misapprehends one's contaminated body and mind as permanent, and so on.
The suffering of human beingsExperiencing  the  suffering  of  hunger  and  thirst,  heat  and  cold,  searching  for  sustenance  and  becoming  fatigued.  
Experiencing the seven types of suffering as shown in chart 1. Being tormented by pain like hell beings, being deprived  
like hungry ghosts, being oppressed like animals. The suffering of poverty, discontent, yearning, quarrels and being killed.  
For the privileged, pain is mental, for common people, pain is physical, and so on.
The suffering of demigodsFirst they are tortured by their unbearable envy of the higher deities' wealth. Due to that, they fight with them and endure  
many sufferings, such as having their bodies cut and split apart. They are intelligent, but they have mental obscurations,  
which are the fruitions of past karma, which make it impossible for them to see the truth from within their situation.
The suffering of the deitiesThe deities of the 
desire realms - The sufferings of dying and falling to lower realms, anxiety, being cut, gashed, killed and banished.
The deities of the 
form and 
formless realms - Even though they escape these sufferings (explained above), nevertheless die in possession of afflictions  
and obscurations. Because they have no control over their future dwelling place, suffer on account of  
dysfunctional tendencies (that takes on something flawed which is a source for future suffering.)
4) The Origins of Suffering 
How the 
afflictions 
arise The afflictions are primary 1) If there are no afflictions, even though you have accumulated immeasurable karma in the past, there will be no  
results of suffering because the karma lacks the necessary cooperative conditions. 2) Even if there are previously  
accumulated karma, if the afflictions are still present, one will immediately accumulate new karma, and will  
thereby appropriate aggregates in the future.
Identifying the afflictions An  affliction  is  defined  as  a  phenomena  that,  when  it is  produced,  it disturbs  the  mind-stream.  The  five  
afflictions which are non-views are attachment, hostility, pride, ignorance and doubt. The five afflictions which  
are views are the view of the transitory collections, an extremist view, a belief in the supremacy of wrong views,  
a belief in the supremacy of ethics and religious discipline and wrong view.
The order in which the  
afflictions arise Ignorance, view of the transitory collections, attachment, hostility, pride, an extremist view,  a belief in the  
supremacy of wrong views, a belief in the supremacy of ethics and religious discipline,  wrong view and  doubt.  
(The main thing to note: ascertain how all of one's afflictions has ignorance as its origin.)
The faults of the afflictions 1) They completely afflict one's mind, causing one to err with regard to what one is observing, reinforcing one's  
potential habits, and causing the same sort of afflictions to recur. 2) They harm one, others, or both. 3) They lead  
to misdeeds in this life, future lives, or in both. 4) They create experiences of pain and anguish, as well as the  
sufferings of birth, and the like. 5) They take one far from nirvana 6) One's virtue is destroyed and resources are  
depleted. 7) In society one feels apprehensive, joyless, and devoid of confidence, while one's notoriety  spreads  
in all directions. 8) Excellent persons such as teachers and protectors rebuke one. 9) One dies with regret and  
with aims unfulfilled. 10) After death, one is reborn into a miserable realm.
How you 
thereby 
accumulate 
karmaIdentifying karmaKarma that is intention – With respect to physical and verbal actions, at the time of motivation, there is intention  
that moves the mind towards its object. This intention is the karma that is intention.
Karma that is intended action – On the basis of the karma that is intention, this intention is carried out in a  
physical or verbal action. This physical or verbal action is the karma that is the intended action.
How one accumulates karma  
(of the true origins of suffering)In general, there are three types of karma, virtuous, non-virtuous and ethically neutral. With respect to projecting  
karma that propels rebirth in cyclic existence, there are also three: 1) Non-meritorious 2) Meritorious 
3) Invariable
How one dies and is reborn1) Causes of death 2) The mind at death 3) Where heat gathers 4) How one reaches the intermediate state after  
death 5) How one takes rebirth
5) The Twelve Factors of Dependent-Arising 
Sequence according 
scripture & meditation Actual chronological  
sequence 
& their analogiesTypes of 
paths & their 
sequenceAbbreviated categories of the factors
1. Ignorance 1 - Farmer1a - 
Affliction
Projecting factors / 
Projecting causes / 
Projectors Manner of projection:  
occurred through the force of  
dormant karmic tendencies  
infused in the causal period  
consciousness by 
compositional activity /  
projecting karma
Projected: 
means having created the  
projected effects conducive to  
actualization once the 
actualizers are present2. Compositional activity  2 - Seed2a - 
KarmaProjecting karma: the factor  
that has done the projecting
3. Consciousness Causal 
period3 - Field
3a - 
True 
SufferingEffect 
periodProjected factors / 
Projected effects / 
Results / effects of projection:
True sufferings, dormant at the  
time of projection, therefore,  
sufferings will only be actualized in  
future lifetimes4. Name & Form 8 - Sprout
5. Six Sources 9 - Stem
6. Contact 10 - Flower
7. Feeling 11 - Fruit Craving, an actualizing factor,  
and feeling, which gives rise to  
this craving, are not in the same  
sequence of dependent-arising  
but a result of some other  
sequence8. Craving 4 - Water1b - 
AfflictionActualizing factors / 
Actualizing causes / 
Actualizers:
Nourishing the projecting causes to  
certainly issue forth result in  
existenceManner of actualization:
occurred through the force of  
empowering / nourishing the  
dormant karmic tendencies  
infused in the causal period  
consciousness by 
compositional activity /  
projecting karma9. Grasping 5 - FertilizerGrasping: the factor that has  
done the actualizing
10. Potential Existence  6 – Seed is ready to 
grow2b - 
KarmaActualizing karma
11. Birth 7- Sprout3b - 
True 
SufferingActualized factors / 
Actualized effects /
Results/ effects of actualization:
True sufferings & sufferings  
actualized in the present lifetime Birth has two causes:  
projecting & actualizing causes
12. Aging & Death 12 – Fruit, when left 
untouched, wither and  
falls to the ground
The twelve factors Entity Boundary / Limits of pervasion Analogies Meanings
1. Ignorance  Not knowing the ultimate nature of reality, suchness Blind old man - never reaches intended  
destination, does not  know whether the  
food he eats is safe or not, unable to avoid  
dangerous places and falls over precipice  
and undergoes myriad sufferingsPrevented from reaching the higher realms  
due to not knowing about karma and its  
effects, falls and ends up in the lower  
realms
2. Compositional 
activity Compositional action / projecting karma Potter – determines the shape, size and  
quality of the pot he wishes to create Due to various karma accumulated, one  
takes good or bad rebirths, undergoing  
pleasant or miserable experiences
3. Consciousness Contaminated mental consciousness which is the  
basis of infusion of accumulated karmaEstablished when the imprint of action is left  
in this specific consciousnessMonkey – swinging from tree to tree and  
by nature very restlessConsciousness moving from one life to  
another, unable to focus on a chosen object  
and being distracted to all sorts of objects
4. Name & Form  Four aggregates other than form (name) & one  
physical (form) aggregate. The four aggregates that  
are name can only appear to the mind via a name/  
term/ label, therefore not an object of the sense  
powersStarts from the time these five aggregates  
come into existence up to but before the six  
sources are developed, therefore do not refer  
to the general meaning of five aggregates.  
Also, the five aggregates of the intermediate  
state before rebirth is subsumed here as wellPeople on boat - moving from one shore to  
another To enter into a birth state, one has to pass  
through the intermediate state. On the basis  
of possessing the five aggregates in the  
intermediate state, one enters into the birth  
state 
5. Six Sources Five physical & one mental sense powers, the  
empowering condition for the arising of the six  
consciousnessesStarts from the time the six sources come  
into existence up to but before the arisal of  
the six consciousnesses that depend on the  
six sources to come aboutEmpty house with 6 windows Symbolizing the establishment of the six  
sense powers without the establishment of  
the six consciousnesses
6. Contact The consciousness/ mental factor that arises upon  
the gathering of sense powers, sense objects and  
body. Distinguishes objects as pleasant, unpleasant  
or neutralStarts from the time this mental factor arises  
up to but before the arisal of the mental  
factor of feeling Couple in embrace When in first contact, feeling does not  
arise, only the gathering of sense powers,  
sense objects and body
7. FeelingMental factor of pleasant, unpleasant or neutral  
feelings arising from its corresponding contact  
distinguishing the three sense objects, the  
experiencing of birth or the fruition of karmaStarts from the time this mental factor  
manifests strongly up to but before cravingPerson whose eye is pierced by an arrow –  
the pain of having one's eye pierced by an  
arrow is so overwhelming that he is unable  
to have other thoughtsStrong feeling arising such that one is  
totally fixated on the experience and unable  
think of anything else
8. Craving Strong attachment of feeling that nourishes dormant  
karmic tendencies infused in the causal period  
consciousness, making it even stronger. Starts from the time this mental factor  
manifests up to but before graspingAlcoholic – one who drinks without  
measureThe more attachment arises, the more it  
cannot be satisfied, the stronger the  
attachment becomes
9. Grasping Even stronger form of craving, a yearning for  
somethingStarts from the time this mental factor  
manifests up to but before potential existenceMonkey plucking fruits – being  
dissatisfied with every fruit it plucks
10. Potential 
Existence The dormant karmic tendency that was nourished/  
nurtured by craving and grasping to the point that it  
becomes strong enough to almost ready to issue  
forth its effectStarts from the time this factor arises up to  
but before birthPregnant woman about to deliver
11. Birth First moment of consciousness at rebirth Newly born infant just emerging from the  
mother's womb
12. Aging & Death Second moment of consciousness up to the death  
state Person carrying a corpse on his back 
6)  Spirit of Enlightenment, the entrance to the Mahayana
The reasons for 
entering the 
Mahayana from 
the start 1) If one merely seeks liberation, one's elimination of faults and attainment of good qualities will be incomplete. One will not have  
accomplished one's own aims. 2) Due to this, one would not be able to fulfil the aims of others perfectly. Therefore, intelligent persons should  
enter the Mahayana from the beginning (immediately after having generated the mind intend on liberation).
The spirit of 
enlightenment 
is the only 
entrance to the 
Mahayana The Conqueror taught that there are no Mahayana vehicles other than the perfection vehicle and the tantra vehicle. Whichever of these two  
one enters, the only entrance is the spirit of enlightenment.
Being posited as a follower of the Mahayana also solely depends on the spirit of enlightenment.
Only those who have generated the spirit of enlightenment becomes a son of the Conqueror and outshines the Hearers and Solitary realizers.
It is important that the person who is practising to be a Mahayanist and not so much that the dharma that he is practising to be Mahayana.
The spirit of enlightenment, the method aspect, is the specific cause (seed) of full enlightenment, whereas the wisdom realizing emptiness,  
the wisdom aspect, is the general cause (fertilizer, water, etc.). Therefore, this spirit is indispensable than the view of emptiness as it is this  
mind alone that gives birth to a buddha.
7) Compassion, the root of the Mahayana path 
Compassion is 
the root of the 
Mahayana path The importance of compassion in the beginning – Generating the wholehearted resolve to free all beings from cyclic existence requires great  
compassion, without which one would not be able to enter the Mahayana.
The importance of compassion in the middle – There will be the danger of losing the spirit of enlightenment, therefore, continuously  
accustoming oneself with great compassion will prevent this from occurring.
The importance of compassion in the end – It is also important for great compassion to be present in the mind at the end, without which one  
would merely abide in peace and not work for beings' welfare.
The other six 
personal 
instructions are 
either causes or 
effects of 
compassion - The  first  four  instructions  are  
causes of compassionTo develop great compassion (in this context), one needs to cultivate a special love that comes from an  
affection that regards beings as attractive, precious and important to one. Such an affection in turn comes  
from seeing all beings as one's mother, recalling their kindness and wishes to repay those kindness.
The wholehearted resolve and  
spirit of enlightenment are the  
effects of compassionTo enter the ranks of the Mahayana, one necessarily needs the wholehearted resolve, which takes on  
personal responsibility to free all beings from their suffering by oneself alone. This resolve is possible  
only with the development of great compassion. When one wonders if under one's present situation, as a  
fellow sentient being, would one be able to fulfil that resolve, one would conclude that only buddha can  
accomplish this. One then develops the desire to become a buddha oneself.
8) The Seven Cause-and-Effect Instructions
Training 
the mind 
intent on 
others' 
welfare – 
the main 
training of 
the 
MahayanaAchieving 
impartiality 
towards all 
beingsPreliminary 
practice One necessarily needs to first cultivate the preliminaries like reflections on karma, the faults of cyclic existence, and  
so forth, which are the practices shared with persons of small and medium capacities, before even attempting to  
develop impartiality.
Developing 
impartialityOne first needs to stop attachment and hostility, which are obstacles for developing unbiased love and compassion. 
One then cultivates an impartiality that is being even-minded oneself towards all.
One then cultivates removing attachment or hostility towards specific persons whom one has neutral feelings, loved  
ones, enemies and then towards all beings respectively.
Having 
affection 
for all 
beingsRecognizing 
all beings as 
one's motherSince cyclic existence has no beginning, one's own rebirths were without beginning. One would have taken rebirths  
through all sentient beings countless times. Therefore, one would not be able to find a sentient being who has not been  
one's mother.
Remembering 
their kindnessOne first recalls the kindness of one's present life mother. One then remembers her kindness as one's mother in  
countless past lives. One then focuses on one's loved ones, those with whom one has neutral feelings, enemies, then to  
all beings.
Wish to repay 
their kindnessSince beings were so kind to one, therefore, in terms of repaying their kindness, one should offer the best gift, freeing  
them from their suffering in cyclic existence once and for all, particularly from their ignorance.
Developing 
the attitude 
of being 
intent on 
other's 
welfareLoveDefinition – a mind focussing on beings who do not have happiness thinking “how nice if beings were happy, may  
they be happy, I will cause them to be happy.”
Stages – first cultivate love towards loved ones, those whom one has neutral feelings, enemies, then all beings.
Method – Reflect that so long as someone is in cyclic existence, there's no real happiness and is deprived of the  
highest happiness. The wish for others' happiness (love) will naturally arise.
CompassionDefinition – a mind focussing on beings who are suffering, thinking “how nice if beings were free from suffering, may  
they be free from suffering, I will cause them to be free from suffering”.
Stages – first cultivate compassion towards loved ones, those whom one has neutral feelings, enemies, then all beings.
Method – Reflect how all beings are tormented by suffering in cyclic existence. This is based on reflecting well how  
oneself is tormented by suffering in cyclic existence. This in turn, is based on the reflections on the topics of persons  
of medium capacity. The wish to free others from such suffering (compassion) will naturally arise.
Wholehearted 
resolveAfter cultivating love and compassion well, one will be able to develop the wholehearted resolve, which is the  
compassion thinking “I will achieve this by myself alone”. One assumes the personal responsibility by repeatedly  
familiarizing oneself with this thought.
Training the mind 
intent on 
enlightenmentIt is only having trained well in the practices above that the wish will arise to achieve full enlightenment. However, this is insufficient.  
One still needs to develop a full faith of conviction with respect to Buddha's Body, Speech, Mind and Enlightened activities, one's  
object of refuge. One then aspires with strong faith for oneself to be exactly like that. One ascertains that it is absolutely necessary to  
perfectly 1) accomplish others' and 2) one's own welfare. Through this, one develops the spirit of enlightenment.
Identifying the spirit  
of enlightenment, the  
fruit of the trainingThe  spirit  of  enlightenment  is  the  Mahayana  main  mind  that  is  concomitant  with  the  two  aspirations  that  desires  full  
enlightenment for others' welfare . Therefore, the main causes for the spirit of enlightenment are the two aspirations: for full  
enlightenment and intent on others' welfare.
Bodhicitta is the same Mahayana main mind as above that exits (only) in the continuum bodhisattvas.
Divisions of 
the spirit of 
enlightenmentAspirational spirit of enlightenment - the same Mahayana main mind as above that is not directly conjoined with the  
intention of engaging in the bodhisattva deeds.
Engaged spirit of enlightenment - the same Mahayana main mind as above that is directly conjoined with the intention  
of engaging in the bodhisattva deeds.
9) Exchanging Self and Other
Benefits and faults of  
exchanging and not  
exchanging self and  
otherWhatever worldly joy there is arises from wishing for others' happiness, whatever worldly suffering there is arises from wishing for  
your own happiness. What need is there to say more? Look at the difference between these two: Ordinary persons act for their own  
welfare; the sage acts for others' welfare. If you do not genuinely exchange your own happiness for others' suffering, you will not  
achieve buddhahood, and even in cyclic existence, you will have no joy.
The ability to exchange  
self and other if one  
accustom oneself to the  
thought of doing soReflect thoroughly on the benefits of being other-centred and the faults of being self-centred. Thereby you will produce from the  
depths of  your heart a great delight in meditating on the exchange of self and other. Then recognize that you can actually generate it  
once you have become accustomed to it.
The stages of 
meditating on 
exchanging self and  
otherWhat is 
exchanging 
self and other It is not thinking “I am others” and “Others are mine”. Rather, it is to cherish others as one presently cherishes  
oneself and to neglect oneself as one presently neglects others. This means one trains to remove others' suffering  
while disregarding one's own happiness.
Overcoming 
two obstacles Differentiation categorically between self and other: one accomplishes one's own happiness and removes one's own  
suffering thinking of them as “mine”, and neglecting others' happiness and suffering thinking of them as “belonging  
to others.”  Remedy: Not to make such differentiation. Self and other are mutually dependent, merely posited in  
relation to a particular reference point and do not essentially exist.
“I will not remove others' suffering because their suffering do not harm me.” Remedy: Since beginningless time you  
have found your own suffering unbearable because you have been conditioned to self-cherishing. Therefore, if you  
become conditioned to cherishing others, you will give rise to an attitude of finding others' suffering unbearable.
10) The Ritual for Adopting the Spirit of Enlightenment
Attaining the spirit of enlightenment which you have not attained
The person before whom you adopt  
the spirit of enlightenmentSomeone who possesses the vows of the engaged spirit of enlightenment.
The persons who adopt the spirit of  
enlightenmentSomeone who has trained his/ her mind in the stages of the path (in general, having trained well in the seven cause-and-
effect instructions and exchanging self and other).
Taking part 
in the ritualPreparationSpecial 
practice 
of going 
for refugeAfter decorating the place of the ritual and setting up representations of the three jewels, arranging the offerings – the  
guru instructs the student to wholeheartedly generate clear faith in the good qualities of the merit field to be visualized,  
one then performs the seven branches of worship.
Supplications and 
going for refugeSupplication – Having the idea that one's guru is the Buddha, make obeisance, offer mandala and  
perform the supplication prayer three times.
Special refuge – This specific Mahayana objects of refuge are Buddha, the teaching that emphasizes  
the Mahayana cessations and the irreversible community of Arya bodhisattvas. Perform this special  
Mahayana practice of going for refuge to never turn away from the Mahayana attitude, recite the  
prayer three times.
Stating the precepts of refuge – the master gives the precepts already explained in the context of person of small  
capacity.
Amassing the collection of merit – Perform the seven branches of worship to one's merit field.
Purifying your attitude – First generate love, then the spirit of enlightenment in one's heart upon seeing the suffering living beings.  
Bring to mind the objects and subjective aspects for love and compassion.
Actual ritual 
(with or 
without the 
presence of 
a master)Generating the aspirational spirit of enlightenment without the commitment and precepts – think “I will attain buddhahood for  
others' sake.
Generating the aspirational spirit of enlightenment with the commitment and precepts – the commitment is to generate this thought  
“I will not part from this determination to attain buddhahood for the sake of all beings until I reach enlightenment.” One then takes  
the precepts of the aspirational spirit of enlightenment.
Generating the engaged spirit of enlightenment that necessarily comes with the bodhisattva vows – Over and above those  
commitment and precepts, one takes the bodhisattva vows. In all three cases, recite the prayer for adopting the spirit of  
enlightenment three times.
ConclusionThe master instructs the student on the precepts of the aspirational spirit of enlightenment.
11) Maintaining the Spirit of Enlightenment
Maintaining and not weakening the spirit of enlightenment that you have attained
Training in the 
precepts that cause  
you not to weaken 
the spirit of 
enlightenment in 
this lifetimeRecalling the benefits of the spirit of enlightenment (as the  
uncommon cause for full enlightenment) to increase the  
strength of your enthusiasm for itBecoming a pure field for accumulating merit and being fully endowed  
with protective merit – if the merit of the spirit of enlightenment were to  
take form, it would not even fit into the sky, nor does the merit of making  
material offerings to the Buddha equal a mere portion of it.
Generate the spirit of enlightenment six times each day to  
increase the actual spirit of enlightenmentNot giving up your development of the aspirational spirit of enlightenment  
– think “how wonderful that I have attained something like this,” and never  
give it up. Devoting particular attention to this, vow over and over not to  
give it up even for an instant.
Increase your aspirational spirit of enlightenment – It is not enough merely  
not to give up the aspirational spirit of enlightenment , increase it with  
great effort three times during the day and three times at night.
Not mentally abandoning the beings whose sake you  
develop the spirit of enlightenmentThe measure of mentally abandoning beings is when you think “I will  
never  work  for  this  person's  welfare,”  due  to  some  conditions  like  
unacceptable actions an so forth.
Accumulate the collections of merit and sublime wisdomStrive  daily  to  accumulate  the  collections  to  increase  the  spirit  of  
enlightenment.
Training in the 
precepts that cause  
you not to weaken 
the spirit of 
enlightenment in 
future lifetimesEliminating the four dark practicesAdopting the four white practices 
(which also becomes the remedy for the four dark practices)
1) Deceiving abbots, masters, gurus, and those worthy of  
offerings1) Forsaking consciously lying to any being whatsoever even in jest or  
even for the sake of your life 
2) Making others feel regret about something not regrettable 4) Causing the living beings that you are helping to mature to not want the  
modest vehicle but to adhere to perfect enlightenment
3) Speaking disparagingly, etc., to beings who have correctly  
entered the Mahayana3) Developing the idea that all bodhisattvas are the teacher
4)  In  an  absence  of  sincerity,  using  deceit  and  
misrepresentation to get the service of others2) Not deceiving but remaining sincere to all beings
Repairing the spirit  
of enlightenment if  
you do weaken itWith the exception of the precepts not to relinquish the aspirational spirit of enlightenment and not to mentally abandon beings, breaking  
the precepts is a misdeed and does not constitute a transgression of the spirit of enlightenment until you receive the bodhisattva vows.  
You should make a confession with the four powers. After you have received the vows, these become transgressions of the vows, you  
repair it in the manner in which you were instructed in the procedure included in the precepts for the engaged spirit of enlightenment.
12) Introduction to the six perfections – learning the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of enlightenment
Why you must learn  
the trainings after 
developing the spirit  
of enlightenmentKing of concentration sutra: “Take learning the bodhisattva trainings (vows) to heart. Why? O prince, because when you take this  
practice to heart, perfect enlightenment is not hard to attain.” Bodhisattvas understand that without disciplining themselves they cannot  
discipline others and so involve themselves in the practice of generosity and so forth. Therefore, practice is said to be learning the  
training in the precepts associated with the bodhisattva vows after you have taken them.
You will not become  
a buddha by learning  
either method or 
wisdom separatelyTrain in the unmistaken and complete method The unmistaken and complete set of causes and conditions for enlightenment come from  
compassion as its root, the (conventional and ultimate) spirit of enlightenment as its  
cause, and brought to completion by the methods of generosity and so forth.
The non-abiding nirvana (of enlightenment)  
has to be accomplished by a path of method  
and wisdom The goal of the Mahayana practitioners is non-abiding nirvana. For this you have to  
achieve the non-abiding in cyclic existence via the wisdom that knows reality,  the  
collection of sublime wisdom, the “factor of wisdom.” You also have to achieve a non-
abiding in the peace that is nirvana via the wisdom that understands the diversity of  
phenomena, the collection of merit, the “factor of method.”
On the basis of ascertaining the two truths,  
you train in the two paths to achieve the two  
resultsJust as at the time of result, there is no contradiction in the attainments of buddha's  
embodiment of truth and embodiment of form, so on the path you ascertain that there is  
no contradiction between gaining freedom from the elaboration of the conception of true  
existence  and  the  functionality  of  cyclic  existence.  This  is  contingent  on  your  
determination of the two truths, that even though phenomena is absent of even a particle  
of essential nature, it does not contradict the establishment of cause and effect to be  
certain.
The process of 
learning the precepts  
(of the bodhisattva 
vows)Desire to learn the precepts (of the bodhisattva  
vows) You should first understand the precepts well and then, after you have trained in them, if  
you have an enthusiasm for taking them, you are given the vows.
Taking the vows of the bodhisattva after  
establishing the desire to learn the preceptsIt is most necessary that you understand how to 1) attain 2) maintain 3) not weaken and  
4) repair those weakened, the spirit of enlightenment explained above (charts 10 & 11). 
How to train after taking the vows –  how all 
the precepts (of the bodhisattva vows) are  
based upon and included in the six perfectionsThe fixed number of the perfections are explained based on: 1) high status 2) fulfilling  
the two aims 3) perfecting the complete fulfillment of others' aims 4) their subsuming  
the entire Mahayana 5) the completeness of paths or method 6) the three trainings.
The fixed order of the perfections are explained in terms of 1) arising 2) inferior and  
superior 3) coarse and subtle, in the order of the number of Perfections: generosity,  
ethical discipline, patience, joyous perseverance, meditative stabilization and wisdom.