Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson56.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.194506
================================================================================


Do you have any questions pertaining to the generation of bodhichitta
through the instruction of either the sevenfold cause-and-effect
instructions or the exchanging self and other that we have covered so far?
Student 1: With respect to mind generation and bodhicitta, both have
different pervasion for the boundaries, so I assumed both have different
definition. Can I check whether the definition of the bodhichitta can be
this: bodhichitta is the Mahayana main mind generation that exist in the
continuum of bodhisattvas?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Yes, you can say that.
Ven Gyurme: As discussed with Khen Rinpoche whether is it necessary for you
to put the word ‘main’ because if it is a Mahayana mind generation, it is
necessary a main knower.
Student 1: But there is no harm stating that.
Ven Gyurme:  There is a main mind generation. Is there a mind generation
that is not main?
Student 1: There is no pervasion to that. Just to make it clear that it is
not a mental factor. The difference between the two -mind generation and
bodhichitta- to me was quite a recent phenomenon.
Student 1: For the aspirational mind generation, this entity does not exist
on the buddha ground?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): No
Student 1: Only the engaged mind generation exist?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Yes
Student 1: Therefore it should also have the same connotation of the
definition that said exist in the continuum of a bodhisattva. That means
the aspirational mind generation is…
Ven Gyurme: The whole definition plus “existing in the continuum of a
bodhisattva”.
Student 1: Yeah, it is not directly conjoined with the activity of engaging
in the bodhisattva deeds that exist in the continuum of the bodhisattvas.
Khen Rinpoche: If you said this, it is alright but there is no need for you
to say because if it an aspirational mind generation, it is necessarily
exist in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
Student 2: In the LRCM, there is no mentioned about the combination of the
two methods: sevenfold cause-and-effect instructions and exchanging self
and others whereas it was mentioned in the commentary.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, it is not mentioned in the great treatise of the stages
of the path. As mentioned in the Lamrim text “Liberation in The Palm of
Your Hand (by Pabongka Rinpoche)”, in order to practice the instruction of
sevenfold cause-and-effect, one doesn’t need the instruction of exchanging
self and other. If you practice the instruction of exchanging self and
other, the essential point of the sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction
must be present. The instruction of exchanging self and other is also to
develop love and compassion but as we have seen in the sevenfold cause-and-
effect instruction, in order to develop love and compassion, first one must
be able to see all sentient beings as very attractive and pleasant and they
are matter to us. Without having affection for sentient beings, it is not
possible to develop the love that arises through the force of such
affection. Without having cultivated strong love and strong compassion,
there is really no way to have this attitude of exchanging self and other.
If strong love and compassion have already been cultivated then one would
have the wish to exchange self and other i.e. one will willingly exchange
others’ suffering for one’s happiness. Therefore, it is taught that in
order to be able to train successfully in the instruction of exchanging
self and other, one’s training must possess the essential points of the
sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction.
Next is the ritual for adopting the spirit of enlightenment. I think I will
just cover this briefly.
[LRCM V2 page 62]  How to adopt the spirit of enlightenment through its
ritual has three parts
   a) Attaining that which you have not attained
   b) Maintaining and not weakening what you have attained
   c) The method of repairing the spirit of enlightenment if you do weaken
      it
a)  Attaining that which you have not attained
Attaining the spirit of enlightenment which you have not attained has three
parts:
   1. The person before whom you adopt the spirit of enlightenment
   2. The persons who adopt the spirit of enlightenment
   3. How to take part in the ritual of adopting the spirit of enlightenment
1. The person before whom you adopt the spirit of enlightenment
Here we are talking about adopting the aspirational spirit of
enlightenment. Before whom we adopt this spirit of enlightenment? Here we
are talking about generating the aspirational spirit of enlightenment that
comes with commitment. So, generating the aspirational spirit of
enlightenment that comes with commitment is taken in the present of someone
who has received the bodhisattva vows.
2. The persons who adopt the spirit of enlightenment
Who is the person that can adopt this aspirational spirit of enlightenment
that come with commitment? We are talking about the person who can adopt
the aspirational spirit of enlightenment that comes with commitment through
a ritual. The person who can adopt this one who has trained one’s mind in
either the sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction or the instruction of
exchanging self and other and through such trainings to have at least
gained some transformative experience in relation to bodhichitta.
3. How to take part in the ritual of adopting the spirit of enlightenment
The explanation of how to take part in the ritual of adopting the spirit of
enlightenment has three parts:
   A. The preparation for the ritual
   B. Actual ritual
   C. The conclusion of the ritual
A. The preparation for the ritual
The preparation for the ritual has three sections:
   I. Performing the special practice of going for refuge
  II. Amassing the collection of merit
 III. Purifying your attitude
I  Performing the special practice of going for refuge
Performing the special practice of going for refuge has three parts:
   1. After decorating the place of the ritual and setting up
      representations of the three jewels, arranging the offerings
   2. Supplications and going for refuge
   3. Stating the precepts of refuge
Here, you have to make preparation such as the offerings and so forth for
adopting the aspirational spirit of enlightenment that comes with
commitment through a ritual. So, what are the preparations that you need to
do?
  -At the place where you are going to adopt this aspirational spirit of
enlightenment that come with commitment i.e. the place where the ritual is
going to be held, has to be cleaned well.
  -You are supposed to anoint the place with scented water, perfume and
make beautiful with flower offerings.
  -You should also arrange the representation of the Buddha exalted body,
speech and mind.
  -You should also prepare a throne for the teacher, the person whom you
are taking this ritual from. It is said that the throne should be decorated
with flowers.
There are reasons why you need to engage in these preparatory practices
before the actual adoption of the aspirational spirit of enlightenment that
comes with commitment. Here we are talking about generating a very
expansive mind that focus on achieving benefit for all living being. Even
if this mind is generated for a very short instance, it can bring limitless
benefits. Here we are talking about generating a mind for limitless
sentient beings, adopting a mind wanting to achieve enlightenment for them
and wanting to place them in the state of enlightenment. In order to
generate such a precious mind we need to develop respect. That is the
reason why you clean the place because it is matter to you that such a mind
is so important and you want to generate it. Making all these preparations
such as cleaning the place, setting up the throne for the qualified person
who possesses the vows and from whom you are going to go through this
ritual is a sign of respect.
All these preparations for the ritual are supposed to be done voluntarily,
happily and enthusiastically because you understand the significant of the
ritual as you are generating the very precious mind. If you has to the
ability, you should set up as extensive offerings as possible and of the
best qualities as possible. If you do not have the necessity or the ability
then it is an exception; otherwise you should make as many good offerings
as possible, because making extensive offerings become the condition for
you to be able to develop this mind. If you understand the reason for
making extensive offerings then making extensive offerings will not be a
problem.
As I mentioned before, here we are talking about developing this precious
mind -the aspirational spirit of enlightenment. When it arises in the mind,
you will not feel difficult at all to work for others no matter how
difficult it is. Also with this mind of this spirit of enlightenment, it
really gives a very strong impetus to developing joyous perseverance. When
you have these two -joyous perseverance and a never die attitude- you will
amass the collections quickly. If the collections are amassed quickly, you
will achieve enlightenment quickly. So, if you see how important it is to
generate this spirit of enlightenment then you will not feel any difficulty
in making the extensive offerings.
As for the students who are adopting this spirit of enlightenment through
the ritual, the students have to wash themselves, keep clean and put on
good clothes. The master, the person who is conducting the ritual, should
help the students to generate faith by talking about the good qualities of
the objects of refuge. Before adopting this spirit of enlightenment through
ritual the students should also engage in the practice of accumulating
merits and purify the mind of obscurations through the seven-branch
worship.
In the beginning, the person who generate the aspirational spirit of
enlightenment that come with commitment should generate the attitude that
the person who is conducting the ritual is a Buddha. He/she makes
prostration to the master and makes a mandala offering. One has to kneel on
one’s right knee and joining the hand respectively, and one makes a
supplication for the spirit of enlightenment. The verse for the
supplication is given in the text:
[LRCM V2 page 65]  Just as the former perfect buddhas, who are tathagatas
and arhats, and the great bodhisattvas on the high levels initially
generated the spirit of unexcelled, perfect enlightenment, please, O
master, help me, (say your name at this point), to generate the spirit of
unexcelled, perfect enlightenment.
Next is the special way of going for refuge. This special way of going for
refuge is going to refuge in a Mahayana way thinking: "From now until I
achieve enlightenment for the sake of protecting all sentient beings, I
always going for refuge to the Buddha, I always going for refuge to the
Dharma and I always going for refuge to the Sangha." The master should
explain the precepts of going for refuge. We have already studied these
precepts when we were looking at the practices that are shared with the
person of small capacity.
II. Amassing the collection of merit
After having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, one has to
amass the collection of merit. As mentioned earlier, one visualizes the
root and lineage gurus and all the buddhas and bodhisattvas and in relation
to them, one accumulates merit.
III. Purifying your attitude
One purifies the attitude by bringing to mind the meditation on love and
compassion for developing the feeling of bodhichitta and actively sustain
that in thought.
All of these are the preparations for the ritual. These are all the
important points that form the preparation of the ritual. On the basis of
cleaning well the place where the ritual will be conducted, you have to go
for refuge in the Mahayana way. Then you have to amass the collection of
merit, and you have to purify your attitude. On the basis of sustaining the
meditation on love and compassion and until there is some feeling in the
heart, you can then say the preparation of the ritual is complete.

B. Actual ritual.
On the basis of doing all these preparatory practices and through
sustaining the meditation of love and compassion, come the time when you
actually have transformative experiences with some feeling in the heart
through thinking of love and compassion, then you become the actual basis
or the person who can take part in the ritual. This is the ideal situation
and it has to be like that. It is not sufficient for you just repeating
after what the master has to say. As mentioned in the text, the person who
adopts this spirit of enlightenment should be someone who has trained their
mind in the way that has been explained earlier and has gained some
transformative experience with respect to the spirit of enlightenment.
In order to be able to take part in the actual ritual and to benefit from
it, we have to do all these preparations well. If all these preparations
have been done well, then the actual ritual will also take place nicely. If
you are able to go through the actual ritual nicely, you will also have a
very good result.
But we are not like that. Our preparation is not done well and the actual
ritual would not be perfect and we do not have much of the result. However,
I think it is important for us to know this, so as much as possible, we
just have to try to make sure that our preparations are done well in order
for us to be able to generate this aspirational spirit of enlightenment.
For the actual ritual, in the presence of the master you kneel down with
respect. Here, it is not that you generate the spirit of enlightenment
thinking only, “I will attain buddhahood for others sake.” Rather, you
focus on such a thought and make the commitment, “I will not part from this
determination to attain buddhahood for the sake of all beings until I reach
enlightenment.” So generate the attitude with these two aspects in
dependence on the ritual.
Generating the aspirational spirit of enlightenment alone which entails
generating the intention thinking “I will achieve enlightenment for the
benefit of all sentient beings” can be done by anyone. However, if you do
generate the aspirational spirit of enlightenment that come with the
commitment which entails making a promise that never forsake this intention
until you have achieved enlightenment, then you have to train in the
precepts that come with commitment.
Generating the aspirational spirit of enlightenment through a ritual
doesn’t necessarily come with the commitment as anyone can do this.
However, when it comes to generating the engaged spirit of enlightenment
then it is necessarily come with the commitment. Maybe it would be helpful
if we go through the verse of the ritual for adopting the spirit of
enlightenment that come with the commitment. This verse is to be repeated
three times after the master.
[LRCM V2 page 68] The ritual for adopting the spirit of enlightenment is as
follows. Recite the following three times:
 All buddhas and bodhisattvas who reside in the ten directions, please
 listen to me. O master, please listen to me. By means of my virtuous roots
 in the nature of generosity, ethics, or meditation— which I, (say your
 name at this point), in this and all other lives, cultivated, enjoined
 others to cultivate, or rejoiced in the cultivation of—I, (say your name),
 will generate the spirit of great, unexcelled, perfect enlightenment from
 now until I reach the heart of enlightenment, just as the earlier perfect
 buddhas, who are arhats and tathagatas, and the great bodhisattvas who
 reside on the high levels generated the spirit of unexcelled, perfect
 enlightenment. I will liberate all living beings who are not liberated. I
 will free all living beings who are not freed. I will relieve those
 without relief. [326] I will cause to reach nirvana those who have not
 reached it.
This is the way to adopt the spirit of enlightenment through a ritual if
you are able to find someone to perform this ritual for you. However, it
doesn’t mean that you cannot adopt the spirit of enlightenment through the
ritual if you cannot find a master. You can adopt the aspirational spirit
of enlightenment through the ritual even if you cannot find a master. The
preparation is about the same.
 -Imagine Shakyamuni Buddha and all the buddhas in front of you.
 -Make obeisance and offerings.
 -Accumulate merits by doing the seven-branch worship.
 -Go for refuge and so forth.
You think that you are adopting this spirit of enlightenment by reciting
the verse after Shakyamuni Buddha in front of you.
This is adopting the spirit of enlightenment through ritual and attaining
that which you have not attained. After you have attained of what you have
not attained, then the next thing is to maintain it and not weakening what
you have attained.
Once you have adopted this spirit of enlightenment through a ritual and
have attained what you have not attained, you have to ensure it does not
degenerate. In order to ensure it does not degenerate, you have to train in
the precepts.
[LRCM V2 page 69]  b' Maintaining and not weakening what you have attained
You need to know the precepts, so I will explain them. This has two parts:
   1' The training in the precepts that cause you not to weaken your spirit
      of enlightenment in this lifetime.
   2' The training in the precepts that cause you to not separate from your
      spirit of enlightenment in future lifetimes as well
1’.  The training in the precepts that cause you not to weaken your spirit
of enlightenment in this lifetime
The training in the precepts that cause you not to weaken your spirit of
enlightenment in this lifetime has four parts:
a. The training in the precept to recall the benefits of the spirit of
   enlightenment in order to increase the strength of your
   enthusiasm for it
b. The training in the precept to generate the spirit of enlightenment six
   times each day in order to increase the actual spirit of enlightenment
c. The training in the precept not to mentally abandon the living beings
   for whose sake you develop the spirit of enlightenment
d. The training in the precept to accumulate the collections of merit and
   sublime wisdom


a. The training in the precept to recall the benefits of the spirit of
enlightenment in order to increase the strength of your
enthusiasm for it
Here, we talk about the two advantages of having generated a stable spirit
of enlightenment:
   1. You become a pure field for accumulating merit.
   2. You become fully endowed with protective merit.
Once the spirit of enlightenment arises in your mind, immediately you will
become an object of worship for all living beings i.e. you become an object
suitable for reverend.
When you have developed bodhicitta through having trained the mind in the
sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction and/or the instruction of exchanging
self and other, naturally you become the object of reverend and respect for
the sentient beings. You become the leader of the sentient beings and are
unexcelled in the mind of sentient beings.
When you think about it, I guess it becomes apparent that anyone who
develops the real bodhichitta would become the source of benefit for
sentient beings; only benefitting others and not harming others. If the
person is like that, people will just naturally respect that person.
The second benefit for those who have generated the bodhichitta are always
protected by guardians of a universal monarch or a wheel turning king. The
wheel turning king has protective guardians. It is said that one will be
protected by guardians that are twice as numerous as these wheel turning
kings. The person who has developed bodhichitta cannot be harmed by non-
human entities such as yaksas and local spirits.
[LRCM V2 page 71]  Secret mantras and knowledge mantras that can cure
epidemics, injuries, and infections but are not effective in the hands of
living beings become effective when someone with a stable generation of the
spirit of enlightenment uses them.
Here it says about the importance of having a stable spirit of
enlightenment/ bodhichitta, otherwise those mantras that are supposedly to
be very powerful and effective doesn’t become effective or doesn’t show
their power or doesn’t show its effectiveness when practiced by people who
have no bodhichitta.  However, these mantras become very effective and
powerful when practiced by people who have bodhichitta. So, we need to
understand that by having bodhichitta does makes the secret mantras and
knowledge mantras show their effectiveness and are able to produce whatever
result they are supposed to produce.
Those who have developed this spirit of enlightenment do not retaliate when
harmed. Even those who have developed the spirit of enlightenment are born
in the lower realms they will be quickly released from those rebirths. For
those who have bodhichitta, whatever suffering they experience becomes the
condition for the compassion to increase.
In order to increase the strength of enthusiasm for bodhichitta, we have to
constantly remember the advantages and the benefits of having bodhichitta.
b  The training in the precept to generate the spirit of enlightenment six
times each day in order to increase the actual spirit of enlightenment
[LRCM V2 page 73] The training in the precept to generate the spirit of
enlightenment six times each day has two parts:
   1. Not giving up your development of the aspirational spirit
   2. The training to increase the aspirational spirit of enlightenment
Great faults or disadvantages will arise from giving up this aspirational
spirit of enlightenment because when you generated this special mind, you
make the commitment in the presence of the buddhas and bodhisattvas and the
gurus. So if you give up this commitment then the ensuing faults or
disadvantages would be great.
[LRCM V2 page 74]  Therefore it also says:
    Like a blind person finding a jewel
    In a heap of garbage,
    By chance the spirit of enlightenment
    Has arisen in me.
Think, "How very wonderful that I have attained something like this," and
never give it up. Devoting particular attention to this, vow over and over
not to give it up for even an instant.
Here is an example of a blind person finding a jewel in a pile of garbage;
that is almost impossible and so rare. Likewise, considering the fact that
anyone who has the chance to develop this aspirational spirit of
enlightenment is really so rare. So, you should remember this and generate
the thought over and over again that you will never ever giving this up.
You need to engage in training to increase whatever aspirational spirit of
enlightenment that has been generated. Therefore, you should generate this
mind three times during the day and three times at night.
In order to strengthen this spirit of enlightenment, you are supposed to
develop this mind three times during the day and three times at night. You
can do so through the ritual. As mentioned here, you visualize the field of
merit and then make offerings. In particular, as mentioned earlier in the
preparatory ritual, you have to purify your attitude by sustaining in the
meditation on love and compassion. On such a basis, you again generate the
spirit of enlightenment and recite this verse three times:
    I go for refuge until enlightenment
    To the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha;
    By the merit of practicing the six perfections
    May I achieve buddhahood in order to help living beings.
It would be ideal if you can use the words from the longer ritual that was
mentioned earlier for adopting this spirit of enlightenment. If not, you
can just use this short verse as a mean to develop and strengthen the
spirit of enlightenment.
c The training in the precept not to mentally abandon the living beings for
whose sake you develop the spirit of enlightenment
What is the meaning of “mentally abandoning the sentient beings”? Mentally
abandoning the sentient being is that you generate the thought thinking,
“Now I will never work for that person,” based upon some conditions.
d The training in the precept to accumulate the collections of merit and
sublime wisdom
After having generated the spirit of enlightenment, you have to strive to
accumulate merit and to purify obscurations by doing the seven-branch
worship.
So these are the four trainings that you have to engage in order to not
weaken the spirit of enlightenment in this life.
2' The training in the precepts that cause you to not separate from your
spirit of enlightenment in future lifetimes as well
[LRCM V2 page 75] The training in the precepts that cause you to not
separate from your spirit of enlightenment in future lifetimes as well has
two sections:
   1. The training in the precept to eliminate the four dark practices which
      weaken the spirit of enlightenment
   2. The training in the precept to adopt the four light practices which
      keep the spirit of enlightenment from weakening
Note: The four dark practices and four light practices can be translated as
four dark dharmas and four white dharmas respectively.
We will take about these four white dharmas and four black dharmas in the
next session. Please read this up on your own.
Student 3: (audio 85:59-87:08) Two methods have been taught for generating
bodhichitta, do we need to practice both to become a bodhisattva? Or these
two methods are taught because of different mental inclination? Whether the
strength of the bodhichitta achieved through these methods are the same or
different?
Khen Rinpoche: These two systems of developing the spirit of enlightenment
come about because of the lineage coming from the two masters. The spirit
of enlightenment that is generated through training in either of these
systems is the same. In the Lamrim text “Liberation in The Palm of Your
Hand (by Pabongka Rinpoche)”,  it says that the system of exchanging self
and other is a more powerful technique because this instruction contain the
essential points of the sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction. But when we
practice the sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction, the essential points
of the instruction of exchanging of self and other need not be there. This
is what is mentioned in the “Liberation in The Palm of Your Hand (by
Pabongka Rinpoche),” but we have to think about this.
Student 4: (audio 91:07-92:10) If our precious guru liked Kyabje Lama Zopa
Rinpoche who is a great practitioner and who has developed the realization
of bodhichitta are still the subject to be harmed by spirit, it is hard for
me to accept what is being said in the text just now. Maybe Khen Rinpoche
would like to comment on this.
Khen Rinpoche: There isn’t a straightforward answer to this. One can
approach this from many angles. Basically you can comment on it from
various angles. In order even to be able to comment on this from various
angles, we need to know many things. One of which is the presentation of
the four Buddhist tenets. For example, according to the Great Exposition
School (GES), the Vaibhashika, the Buddha’s’ body is true suffering and is
not Buddha; whereas the Sutra School and the above do not accept that. If
we follow the GES, the Buddha’s aggregates (body) is not a Buddha because
it is true suffering. If it is true suffering, then problem will arise.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Which school you are in? Vaibhashika? You
are in the highest school, the Middle Way School,but your question is from
Vaibhashika’s school.
Khen Rinpoche: From the Sutra School onwards, the Buddha’s aggregate is
Buddha; not true suffering. Once you accept the Buddha is Buddha, then it
becomes a contradiction if you say Buddha receive harm. People seeing the
Buddha receiving harm such as Buddha Shakyamuni shed blood when harmed by
Devadatta but when we see somebody receiving harm, this does not mean that
person is receiving harm as in the case of the Buddha. Buddha is showing
the aspect of receiving harm. Once you accept the individual involved is a
Buddha then to assert that person is suffering is a contradiction. So, the
only explanation left is that it is due to your impure perception from the
impure mind. It would be easy if we fit our mind according to the
Vaibhashika’s view. Anyway, whether someone is Buddha or not does depends
on the level of mind. To the mind that is completely free of all the
obscurations, then he is a Buddha and it doesn’t matter whatever happen to
the body. However, that is not the ultimate view and is not the reality of
thing.
Student 5: (audio 99:46-100:35) Let us say in my previous life I have taken
the bodhisattva vows and in this lifetime I don’t remember the precepts
until I take the bodhisattva vows again. Do I accumulate negative karma
that is done but not accumulated?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): This life when you fall asleep, do you
create negative karma or not by not keeping the precept?
Student 5: No
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Why? When you fall asleep, you don’t keep
your precept, isn’t it?
Student 5: (audio 101:08-101:43)
Khen Rinpoche: When you engage in the training that will ensure the spirit
of enlightenment is not weaken in this life and if you engage the training
that will ensure you will not separated from this spirit of enlightenment
in your future lives then it should not degenerate. When we die, during the
whole period of the intermediate state, the spirit of enlightenment does
not manifest. If it does not manifest then we say it is in the aspect of
not degenerating. Upon taking rebirth, the coarse level of consciousness
starts to operate and one may start to have good heart and it is possible
the spirit of enlightenment might arise. I think in that life, in order to
bring it back, one has to train in order to generate this spirit of
enlightenment by adopting it through ritual. I am not sure whether you
incur the fault of not keeping the vows or not during the in between period
when the spirit of enlightenment is not manifest. When we are asleep the
mind of enlightenment is not manifest. During that time it does not really
matter whether one practice the four white dharmas or whether one doesn’t
abandon the four black dharmas.  If one goes crazy, probably there is no
fault in not being able to abandon the four black dharmas and not able to
cultivate the four white dharmas. I guess there wouldn’t be incurred any
faults because those are exception and it is beyond control.
Student 5: (audio 105:47-110)

Extracted from Practicing the Path by Yangsi Rinpoche
Stages of the Actual Practice of Equalizing and Exchanging Self with Others
Although the seven-point instructions on cause and effect were taught by
Chandrakirti, and the technique of equalizing and exchanging self w others
was taught by Shantideva, in the Lamrim Chenmo the two methods are often
presented in a combined practice having eleven parts. Training the mind in
this method is an extremely effective way to develop and sustain the mind
of bodhichitta.
The first point is creating the basis of the mind of equanimity as
presented in Kamalashila's Stages of Meditation. We should be familiar with
the method for doing this, as we have discussed equanimity extensively
already.
The second point is the recognition of all sentient beings as our mothers,
which we have also discussed, followed by the third point, remembering
their kindness.
In the usual form of remembering kindness from the seven point instructions
of cause and effect, we focus on remembering the kindness of sentient
beings as our mothers in particular. We concentrate on the fact that
sentient beings have been our mothers countless times, and have so
selflessly nurtured us. In the combined practice, however, we remember the
kindness of sentient beings in an extraordinary way: we think about the
kindness of sentient beings even while they were not our mother. In respect
to this, we should reflect on the fact that all of our comfort and
happiness, great or small, comes in dependence on an infinite chain of
direct and indirect kindness from other sentient beings. When practicing
the combined technique, it is most effective if we think about kindness in
these two ways by focusing on the kindness of mother sentient beings in
terms of that particular relationship, and then recalling how, even outside
of that role, sentient beings are responsible for every single happiness
that we experience.
The fourth point is the wish to repay that kindness, as we have already
discussed.
The fifth is equalizing self and others in the sense of understanding that
we are all the same in wanting happiness and in not wanting suffering -that
there is no difference between ourselves and others in that way.
Furthermore, we should contemplate the reality that we are not inhere
existent, that what is "I" and what is "others" is totally interdependent.
The sixth point is thinking of the manifold disadvantages of cherishing the
self, which should be clear by now.
The seventh is thinking of the manifold advantages of cherishing others,
which should also be clear.
The result of thinking in these ways brings us to the eighth point. This is
the actual practice of exchanging self with others in which we visualize
taking on the sufferings of others from the base of the mind of compassion.
Although we do not possess omniscience, great compassion, or the perfect
power to know sentient beings' exact needs or their mind level and
predispositions at the moment, as beginners on the path or as ordinary
sentient beings we can nonetheless enhance the mind of compassion through
this visualization practice.
    We should begin our practice by imagining that we are taking on the
suffering of people who are very close and dear to us. When we can generate
a genuine and heartfelt sense of this, we can then extend our practice to
include strangers, then further extend it to all of our enemies. In this
way we will cultivate a very pervasive sense of compassion, even extending
to beings born in the hot hells and the cold hells—taking on the suffering
of all the beings of the six realms as well as all of the bodhisattvas up
to the tenth ground.
    This meditation on compassion should have the effect of opening our
hearts. If we feel uncomfortable taking on the suffering of others even at
the level of imagination, it means that we have not fully embraced the mind
of compassion. The reason there is discomfort or doubt in our minds is
because we lack compassion, and the reason that we lack compassion is
because we lack the strength of the mind that cherishes others. We lack the
capacity to cherish others because we cherish ourselves so strongly. We
have a very strong sense of cherishing the self because we have not
succeeded in our practice of equalizing and exchanging self for others.
Therefore, we should go back to the root, reinforcing our thinking by
repeating the contemplations regarding the advantages in cherishing others
and the disadvantages of cherishing self.
    If we have cultivated the mind of compassion, but are still
experiencing obstacles in our practice of taking on the suffering of
others, we are advised to begin with taking on our own future suffering
-whatever suffering is to come in the later part of the day, in the week
ahead, in the month ahead, or in the years ahead. It is easy to accept
taking on our own suffering because it has to do with ourselves. As we
become habituated to taking on our own future suffering, we can gradually
begin to take on the suffering of beings that are very close and dear to
us, then extend that to strangers, to enemies, and to all the beings of the
six realms.
  Even though we are only practicing the visual technique of taking on the
suffering of others, and thus not actually relieving them of suffering,
this practice is nonetheless a basis upon which we can accumulate extensive
merit. Our practice of this technique will improve with familiarity and
habit. Although in the beginning stages we will not be able to bring about
a perfect result, there are cases in which the karmic connection is
extraordinarily strong and in which the mind of the practitioner has been
developed so completely that the visualization can actually become real.
You may have heard about the bodhisattva Togmay Sangpo, who cried out in
pain and took the bruises onto his own body when someone threw a stone at a
stray dog. In the cases of those bodhisattvas who have fully encompassed
the mind of great compassion that wishes to take on every suffering of
others, these kinds of things can happen in reality.
  Having  familiarized  ourselves  with  the  technique  of  taking  on  the
suffering of others, we should then practice giving happiness, which is the
ninth point. Actually, the order in which we practice the two points—giving
happiness with love and taking suffering with compassion—is not set. It  is
fine to begin either way. However, from the point of view  of  convenience,
it is usually recommended that we first take on suffering with the mind  of
compassion, and then give happiness from  the  resources  of  the  mind  of
infinite loving-kindness.
    Giving happiness, too, at this stage, is only a visual form of giving.
With the love that wishes happiness for others, we visualize that we are
giving our body, our possessions, and our merits of the past, present, and
future to bring forth the result of ultimate happiness in the lives of
others. In real life, giving happiness can even be the wish to give, if it
is not possible to really give something.
   Having practiced in this way for a while, we should then recall that
although by means of this practice we are developing our mind's capacity to
take on the suffering of others and to give them happiness that is all we
are doing. In reality, at present, we cannot actually bring about these
results. Therefore, the tenth point in this meditation is the cultivation
of the extraordinary supreme thought, by which we make the resolution to
take on the complete responsibility to liberate sentient beings from
suffering.
    To clarify, the practice of giving and taking with loving compassion is
the actual manifestation of the mind wishing to benefit others. When we do
this practice, of course, any benefit to others that we are actually able
to bring about occurs only through our imaginations. To be able to take on
the suffering of sentient beings in our lives for real, we need to attain
the state of perfection in which we have abandoned everything that is to be
abandoned and realized everything that is to be realized. Once we have
attained this state, we can actualize the objectives of our love and
compassion.
    Therefore, the eleventh point is training the mind in the wish to
attain enlightenment solely for the welfare of others. This is also known
as the Mahayana mind generation. When the thought aspiring to attain
enlightenment for the benefit of beings is established very firmly like the
king of mountains in our minds, we can quickly complete the realizations of
the paths and grounds and reach the ultimate attainment
