Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson34.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.961201
================================================================================


In the last lesson we looked at the meanings of “karma done” and “karma
accumulated”.  Let us use studying the dharma as an illustration.  How does
one accumulate the karma of studying the dharma? In order for us to
accumulate the karma of studying the dharma, there must be a very strong
drive in us to want to study the dharma and the intention has to be long
lasting. Karma is a mental factor. If you have this strong and long-lasting
intention to study, it moves your mind towards the object which is
studying. Only then you can say that you are accumulating the karma of
studying.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Are you accumulating the karma to study
or not?
In the last lesson we saw how in order for the karma/action to be
accumulated, the intention has to be strong and long-lasting. So that is
the meaning of accumulating the karma of studying.
If the intention is strong and long-lasting then you accumulate the karma
of studying. The result of the karma that is accumulated is the result that
you will definitely experience. If you have the strong and long-lasting
intention to study, you will experience the result of being able to
complete your study. So this is the effect.
If you have the strong and long-lasting intention to study, then you
actually carry out the intention and physically engage in the activity of
studying. You also create the karma of study. Then in this case you will
have both the karma that is accumulated and the karma that is done.
The result of having created the karma of studying is that you will
definitely experience the result; without which the study will not be
completed. If you do not create the karma of studying and if you do not
accumulate the karma of studying then of course you will not have the
result of having studying the dharma. So it is very important to have these
two: to create and to accumulate the karma. Therefore it is important to
strive to have both the karma of having done the study and accumulating the
karma of studying. If we have these two, then we will definitely experience
the result. Definitely we may experience the result either in this life, if
not in the next life or some other life time. The result is definite.

(ii) Karma whose result you will definitely or only possibly experience
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 242: From the viewpoint of the time at which
you experience a result, there are three types of certainty of experiencing
results of karma: experiencing it here and now; experiencing it after
taking rebirth; and experiencing it at another time.
Karma that you experience here and now is the effect of actions which ripen
in the very lifetime in which you do the actions.
Karma that you will experience after you have been reborn is the effect of
actions which you will experience in the second [next] lifetime.
Karma that you will experience at other times is the effect of actions
which will ripen in or after the third lifetime.]
From the viewpoint of the time at which you experience a result of the
action, there are three:
   1. Karma that you experience now as the effects of action that ripen in
      the very lifetime in which you did those actions
   2. Karma that you will experience after taking rebirth, i.e. in your next
      life
   3. Karma that you will experience at some other time.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 242: The way in which the  many  virtuous  and
nonvirtuous karmas that exist in your mindstream ripen is as follows:
   1. Whichever karma is weightiest will ripen first.
   2. If weights are equal, whatever karma is manifest at the time of  death
      will ripen first.
   3. If this also is the same, whatever karma you have predominantly become
      habituated to will ripen first.
   4. If this also is the same, whatever karma  you  have  done  first  will
      ripen earliest.
As cited in the Treasury of Knowledge Auto-commentary:
   As to the actions that give rise to cyclic existence,
   There are those that are weighty, those that are near,
   Those to which you are habituated, and those you did earliest.
   Among these, the former will ripen first.]

Very often we have people asking: “When we will experience the result of a
virtuous action or a non-virtuous action?”
It is not there in the MLR but it is in the LRCM.
The way in which virtuous and non-virtuous karma ripens is as follow:
1. Whether it is a virtuous karma or non-virtuous karma, whichever karma is
   heaviest will ripen first.
2. If both karmas are equal, then the karma that manifest at the time of
   death will ripen first.
3. If at the time of death, both karmas manifest, the karma that you have
   been predominantly habituated to will ripen first.
4. If both karmas are equally habituated then the karma that you have done
   first will ripen first.
Question: Is it possible to have everything the same?
Question for discussion:
1. For the three non-virtuous mental actions (covetousness, malice and
   wrong view), there isn’t any example of that actions that is accumulated
   but not done. Why?
2. Why the three non-virtuous mental actions are not karma?
It is not there in the MLR but it is in the LRCM.
Ven Gyurme: This means that if it is a non-virtuous mental action, it is
necessarily both accumulate and done.
On the question “Why the three non-virtuous mental actions are not karma?”
the answer given in the text is because they are afflictions. Then explain
why something that is affliction cannot be karma.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Did you get the question? You must get
the question then you can think or ask other people. That is the best way
to learn.

2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-1 The fully ripened positive qualities and their function
  A Excellent life span
  B Excellent complexion
  C Excellent extraction
  D Excellent power
  E Respectable words
  F Renown as being very powerful
  G Being male
  H Possessing strength
The first one has eight points: excellent life span, excellent complexion,
excellent extraction, excellent power, respectable words, renown as being
very powerful , being male, and having strength.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 243: a" The attributes of the fruitions
There are eight fruitions: consummate life span, consummate color,
consummate lineage, consummate power, trustworthy words, renown as a great
power, being a male, and having strength.
Consummate life span is when a virtuous projecting karma from a previous
lifetime projects a long life span and you live for the long time that was
projected. Consummate color is having an excellent body by way of its good
color and shape; being pleasant to look at because you do not have
incomplete sensory faculties; and being beautiful due to being well-
proportioned. Consummate lineage is having been born with the good lineage
that is esteemed and famed in the world. Consummate power is great
resources, an abundance of close associates such as relatives, and many
helpers. Trustworthy words are words that living beings will accept because
you are suitable to be trusted not to delude others physically or vocally,
and are an authoritative witness in all disputes. Renown as a great power
is to be honored by a great multitude of beings because of your fame and
wide acclaim due to your confident generosity and possession of good
qualities such as perseverance. Being a male is to have a male organ.
Having strength is, by the power of previous karma, naturally experiencing
little injury, no illness, and great enthusiasm arising from this life's
circumstances.
Moreover, the first, consummate life span, is living in a happy realm. The
second, consummate color is the body. The third, consummate lineage, is
birth. The fourth, consummate power, is resources and helpers. The fifth,
trustworthy words, is being an authority in the world. The sixth, renown as
a great power, is fame about such power. The seventh, being a male, is
having the capacity for all good qualities. The eighth, strength, is having
power in your activities.]

The next section in the MLR root text discuss on the eight fruitions of
karma.
If one is reborn as a human being with these eight fruitions or special
qualities, they are the basis for favorable practice. The eight fruitions
are:
   1. excellent life span
   2. excellent color
   3. excellent lineage
   4. excellent power
   5. trustworthy words
   6. renown as a great power
   7. being a male
   8. having strength
Excellent span does not just refer to have long-life. The point of having a
long-life is that with the long lifespan, you are able to work not only for
your own welfare but also able to do things that are of benefit to others.
If you are able to live a long life, you will also be able to accumulate
more virtuous actions.
The effect of having excellent color is that people will be attracted to
your looks so that you are able to encourage them and cause them to engage
in virtues.
On the excellent lineage, this day is not so apparent and not so important
anymore. In ancient times, family lineage (or caste) does make a
difference. If you are born with good lineage or caste which is well
regarded in societies , you will make people listen to you and cause them
to engage in virtues. If you are born in lower lineage or caste somehow you
are not able to have that kind of effect and people don’t really listen to
you.
I think there is a big difference in term of the type of lineage or caste
that people are born into. If you look at the context of India which has
caste system, people who are born in the Brahmin class are considered to be
the highest in society. Because of being born in the Brahmin class, a lot
of emphasis is placed on the external cleanliness in the various aspect of
their life and that definitely somehow has the effect on the development of
their intelligence; whereas those people who are born in the lower caste in
those day do not place much emphasis on cleanliness and I guess that has
some effect on the development of their intelligence as well.
Please take note that we are just talking about things in general. Of
course, there is always an exception. I am not saying that is necessarily
so. We cannot expect all Brahmin to be rocket scientists and people who are
born in the lower caste are like dirt. We cannot say that. Here the quality
of having excellent lineage is very much related to the time and the
situation in which one is born into. If you relate this to the ancient
India then there is a difference.
If you are born in the excellent lineage during the time when there are
such divisions in society, then there is a difference.
If you have the excellent power, it means that you have a lot of resources
at your disposal. You also have a lot of acquaintances, friends and helpers
who can help you. These make a difference to your abilities to gather
sentient beings and bring them to Dharma.
The next fruition in MLR is respectable words and in LRCM is trustworthy
words. Basically having trustworthy words refers to someone who does not
speak in anyhow manner; especially will not speak in the way to deceive
others. If you do not speak in the way to deceive others, others will
consider you to be a valid authority. When people consider you as a valid
authority then you are in the position to help people.
Renown as a great power (no commentary given)
The attribute of being a male is also related to the time in the world.  We
are talking about this in a general way. There is a particular time in the
world when male are generally considered to be much capable and of better
rebirth than woman. However in this time there is greater equality between
the sexes and there is woman right and so forth. Perhaps one can think
whether it is necessarily to be born as male or not.
Having strength means having great enthusiasm and determination for
virtuous practice for dharma.
If one is born as a human being with these eight fruitions then these eight
fruitions will make your human life very favorable for practicing the
dharma. Because of these reasons, it makes the dharma practice better;
basically you have better conditions for practicing dharma. Therefore Lama
Tsongkhapa advises us to pray to be born as a human being with these eight
fruitions.
These eight fruitions have their causes. You can read this as it is quite
straight forward. There you will find the causes that you need to create in
order to gain the result of all these eight fruitions.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 244: b" The effects of the fruitions
There are eight effects of the fruitions:
   1) The effect of consummate life span is that you accumulate much
      virtuous karma for a long time in terms of working for the welfare of
      both yourself and others.
   2) The effect of consummate color is that merely through seeing you,
      disciples are pleased and gather around you. They then listen to your
      words and want to carry out your instructions.
   3) The effect of consummate lineage is that people carry out your
      instructions without disregard.
   4) The effect of consummate power is that through giving you gather
      living beings and then mature them.
   5) The effect of trustworthy words is that through kind speech,
      purposeful behavior, and being one whose aims are the same as the
      disciples', you gather living beings and mature them.
   6) The effect of renown as a great power is that, because you have helped
      and assisted others in all activities, they repay your kindness and
      listen immediately to your instructions.
   7) The effect of being a male is that you will have the capacity for all
      good qualities, a capacity for all skilled actions by way of
      aspiration and endeavor, and a capacity for broad wisdom, the
      discrimination of objects of knowledge. Moreover, you will be unafraid
      in assemblies and will have no reversals or obstacles whether
      accompanying all living beings, speaking to them, enjoying resources
      with them, or dwelling in isolation.
   8) The effect of strength is that, because you are not disillusioned
      about either your own or others' welfare and are steady in your great
      enthusiasm for them, you will obtain the power of discernment, and
      then quickly have the superknowledges.]
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 245: c" The causes of the fruitions
There are eight causes of the fruitions:
1) The cause of consummate life span is not harming living beings and the
application of a nonviolent attitude. Further, it is said that:
   By rescuing those approaching a place where they will be killed,
   And likewise giving life to others,
   And turning harm away from living beings,
   You will acquire a long life span.
   Through caring for the sick,
   Through a doctor's giving medicine to the sick,
   And through not harming living beings with sticks,
   Clumps of earth, and the like, you will be without illness.
2) The cause of consummate color is giving light, such as butter lamps, and
new clothing. Further, it is said that:
   By relying on kindness
   And giving jewelry, you will have a good physical form.
   The result of being without jealousy
   Is said to be good fortune.
3) The cause of consummate lineage is first overcoming pride and then
making obeisance and so forth to gurus and
the like, and respecting others as if you were their servant.
4) The cause of consummate power is giving food, clothing, and so forth to
those who request them; even when they
are not requested, giving such assistance; and giving to those who suffer
and to recipients who have good qualities but no
possessions.
5) The cause of trustworthy words is habituation to giving up the four
vocal nonvirtues.
6) The cause of renown as a great power is making aspirational prayers to
acquire various good qualities in the future,
making offerings to the three jewels, and making offerings to parents,
sravakas, pratyekabuddhas, abbots, masters, and gurus.
7) The cause of being a male is delight in the attributes of a male, lack
of delight in female things and seeing their disad
vantages, stopping the yearnings of those who want to be reborn in women's
bodies, and rescuing those whose male organs will be cut off.
8) The cause of strength is accomplishing what cannot at all be done by
others, assisting in what can be done with your
collaboration, and giving food and drink.]

2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B   Threefold division
  1 The first cause: a perfectly pure mind
  2 The second cause: pure performance
  3 The third cause: a pure field
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 245: If these eight causes are endowed with
three causes -[pure attitude, pure application, and pure recipient]- their
fruitions will be outstanding. Among the three causes, there are two types
of pure attitude -self-directed and other-directed.
The two self-directed pure attitudes are:
 1. not hoping for fruition, which is dedicating the virtues from your
    creation of the causes for unexcelled enlightenment
 2. intense power, which is achieving the causes from the depths of your
    heart.
The two other-directed pure attitudes are:
(1) abandoning jealousy, competitiveness, and contempt when you see fellow
practitioners of the teaching who are better, equal, or less than yourself,
and admiring them;
(2) even if you are unable to do the above, discerning many times every day
that you must do it.]

Then the text goes on to talks about how if one engages in an action with
the three causes, -pure attitude, pure application, and pure recipient- how
the results will be outstanding.
1. Not hoping for any result i.e. having pure attitude. You do the actions
   and dedicate the virtues from your actions to achieve your own
   enlightenment for the benefit of others.
2. Creating causes sincerely from the depth of your heart.
When you see other practitioners who are either better than you or who are
contemporary equal or who are lower than you, you should abandon jealousy,
competitiveness and contempt. You should admire them and rejoice in
whatever they are doing. Even if you are unable to do the above, you must
generate the thought many times every day that this is something you must
do.

2B4B-2B1A-2B3   After these considerations how to engage [in virtuous
actions] and oppose [the non-virtuous]
  A General presentation
  B Specifically how to purify by means of the four powers
I did not give you some of the things in the text because we don’t really
have the time. If we have to read every single thing in the class then we
are not going to finish it. Therefore it is important that you have to read
the text. If there is anything that you do not understand then you must
bring it up in the class.
Now we are talking about how after having reflected on karma and its
result, how are we to put them into practice i.e. how do we practice
virtues and turn away from non-virtue.

A General presentation
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 247 : Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds:
  "From non-virtue comes suffering;
  How can I truly be free of this?"
  It is fitting that at all times, day and night,
  I think only of this.
  And also:
  For the Sage has said that conviction
  Is the root of all virtues,
  And to constantly meditate on fruitional effects
  Is the root of this conviction.
Thus, having understood virtuous and nonvirtuous karma and their effects,
do not leave it at just an understanding but meditate on it over and over,
because this is a very obscure subject and it is difficult to acquire
certainty about it. ]
The text is saying it is difficult to gain conviction about karma and its
result because the results of karma are very obscured and it is difficult
for us to see how a particular action can has such a result. This is beyond
us so it is very obscured. Because it is obscure therefore it makes us
difficult to gain conviction about karma and its result. We will talk about
this in the next module on philosophy. For now, we just have to know that
all phenomena are group into three categories:
   1. Phenomena that are obvious (manifest or directly perceptible)
   2. Phenomena that are slightly obscure (hidden)
   3. Phenomena that are very obscure (extreme hidden)
It is difficult to gain a full conviction in karma and its result
especially those subtle ones.  In order to gain such conviction in the
working of karma, having conviction in the Buddha’s teachings becomes very
important.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 248:  Further, the King of Concentrations
Sutra says:
   Were the moon and the stars to fall from their place
   And the earth with its mountains and cities to perish
   Or the realm of the sky to completely transform,
   You [Buddha] still would not speak a word of untruth.
Thus, have conviction in the teachings of the Tathagata, and then sustain
your meditation on them. If you do not have uncontrived certainty about
this quality of truth in the Buddha's teachings, then you will not gain the
certainty that will please the Conqueror with regard to any of the
teachings.]
The text goes on to explain on how an understanding the knowledge of
emptiness –the ultimate nature of reality- would actually assist, help and
increases one’s understanding and conviction in karma. A correct
understanding of emptiness does not in any way harm one’s conviction in
karma.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 247: Some, who claim that they have acquired
certain knowledge of emptiness, are uncertain about karma and its effects
and do not value it. This is a mistaken understanding of emptiness.]
There are people who think that they have understood emptiness and then
think that everything is empty. With that understanding they don’t really
give any consideration to karma. They do not value karma. If that happens,
this shows that the person understanding of emptiness is wrong.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 247: For, once you understand emptiness, you
will see that it is the meaning of dependent-arising, and it will assist
you in becoming certain about karma and its effects.]
We will look into the meaning of emptiness in detail in the coming modules.
For now, we have to know that emptiness here refers to the absence of
inherent existent.
Emptiness means emptiness of inherent existent. This is saying that things
and events do not exist inherently. If things and events do not exist
inherently, then how do things exist? They do exist but they exist as
dependently originated. They are dependently arisen.
When one have the correct understanding of emptiness this would mean that
one will see that the meaning is dependent arising. If you have a very good
understanding of what dependent arising is, obviously it will help you in
understanding karma and its result.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 248: The same sutra says:
   Like illusions, bubbles, mirages, and lightning,
   All phenomena are like the moon [reflected] in water.
   It is not the case that living beings—who die
   And go on to their next lives—are offspring of Manu [the first human at
   the beginning of the eon].
   Yet the karma that you possess does not disappear;
   The virtuous and nonvirtuous give rise to their effects accordingly;
   This logical approach is sound; though subtle and difficult to see,
   It is within the scope of the Conqueror.]
This paragraph is advising all of us that by just knowing the presentation
of karma and its effect are not helpful. Just having the knowledge of karma
and its effect will not prevent us from going to the bad rebirth. The text
continues:
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 248: Therefore, develop certain knowledge of
dependent-arising together with the causality of the two kinds of karma,
and examine your physical, verbal, and mental actions all day and all
night. By this means, you will put an end to miserable rebirths.]
Here it is saying that we have to be conscientious of what we do with our
body, speech and mind. If we are able to do that then we will be able to
put an end to the lower realms.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 250: Furthermore, how you turn away from
wrongdoing once you have reflected in this way is stated in the Chapter of
the Truth Speaker:
   O King, do not kill.
   Life is very dear to all beings.
   Hence, they want to maintain their lives for a long time.
   So think not of killing, even in the depths of your mind.
Apply this attitude of restraint toward the ten nonvirtuous actions as well
as the misdeeds previously explained.]
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 251: Sha-ra-wa said, "The Buddha said that
any faults and shortcomings that occur are not due to some bad area or the
building of a new house but are only the arising of such and such from
having done such and such an action."]
It is extremely important for us to gain an understanding the general
characteristics of karma which was discussed earlier in the previous
lessons.  The characteristics of karma are:
   1. Karma is definite.
   2. Karma increases.
   3. We will not experience the result of an action that we do not create.


   4. An action that we created will not disappear on its own accord.
We have to gain an understanding and conviction with these characteristics.
So whatever problems and sufferings that we experience in life, we have to
understand that the main cause is karma. The main cause for whatever
happenings that we experience is karma. We have to identify the causes for
whatever happiness we desire.
You have to work at the main causes of the happiness and the problems.
Whatever particular unpleasant experience that we want to avoid as we do
not want suffering then we have to identify the main cause correctly and
then we have to strive to abandon that main cause. As a Buddhist we have to
understand that the main cause is karma. The main cause of happiness and
the main cause of suffering is karma. We have to identify the causes
correctly and then try to work on it or abandon it; whether it is suffering
or happiness.
A lot of time people miss the point. They don’t look for the main causes
but just work at those temporary conditions and then blaming the location
of their house for their problem, the house is not facing the correct
direction or the day is a wrong day. They then try to solve the problem by
working at these factors but these are just conditions and are not the main
cause for either suffering or happiness. The main cause is karma. So we
have to work at and put attention to the main causes; which is karma. With
this as the focus only then sometime you can look into those conditions
such as the location and direction (of the house). Then it is alright as
long you do not neglect the main causes. But if you neglect the main cause,
which is karma, and do not work on karma but try to change using the
temporary conditions then that is wrong. Even if you do that I do not think
you will experience much change.

2B4B-2B1A-2B3B Specifically how to purify [non-virtues] by means of the
four powers
 1 How negativites and downfalls need to be purified by various means in
 accordance with statements of the Teacher Buddha
 2 How to redress downfalls
 3 How to redress negative actions
 4 How the four powers are complete with all the antidotes
 5 The manner of purification
 6 How it is necessary to strive not to be tainted by faulty conduct from
 the start

The next section in the text talks about confessing negativities through
applying the four opponent powers. I do not remember exactly where in the
LRCM but there is a sentence that says:
It is more difficult to realize the subtle working of karma than realizing
emptiness.
To realize emptiness is already difficult enough but it is really much more
difficult to gain full conviction on the working of karma. Realizing
emptiness -the ultimate nature of reality- is challenging and is really
difficult but it is still possible to gain some understanding to it because
you can gain an understanding by learning it.  When you learn about
emptiness you can use various lines of reasoning and logics. If you think
about it, it is possible to gain some idea of emptiness. But when it comes
to karma, when we say “this action will have that result” and even if you
try to use logic and reasoning, it is really difficult to conclude “It is
definitely like that.”
Student 1: In the previous lesson you mentioned that the best offering to
the Buddha is the giving the practice of Dharma. What is the meaning of
practice in this context? (listen to audio for more detail -from 79min)
Khen Rinpoche: Offering of practice is the best offering to the Buddha
which is putting the Dharma into practice. There are many different
practices. Just to give an illustration. The Buddha says: “It is good to
practice giving.” When you hear the teaching and understand it then you put
it into practice. How do you put it into practice when the Buddha says it
is good to give? You increase your own willingness to give and increase the
wish. You then act on the wish by physically give out something. That is
carrying out the practice. Practice does not just refer to hearing the
teaching but is what you do after hearing the teaching and then carry out
the action with your body, speech and mind. At the end of the day, if you
were to ask what practice is, the conclusion is that practice means to
change the mind or transform the mind for the better. You increase whatever
good positive aspect of the mind and transform the mind for the better.
That is what practice is.
Student 1: What is the meaning of karma manifest?
Khen Rinpoche:  At the time of death there are twelve links of dependent
arising. You have the links of craving and grasping. These two links act to
nourish whatever karmas i.e. they give potency to the karma -whether good
karma or bad karma- and make it strong. Therefore craving and grasping
nourish the karma and give it strength. This makes the karma powerful.
Manifest means that karma that will cause you to take whatever rebirth.
That manifest is given strength and nourish by craving and grasping at the
time of death.  So karma manifests and causes you to go to where you are
supposed to go.
The next section in the text talks about purifying our negativities through
the four powers. There are quite a lot of things to discuss but the text
says: “Meditation of emptiness is one of the most powerful means for
purifying negativities”.
Question: How does meditation on emptiness destroy your negativities?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You need to have the answer by Thurs. The
senior students will talk and the new students will listen to what the
senior students said.
Student 2:  Regarding your earlier answer on karma manifest, you mentioned
that craving and grasping will activate that karma. What about manifest of
good karma such as compassion for the good rebirth? How does that answer
relate to a good rebirth?
Ven Gyurme: Good rebirth in samsara?
Student 2: I mean favorable higher rebirth.
Khen Rinpoche: It does not matter where you are reborn in samsara. Even the
higher realms -human, demigod and gods- are still in samsara. If it is a
rebirth in samsara, it is definitely a rebirth impelled by karma and
afflictions. If that is the case, you have to complete the twelve links.
The thing that activate whatever karma, whether it is virtuous or non-
virtuous karma or that will cause a good rebirth in samsara, it has to be
nourished first by craving and grasping.
Student 2: My understanding is this: If I generate an angry thought at the
time of death, to me, the manifest karma is anger. That will lead to a
negative projecting karma that will lead me to a lower rebirth. If however
at the time of death, my last thought is one of compassion, that is a
positive manifest karma that will activate a positive projecting karma. So
to me, manifest karma and projecting karma are different. One is already
manifested, the other is that which is activated by the manifested karma.
(listen to audio for more detail -from 93min)
Khen Rinpoche: In the twelve links of dependent arising, at the time of
death, the projecting karma is not there. The projecting karma was
accumulated long time ago.  So whatever projecting karma it is, it was
accumulated long time ago prior to the time of death. The sequence of the
twelve links is ignorance, compositional activity and consciousness and so
forth. Ignorance motivates the compositional activity and that impression
of the action –the imprints of the action- is left on the mental continuum
and this is the third link: consciousness. The imprints of all those
actions continue with the mind to wherever the mind goes.
At the time of death the imprints of the projecting karma that was
accumulated long time ago is nourished and activated by craving and
grasping. Both craving and grasping are the derivative of attachment and
desire. Both are different forms of attachment.
These craving and grasping nourishes the seed of the karma such that it
become powerful enough to throw you readily to your next rebirth; whether
it is a good rebirth or bad rebirth. That is called actualizing karma.
In general, the LRCM, in the section of the practices of the person of
medium capacity, after the presentation of the Four Noble Truths is the
presentation of the twelve links of dependent arising.
In the next lesson we will look at the purifying the negativities through
applying the four powers. This is an important section. Please read this on
your own so that if you have any question, please bring up in the next
lesson. Once we have finished with that, we will move on to the practices
of the person of medium capacity.

Note that there will be class on 26 Feb (1.30pm to 3.30pm) and discussion
class on 28 Feb.
