Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson40.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.221233
================================================================================


Meditation on Manjushri
Visualize Manjushri in the space in front of you. On that basis, accumulate
merits and purify all obscurations through the practice of the seven-branch
worship. After that, do the visualization of the flow of lights and nectars
into you and purifying all obscurations. Think that you have received this
blessing to increase your intelligence and wisdom. At the end, make a
single-pointed request to Manjushri to pacify whatever obstacles in the
dharma studies and practices.
Student 1: Can you give an example of mental karma that is done but not
accumulated and is also something that is not done consciously?
Khen Rinpoche: Maybe getting upset in the dream or having very strong
malice (ill will) in the dream. You have to think about this. I think
perhaps generating malice in the dream would be the mental karma that is
done but not accumulated. However it seems that malice is something that is
done voluntarily.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It should be voluntarily because it is
from your side as nobody forces you to have malice. For example, you do not
want to kill but someone force you to kill. Your mind belongs to you.  It
is your own mind and nobody can force you.
Khen Rinpoche: In the case of malice, it is clear that it is not something
that people can force you as you do it by yourself.  Actions such malice,
covetousness and wrong views are not force upon us but it come from our own
side. Unlike certain actions of the body and speech which we are sometimes
force to do it.
Student 2: For karma that is neither done nor accumulated, what is the
result that one will definitely experience or possibly experience?
Khen Rinpoche: If we look at karma in term of its result, there are two:
   1. Karma whose result you will definitely experience
   2. Karma whose result you will only possibly experience
For karma that is accumulated fall under the karma whose result you will
definitely experience.
For karma that is done but not accumulated is the karma whose result you
will only possibly experience
For karma that is not done and is not accumulated it would be the karma
whose result you will only possibly experience.
In the case of creating karma in the dream, we are not saying that you will
definitely not experience any result but it is possible that you may
experience its result. Let’s say you develop malice in your dream for a
short period of time, you may experience its result. If you think about it,
the thought of killing which last for a very short period of time is
nevertheless a negative mind. So you may experience its result. Student 2
is trying to figure out how can there be any result from an action that is
not done and is not accumulated.
Student 2: If that is the case can I assume that the karma that is neither
done nor accumulated does not fall under the path of action but is the
action which is at time of motivation stage; but not at the time of
performance. Can I say that this karma fall under the category of karma
that is neither done nor accumulated, even for a short period of time is
there a possibility of experiencing the result?
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say that you develop a wish to kill for a very short
period of time, that can be considered as an example of karma that is not
done and is not accumulated. Because there is karma that is not done and is
not accumulated, therefore we must come out with an illustration. So
perhaps for having the thought to kill which last for a very short period
of time can be an example of this. This thought to kill although it is for
a very short period of time exists at the time of motivation. So there will
be karma but not the path of action. This exists during the motivation
phase.
In the previous lesson, we saw how karma and the afflictions are both
necessary as causes for the creation of cyclic existence, but the
afflictions are primary. There are two reasons to support that.
[1. For, just as a seed without moisture, soil, etc. will not produce a
sprout, so in the absence of afflictions -even though you have accumulated
immeasurable karma in the past- there will be no sprout of suffering
because the karma lacks the necessary cooperating conditions
2. Even without previously accumulated karma -if afflictions are present,
you immediately accumulate new karma, and will thereby appropriate
aggregates in the future.]
In identifying the afflictions, we did look at what an affliction is.
An affliction is a mind when arises it disturbs us.
*1[The definition of an affliction is a phenomenon such that when it
arises, the characteristic of being very unpeaceful arises, and due to its
arising, the mental continuum arises as being very unpeaceful.]
*1: Extract from “A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing
the Modes of Minds and Mental Factors”
There are ten afflictions:
   1. Attachment
   2. Anger
   3. Pride
   4. Ignorance
   5. Doubt
   6. The view of the transitory collection
   7. Extreme view
   8. View holding a bad view as supreme
   9. View holding bad ethics & modes of conduct as supreme
  10. Wrong view
1. Attachment means noticing a pleasant or attractive external or internal
object and desiring it. When attachment clings to its object and grows
stronger, it is hard to tear yourself away from the object, just as it is
difficult to remove oil which has soaked into a cloth.
External object refers to phenomenon that is not conjoined with the
consciousness such as one’s abode, dwelling or resources.
Internal object refers to phenomenon that is conjoined with one mental
continuum such as one’s aggregates.
Attachment focuses on either an attractive external object or an attractive
internal object and it view that object to be nature pleasant and
attractive and then desire for that object. It is as if the mind has
completely absorbs into the object and as say in the text, it is difficult
to separate yourself from the object.
Attachment is the mind that desires for an object and by focusing on it
develops attachment for the object.
The function of attachment serves as the basis for producing suffering.
Because of having attachment for the object and when harm or damage is done
to the object of attachment, anger arises. Karma is then created and once
one accumulates karma, one has to circle in cyclic existence thereby
experiencing various sufferings.
*1 [The function of attachment is specified as "producing suffering" for
the purpose of making us understand that the root of all suffering within
the three realms of cyclic existence is rebirth which connects us to cyclic
existence, and the principal cause for rebirth within cyclic existence is
attachment, craving itself.]
2. Anger means observing origins of suffering -such as living beings, pain,
weapons, or thorns- and giving rise to a harsh, tormented mind that
contemplates harming these objects.
Object of anger: One can angry with living beings, pain, weapons or thorns
“Pain” here refers to suffering; which means one’s own suffering.
Weapons and thorns describe the sources of sufferings.
Anger is a mind and when focusing on these objects, it is unable to bear
with them and wishes to cause harm.
The function of anger is causing one not to abide in happiness in this
lifetime, and produces immeasurable suffering in future lives.
*1 The Garland of Birth Stories (stanza 21.29-33) says:
        Due to the fire of anger, one colors unflatteringly,
        Even adorned with ornaments, one does not look good.
        Even though one may lie on a comfortable bed,
        One's mind suffers due to the agony of anger.
        Forgetful of the benefits one has enjoyed,
        Tormented by anger, one proceeds on a bad path.
        One's reputation and achievements degenerate,
        Like the waning moon, one's glory fades.
        Although supported by friends,
        Due to anger, one plummets senselessly into the abyss.
        One's contemplation of benefit and harm degenerates;
        One becomes erratic and confused.
        Due to anger, one becomes habituated to misdeeds,
        And will experience suffering for hundreds of years in the bad
        migrations.
        Even an enemy who goes to great lengths to inflict great harm cannot
        manage more than this.
Even though you may be pleasant looking by nature and have nice complexion
and shape but when you develop anger you may not look nice.
Even you may be adorned with beautiful ornaments and are well dressed, but
when you are upset, suddenly the whole appearance become unpleasant.
Even you may have a comfortable bed to have a good rest but when you are
upset and angry, you may not be able to fall asleep.
Because of anger, you may have forgotten the kindness of those whom you
have received the benefits from. Due to anger, you have forgotten the
benefits that they have given to you. Instead of returning the kindness,
you act in the opposite way.
Due to anger, you may lose friends, companions and so forth. As a result,
you will not be able to accomplish your own goal.
When you are upset, even the good and helpful advice given to you by your
loved one will not benefit you because due to anger, you will not be able
to distinguish between what is right and what is wrong.
These things are so obvious in our life and are something that we can
understand. That is why the function of anger is to cause suffering in this
life. Due to anger, we become habituated to non-virtues. Due to that we
have to experience the result of taking rebirth in the lower realms in our
future lives and we have to suffer for a long time.
So anger is a mind that is unable to tolerate those objects which I have
mentioned. Anger is a mind that contemplates on harming those objects. When
anger arises, immediately the mind is disturbed.
Question: In the text, thorn is stated as an object of anger. How do you
get upset with a thorn and how do you contemplate of harming the thorn?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I will tell one story. Last time in the
monastery I have one friend. At that time we don’t have gas and we have to
cook with the stove using kerosene and the pump. You have to hold the stove
with one hand and pump with the other hand. Only then the fire will start
so you can continue to cook. In India, the stove has small holes which
sometimes got stuck. You have to clean it with small needle. I think the
older generation should know that. The young one may not have seen that.
If you are not careful with the cleaning sometime the needle will break and
got stuck inside. There is no way to take out the needle. Most of us have
that kind of stove but my friend got a special stove, maybe from Europe
which is better than the Indian. It is small and portable whereas the
Indian one is big. I think he is the only one who had that kind. When he
cooks, sometime there is no gas coming out and sometime too much kerosene.
One day he rushed with the cooking because he has class after that. As the
stove was not working well, he used the needle to clean but the needle
happened to break and went inside the stove. As he cannot do anything, he
got very angry. In the kitchen, he took the bread roller which he found
beside him and smashed the stove. The top of stove become dented. As he was
so angry, he threw the stove outside of the kitchen. After ten minutes
later, he felt regret with his action. Then he brought the stove back to
the kitchen and started to look at it and thinking how to fix it. So when
strong anger arises, he totally forgot. This may be the example that one is
angry with different objects. I think he took back and somehow he could not
fix it. Then someone asked for it and he gave to it to that person there.
The other person then fixed it and he feel like…He wanted it back but
cannot. He think; “I am so stupid.”
3. Pride means observing -either internally or externally- qualities that
are high, low, good, or bad, and, based on the view of the transitory
collection, allowing your mind to become inflated; you assume an aspect of
superiority.
The pride observes something external or something internal.
External refers to one’s wealth or one’s possession.
Internal refers to one’s quality.
As it says here that one can develop pride by focusing on either internally
or externally- qualities that are high, low, good, or bad.
Pride is developed based on the view of the transitory collection. It means
that pride is developed based on this innate conception which thinks “I”
and this allows the mind to become inflated and assume the aspect of
superiority.
You can develop pride by thinking that you are just as slightly lower than
those who are actually much more superior. You can also develop pride by
thinking of those who are lower than you and thinking that you are more
superior to them. By thinking like this, then your mind become inflated or
literally puffing of the mind.
Pride has the function to disrespect those possess qualities and obstruct
your own attainment and qualities.
Pride can cause you to engage in actions that will result in lower realms
rebirth. Even if you are reborn as human, it can cause you to be reborn in
lower caste such as servant.
*1[Pride has the function of obscuring any new attainment of the Dharma of
scriptures and realization due to its disrespect for those who possess
excellent qualities, causes rebirth in bad migrations in future lives, and
even when reborn as a human, acts as the cause for rebirth in a low caste,
as a servant and the like. Therefore, it produces the undesirable in both
this and future lives.]
4. Ignorance means possessing the affliction of misunderstanding on account
of a mind that is unclear about the nature of the four truths, karma and
its effects, and the three jewels.
Identifying ignorance:
   1. Ignorance to mean mere lack of knowledge of something
   2. Ignorance to mean mistaken way of apprehending an object
Due to the different ways of explanation by the past lineage Indian
masters, you will have different ways of identifying ignorance. For
example, Arya Asanga and Vasubandhu explained ignorance to be mere lack of
understanding of a particular object; which is unknowing. However
Dharmakirti asserts that ignorance is an active misapprehension of
something.
The function of ignorance is acting as the basis for all the other
afflictions to arise.
*1[Its function is specified as "acting as a support for the arising of
wrong ascertainment, doubt and afflictions with respect to phenomena,"
because other afflictions arise in dependence on ignorance; in dependence
on them [i.e., afflictions] actions arise; in dependence on actions all
sufferings of cyclic existence arise. Therefore, all afflictions and faults
arise in dependence on ignorance.]
5. Doubt means considering those three -the four truths, karma and its
effects, and the three jewels- and being uncertain whether they exist or
are real.
Doubt is a two-pointed mind that think a particular phenomenon; “Does it
exist or not?” Example, a mind that focus on the four noble and wonder “is
it or is it not?” or a mind focus on the Three Jewels and wonder whether it
is the Three Jewels or not. It obstructs you from gaining an ascertainment
and the correct understanding of the Four Noble Truths. By having doubt on
karma and its effect, it prevents you from living your life in according to
the principle of karma. For example, have doubt in karma may obstruct in
the accumulation of virtues.
You have to think how doubt interferes with your understanding of the Four
Noble Truths and how it interferes in our accumulation of virtues.
If it is doubt that is tending towards the non-factual, for example, with
reference to karma and you tend to think; “There is unlikely such thing as
karma”.  Of course that will interfere with living a life in accordance
with karma.
What about doubt that is tending towards the factual? You still have doubt
and think; “May be there is karma.”
Does the doubt that is tending towards the fact interfere with the living
in an ethical way of life?
Does the doubt that is tending towards the fact harm or benefit?
The doubt that is tending towards the fact is not a mind that has developed
certainty with respect to its object, for example, with respect to karma,
you think; “Very likely there is karma” but you still have no definite
ascertainment as you still have doubt. Does that kind of doubt interfere
with the practice or help with the practice?
*1 [Just as it has been said above, it is a mental factor that wavers
between two points within observation of the four truths, cause and result,
and so forth. This doubt hinders all virtuous activities and especially
hinders the seeing of the truth. Since it will be overcome when one sees
the truth, it is said to be a thorough entanglement that is an object of
abandonment of the path of seeing.]
For now it is sufficient for you to have a rough idea of what these
afflictions are. When we study the Minds and Mental Factors in the next
module, more details will come.
6. The view of the transitory collection is an afflictive intelligence that
observes the appropriated aggregates and regards them as "I" or "mine,"
that is, as the self or that which belongs to the self. Here, since
"transitory" means impermanent and "collections" is plural, the terms
indicate that what are apprehended are simply impermanent and multiple
phenomena; there is no permanent and unitary person. This is why it is
called "the view of the transitory collection."
The object of observation of the view of the transitory collection is one’s
appropriated aggregates. Based on that the concept of “I” arises and then
one apprehends the ‘I’ to be self-sufficient substantially existent. The
way it looks at the ‘I’ as something that is separate from the body and
mind and apprehends this ‘I’ as owner of the aggregates or the master that
own the aggregates.
At this point in time we are talking about the view of a self that is
shared by the major Buddhist tenets. The view of the transitory collection
focuses on one’s appropriated aggregates and then the sense of ‘I’ arises.
Then one apprehends this ‘I’ to be something that is separate from the body
and mind and apprehends this ‘I’ to be the owner of the aggregates. In this
sense one apprehend the ‘I’ to be self-sufficient substantially existent.
One apprehends the ‘I’ to exist without depending on the body and mind i.e.
apprehends the ‘I’ to be self-sufficient.
This mind is an afflictive intelligence. As said in the text,  the  view  of
the transitory collection is an intelligence that observes the  appropriated
aggregates and regards them as "I" or "mine" but this  does  not  mean  that
the view of the transitory collection apprehends the aggregates  as  ‘I’  or
mine. This is not what it means.  The meaning is that  with  the  aggregates
as the  object  of  observation  then  the  sense  of  ‘I’  arises  and  one
apprehends this “I” to be distinct from the aggregates, to be the  owner  of
the  aggregates.  Such  a  mind  is  called  the  view  of  the   transitory
collection.
For those hearing this for the first time, it will take some time to
understand this because even the words itself is challenging. If you get
discourage for the first time then nothing can happens. The point is to
hear it more, to have discussion among yourself and to learn more, then it
will become clearer.
The view of the transitory collection has the function of acting as a
support for all bad views.
“Here, since "transitory" means impermanent and "collections" is plural,
the terms indicate that what are apprehended are simply impermanent and
multiple phenomena; there is no permanent and unitary person. This is why
it is called "the view of the transitory collection" – this is the
explanation for the words that make-up the view of the transitory
collection.
The explanation here is to help us to understand that a permanent, unitary
and independent self does not exist. On top of that, it is to help us to
understand that self-sufficient substantially existent person does not
exist. The explanation here is to help us to negate the non-Buddhist
assertion of a self. The non-Buddhist philosophical system asserts that the
self or the soul is something that is permanent, unitary and independent
whereas in reality there isn’t such a phenomenon.
According to the Buddhist’s view, a permanent, unitary and independent self
does not exist. If you are going a little bit deeper there is also an
explanation how a self-sufficient substantially existent person does not
exist. If you go on deeper than that then there is also an explanation of
how a person which exists by way of its own character does not exist.
For our purpose here the view of the transitory collection is a mind which
apprehends the ‘I’ or self as something separate from the aggregates and
apprehend this ‘I’ to be the controller of the aggregates; the owner of the
body and mind.  Such a mind that apprehends the ‘I’ in such a way is called
the view of the transitory collection.
Student 3:  The aspect of ‘I’ not being independent is not described here.
It only describe as transitory (as impermanent) and collection (as plural),
but not being independent. Where do we find it being taught?
Khen Rinpoche: Here we are trying to explain the meaning of the words
transitory and collection in the phrase the view of the transitory
collection. It is transitory because the aggregates are impermanent and
changing in each and every single moment. For the word collection, because
the aggregates are many therefore they are not unitary. What it is trying
to show is that the permanent, unitary and independent self does not exist.
I guess the word “independent” is not mentioned here because here it is
trying to explain the words transitory and collection.
Student 4: Is there any reason why in the list that is given by Lama
Tsongkhapa, ignorance does not come up at the top of the ten afflictions
but instead attachment is mentioned as the first one even though ignorance
is the basis of all sufferings?
Khen Rinpoche: When we talked about the three mental poisons the order is
attachment, anger and ignorance which is based on the order of the Tibetan
slang. I guess in Tibetan the words are arranged in order of the ease of
the pronunciations.
Student 5: What is the meaning of “appropriated” in appropriated
aggregates? (Details refers to audio 101.48 -103)
Khen Rinpoche: The aggregates are the product of karma and afflictions. In
English, the aggregates are appropriated by karma and afflictions.
Appropriated means aggregates are taken on due to the power or influence of
karma and afflictions.
Student 5: Apprehending the ‘I’ to be something that is separate from the
body and mind and apprehending this ‘I’ to be the owner of the aggregates.
I am wondering whether this relates to the word “appropriated.”
Khen Rinpoche (Spoke in English): I didn’t get exactly what you are saying
in the question.
Khen Rinpoche: The meaning is that there isn’t a self or person that is of
different entity from the aggregates. The Buddhist philosophical system
asserts that there isn’t an ‘I’ or a self or a person that is of different
entity from the body or from the mind. The ‘I’ does not exist as a
different entity from the body and mind, but having said that we are not
saying that the body and mind is the ‘I’. It is incorrect to think or to
assert that there is an ‘I’ that is of different entity from the body mind.

However for us, we believe strongly that we ourselves or ‘I’ or the person
is something that exist and it exist as something completely separate from
our mind and body i.e. nothing to do with our mind and body. We have such a
mind and we believe that ourselves, the ‘I’ or the person or the self as
something that exist completely separate from the body and mind. Such a
belief is called the view of the transitory collection.
This is something difficult to understand and it requires time before it
become clearer.

For reference only
Extract from “Meditations on the Path to Enlightenment” by Geshe Acharya
Thubten Loden (page 268-273)
Delusions/ afflictions are defined as mental factors that, when generated,
cause the mental continuum to be very unpeaceful. Delusions are otherwise
referred to as afflictions, defilements, negative minds, or contaminated
minds and they are the obstructions to liberation.
The source of cyclic existence is karma and delusion. Of these, delusion is
the principal cause. If there were no delusion, even though you might have
countless previously-created karmas, suffering would not be produced.
Just as a seed cannot sprout without the co-operative causes of soil, heat
and water, karma cannot ripen without the co-operative cause of the
delusions. Having a deluded state of mind is like pouring water on a dry
field in which lie the unripened seeds of previous negative karma. If
delusions are present, even if there were no previously created karma, it
would immediately be created and establish future contaminated aggregates.
For this reason it is important to apply antidotes to the delusions, and to
do so you must become knowledgeable about them.
Individual delusions
There are limitless delusions but they are most commonly classified into
the six root delusions. The six root delusions are desirous attachment,
anger, pride, ignorance, doubt and deluded view. The last of these, deluded
view, has five types and these are known as speculative delusions because
they are views established through conceptual reasoning.
Desirous attachment is a mental factor that perceives external or internal
objects as attractive, exaggerates their attractiveness and wishes to
possess and retain them. With desirous attachment it is very difficult to
separate the mind from its object. Desirous attachment is like mental glue
and clings to the object of desire. Other delusions stain the mind as dirt
stains a white cloth, whereas attachment is like an oil stain soaked into
the cloth. It is relatively easy to remove ordinary dirt through washing,
but because oil absorbs so thoroughly into cloth, it is very difficult to
clean away. Because attachment clings to the object of desire so strongly,
and holds on to it, it is as though the mind of desirous attachment absorbs
into its object. Like separating oil from cloth, it is very difficult to
separate attachment from its object. Desirous attachment encompasses
desire, attachment, clinging, possessiveness, grasping, passion and so on.
It is generated toward any of the objects of the six senses. Desirous
attachment is therefore experienced continuously, because you are always in
contact with an object of desirous attachment. In the case of anger and
other delusions you are not constantly in contact with the objects of those
delusions, and so their effect is not so pervasively dangerous as with
desirous attachment. It is the attachment that clings to self and phenomena
as inherently existent that is the base of all delusions and the root cause
of cyclic existence.
Anger is a mental factor that perceives its object as unattractive,
exaggerates its unattractiveness, becomes antagonistic, and wishes to harm
the object. You become angry at those who harm you, or at those who harm
those close to you, or side with your enemies. Your mind exaggerates the
faults and unattractiveness of the object of anger and can blow these out
of all proportion, so that you can see not the slightest redeeming feature
in the horror appearing to your mind. Your agitated mind then wishes to
harm the object of anger in some way, whether by bodily action, speech or
thought. Anger creates the heaviest negative karma. It destroys positive
karma and happy states of mind and creates the sort of stress-related
tension that will not allow you to relax. As a bee loses its sting and dies
when it attacks you, so your anger harms others, but harms you more. When
you become angry you lose control of your mind and become totally
irrational. Intense anger will cause people to kill their parents, child,
partner or even holy Bodhisattvas filled with compassion and patience. In a
rational, calm state of mind a person would not even contemplate doing such
a thing, but in the heat of an angry rage anything is possible.
Pride is a mental factor that grasps at the inflated feeling of being
superior. It is a form of arrogance that puts yourself above others. You
can generate pride in relation to your beauty, wealth, family, knowledge,
intelligence and so on. When you approach the practice of Dharma with pride
in your knowledge and so on, your progress stops. Pride prevents you from
learning from others. The delusion of pride is based on the insecurity of
ego-grasping and is quite distinct from self-confidence and self-esteem.
Ignorance is a deluded state of mind confused about its object by being
unclear about the nature of such things as the law of cause and effect, the
Three Jewels, the four noble truths and so on. There are many forms of
ignorance but two are particularly significant. The first is the ignorance
of not knowing karma, the relationship between your actions and the results
they produce. This form of ignorance allows you to continue accumulating
actions that will bring lower rebirths. The second is the ignorance that
does not know the true nature of self and phenomena and that is the root,
or basic, ignorance that binds you to cyclic existence. It is called the
self-grasping ignorance because it observes self and phenomena and grasps
at them as being self-existent, or inherently existent. From the self-
grasping ignorance all other delusions arise and thus contaminated actions
are accumulated and cyclic existence perpetuated. Until you eliminate the
self-grasping ignorance by correctly perceiving the emptiness of inherent
existence of the self and phenomena, it is not possible to permanently
remove other delusions. However, by practising the wisdom perceiving
emptiness and thus overcoming this basic ignorance, all delusions are
completely and permanently ceased. If we wanted to kill off a large oak
tree, we could start by trimming its leaves and pruning the outer branches.
However, without a great and constant effort the branches and leaves would
just keep growing back. By using a sharp axe to cut the tree at its roots
though, it would be killed off forever and no more effort would need to be
applied. The great tree of cyclic existence continues to grow more leaves
of suffering from the branches of karma and delusion. However, if we cut
its root of self-grasping ignorance with the sharp axe of wisdom wielded by
the steady hand of concentration, we will kill the tree of cyclic existence
forever.
Doubt is a mental factor that is two-pointed and wavers in indecision
regarding the four noble truths, karma and so on. It is a great obstacle to
achieving realisations. Just as you cannot sew with a two-pointed needle,
you cannot gain realisations while your mind is still uncertain about the
very base of those realisations. For example, you will never gain
realisations from the practice of vajrayana if your mind vacillates in
uncertain doubt regarding the deity or guru. If you doubt the existence of
the Buddha, then how can you make progress towards his state—enlightenment?
If you doubt that cyclic existence is really as bad as 'these heavy lamas'
make it out to be, then you will never gain the realisation of
renunciation.
The view of the transitory collection is a deluded view that observes the
appropriated aggregates and conceives of them as “I” and 'mine'. It is
'understanding with delusion' in that the observed object, a self merely
imputed on the collection of the five aggregates, does exist
conventionally. However, the deluded view of the transitory collection
apprehends such a self to be permanent, independent and inherently existent
when this type of self is, in fact, non-existent. The 'collection' refers
to the collection of the parts that are the basis of the label “I”: that
is, the five aggregates, the four elements, the eighteen constituents and
so on. They are impermanent and therefore referred to as the transitory
collection. The view of the transitory collection conceives them to be a
permanent, partless, independent, inherently existent self. By establishing
this deluded view of an inherently existent “I”, the view of inherently
existent 'mine' follows—that is, my body, feelings etc. The view of
inherently existent “I” and 'mine' is the base of all other delusions and
causes one to engage in actions that are a source of cyclic existence.
