Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 5.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.230779
================================================================================


At this point in of our life, we have met with the teachings of the Buddha.
The teachings of the Buddha still exist in this world. From our side, we
have the interest and intention to learn and put those teachings into
practice. If you do think about this, for sure we can say that we have
accumulated some virtuous karma and a lot of merits in our previous lives
in order for this to happen now. At this juncture in our life, when all the
conditions are there for us to learn; the teacher is present and you have
the interest to learn. All these conditions must come together in order for
this class to happen; but we cannot take this for granted. We have to
understand that this is not something that will remain forever. We should
not expect this to be natural. It is not like that. With this
understanding, we should realize how fortunate we are. Therefore we should
generate a stronger determination to make sure that we do not waste this
opportunity.  In such a time in the world of ours, if there is only one
teacher teaching just one or two students, it is very unlikely that such a
class will ever be organized or will take place anywhere. The very fact
that many peoples of the same interest coming together to attend the same
class does make a difference. Naturally, if you are part of the group with
the same intention doing the same thing, somehow it helps to push you along
and give you some encouragement especially when you see that there are also
many people trying to do the same thing. We are in this together so we the
members of the same class. This is something that we have to remember at
all time. We are here to support one another. When we see one another, we
should remember that they are our companions who help us in our study. With
this, we should feel happy to see one another presence. This is something
we should keep in our mind all the time. Just like a family where there are
siblings, there are feelings of mutual understanding, love and respect.
Likewise, for this class, we should cultivate that kind of relationship. In
fact, it should be even more as we are in this together. So it is very
important to cultivate this sense of feeling towards one another in the
class. We are like in the same family. Please remember this as this is very
important. We have to pay attention to this and from our own side, we
should put in effort. If we are able to do this from our side, the center
benefit and, we as individual also benefit. Along the way, other also
benefit from our actions. In fact, everyone benefit. This is how the center
progress and make further progress and improvement.
Stages of the Path
We have started to look at the first greatness in this Lamrim instruction:
The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory. After much
has been said on this, what is the main point we have to get at the end of
the day? A lot of people have the huge misconception that the Hinayana
teaching and the Mahayana teaching are contradictory i.e. they have nothing
to do with one another, these two are in conflict and if you practice one,
then you should not practice the other. In this text, Lama Tsongkhapa has
explained very clearly that this is not the case. To hold on to such a
view, this is a huge mistake. Lama Tsongkhapa has explained that the
Hinayana and the Mahayana teachings are not contradictory. In fact, they
are complementary and they do assist one another. Even if one is the
follower of the Mahayana, one must still learn and practice the Hinayana
teaching. This is the essence of this particular outline; the Buddha’s
teachings are not contradictory - the Mahayana and Hinayana teachings are
not contradictory.
But saying that alone is not sufficient because we must understand why this
is the case? Why the teachings of the Buddha are not contradictory? Why the
Mahayana and Hinayana teachings are not contradictory? You should be able
to explain this. Just bringing up the quotations from the Buddha’s
teachings to substantiate that point is not sufficient. The main thing to
prove that is using logic and reasoning. In this particular context, what
is the logic and reasoning that is employed to prove that the Mahayana and
Hinayana teachings are not contradictory? Only then, you bring in the
scriptural authorities and then the relevant quotations from the Buddha’s
teaching to support that particular line of argument.
Then there is another misconception with regards to the Mahayana Sutra and
Mahayana Tantra, which you normally heard of; but specifically it should be
Mahayana Paramitayana (Mahayana Perfection Vehicle) and Mahayana Vajrayana
(Mahayana Vajra Vehicle). ‘Yana’ means vehicle.  Many people think that
Paramitayana and Vajrayana have nothing to do with one another and are
contradictory. This is another misconception that we have to remove. The
important point is that these two yanas are not contradictory.
Do you understand the reason why the Paramitayana and Vajrayana are not
contradictory? You have to establish that by logic and then bring in the
scriptural authorities to substantiate the argument.
Even as a Vajrayana practitioner, you must practice the teaching of
Paramitayana. The teaching of Paramitayana does not contradict with the
teaching of Vajrayana. With respect to this outline on the first greatness,
which is from page 8 to the first paragraph of page 9 of the text, you
should be able to understand these two things:
   1. How the Hinayana and Mahayana teachings are not contradictory? How to
      prove that by reason and then substantiated by scriptural authorities?
   2. With regards to the Paramitayana and Vajrayana, what is the reason
      that proves these two are not contradictory? What is the scriptural
      authority that is used to substantiate that reason?
I have talked about these quite a bit and I will not repeat them. We need
to move on; otherwise we will spend a lot of time on this particular
section. The point is that you have to read the text and after having read
these few paragraphs, you should see the result. If in the case after
having read a few times and have thought about it but still cannot figure
out the reasons, then you can ask me. Only then when I give you the answer,
the answer will stick to your mind for a long time. This is because, from
your side, you have already tried to look for the answer.
2B2C-2 The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings dawning on you as
useful instructions
Second: the greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings dawning on you as
useful instructions

This is the second greatness of the Lamrim: The greatness of enabling one
to understand that all of the scriptures are instructions for practice.
There is a very big misconception in people’s mind that all these great
philosophical texts do not contain thing that to be practiced.  With
regards to all the sutras, the Kangyur (translated words of the Buddha) and
the Tengyur (translation of all the commentaries of the great Indian
masters in the past), we do not think of them as something to be put into
practice.  This is an extremely huge misconception, so it is extremely
important to eliminate this misconception. With regards to this, Lama
Tsongkhapa says the following.
A The distinction of pure and impure manners of comprehending
Anyone construing the great scriptures to be explanatory teachings that do
not contain the points of practice who thinks that guidance indicating the
meaning of the essential points of practice exists separately from them,
and holds that even in the holy Dharma the explanatory and accomplishing
teachings are found in different places,
If you hold on to the view that the dharma is divided into:
      -there is dharma to be explained and
      -there is dharma to be practiced;
this constitutes a huge misconception. When we talk about this huge
misconception, we need not look elsewhere because it is in our mind. We
have this belief and this is what we think. Why? Just think about our own
attitude towards these great philosophical texts. Whenever we talk about
these great philosophical texts, such as Extensive Stages of the Path,
various Perfection of Wisdoms, the Middle Ways, we just think that they are
just philosophy and are just something to be learned. We may even think
that by learning these teachings are to make us more intelligent, to make
our mind sharper and also to make our mouth sharper and quicker as well;
but these teachings are not meant for practice. When we think about
practice, we think of texts that are only related to our daily recitation,
our sadhana, our prayer, short mind training text and short Lamrim text. We
think that these are the real things that we should put into practice. In
our mind, we make a distinction between the teachings that are only to be
learned and to study and the teachings to be practiced. If we think like
this, then we have to realize that this is a huge misconception and it is
wrong. What is the negative consequence by thinking in this way? The
consequence is as follows:
will create an obstacle for the origination of deep respect towards the
immaculate sutras and tantras as well as the treatises clarifying their
intent. One should be aware that the karmic obscuration of abandoning the
Dharma is accumulated by despising them, saying that they only outline
external knowledge without presenting the inner meaning.
If we have the idea that the actual words of the Buddha in the stainless
sutras and tantras as well as the flawless treatises clarifying their
intent are only meant for knowledge and not as something to be put into
practice, then obviously, when we pick-up such a text, we will not have
much faith and respect for it. We will not see that they are necessary for
our own development. We will not see the need of these teachings. When we
think of something that is not useful to us, the chances of us putting it
down is much greater. We will start to despise and look down upon these
teachings. When that happens, then we are in danger of creating the
negative karma of abandoning the dharma. If this happen to us, we really
incur a heavy loss for ourselves. Lama Tsongkhapa says that these classic
texts /treatises are the supreme instructions. Our lack of understanding
that they are the supreme instructions is our own fault and mistake.  So
Lama Tsongkhapa says
Hence, for those who want liberation, the infallible, supreme instructions
are indeed the great scriptures.  Nevertheless, it is possible that, due to
poor intelligence etc., one cannot reach certainty through relying on these
scriptures only as supreme instruction.
Although these sutras and tantras as well as the great treatises clarifying
their intent are the supreme instructions, our lack of understanding this
fact is our own fault and mistake. Our lack of understanding this fact
arises due to:
    - Lack of intelligence
    - Lack of merit
    - Having a lot of negativities and obscurations obscuring the mind
    - Not relying on a qualified teacher who can point out the way
These are the various reasons that are responsible for not understanding
that these scriptures and great treaties are instructions for practice. It
is not that the great treatises do not show the instructions for practice,
but rather due to the limitations, we fail to realize that.
So the question is: If these sutras and tantras as well as the great
treatises/ classic texts clarifying their intent are the best instructions,
how should we extract the instructions from these teachings?
Therefore and one must seek certainty with respect to them by relying on
excellent direct instructions, but one should not think that the great
scriptures do not contain the heart of the matter because they only outline
external knowledge while the direct instructions are supreme because they
present the inner meaning. [Alternative translation: Thus, you must seek
out personal instructions, thinking, “I will seek certain knowledge of
those texts based on the personal instructions of an excellent being.”]
Let’s take the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra that is taught by the Buddha. In
order to understand the real intended meaning of that sutra, you have to
rely on the classic texts/ great treatises that were composed by the great
Indian masters of the past. Even if you look at the great treatises that
were composed by the great Indian masters of the past, you will have
difficulties to understand them. In order to be able to understand that
great treatises, you have rely on the commentary of that. In order to
understand that commentary to that commentary, you have to rely on personal
instructions of a qualified teacher. By relying on this personal
instruction, then you can understand that great treatises that elucidate/
clarify the intent of the sutra. Therefore, you have to rely on the
personal instruction of a qualified teacher whom possess the unbroken
lineage that contains the unmistaken instruction which comes from the
Buddha himself. Basically, we have to understand that this personal
instruction help us to understand the intended meaning of the sutras and
tantras as well as the great treatises as the supreme instructions are
found in the sutras, tantras and the great treatises. We should not have
the idea that the personal instruction is something different and the
supreme instructions are somewhere else. So Lama Tsongkhapa says: “one
should not think that the great scriptures do not contain the heart of the
matter because they only outline external knowledge while the direct
instructions are supreme because they present the inner meaning.”
Next the text goes on to explain what are the personal instructions that we
should rely on.
B How all the Buddha’s teachings dawn on you as useful instructions
The great Yogi Jangchub Rinchen said:
  Someone who has reached certainty concerning a handy little volume,
  cannot be said to know all the topics of direct instructions, this is
  said about someone who understands all of the Buddha’s teachings as
  instructions.
Sometime we think that we can just rely on one small text but that text
does not shows the essential points of the entire path; it only show a
portion of the path in which we rely on. That is not the way to go about
it, but rather, we have to rely on those treatises that contain the
instructions concerning the whole path and the whole teachings. In order
for all the scriptures to appear to us as instructions and in order for us
to realize that all the scriptures are meant for practice, from our own
side, we have to gather all the causes and conditions for that to happen.
We need the kind of understanding Great Jowo [Atisha]’s disciple Gompa
Rinchen Lama expressed saying he had ground his body, speech and mind to
dust in a single meditation session on Atisha’s instructions and that
thereby the understanding had now arisen in him that all scriptures are
instructions.
What does it mean by “in a single meditation”? It means that with regards
to whatever you are practicing, until you have gained a thorough
ascertainment in your heart of a particular subject that you are
practicing, you have to continuously analyze and check in order to generate
an ascertainment.
How does one conduct that one meditation session? As Gompa Rinchen Lama
expressed saying he had ground his body, speech and mind to dust in a
single meditation. This mean that in order to arrive at a thorough
ascertainment of whatever you are practicing, you have to continuously work
at it with your body, speech and mind.
In the context of what we are studying here, we are here to study the
Lamrim –the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. Therefore, we have to
devote our body, speech and mind to study the Lamrim so we can arrive at
the definite ascertainment and understanding of this text. In order to make
our study and understanding successful, we also have to strive and put in
effort to accumulate merits, purifying our mind of obscurations in
particular engaging in guru devotion practice –Guru Yoga. When all these
different practices and conditions come together, all the scriptures will
arise as instructions. It does happens to people that despite having heard
so many teachings, but when come to practice, they have no idea where to
start and what to do. Why does this happen? Lama Tsongkhapa then goes on to
explain:
In the words of the precious [Drom] Tonpa:
  If, after studying the Dharma a lot, you feel the need to search
  elsewhere for a way of applying the Dharma, you are mistaken.
Likewise, those who study the Dharma a lot over a long period and,
completely ignorant as to how to set about it, develop the wish to practice
Dharma, do not understand and therefore err in the manner described above.
Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that their mistake is not understanding of what I
have already explained. As I have stated very clearly, the text is saying
that what the supreme instructions are. The supreme instructions are the
great classical text -the sutra, tantra and the great treatises- that
clarified the intent of those teachings. In order for us to realize the
meaning of these great treatises, we have to rely on personal instructions
of a teacher. The purpose of relying on the personal instructions is to
understand the great classical texts that clarified the intent of the
Buddha’s teachings. If one does not understand this process, even if one
study a lot but have no idea of what to practice, then this is a clear sign
of not having understood of what I have just mentioned.
So if you have understood of what was just being discussed, then you will
understand that the scriptural teaching and the realizational teaching are
related. Literally in Tibetan, it means that if your learning the dharma
and hearing the teaching has hit the mark, then you will realize that the
scriptural teaching and the realizational teaching are complementary and
are related.
As it says in the Treasury:
       The Buddha’s teachings have two aspects:
       their nature is scripture and realization.
In accordance with this dictum, the teaching is nothing apart from the
scriptural teaching and the realizational teaching.
The scriptural teaching is how the Dharma should be practiced and
establishes the manner of accomplishment, while the realizational teaching
is what is [thus] established. Since one practices in accordance with what
is to be established, these two act as cause and effect. To give an
analogy: when you have a horse race, the horse is first shown the course
and afterwards, likewise, it runs there.
[Alternative translation LRCM Vol I page 51: As this says, there are no
more than two types of teaching –scriptural and realized. The scriptural
teachings determine the way that you take the teachings in hand, the
procedures for the practice; the teachings as they are realized are your
practice of these procedures in accordance with how you have already
determined them. Thus, these two serve as cause and effect. For example, it
is like showing a horse the racecourse before you race. Once you have shown
it, you then race there. It would be ridiculous to show the horse one
racecourse and then race on another. Similarly, why would you determine one
thing by means of study and reflection, and then, when you practice,
practice something else?]
When there is a horse race, first you show the horse the racecourse.
Similarly, you are supposed to practice those teachings that you have
received. If the teaching that you have heard has nothing to do what you
are supposed to practice then something is wrong. If that happen then it
would be like as follows:
It would be ridiculous to show it a course and then have the race
elsewhere. When it comes to attainments practice, how could it be
appropriate to accomplish something after having determined something else
through listening and reflecting?
In the course of practice, we do engage in meditation. Actually, we also do
engage in analytical meditation but there are people who have the
misconception that we should not engage in analytical meditation. They say:
“Analytical meditation is fine. It is fine to do analysis during the time
of listening to the teaching and doing the reflection. But during the
meditation, you should not do any analysis. You should abandon all
conceptualities”. This people say that thinking during meditation is a
hindrance in achieving enlightenment. This is a misconception. Essentially,
these people are saying that whatever you have learned through listening
and reflection has no relation to what you are going to meditate on.
Therefore what you meditate is something that is different from what you
have learned through listening and reflection.
In essence, Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that if the conclusion that you
arrive through hearing and reflecting on the teachings is completely
unrelated to what you are going to meditate on, then that is wrong. In
order to support this fact, Lama Tsongkhapa then relies on the scriptural
authorities.
That is also expressed in the last volume of Stages of Meditation:
“Whatever has been realized by the wisdom arising from listening and
reflecting is precisely what should be cultivated by means of the wisdom
arising from meditation. Just like a horse runs along the course it has
been shown.”
Summary: Whatever we have gained from hearing and reflecting on the
teaching is what we must meditate on. If we end up meditating on something
that is not what we have learned and reflected on, that is a mistake. How
can we, one day, be able to see all the scriptures as an instruction? In
order to realize that all the scriptures –the sutra, tantra and the great
classical texts of the great Indian masters- are the supreme instructions,
we have to rely on personal instructions such as the Lamrim –Stages of the
Path of Enlightenment. The Lamrim is the personal instructions of the
master. By relying on the personal instructions of the master such as the
Lamrim, then we can come to the understanding that all the scriptures are
the instructions. How should we seek the intent of the great treatises? We
should dedicate our entire body, speech and mind to that endeavor. Whatever
we meditate on is none other than the conclusion that we arrive at through
hearing and reflection on the teachings. It is a mistake to meditate on
something that is not the conclusion from our hearing and reflection on the
teachings.  Later in the text, Lama Tsongkhapa will explain in detail about
the meaning of meditation. It is clearly mentioned in the text that there
are two types of meditation: analytical meditation and stabilizing
meditation (or concentration meditation). Of these two, analytical
meditation is the more important one. That will comes later.
Today, what you have to understand is the threefold activity:  hearing the
teaching, reflecting on the teaching and meditating on the teaching are
interrelated. They support one another rather than obstructing one another.
They are not of separate entity. It is important that you understand this
threefold activity -hearing the teaching, reflecting on the teaching and
meditating on the teaching- are interconnected and do help one another
rather than obstructing one another. Lama Tsongkhapa says very clearly in
the text that the supreme instructions are non-other than those great
treatises. These great treatises are the supreme instructions. It is quite
difficult for us to understand now as we have not yet study extensively but
we have to understand that Lama Tsongkhapa is the one who say this. Another
thing to remember is that Lama Tsongkhapa says very clearly in the text
that we must never ever make a distinction between the teaching to be
explained and the teaching to be practiced and he also says that thinking
the dharma teaching in such way is a huge obstacle. Whatever we have
learned is the thing that we are supposed to practice. We should not make
such a distinction. We should keep this in our heart all the times and, as
much as possible, we should apply them in our daily life.
