Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson45.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.055309
================================================================================


Student 1: Can you please elaborate on invariable action? (from Lesson 44)
Khen Rinpoche: We have talked about meritorious karma, non-meritorious
karma and invariable karma (or immovable karma).
Meritorious karma is the karma that will project a good rebirth in the
desire realm.
Invariable karma refers to the karma that will project a rebirth into the
first concentration of the form realm and above.
The karma that projects a good rebirth in the desire realm is the variable
karma. It is called variable karma because the result of an action that
project rebirth, for example, as a desire realms god, can be experienced
instead as rebirth as a human body and not necessary as rebirth as a desire
realm god.  In that sense the result of the karma is variable, therefore it
is called a variable karma.
For the karma that project a rebirth into the first concentration of the
form realm, the result of that karma will only ripen as that: rebirth as a
first concentration being. Similarly, the karma that project a rebirth into
the second concentration can only ripen as a rebirth as a second
concentration being.
There is also an explanation of the word invariable karma. The beings in
these upper realms are not distracted by conceptuality; so the karma that
causes the rebirth is called invariable.
Student 1: What is the cause of the rebirth in the form and formless
realms? The karma that you will accumulate while you are in the form or
formless realms is variable or invariable?
Khen Rinpoche: On the second part of the question, when they are already in
the form or formless realms, they do accumulate all sorts of karma. For
example, when they are in the first concentration, they do not accumulate
the projecting karma to be born in the desire realms but they do accumulate
projecting karma to be born either in the form or the formless realms. The
reason why the god, for example, born into the first concentration of the
form realm does not accumulate projecting karma for the desire realm
because in order to accumulate projecting karma to be born in the desire
realm, the projecting cause has to be the ignorance that belongs to the
desire realm. The god in the form realm has only the ignorance of the form
realm.
We will just leave it as that and think about it. The reason why the god of
the form realm does not accumulate projecting karma to be born in the
desire realm is because they do not have the ignorance of the desire realm.
If you really want to know the detail of the whole process, it can be
complicated. The topic that deals with this is “Form and formless
absorption.”  The discussion of this can be found in the “Elaborate
explanation on the twelve links of dependent arising.”
Maybe it would be helpful to have some understanding of “the four stages of
existence.”
The four stages of existence:
   1. Birth existence
   2. Death existence
   3. Intermediate state existence
   4. Prior time existence
1. The birth existence refers the first moment when the consciousness
enters into the womb.
2. From the second moment after birth up to the moment before the mind at
death is called prior time existence.
3. Death existence is when the mind at death manifests.
4. The intermediate state existence happens when the consciousness exit
from the heart of the body and simultaneously with that, the intermediate
state is established.
In the last lesson we have talked about the intermediate state. The person
who is born in the intermediate state will have the appearance of the type
of rebirth that he will take. However there are people who believe that
when the intermediate beings upon seeing the body of the past life, it will
develop an attachment for the body and thinking: “This is mine.” This is a
mistaken belief. The intermediate being does not develop attachment for the
body that he has just discarded because the relationship with the past body
has been terminated.
There are also people who believe that the intermediate state being has the
appearance of the previous life. There are people who have the experience
in whatever way of their loved one, for example, their parent who has just
passed away, have the appearance of their parent coming to them asking for
offerings to be made. Based on their experience, they believe the
intermediate state being has the appearance of their past life. But this is
not the case. People who see their departed loved one appearing to them
does not mean that the intermediate being has the appearance of the past
life. These appearances do happen due to certain non-human being who take
on the appearance of the deceased and then deceive the living relatives of
the deceased. This must be the reason why there is this tradition of
praying and honoring the deceased which is likely due to the experience of
certain individual “see” their deceased and then spread the words around.
Lama Tsongkhapa does say clearly that the intermediate being does not have
the shape of the body from the previous body but rather it has the shape of
the body of the rebirth that he is going to take.
The intermediate state can also change. Let’s say a person is in the
intermediate state of hell realm. If powerful virtues are accumulated and
dedicated for that being, that intermediate state of the being can be
changed, for example, to the intermediate state of a human being. This is
the assertion of the higher Abhidharma, “The Compendium of Knowledge.”
How does the intermediate state being take rebirth
If a being of the intermediate state is to be born in a womb, it observes
beings of the same type as itself at its future birthplace. The
intermediate being wishes to gaze at them, play with them, and so forth,
and desire to reach this place.
What does the intermediate being enter into when they take rebirth?
After sexual intercourse, the white  and  red  drops  of  the  parents  come
together, mix and congeal. The intermediate  state  being  enters  into  the
mixture of the white and red drops of the parent; which are  the  semen  and
the egg of the parents. When the consciousness is about to enter  into  this
mixture of white and red drops, the intermediate state being perceives  this
mixture of the two drops as the lying together. Although   the  parents  are
not actually together at this time but this is what the  intermediate  being
see; as if in  an  illusion,  it  sees  them  lying  together  -and  becomes
attached. If it is to be born female, it  turns  away  from  the  woman  and
desires the man, wanting to lie with him. If it  is  to  be  born  male,  it
turns away from the man and desires the woman, wanting to lie with her.
[In this way, as the Levels of Yogic Deeds explains, it  does  not  see  its
actual parents -it sees them lying together through misperceiving the  semen
and blood.]
Having conceived such a desire, the being of the  intermediate  state  draws
closer and closer to the man and  woman,  eventually  arriving  at  a  point
where it cannot see any part of their  bodies  except  for  their  genitals.
Angry at this sight, the intermediate state being dies and is  reborn.  This
is how the intermediate state being born in the womb.
Although the mixture of the semen and the egg  is  not  the  actual  parents
lying together but this is what the intermediate state being  sees.  On  the
other hand, it is said that the intermediate state being possesses  all  the
sensory faculties and some kind clairvoyance that is unimpeded.
Question: Is there any contradiction here?
The measure of having generated the attitude of a person of medium
capacity.
You must understand in detail the characteristics of cyclic existence,  both
by  way  of  suffering  and  its   origin.   Once   you   understand   these
characteristics,  you  will  develop  a  desire  to  abandon  and  to  quell
suffering and its origin. At this point, although  you  may  have  a  simple
determination to be free, you should not  be  satisfied  merely  with  this.
Develop an attitude about cyclic existence like those who feel aversion  for
their confinement in a blazing house or a prison, and want to  escape.  Then
progressively increase this feeling of aversion and desire to escape.
Please read this over and over again  and  have  an  understanding  to  this
paragraph. There is nothing more I can say.
If one’s determination to be free or the renunciation is not pure, then  one
will not develop pure wish to achieve  liberation.  So  whatever  bodhicitta
one may be developing will not be pure as well.
Sha-ra-wa described a superficial determination to be  free  as  being  like
when you pour powder into inferior beer; the powder forms just a thin  layer
on the surface. If your ability to see the undesirability  of  true  origins
-the causes of cyclic existence- is superficial like this, then your  search
for liberation, the cessation of suffering  and  its  origin,  will  be  the
same. Likewise, your desire to attain the path to liberation  will  be  mere
words. Thus, you will not be able to  develop  either  the  compassion  that
cannot bear to see the sufferings of living beings in  cyclic  existence  or
the uncontrived spirit of unsurpassed enlightenment that instills  you  with
strength. Hence, your understanding of the  Mahayana  will  also  be  merely
intellectual. Therefore, you must practice these teachings  for  the  person
of medium capacity and regard them as crucial instructions.
Here it is saying that if one is able  to  see  the  undesirability  of  the
causes of cyclic existence –true origins- then one will be able  to  develop
a real desire to  achieve  liberation.  In  essence,  we  have  to  see  for
ourselves how our contaminated / appropriated mental and physical  aggregate
is true sufferings. We have to see how this true suffering arises  from  the
true origins. If we  can  see  how  our  contaminated  mental  and  physical
aggregates do not pass beyond the nature of suffering, then we will  develop
a desire to be free of these. If we are unable to see how we  ourselves  are
suffering and how the real suffering is having the contaminated  mental  and
physical aggregates (which  are  in  the  nature  of  suffering)  and  don’t
recognize this in our situation, then when we see other  suffering  sentient
beings –how they are like us- and even we look at them and  focus  on  their
suffering we will not be able to develop great compassion for  them.  If  we
are unable to develop compassion for those sentient beings who  are  in  the
same situation as us, then there is no way for us to develop bodhicitta.
[LRCM Vol I page 328]  Dispelling misconceptions
Qualm:  Although  it  is  appropriate   in   the   Hinayana   to   cultivate
disenchantment with cyclic existence, it is inappropriate for  bodhisattvas,
for, if bodhisattvas were to cultivate intense  disgust  and  disenchantment
with cyclic existence, they would be like  the  smvakas  and  fall  into  an
extreme of peace, having become displeased with their involvement in  cyclic
existence.
Response: This is a great error that misconstrues the sutra's meaning.  For,
the  sutra  passage  that  says,  "Thus,  bodhisattvas  should  not   become
disenchanted with cyclic existence," does not teach bodhisattvas not  to  be
disgusted with the sufferings of birth, aging, illness,  death,  and  so  on
-the result of our wondering through cyclic existence  under  the  influence
of  our  karma  and  afflictions.  Rather,   this   sutra   teaches   joyous
perseverance. In order to train in  the  bodhisattvas'  activities  for  the
sake of others until the end of cyclic existence, bodhisattvas must  put  on
armor [courage]. Once they do this,  even  if  all  the  sufferings  of  all
beings were collected  and  the  bodhisattvas  constantly  experienced  them
mentally and physically, they would still persevere joyously, delighting  in
the magnificent deeds that help others, without becoming  disenchanted  with
or frightened by sufferings. Thus, the Buddha said  that  bodhisattvas  must
not be disenchanted with cyclic existence.
The essence of this qualm is developing  the  wish  to  be  free  of  cyclic
existence is the business of the Hearers and  the  Solitary  Realizers;  and
not the business of those in the Mahayana path, that  is,  the  bodhisattvas
are not worried of getting out of cyclic existence. That is  not  true.  The
bodhisattvas do fear of taking rebirth due to  karma  and  afflictions.  The
bodhisattvas do need to develop a wish and desire to not take rebirth  under
the power of karma and afflictions.  There  are  bodhisattvas  who  do  take
rebirth in cyclic existence but they do so through the power  of  compassion
and their aspiration prayers. So in line with  their  compassion  and  their
aspiration prayers they take rebirth  happily.   They  do  so  in  order  to
benefit others. So if they take in  cyclic  existence  under  the  power  of
karma and afflictions, wouldn’t that interfere in their work  of  benefiting
others? The bodhisattvas are afraid of taking rebirth  under  the  power  of
karma and afflictions. In fact the bodhisattvas do fear  of  taking  rebirth
due to karma and afflictions that is even stronger than  those  Hearers  and
Solitary Realizers.
If they take rebirth in cyclic  existence  under  the  power  of  karma  and
afflictions, wouldn’t that interfere in their work of benefiting  others?  I
hope you understand this qualm and work at figuring it out for yourself.
Ascertaining the nature of the path leading to liberation
Ascertaining the nature of the path leading to liberation has two parts:
   1. The kind of life through which you halt cyclic existence
   2. The kind of path you cultivate to halt cyclic existence
The kind of life through which one can stop cyclic existence  is  the  kinds
of the life which we have already achieved right now i.e. the human life  of
leisure and opportunity.
For the kind of path you cultivate to halt cyclic  existence  is  the  three
higher trainings:
   1. Higher training in ethics
   2. Higher training in concentration
   3. Higher training in wisdom
This discussion of the path of the person of medium  capacity  here  in  the
Lamrim is not aim primarily at those who are the  actual  person  of  medium
capacity; but it is for the purpose of  leading  the  person  to  higher  or
better. Therefore the higher training in concentration and  higher  training
in wisdom are not discussed in this section of the path  of  the  person  of
medium capacity. It only discusses the higher training in ethics.
In term of the goal that one can achieve by practicing on  the  path,  there
are two goals:
   1. High status
   2. Definite goodness
Through the practice of the higher training in ethics  and  higher  training
in concentration, one can achieve higher status; which is a good rebirth.
Through the practice of higher training in wisdom, then  one  can  actualize
definite goodness.
In order to train well in  the  higher  training  in  wisdom  one  must  has
trained well in the higher training in concentration.
In order to have a good practice of concentration, one is  to  have  a  good
practice in the higher training in ethics. The  higher  training  in  ethics
helps to cut off distraction and  take  away  all  the  different  kinds  of
chatters in the mind. Therefore it help  when  one  train  in  concentration
because when distraction is removed, one is able to focus more easily.  With
the good training in concentration then  one  will  be  able  to  develop  a
special kind of wisdom with  which  one  can  destroy  the  afflictions  and
thereby achieve liberation.
There is a discussion on the four doors through which we incur  breaches  in
our ethical discipline:
   1. Not knowing what one is supposed to be training
   2. Lack of conscientiousness/ carelessness
   3. Lack of respect for the training
   4. Have predominant of afflictions
The remedy to not knowing what one is supposed to be training  is  to  learn
what one is supposed to observe.
Lack of conscientiousness/ carelessness is one of the causes  of  committing
a breach in one’s ethical training. The  remedy  to  this  is  to  cultivate
mindfulness of the training of what one is supposed to adopt  and  what  one
is supposed to abandon. From time to time we have to examine what our  body,
speech and mind is up to. So we  need  vigilant,  shame  and  embarrassment.
What is the difference between shame and embarrassment?
Shame is more to do with oneself. Embarrassment is more to do with others.
    - Shame is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of oneself.
    - Embarrassment is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of others
Disrespect is a cause for committing a breach  in  one’s  ethical  training.
The remedy is having respect for the teacher, the Buddha, and the  rules  on
ethical training that the Buddha had set for, to  have  respect  for  fellow
ordained people and also respect for sentient beings.
Having various afflictions also a cause for committing  a  breach  in  one’s
ethical training. The  remedy  is  to  examine  one’s  mind  and  see  which
afflictions are predominant and then apply antidote to that.
Basically  the  point  is  that  the  higher  training  in  ethics  is  very
important. It is like a foundation for the other two trainings.
Qualms: Having said that, there are people  who  may  believe  that  if  one
practices Tantra, then there is no real  need  to  be  so  strict  with  one
ethics. Also some people may think that if you are practicing  these  ethics
then you will not be able to practice Tantra.
In reality, the training in the different sets of vows is complementary  and
they do assist one another. So on the basis of keeping the pratimoksha  vow,
then one take the bodhisattva vows. On the basis of that, one then take  the
tantric vows. It is not that when one practice one set of vows then  abandon
some other sets of vows. It does  not  work  like  that.  Therefore  in  the
Kalachakra Tantra, the practitioners who are the fully  ordained  monks  are
praised as the best. Next, come the novice monks and nuns. Only  then  comes
the laypersons. The spirit of the pratimoksha vows is  to  turn  away  one’s
desire and attachment. The same applies to the  spirit  of  the  bodhisattva
vows and tantric vows.  Of course, there is an exception for those who  have
achieved extremely high levels of  tantric  practice.  Even  so,  for  them,
their practices do not allow  their  mind  to  come  under  the  control  of
attachment. They have their mind in full control.
In essence, the practice of higher training in  ethics  does  not  interfere
with tantric practice and in fact it is praised as the best  basis  for  the
practice of tantra. They are not contradictory.
As mentioned a couple of time, it is important for you to read the text and
if there is anything that you do not understand from the reading then you
should bring it out in class. If I have to read everything out from the
text in the class then we will never ever finish.
Student 2: In the text, it says that the best way to stop cyclic existence
is renunciation i.e. to be ordained. Between an ordained monk who is busy
with the monastery daily activities and a yogi who is not ordained meditate
in the cave, who will attain liberation first?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): No, in order to enlighten you do not have
to be monk or nun as lay people can also get enlighten. Are you saying the
yogi who live in the mountain has renunciation and the monk who live in the
city do not have renunciation?
Last time in Dharamsala, there is one monk who lives in the mountain; as
there are many monks live in the mountain in their individual house. He
said that there are two yogis in the mountain. One kind of yogi is like a
fox and one kind of yogi is like a cow. He asked someone: “Which type of
meditator are you?” At first I don’t understand what he means. Later he
explained. There are some meditators live in the mountain but they don’t
meditate. They go up and down the mountain. So that is the yogi like a fox.
Another yogi who sit in the house, eat and sleep. They don’t do much. That
is the yogi like the cow. This does not mean that if you live in mountain
you have renunciation as there are many people who live in the mountain.
Next lesson, I will give a brief introduction to the twelve-links of
dependent arising, although this is not in the Middle Length Lamrim. After
we have finished with that, we will move on to the path of a person of
great capacity.
For those of you who have been here for longer time, if you have doubt
pertaining to the   twelve-links of dependent arising you should bring it
out in the next class.

Briefing on Kopan Oct (2012) retreat:  Listen to the audio file from 85.50
minutes onwards.


