Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson42.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.202890
================================================================================


Question: How is the karma that projects the rebirth as a god or demigod
being accumulated?
Student 1: Intention of voluntarily refraining from killing. (Audio refers
to 13:35 – 14:56)
Khen Rinpoche: I want a specific cause.
Student 1: (audio refers to 15:12 – 16:21)
Khen Rinpoche: In general, the cause of good rebirth is virtue and the
cause of the rebirth in the miserable realms or lower realms is non-virtue.
If you remember what is being mentioned in the text:
  -a strong virtue will leads to the rebirth as god,
  -a middling virtue will leads to a rebirth as a demigod and
  -a small virtue will leads to human rebirth.
When we talk about virtuous karma, in relation to getting the rebirth as a
god, we are talking about desire realm god. In general, virtue causes a
good rebirth. It is virtuous karma that leads to a rebirth as a god, a
demigod and a human being. What kind of virtuous projecting karma would
project a god rebirth, a demigod rebirth as well as a human rebirth? This
is something that we need to think about.  When you think about it, then
you know that it is not so straightforward.
Question: There are people who practice generosity or living in an ethical
way of life with the main motivation of achieving some happiness in this
lifetime. Are their action of keeping ethics and practicing generosity with
the intention of achieving happiness in this lifetime virtuous or not?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): This thing you must able to answer now.
Yes or no?
Question: With an intention of achieving happiness in this lifetime, the
person practice ethic but would he experience any positive result in the
future life?
Question: Is the person’s action of practicing giving or keeping ethics for
the happiness of this life alone dharma or not?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Why not? You must be able to explain. It
is easy to say no. It is not dharma? It is not virtuous? It doesn’t give
result in future? Okay, think about it.
We have been looking at the afflictions and we have finished with:
   1. The view of transitory collection
   2. The view holding on an extreme
   3. The conception of bad view as supreme
9) A belief in the supremacy of ethics and religious discipline (conception
of bad ethics and modes of conduct as supreme) is an afflictive
intelligence  which observes an ethical discipline that renounces faulty
ethical discipline, or a religious discipline which requires certain forms
of dress, manner, speech, and physical behavior, as well as the mental and
physical aggregates on the basis of which these forms of ethics and
asceticism occur, and regards them as cleansing you of negativity, freeing
you from afflictions, and removing you from cyclic existence.
Regarding this belief in the supremacy of ethics and religious discipline,
there are certain ideas about how certain forms of ethics are supreme and
there are also certain ideas about how certain modes of conduct (translated
here as religious discipline) are supreme.
There are certain practices of ethics which will not lead to liberation but
there is a belief that these practices of ethics are good. This is what we
called bad ethics. So there is a belief that these bad ethics are good.
There are also beliefs that certain modes of conduct are good, for example,
that involve in one’s dressing such as wearing human skin or adorning
oneself with bones and skeletons. The text it says: religious discipline or
conduct which requires certain forms of dress i.e. people adorning
themselves with skeletons and human skin.
In the commentary, an example of a bad “manner” would be regard standing on
one leg and just observing the sun moves across the sky as fantastic.
The example of the bad mode of conduct involving speech and physical
behavior would be abiding naked and then keeping silence.
The point is that there are people who engage in these conducts thinking
that will lead them to liberation. The person who has these views about
these forms of bad ethics and bad modes of conduct also regards his own
body and mind as something supreme. By engaging in these forms of ethics
and behaviors he thinks that his aggregates (body and mind) would be
purified.
It is stated in the teaching that there are people who remember their past
lives as a dog or as a pig and believe that such an animal rebirth is the
cause of being human this life. With that conclusion, they engage in the
conducts of a pig or as a dog such as sleeping like a pig or behaving like
a dog. The mind that believes in that form of ethics and wrong modes of
conduct (which will never lead them to liberation) to be supreme is called
a belief in the supremacy of ethics and religious discipline.
10. Wrong view is an afflictive intelligence that denies the existence of
things such as past and future lives or karma and its effects, or that
believes that the cause of living beings is a divine creator or a primal
essence, etc.
Within wrong view, there is wrong view that deprecates reality and there is
wrong view that superimposes qualities and characteristics that do not
exist in reality.
An example of the wrong view that deprecates or denies is the thought
thinking that there is no karma. The wrong view that deprecate is an act of
denying something which exist.
The text says: “or that believes that the cause of living beings is a
divine creator or a primal essence” is an example of wrong view that
superimposes or exaggerates, for example, people who think that the world
is created by some beings such as Ishvara.
These are how the afflictions are identified from the shared perspectives
of the higher and lower tenets whereas the explanation in accordance with
the CMWS will be explained below.

The order in which the afflictions arise
One way to look at this is to consider ignorance as distinct from the view
of the transitory collection. For example, when twilight falls on a coiled
rope, its status as a rope will be unclear and someone may imagine that it
is a snake. Similarly, according to this view, the misapprehension of the
aggregates as a self arises due to the darkness of ignorance, which
prevents clarity about how the aggregates exist. The other afflictions then
develop from this misapprehension.
From that perspective of considering the ignorance to be different from the
view of transitory collection as asserted by Arya Asanga and Vasubandhu,
then the order in which they arise is as follows:
   1. Ignorance – refers to mere misapprehension or lack of knowledge
   2. The view of transitory collection
What is the opposite of being ignorance? It is having the knowledge of
something.
So the opposite of knowledge is ignorance i.e. you are not aware or not
understanding something. In this context, if we take ignorance to mean “not
knowing,” ignorance arises first then the view of transitory collection
arises. This is the position of Arya Asanga and Vasubandhu.
On the other hand, if we assert that ignorance is not just a mere lack of
knowledge but asserting ignorance to be active fundamental misapprehension
of thing. This is the view of Dharmakirti and also asserted by the Middle
Way School. Then according to this view, ignorance is the view of
transitory collection.
On the other hand, if you hold that ignorance and the view of the view of
transitory collection are identical, then the view of the transitory
collection is itself the root of the afflictions.
According to the great master of the past, there are two different ways of
identifying ignorance.
One school thinks that ignorance is to be just mere lack of knowledge or
lack of understanding of something. Another school feels that ignorance is
not just a mere lack of understanding of something but ignorance is a mind
which is actively misapprehending something. The point is that from
ignorance come all the afflictions.
When the view of the transitory collection apprehends a self,
discrimination arises between self and other. Once you have made that
distinction, you become attached to what is associated with yourself and
hostile toward that which pertains to others.
The rest of the afflictions arise from the view of transitory collection.
From our earlier discussion of the view of transitory collection, there is
an ‘I’ or self that is like the owner of the aggregates which is completely
different and separate from the body and mind and apprehending we exist in
such a way. When you have such a belief, naturally the strong concept of
self and others arise. Then there is a strong discrimination between one
and another. Based on this discrimination, one develops attachment when one
associates things that are associated with things and people on “my” side.
In relation to things and people that are associated with “others”, one
develops hostility.
As you observe the self, your mind also becomes inflated. You develop a
belief that this very self is either eternal or subject to annihilation.
You come to believe in the supremacy of a view of the self and the like,
and you also come to believe in the supremacy of the detrimental practices
associated with such views. Similarly, you develop the wrong view that
denies the existence of things such as the Teacher who taught selflessness
and that which he taught -karma and its effects, the four truths, the three
jewels, and so forth; or else you become doubtful as to whether such things
exist or are real. Dharmakirti's Commentary on the "Compendium of Valid
Cognition"
  Once there is a self, there is an idea of an other.
  On behalf of self and other, there is attachment and hostility.
  All of the faults come about
  In association with these.
Therefore it is important for us to understand the order in which the
afflictions arise and how all these afflictions arise from the view of the
transitory collection. It would be good if you can produce a chart or write
it down the order. Of course you have to think about how the view of the
transitory collection is the basis for all the other afflictions to arise
and the order in which they arise. In order to do this successfully, you
first must identify correctly what the afflictions are as there are ten
afflictions given here. You must identify them individually and correctly.
Then on that basis you see how the view of transitory collection acts as
the basis for all the other afflictions to arise.
Student 2: (Audio refers to 55:40- 56.50) In term of doing practice, is
there any particular significant to these two different systems of
regarding ignorance?
   -the first system is saying that ignorance is the basis of view of
transitory collection and
   -the second system is saying that ignorance is the view of transitory
collection.
At the end of the day, it seems like both systems agreed that transitory
collection is root of all afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: The point here is with the meaning of ignorance. One school
views ignorance to be the opposite of knowledge. To them, ignorance is just
the direct opposite of knowledge; which means “not knowing”.
Another school says that this understanding of ignorance (“not knowing”)
alone is not sufficient. Ignorance is not just the mere opposite of
knowing. Ignorance has to be a mind that engages in its object erroneously;
there is a misapprehension of the object. Therefore we have to understand
that there are two ways of looking at ignorance.
There are two explanations as to how the afflictions arise:
   1. Based on ignorance, the view of transitory collection arises.
   2. Both ignorance and the view of the transitory collection are the same.
Student 3: (audio refers to 60.50-62.40) Among the ten afflictions, wrong
view is listed as one of the ten afflictions. What about covetousness and
malice?
Khen Rinpoche: Covetousness is included within desire and attachment.
Malice is included within anger.
Student 4: (audio refers to 63:17 – 64) You asked us to think about how the
view of transitory collection is the cause of the other afflictions. I
would assume that out of these ten afflictions, the view of the transitory
collection will be cause and the rest of the nine afflictions will be the
result of the view of the transitory collection. Out of these ten,
ignorance is one of them but ignorance is the base from which the view of
transitory collection arises. I am quite confused.
Khen Rinpoche: If you take ignorance and the view of transitory collection
to be the same thing then you will not have this question. But if you
assert the ignorance and the view of transitory collection to be different,
then ignorance comes first then the view of transitory collection comes
next.
Student 5: (audio refers to 65.09 – 70) I am trying to clarify the
ignorance of the two schools: one is lack of knowledge and the other is
actively misapprehending. I could put it that way: Misapprehending arises
from not knowing (lacking of knowledge). Can I say that the ignorance which
is misapprehending is even after you have understood the knowledge, you
still misapprehend the object? These are the differences.
Khen Rinpoche: In the first system, there is a distinction made between
just mere not knowing and misapprehension of the object.
Student 5: (audio refers to 71-71.20) The first school says that the
misapprehending and lack of knowledge are different whereas for the second
school, could I then conclude that they are the same.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 5: (audio refers to 71.20-72.11) By having ten virtuous actions but
without bodhichitta and without the wisdom understanding emptiness, would
that classify as bad form of ethical discipline?
Khen Rinpoche: Bad ethics do not refer to just that. It is not about
keeping ethics without bodhichitta, keeping ethics without the view of
emptiness.
Student 5: (audio refers to 73.13-73.40) The reason why I highlight that
because if you only believe the ten virtues alone will lead you to
enlightenment without the wisdom understanding emptiness and without
bodhicitta.
Ven Gyurme:  Your question is that by believing the practice of ten virtues
alone will lead one to enlightenment, is that thought is classified as a
belief in the supremacy of ethics and religious discipline?
Student 5: Yes
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I don’t think so.
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say, if we practice the virtues with the intention of
achieving liberation it will become a cause for liberation. Wouldn’t it?
Student 5: Without that intention?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That is the same questions that I asked
before.
Khen Rinpoche: If we practice ethics with the goals of achieving a good
rebirth, either as a human being or a god then that practice ethics  will
become a cause for us to reborn as a human being or a god. By depending on
the goal and the intention, the same practice of ethics will lead to
different results.
The practice of ethics can lead to enlightenment, it can lead to liberation
or it can lead to a good rebirth by depending on your motivation. So, back
to the question which I gave earlier, if we practice ethics just to seek
some kinds of rewards or happiness of this life, doesn’t it become a cause
for good rebirth,  doesn’t it become a cause for liberation; doesn’t it
become a cause for enlightenment?  What do you think?
Student 6: (audio refers to 78– 79.39)
Khen Rinpoche: You said the first one is “knowing something wrongly.” If
that is the case, there is no difference between the first one and the
second one.
You said the first one: ignorance is the opposite of wisdom but ignorance
is not necessarily the opposite of wisdom. In order to say that, first you
have to posit what wisdom is. Here in this context, wisdom will be posited
or identified as the wisdom that realizes the emptiness of the self-
sufficient substantially existent person i.e. the mind which realizes the
self-sufficient substantially existent person does not exist whatsoever. If
that what wisdom is and if you say ignorance is the opposite of wisdom then
ignorance cannot be just a mere not understanding something. The opposite
of wisdom has to be a fundamental misapprehension of the self-i.e.
apprehending the self to be self-sufficient.
As you say this is the first school of thought but this is not the first
school of thought. The first school of thought is just “mere not
understanding”. If you take the first school to mean “mere not
understanding” or “mere not knowing” then ignorance cannot be the opposite
of wisdom.
For the second school of thought, the ignorance and the view of transitory
collection are the same. The ignorance is the fundamental misapprehension.
Then you can say that it is the opposite of wisdom.
Student 7: (audio refers to 83– 84.55): Those assert that ignorance and the
view of the transitory collection are separate, how would they assert that
the ignorance would be the root of cyclic existence?
Khen Rinpoche: Both systems assert that ignorance is the root of cyclic
existence and you need to overcome ignorance. The thing that overcomes
ignorance is the wisdom. Both of the schools are same in asserting this.
Whether you assert ignorance to be different from the view of transitory
collection or not, both schools assert that it is the view of selflessness
that would overcome ignorance.
According to the first system, the view of selflessness will only remove
the view of transitory collection but there is still ignorance which is the
mere not understanding something. There is no ignorance that cannot be
defeated by the view of selflessness.
Student 6: (audio refers to 86.46-87.45) If ignorance and the view of
transitory collection are asserted to be separate, just eliminate the view
of transitory collection would be enough.
Khen Rinpoche: Like that-ah.
Student 7: (audio refers to 88.35 – 90)  ) On “a belief in the supremacy of
ethics and religious discipline” this only relate to those views and
practices that  obstruct liberation from cyclic existence and these people
who hold this view want to liberated from cyclic existence. Is this not
referring to non-Buddhist practices?
Ven Gyurme: If you say that these people who are aiming for liberation also
don’t know what liberation is.
Student 7: (audio refers to 90.11 – 91)
Khen Rinpoche: In the text, the afflictions are classified as the five
afflicted views and five non-views.
The five views: the view of the transitory collection, the view holding on
to the extreme and so forth come about as a result of thinking; that is why
it is said as afflicted wisdom or afflicted intelligent. As a result of
thinking then the mind believes or concludes “It must be this. It must be
that”. So in order to overcome this view, we have to also engage in
thinking correctly to oppose this afflicted intelligent. Basically we need
discriminating wisdom.
For the first five non-views: attachment, anger, pride, ignorance, doubt,
we need to think about whether these afflictions arise as a result of the
afflicted intelligent. Do they arise from thinking? In order to overcome
these five non-views, does the antidote needs to involve a strong element
of wisdom or not?
This is something we need to think about: Why there is this different way
of classifying afflictions: the afflictions that are non-views and the
afflicted views.
Student 8: On the 9th afflicted view - a belief in the supremacy of ethics
and religious discipline-, regarding the dress code, Khen Rinpoche
mentioned the wearing of skull and skeleton and so on. But I keep on
hearing human skin. I don’t understand where human skin comes from?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): The text said like that.
Student 9: (audio refers to 97 –101)
Khen Rinpoche: There are people who give (generously) or to give up killing
aiming for some rewards in this life such as reputation but these are only
motivated by some reasons associated with this life alone. The motivation
is looking for some rewards in this life then one practice giving or gives
up killing. Are those actions dharma or not? Are they virtues or not?
There are many people in this world who are like that, isn’t it? To get
some rewards in this life they practice charity or stop doing certain
things, are those actions dharma or not?  Are they are virtues or not
virtues? These actions would ripen as a result in the future, right? The
result of these actions would lead to good rebirth, isn’t it? If it doesn’t
ripen in this life, it will definitely ripen in future life right? Then it
ripens as suffering or as happiness?
Student 10: (audio refers to 104 –105)
Khen Rinpoche: It seems like you have not understood the concept of the
three types of person. There are the three types of person, right? It is
not necessarily you must look for liberation. In order for it to be dharma,
when you practice dharma, it is not necessarily that you must look for
liberation and enlightenment right?
Student 10: (audio refers to 105.49 -105.59)
Khen Rinpoche: What is true path? What is the definition?
Student 10: Mind that is conjoined with renunciation.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That means you don’t understand the Three
Jewels.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the boundary of the Three Jewels? What is the
boundary of the Dharma Jewel? Is true path and true cessation present in
the continuum of the ordinary person?
Student 10: No
Khen Rinpoche: Only superior beings possess these true path and true
cessation, right?
Student 10: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: All the paths in the continuum of person of the path of
accumulation are not dharma?
Bodhichitta is not dharma? Renunciation is not dharma? Including the refuge
in your mind?
In the context of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, this is to be
differentiated from the dharma that we are talking here in general; that
which is Dharma and that which is non-dharma.
The question is: there is no motivation beyond this life, you don’t care
about anything else and you just care about this life. In order to achieve
something in this life, you give and you practice ethics. Will your action
has any result in the life beyond this? Yes or no?
You all say “yes”. Therefore it follows that intention is not important,
there is no need to practice with the intention to achieve good rebirth.
Therefore there is no point in dedicating merits as anyway it will ripen in
the future. Then there is no need to generate motivation and no need to
dedicate merits.
If you practice ethics but you motivate and dedicate it towards a good
rebirth, will they result in good rebirth? Similarly for liberation, if you
practice ethics to achieve liberation and you dedicate towards liberation,
will they result in liberation?
There are three people who practice ethics but they experience different
results. One gets good rebirth. One gets liberation. One gets
enlightenment. They practice the same thing but what is it that causes them
to have different results?
(Inaudible)
So practicing ethics for this life and giving in this life would have no
result in the future. Accept or not?
Because the motivation is seeking happiness in this life therefore it will
become a cause of the happiness in this life.  But to say there is no
effect in the future, it is a emotionally difficult thing to accept.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Okay, we stop here. Not so much emotion.



