Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson35.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.003769
================================================================================


In the preceding sections prior to what we have been discussing so far, we
did looked at the topic of refuge: going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma
and Sangha. In that section, we have identified what are our objects of
refuge. In identifying the objects to whom we go for refuge i.e. to whom we
entrust ourselves to, you have to understand how the objects of refuge
especially how the Buddha is a valid authority, how the Buddha is a valid
person, how the Buddha is an infallible person and how the Buddha does not
cheat.
On that basis then the text goes on to discuss on the topic of karma:
action and their result. We have seen recently that the topic of karma is
something which is extremely subtle especially the subtle working of karma
and the kind of result they produce. But we need to develop a conviction in
the working of karma. The way to develop this conviction in karma,
especially in the subtle working of karma, is through trust and belief in
the Buddha by seeing how the Buddha is a valid authority, a valid person
and the Buddha is an infallible. We need to develop faith and conviction in
whatever the Buddha has taught on karma; just as he had taught. We need
that kind of conviction. On that basis then we live our life.
So far, we have been discussing about karma: action and its consequences in
the context of the practices of a person of small capacity. For the person
of small capacity, one of the main things he or she has to do is to abandon
the ten non-virtuous actions. The text says “You should get used to relying
on the mind of restraint a lot without your motivation even moving towards
misdeeds such as the ten non-virtues.” We should restrain our mind such
that we don’t even entertain any thoughts about these ten non-virtuous
actions.
We have to find the faith of conviction that everything that happens is due
to our karma/ action including all the undesirable things, all the
sufferings and all the unwanted experiences that happen to us in our life.
We have to have that kind of understanding and faith: “Everything
undesirable that happens to me is my own doing and basically it is the
result of my own action”.

2B4B-2B1A-2B3B  Specifically how to purify [non-virtues] by means of the
four powers
1 How negativites and downfalls need to be purified by various means in
accordance with statements of the Teacher Buddha
2 How to redress downfalls
3 How to redress negative actions
4 How the four powers are complete with all the antidotes
5 The manner of purification
6 How it is necessary to strive not to be tainted by faulty conduct from
the start
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 251:  b" In particular, the way of
purification through the four powers
Though you make great effort not to be defiled by wrongdoing, faults may
arise due to such things as carelessness and a preponderance of
afflictions. If this happens, it is inappropriate to disregard them without
caring, so you must try to apply the remedy about which the compassionate
Teacher spoke.
Now, in regard to how to remedy any infractions, do as it is explained in
the context of the three vows. However, you should remedy sins through the
four powers. The Sutra Giving the Four Teachings says:
 Maitreya, if bodhisattvas, the great heroes, possess these four teachings,
 then they will overcome any sins that they have committed and accumulated.
 What are the four? They are the power of eradication; the power of
 applying remedies; the power of turning away from faults; and the power of
 the foundation.
You will definitely experience the result of karma that you have done and
accumulated. Since the four powers can destroy this kind of karma before it
starts to take effect, it goes without saying that the four powers can
destroy karma whose result is indefinite.]
Let’s say we have developed this faith and conviction in the working of
karma: actions and their results. Even though one may have such a faith and
conviction in karma but due to carelessness and due to overabundance of
afflictions, we still end up creating negative karma. Then what we have to
do?  The Buddha said that we have to engage in the purification; to purify
all the non-virtuous karma that we have accumulated. The way to do so is to
engage in the purification practice that is complete with the four powers.
We have to purify our negativities through the four powers. The four powers
are:
   1. The power of eradication
   2. The power of applying remedies
   3. The power of turning away from faults
   4. The power of the foundation
I think many of you have already known what these four powers are. So for
those of you who are new to this, this is something that you should keep in
mind. You have to remember what the four powers are and what they mean.
This is important.

1.Power of eradication
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 252:  1" The power of eradication
The first power is great contrition for having done nonvirtuous actions
since beginningless time. In order to feel this, it is necessary to
meditate on the way in which you produce the three effects of
actions—fruitional and so forth. At the time of putting this into practice,
do so by way of the two methods—the confession of sins in the Sutra of the
Golden Light and the confession of sins by way of the thirty-five buddhas.

The first power is the power of eradication. Sometime is translated as
power of regret but that is not the accurate translation.  The power of
eradication means that developing regret for having done the nonvirtuous
actions in the past.  It basically means acknowledging; “I have done
nonvirtuous actions in the past and those nonvirtuous actions are wrong in
the first place. This is something that I shouldn’t have done. This is
something really no good and incorrect”.  But in order for us to feel this
way about our own nonvirtuous actions that we have accumulated in the past,
we first have to understand how karma is created and once karma is
accumulated what are the results. Recently we have looked at the result
i.e. the consequences of engaging in the ten nonvirtuous actions: the
fruitional effects, the causally concordant effects and the environmental
effects. Through understanding how karma is created and the consequences
that we all have to experience, then we will be able to really feel that
all those nonvirtuous actions that we have done in the past are really
wrong and we shouldn’t have done it.
Imagine that we have swallowed some poison. Then we will be very worried
because we know that once the poison takes effect, it will do us a lot of
damage and it may even kill us. It is said that we should feel likewise for
the nonvirtuous actions that we have already accumulated in the past. We
should have very strong regret. What we need here is a strong regret for
the nonvirtuous actions that we have done in the past. But in order for us
to really feel this strong regret we first must be convinced.  In the first
place, we must acknowledge what negativity is. Negativity is something bad
and is not good for us. We must also be convinced of the consequences of
the negativities that we have already accumulated such as how one single
action has many consequences: the fruitional effects, the causally
concordant effects and the environmental effects.  We have already
discussed these earlier. If we do really acknowledge in our heart that the
negativity is such and those are the consequences, only then will we be
able to feel strong regret for our own non-virtue; otherwise it is not
possible. Therefore we have to understand what negativities are and what
the consequences are. On that basis a conclusion in our own mind with faith
should arise: “It is like that just as the Buddha has said”.
Once we are able to feel the real and strong regret which come from the
conviction in all those consequences that will arise in the future for
having accumulated non-virtues, naturally we will want to do something
about our non-virtues.
Naturally we would want to apply a remedy to rectify the problem. So after
the first power -the power of eradication- the next power is the power of
applying the remedies.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 251:  2" The power of applying remedies
The second power has six sections:
   1. "Dependence on the profound sutras" includes such activities as
      receiving the oral transmission of sutras such as the Prajnaparamita,
      retaining their meaning, and reading them.
   2. "Interest in emptiness" means to comprehend the reality in which there
      is no self and which is luminously clear, and to have conviction that
      the mind is primordially pure.
   3. "Dependence on recitation" means to recite, according to the rituals,
      the special formulae such as the hundred-syllable [mantra of
      Vajrasattva].
      Further, repeat the recitations until you see signs that you have
      cleared away your sins. The Formula of Exhortation states that the
      signs are dreaming the following: vomiting bad food; consuming such
      foods as yogurt and milk; vomiting; seeing the sun and the moon;
      moving through the air; blazing fires; subduing water buffalo and
      persons in dark clothing; seeing the community of monks or nuns;
      seeing a tree that gives out a milky substance; riding upon an
      elephant or a bull; climbing upon a lion throne; climbing up a mansion
      or a mountain; and listening to the teaching.
   4. "Dependence upon images" means to make images of the Buddha once you
      have acquired faith in him.
   5. "Dependence on worship" means to make a variety of offerings to an
      image of the Buddha or to a stupa.
   6. "Dependence on names" means to hear the recitation of and retain the
      names of buddhas and great conquerors' children.
These six types of remedies are only those that occur in Santideva's
Compendium of Trainings. There are many others.]

The second power -the power of applying the remedies- has six sections.
There are six kinds of remedies:
   1. Dependence on the profound sutras
   2. Interest in emptiness
   3. Dependence in recitation
   4. Dependence upon images (holy objects)
   5. Dependence on worship
   6. Dependence on names
These six types of remedies are listed in text “Compendium of Trainings”.
When we talked about negativities, there are:
   1. the negativities that have already been accumulated
   2. the negativities that are yet to be accumulated
With respect to the negativities that have already been accumulated, the
first two powers -the power of eradication and the power of applying
remedies- are important.
1. Dependence on the profound sutras – this refers to activities such as
reading the profound sutras, reciting them and retaining their meanings in
the mind. In this context of purification, one engages in such activities
with regret. First you generate regret for having accumulated the non-
virtue in the past and with that regret, you then engage in these
activities as a remedy.
Dependence of the profound sutras here really means reading, reciting and
retaining the meaning of profound sutras such as “The Perfection of the
Wisdom Sutra.” This is supposed to be the remedy to purify the negativities
that we have already been accumulated.
Having said that, we have to think and understand how such activities of
reading, reciting and retaining the meaning of the sutras can actually
purify our negativities. If you think about it, perhaps it is like this.
What do our negativities do to us? Let’s say if you are someone who is
intending to look for good rebirth or to achieve liberation or to achieve
enlightenment, the negativities function as an obstacle hindering you from
achieving any of these goals. So when you engage in activities such as
reading, reciting and retaining the meanings in your mind such as “The
Perfection of the Wisdom Sutra” you accumulate the collection of merits.
Perhaps this accumulation of the collection of merits works against the
negativities that you have already accumulated.
I am not exactly sure about this. This is just my own thought. This is
something to think about. But if we recite these profound sutras after
having developing regret for our nonvirtuous that have accumulated in the
past and let’s say you engage in this recitation also with an intention to
achieve enlightenment, then through such an activity you will accumulate
very powerful collection of merits. This powerful collection of merits
makes the negativities weaker.
2. Interest in emptiness means to comprehend the reality in which there is
no self and to have conviction that the mind is primordially pure and
luminously clear.
This is another thing that we have to think about. I think I have talked
about this before. As mentioned in the teaching, even just having some
understanding of emptiness can shake the very foundation of the entire
samsara. The very root of cyclic existence is ignorance. Ignorance here
does not refer to just lack of knowledge of something or not understanding
something. Ignorance here refers to a fundamental active misapprehension of
the nature of reality.  Basically it is conceiving of things and events to
be inherently existent whereas things and events by nature are empty of
existing inherently. If you have the understanding of the nature of reality
then that is an antidote to ignorance.
On one hand, you have ignorance.  On the other hand, you can see how the
wisdom realizing the emptiness of inherent existence apprehending reality
that is in contrast to how ignorance views reality. Ignorance is the
fundamental active misapprehension of reality and wisdom realizing
emptiness sees reality as it is. So it is a way of apprehending reality
that is completely opposite to ignorance. If that is the case, it can
damage ignorance.
This is something that you can understand. It is not impossible to
understand what I have just said. If you look at negativity, how is it been
accumulated? Non-virtue is accumulated due to the destructive emotions in
the mind - afflictions. The afflictions motivated us to create and to
accumulate karma. If you look at afflictions and the root of all the
afflictions, it is none other than ignorance. Because of ignorance, we have
all the afflictions which then motivate us to create non-virtues and the
imprints of these non-virtues which we called negativity. That is the cause
of all the undesirable experiences, sufferings, which we will have once it
is ripened.
On the other hand, you have the wisdom realizing emptiness which is the
direct antidote to ignorance. So the stronger our understanding and
perception of the nature of reality –emptiness- the weaker will be the
ignorance that apprehending the self. If this ignorance which conceives all
things and events as truly existence is weakened, perhaps we can also say
that the imprints of the actions that are left on the mind will become
weaker. Perhaps this is how we can explain that having an interest in
emptiness can purify our negativities.
This is my own opinion. On Tuesday I did ask you to think about this, isn’t
it? Later I will seek your opinions.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So that we can compare which one is
better but don’t repeat what I have said.
Comes a day, if one, not just understand but also realizes that
negativities are empty of existing inherently then I think the frequency of
accumulating negative karma will definitely become lesser. I guess those
who have direct perception of emptiness i.e. those who have realized
emptiness directly, I don’t think they will create negative karma. Those
who have realized emptiness and those who have realized how everything is
merely imputed by consciousness, I guess they can probably even walk on the
water.
In one account of the glorious Chandrakirti, there is one incident related
to this great master. He was asked by one of his teachers to become the
treasurer of the monastery who is responsible to look after the physical
needs of the sangha community include finding the means of sustenance. He
took up the job with the help of another person.  When he took up the job
as a treasurer, the rest of the sangha community was looking at him because
outwardly he appeared to be someone who could not really do much. Everybody
was just waiting to see how he is going to feed the whole monastery.
Nonetheless, he was able to provide the sangha community with dairy
products such as yogurts, milk and so forth. Basically what he did was
milking the picture of a cow drawn on a wall.
As said in the teaching, those who have direct perception of emptiness have
gained masterly i.e. control, over their mind. For these people, because of
having realized that everything is merely labeled by the mind, even when
they are milking a picture of a cow, it works and functions as such. But
for us, basically it is a bit difficult.
Those who have direct perception of emptiness will see clearly how
everything is merely imputed by the mind. They have gained the complete
masterly control over their mind and they can do almost everything they
want to. Those who have realized how their own mind is pure since
beginningless time (primordially pure), and in the nature of clear light
(luminously clear) I guess their negativities will be purified.
I think one can also explain how by meditating on emptiness would enable
one to accumulate a lot merits as well. Through the vast accumulation of
merits then the negativities become weaker.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Anybody has better idea to add on that?
Basically can you explain how meditation on emptiness can purify
negativities?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Anybody is welcome if you have better
idea to add on.
Student 1: Sharing his idea (Audio details from 49:22 – 51:05)
Khen Rinpoche: Because of meditating on emptiness, one’s afflictions become
weaker so the tendency to create the negative karma in the future will
become smaller. This one works well for the negativities that yet to be
created.
How do you think that meditation of emptiness will reduce the negativities
that have already created? How does the meditation of emptiness purify the
negative karma that was accumulated prior to realizing emptiness?
When we do the purification practice, there is this non-objectifying the
three circles:
   1. The agent (i.e. the one who creates the action)
   2. The action
   3. The negative karma created
So if we focus and reflect on how these three do not exist inherently, it
is said to purify the negativities.
It is also said in the teaching that we should seal our dedication with the
non-objectifying the three circles. This means that we meditate on how
these three do not exist inherently:
   1. The person who has accumulated the merits
   2. The merits itself
   3. The object or the goal to which the merits are dedicated to.
As said in the teaching, if we seal our dedication with such a reflection
then the merits are protected in such a way that it cannot even be
destroyed by anger. By sealing our dedication with such a reflection, it
says that the merits accumulated become even more powerful.
These are something that you have to think about:
1. How does sealing our dedication with the meditation on emptiness of the
   three circles make the merits more powerful?
2. How does such a reflection purify the negativities?
This is really something which we need to think about all the time and to
find an understanding to it. It is important for you to work at it and to
think about it. It is not so straight forward and it is not easy.
3. Dependence of recitation- the recitation of the hundred-syllable mantra
is discussed in the text. The hundred-syllable mantra here is related to
the meditation and the recitation of the practice of Vajrasattva.
You have to follow this practice of Vajrasattva as set-forth in the
teaching. You do the practice with strong regret for having accumulated non-
virtue in the past. This practice is said to be powerful for purifying the
negativities.
It is said that if one does the meditation and recitation practice of
Vajrasattva, by reciting the hundred-syllable mantra of Vajrasattva twenty
one times a day, the negativities will not increase.
If one does the meditation and recitation practice of Vajrasattva as set-
forth in the text correctly and reciting the hundred-syllable mantra of
Vajrasattva a hundred thousand times, it is said that all negativities can
be wiped out.
For the deity Vajrasattva, there are:
   1. The definitive Vajrasattva
   2. The interpretive Vajrasattva
What is the Vajrasattva of the definitely meaning as opposed to the
Vajrasattva of the interpretable meaning?
The Vajrasattva of the definite meaning: if you look at the word
Vajrasattva, it is made of two syllables: Vajra and Sattva. This is being
explained in the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra.
Vajra here means the object emptiness.
Sattva refers to the wisdom of great bliss.
So put them together, Vajrasattva here is this wisdom of great bliss
realizing emptiness.
If we are able to generate this definitive Vajrasattva in our mind, all the
negativities will be purified. If come the day that the definitive
Vajrasattva is generated in one’s mind all the past negativities will be
purified and one will not accumulate any more negativity in the future.
The wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness is the definitive Vajrasattva,
This definitive Vajrasattva then manifest in the aspect of the deity which
we see and that is the interpretive Vajrasattva.
With strong regret for the non-virtue that have already been accumulated in
the past, if one does the meditation and the recitation practice of
Vajrasattva as set-forth in the teaching, we can recite it twenty one times
a day. If we have time to do it in retreat, that is going to be helpful in
purifying the negativities.
Visualize Vajrasattva above you with the hundred-syllable mantra garland at
the heart.
1. When reciting the mantra, visualize the flow of light rays and nectar
coming into you and fill up your body and then purges out all the
negativities from the lower orifices of your body. This is the downward
purification.
2. To purifying from above is to visualize the light rays and nectar comes
from Vajrasattva fill up your body and the negativities leave your body
through the upper orifices.
3. Then visualize all the negativities gather in the form of darkness at
your heart that symbolizing all your negativities.
The light rays and nectar come instantaneously to dispel those negativities
and the darkness instantly vanishes. It is like turning a light on in a
room and the darkness just disappears.
As said in the teaching, if you do the recitation of the Vajrasattva mantra
with these visualizations and with very strong faith and belief, all
negativities will be completely purified especially you place your mind on
the meaning of emptiness by thinking how your mind is primordially clear in
the nature of clear light and how it is empty. You should abide in that
contemplation and then have very strong believe that all your negativities
have been purified. It is said that the stronger your belief is, the more
powerful is the effect of the purification.
It is said that if it is possible for you to do the retreat of Vajrasattva
and reciting the hundred-syllable mantras for a hundred thousand times, it
said that you should recite until you see the signs of the purification as
listed in the text.
The signs listed in the text are the external signs. There are inner signs
as well. The external signs of purification such as dreaming that you are
flying are not so important because that doesn’t necessary mean that your
negativities are purified. The more important thing is look for the inner
sign.
What are the inner signs? Through doing the practice of confession such as
the Vajrasattva practice, over time you should see that your mind become
better, the afflictions become weaker, your faith in the Vajrasattva
inseparable from the guru become stronger, your faith in karma become
stronger and so forth. So these are some of the inner signs which are much
more important than the external signs.
As mentioned in the teaching, the external signs do not guarantee that your
negativities are purified. Let’s say that while you are doing a retreat,
you experience some of these signs such as flying in the sky, nevertheless
it is a sign, this does not necessary mean that something good is
happening. It may be a sign of something good is happening but the more
important thing is the inner sign. So this is what is being said in the
text.
The main sign to look for when doing the practice or the retreat is the
inner sign i.e. to see whether any improvement of the mind is happening.
That is the main thing that you should be working towards when doing the
practice and the retreat.
4. Dependence upon images means to make images of the Buddha once you have
acquired faith in him.
5. Dependence on worship means to make a variety of offerings to the image
of the Buddha or to the stupa.
6. Dependence on names means to hear the recitation and to retain the names
of buddhas and the bodhisattvas.
Today, we have covered the first two powers: power of eradication and power
of applying remedies. These two powers are to purify the negativities that
have been accumulated in the past.
We will finish with the remaining two powers -the power of turning away
from faults and the power of the foundation and then move on to the
practices of the person of medium capacity.







