Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson38.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.360140
================================================================================


We started looking at what is the mind intent on liberation. Earlier on, we
have discussed of how it is not sufficient just to get a good rebirth
either as a human being or as a god. Here, in the section of the persons of
medium capacity, there is an explanation as to why we need to aim for
liberation. Before we can generate the mind that is intent on liberation,
we have to identify correctly as to what liberation is. Liberation is when
the suchness of our mind is completely separated from the afflictions.
After having identifying what liberation is the text goes on to discuss on
the Four Noble Truths. It is essential to understand the Four Noble Truths
in being able to develop the mind that is intent on liberation. Of the Four
Noble Truths, the first is the truth of suffering which recognizes and
identifies what suffering is. Then we go on to look at the origins of our
sufferings: the truth of the origin of suffering. Next is the truth of
cessation. On the basis of understanding what true suffering is and the
causes of our suffering, one comes to see that liberation is an existent
phenomena and how, as an individual, there is a possibility to achieve such
state. With this understanding and conviction then one puts in the effort
to achieve liberation.
The order in which the Four Noble Truths are presented can be different.
In the text, from the perspective of practice, the order is:
      1. True suffering
      2. True origins of suffering
      3. True cessation
      4. True path
In some other text, the order of the Four Noble Truths is arranged from the
perspective of cause and effect relationship:
      1. True origins
      2. True suffering
      3. True path
      4. True cessation
So by coming to class, you know why the Four Noble Truths are arranged in
different orders, then I think we have achieved our purpose here.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 270: This being the case, the four truths are
taught repeatedly throughout the Mahayana and the Hinayana. Since the
Sugata has included in the four truths the vital points concerning the
process of cyclic existence and its cessation, this teaching is crucial for
achieving freedom. Since this synoptic outline of practice is important, it
must be taught to students in just this order. Why? Unless you reflect on
the truth of suffering to the point of actually becoming revolted by cyclic
existence, your desire to attain liberation will be mere words, and
whatever you do will lead to origins of further suffering. Unless you
reflect on the origin of suffering until you have a good understanding of
the root of cyclic existence, which is karma and the afflictions, you will
be like an archer who does not see the target— you will miss the essential
points of the path. You will mistake what is not a path to freedom from
cyclic existence for the path and exhaust yourself without result. Finally,
if you fail to understand the need to eliminate suffering and its origin,
you will also fail to recognize the liberation that provides relief from
suffering and its origin; hence your interest in liberation will be a mere
conceit.]
It is so well said here by Lama Tsongkhapa.  This presentation of the Four
Noble Truths is very important and you must understand it. In the
beginning, it is very important to understand what suffering is and what
cyclic existence is. Until we get disenchanted with cyclic existence, our
wish for liberation is just mere talk.  The reason why we are not able to
develop a real desire for liberation is because we are so attached to
cyclic existence. We want to be in cyclic existence, we like it and we
think that is good. Since we have this kind of feeling, then obviously we
do not have the mind that seeks liberation. Although we may think about it
and want it, but this is not really the real wish.
We first need to be revolted by cyclic existence. Only then will we have a
real desire to achieve liberation. After that we have to understand the
root of cyclic existence because we need to understand what the true origin
of all suffering is. We need to understand and see correctly the root of
all the suffering. If we do not identify the true origin of suffering
correctly, even though we may be doing many different kinds of practice and
try very hard, it is a waste of time because you will not achieve any
result. So if we do not identify the root of all the problems correctly
then whatever we do will not harm or destroy the roots of the problem.  So
it is important for us to really understand and realize the first two
truths: true sufferings and true origins.  Without which nothing will
happen.
The actual meditation on suffering
The actual meditation on suffering is explained in two parts:
  1. Reflection on the universal suffering of cyclic existence
  2. Reflection on specific sufferings
1. Reflection on the universal suffering of cyclic existence is divided
into two:
  1. Reflection on the eight types of suffering
  2. Reflection on the six types of suffering
Here this is the way to sustain the meditation session for the persons of
medium capacity.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 271: During every session in which you
meditate on the teachings shared with persons of medium capacity, take up
as well the shared teachings that I explained in the section on the
practices appropriate to persons of small capacity. As for the teachings
that are not shared with persons of small capacity, if your mind is strong,
sustain them in meditation in exactly the way that I have written them
here; if it is weak, then leave out the scriptural citations, and only
meditate on the meaning of the points I have outlined.]
Whatever meditation that one is doing, the meditation should be free from
both laxity and excitement.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 271: Though these are analytical meditations,
you should nonetheless arrest excitement and so forth with regard to your
mental object, not taking up any object -virtuous, nonvirtuous, or
ethically neutral- other than that which you are meditating upon. Without
letting your mind fall under the influence of sleep, lethargy, or laxity,
meditate continually in a state of consciousness that is very clear and
pure. For, as Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says, there will be little
result from any virtuous practice if the mind is distracted. ]
Here, for a person of medium capacity, the person has to begin the
meditation on the true sufferings and the true origins of suffering. The
meditation is essentially an analytical meditation and the analytical
meditation should be free from the faults of laxity and excitement. The
mind that is performing this analytical meditation on true sufferings and
true origins has to be clear and alert. In fact this applies to all kinds
of reflection and meditation i.e. the practice is to be done with a clear
and alert mind.
Whatever practice that one is doing, it should be done without any mental
distraction. Whatever practice that one is doing, be it meditation or
reciting of text or mantra, the benefits as mentioned in the text from
doing these practices will show themselves if these practices are done with
an undistracted mind i.e. a mind that is free from laxity and excitement.
The text then goes on to explain how calm abiding (translated as meditative
serenity in LRCM) and special insight are extremely important for
developing any virtuous qualities.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 272: Therefore, the Buddha says that any
achievement of a virtuous quality in the three vehicles requires a state of
mind that is both (1) an actual meditative serenity, or a similitude of it,
which rests one-pointedly on its virtuous object of meditation without
wandering from it; and (2) an actual insight, or a similitude of it, which
carefully analyzes a virtuous object of meditation and distinguishes both
the real nature and the diversity of phenomena. Similarly, the Sutra
Unravelling the Intended Meaning says:
  Maitreya, you should know that all the virtuous qualities, mundane or
  supramundane, of the s'ravakas, the bodhisattvas or the tathagatas result
  from meditative serenity and insight.
Construe "meditative serenity" and "insight" here as including both actual
serenity and insight and states of mind that are similar to them. For it is
not certain that all of the good qualities of the three vehicles develop as
a result of actual serenity and insight.]
Next is identifying the eight types of sufferings. I don’t think I need to
go through them as they are quite straight-forward. You should read it on
your own.
The eight types of sufferings are:
     1. The suffering of birth
     2. The suffering of old age
     3. The suffering of illness
     4. The suffering of death
     5. The suffering of encountering what is unpleasant
     6. The suffering of separation from what is pleasant
     7. The suffering of not getting what you want
     8. The suffering of the five appropriated aggregates
 [Alt translation LRCM V1 page 272 (1) The suffering of birth: There are
five points to contemplate:
1) Birth is suffering because it is associated with pain: birth is
   accompanied by many intense feelings of pain for the following four
   types of living beings: those born as hell-beings, hungry ghosts who
   invariably suffer, beings born from a womb, and beings born from an egg.
   ]
Here it says that hungry ghosts invariably suffer.  There are hungry ghosts
do experience the suffering of birth but it is not necessarily that all
hungry ghosts have the suffering of birth. This is explained in one of the
commentaries in this section.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 273:
2) Birth in suffering been use it is associated with dysfunctional
   tendencies: because the compositional factors are associated with seeds
   that generate, sustain, and increase the afflictions, they are ill-
   suited to the service of virtue; furthermore, you cannot control them as
   you would wish.]
For the seeds of dysfunctional tendencies, there is the dysfunctional
tendency of the body in which the body has the heavy feeling that one finds
it difficult to employ the body in virtue. There is also the dysfunctional
tendency of the mind and when the mind is influenced by laxity and
excitement, it does not allow the mind to focus on the chosen object. The
moment we are born, the seeds of these dysfunctional tendencies are right
there and we are born with the dysfunctional tendencies of both body and
mind. This is one reason why birth is suffering.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 273:
3) Birth is suffering because it is the origin of suffering: you take birth
in the three realms and on that basis suffer old age, illness, and death.]
Being born is a condition for us to age, to get sick and then to die.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 273
4) Birth is suffering because it is the origin of the afflictions: when you
are born in cyclic existence, the three mental poisons arise for objects of
attachment, hostility, and ignorance, and as a result, body and mind are
disturbed and in pain, and you cannot be happy. The afflictions torment
your body and mind in numerous ways.]
5) Birth is suffering because it is an unwanted separation: all births end
in death, which is undesirable, and causes you to experience only
suffering. ]
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 273: (viii) The suffering of the five
appropriated aggregates
The Buddha said, "In brief, the five appropriated aggregates are
suffering." Reflection on the meaning of this teaching again takes in five
points. It is the nature of the five aggregates appropriated by karma and
the afflictions to be:
    (1) vessels for future suffering;
    (2) vessels for suffering based on what presently exists;
    (3) vessels for the suffering of pain;
    (4) vessels for the suffering of change; and
    (5) vessels for the suffering of conditionality. ]
It is the nature of the five aggregates appropriated by karma and the
afflictions to be the vessels for future suffering. Why are the five
aggregates in the nature of suffering? Because it is a vessel that induces
suffering in future lives by taking up these appropriated aggregates. The
moment we take on this contaminated body and mind, we still have
afflictions. Due to these afflictions, we accumulate projecting karma which
causes us to take on another set of contaminated body and mind. When that
happens, we experience more suffering. That is why this contaminated body
and mind is a vessel for future suffering.
These appropriated aggregates, the contaminated body and mind, the result
of karma and afflictions is a vessel for suffering based on what presently
exists. Our appropriated aggregates form the basis for the sufferings that
we will experience such as illness and old age, that are grounded in the
current aggregates. If we do not have this contaminated body and mind in
the very first place, there is no way we will experience old age and
illness. Therefore this contaminated body and mind is in the nature of
suffering.
These contaminated appropriated aggregates are also the basis for
experiencing the suffering of pain and the suffering of change. These two
sufferings come about because the appropriated aggregates are linked with
dysfunctional tendencies towards these two types of sufferings. Once we get
this contaminated body and mind, it comes with the dysfunctional
tendencies, the seeds for us to experience the suffering of pain and the
suffering of change. The seeds for experiencing these two sufferings come
along the moment this contaminated body and mind is established.
Our contaminated appropriated aggregates are the vessels for the suffering
of conditionality. As for this point, the very existence of the
appropriated aggregates constitutes the nature of the suffering of
conditionality because all of the compositional factors which depend on
previous karma and afflictions are the suffering of conditionality.
The essence that we should get by reflecting on this section is to
understand and realize that how the contaminated body and mind, the
contaminated appropriated aggregates, is in the nature of suffering.
Dharmakirti says: “Because it is impermanent, it is in the nature of
suffering. Because of that, therefore it is selfless.”
The quotation says; “Because it is impermanent, it is in the nature of
suffering”: impermanence here is applied to the appropriated physical and
mental aggregates. Our contaminated body and mind is in the nature of
impermanent and is changing in each and every moment. Why is it in the
nature of impermanent? The cause of its changing in each and every single
moment is none other than the cause that has brought about the aggregates.
The root cause is ignorance. Because of that, it is in the nature of
suffering. This is how the aggregates are established to be in the nature
of suffering with the reason of impermanence.
This is something you have to think about because not everything that is
impermanent is in the nature of suffering. When we look at the impermanence
of our appropriated aggregates, our contaminated body and mind, it is in
the nature of impermanent. It changes in each and every single moment.
What is the cause of our appropriated aggregates changing in each and every
single moment? The cause is none other than the cause that has brought
about this contaminated body and mind.
What is the cause that has brought about this contaminated body and mind?
It is ignorance. Therefore it is in the nature of suffering. Because it is
impermanent, therefore it is suffering.
Because it is in the nature of suffering therefore it is selfless.
There are different ways in which you can interpret this. If you look at it
simply, since the aggregates are in the nature of suffering, because it is
impermanent, there is no need to hold on to them as ‘I’ or mine.
If it is in the nature of suffering, why do you want to hold it as yours?
The nature of suffering is selfless. Selfless here means not holding onto
the aggregates as ‘I’ or self.
You have to understand on how our contaminated appropriated aggregates
which are the result of karma and afflictions, are in the nature of
suffering, the reason being that their root cause is ignorance. Because our
contaminated body and mind came from ignorance, therefore the result is
suffering. It is in the nature of suffering. So, it is extremely important
to understand and to see how our body and mind is in the nature of
suffering. If we don‘t understand this then we will not understand true
sufferings well. In order to understand the first Noble Truth, true
sufferings, we have to understand this contaminated body and mind is in the
nature of suffering.
Back to the earlier quotation, “Because it is impermanent, it is in the
nature of suffering. Because of that, therefore it is selfless.” The
earlier explanation is: because the aggregates are in the nature of
suffering therefore there is no need to hold onto it as the self or I.
Therefore is selfless.
Another way of looking at it is: the aggregates are in the nature of
suffering because of its cause is ignorance. What is ignorance? Ignorance
is the active misapprehension of reality. The object that is conceived by
ignorance does not exist in reality. Things do not exist in the way as
apprehended by ignorance. Therefore when it comes to the aggregates, we
should not apprehend it as the self or the ‘I’.
The contaminated body and mind came from ignorance. Ignorance is an
erroneous mind and it is a mind that misconstrues reality. Therefore that
makes the aggregates selfless and you don‘t have to apprehend the
aggregates as having a self.
Do you see the connection between impermanent, nature of suffering, and
selfless?
This section concludes with Lama Tsongkhapa saying:
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 279: If you do not cultivate a genuine sense
of disenchantment with cyclic existence -the nature of which is the
appropriated aggregates- you will have no chance to develop a genuine mind
intent on liberation, and there will be no way for you to develop great
compassion for living beings wandering through cyclic existence. Hence this
reflection is extremely important, regardless of which vehicle - Mahayana
or Hinayana- you enter.]
The above is saying that it is important to recognize our own contaminated
body and mind is the result of our own karma and afflictions and also to
realize that this contaminated body and mind is in the nature of suffering.
When we talk about samsara, basically we are talking about this
contaminated body and mind which we possess. If we are not able to see how
our contaminated body and mind is in the nature of suffering and therefore
develop a renunciation for it, then there is no way we can achieve
liberation; not even the mind intent on liberation. If we are unable to see
our own aggregates which are in the nature of suffering to be samsara then
we will not be able to understand how other sentient beings circle in
samsara. Then there is no way for us to develop genuine great compassion
for them. Therefore there is so much emphasis in this section on developing
an understanding as to how our aggregates are in the nature of suffering.
In order for us to understand true sufferings, at the end of the day, we
must come to the understandings that how our contaminated appropriated
aggregates, both the body and mind, are in the nature of suffering. What
can we do to arrive at this understanding? What are some of the reasons
that can help us with this understanding? This is something which we have
to think for ourselves.
When we think about it, it is quite clear that our current contaminated
body and mind is the basis or platform on which we experience every single
problem and suffering such as old age, sickness and death. All these will
not happen if there is no basis to begin with. Is it not the very fact that
this contaminated body and mind causes us to experience all these
sufferings? This contaminated body and mind that we have now causes us to
develop afflictions over and over again because the seeds of the
afflictions come along with the contaminated body and mind.  Without this
contaminated body and mind there is no way for the seeds of afflictions to
be carried forward. But we carry the seeds into this life and when the
afflictions manifest, we accumulate projecting karma that causes us to take
another rebirth. If we do not have this contaminated body and mind, then
none of this will happen.
This is how we can come to understand and see for ourselves how our
contaminated body and mind is in the nature of suffering. On the basis of
this understanding, next we have to understand and realize the causes that
bring about this contaminated body and mind. This leads us to true origins
of suffering.
(b) Reflection on the six types of suffering (source: Mahamati's Clear
Words: Explanation of the "Friendly Letter”)
        1. The fault of uncertainty
        2. The fault of insatiability
        3. The fault of casting off bodies repeatedly
        4. The fault of repeated rebirth
        5. The fault of repeatedly descending from high to low
        6. The fault of having no companions
In the Middle Length Lamrim (MLR) these six types of suffering are
presented into three groups.
1. How in cyclic existence there is no secure basis that you can count on.
2. However much that we indulge in its pleasures, they bring no
satisfaction in the end.
3. You have been caught up in cyclic existence from beginningless time

[MLR page 112: 2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2A Summarised presentation of the six
[types of] suffering
Second – Considering the six [types of] suffering -: The Letter to a Friend
sets out the faults [of cyclic existence]:
    - lack of certainty,
    - insatiability,
    - discarding one’s body again and again,
    - being reborn again and again,
    - changing from high to low [states] again and again, and
    - lacking companions.

2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2B Presentation of them in three groups
1 There is nothing reliable
2 No satisfaction
3 Beginninglessness
Summing them up in three [groups]:
   - in cyclic existence there is nothing reliable,
   - no matter how much of its happiness one enjoys, there is no final
   point of satisfaction, and
   - one has been in it since beginningless times.]

[MLR page 113: 2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2C How there is nothing in contaminated
feelings that is of the essence of happiness
at present most of the happy feelings that increase our attachment are
minds of happiness that arise with respect to a remedy of suffering. Yet,
there is no happiness by way of an essence that is unrelated to suffering.
For instance, if you suffer because you have walked a lot, the mind of
happiness that arises due to sitting down appears to be happiness that
arises gradually while the previous great suffering gradually ceases.
However, it is not happiness by way of its essence, for if you sit too
much, again, that will produce suffering as before. If they were causes of
happiness by way of their essence, walking, sitting, lying, eating and
drinking, as well as sun and shade etc. should result in happiness growing
to the same extent as you have spent time indulging in them – just like
suffering growing to the same extent as you are subject to the causes of
suffering. However, it appears that after too long only [more] suffering is
produced. ]
For us, we apprehend that which is in the nature of suffering to be the
real pleasure. Here is a discussion on the suffering of change; our
contaminated pleasant feeling. Although it is in the nature of suffering,
we do not see it as in the nature of suffering but we apprehend it as real
happiness. Because of that belief, we get attach to it. Because of that
attachment, we engage in the different kinds of actions and then accumulate
karma that results in problems in the future. The way to stop this is to
see that which is in the nature of suffering to be in the nature of
suffering.
Here we are talking about the suffering of change. We have to do something
with our attachment for this kind of suffering. The way to reverse our
attraction to this kind of suffering is to realize that it is in the nature
of suffering.
Let‘s say you come down with a serious illness. Usually it is accompanied
by intense feeling of pain and this painful sensation is unpleasant.
Because of this unpleasant feeling, you get very upset and angry.
We usually get upset when we are unwell and experiencing painful
sensations.  We have to do something about the unhappy mind, for example,
anger. In this situation the way to reduce anger is to accept that this is
life; if it will happen, it happens. This is because we have the basis for
it. As long as we have these contaminated body and mind, this bound to
happen and it can happen. By accepting that this is the nature of life,
then we can deal with our anger better.
Because we have this contaminated body and mind therefore we are subject to
all these kinds of suffering. By acknowledging this is just the nature of
life and accepting it, then we can work with our anger which arises due to
the feeling of pain. Another way to think about it is whatever experiences
that we have, including bad experiences and suffering, we have to accept
that we ourselves are at fault because we have created the cause -the
action- in the past and accumulated the karma and we are experiencing the
result now. By accepting that then we can work with our anger. On top of
this, if you have a courageous mind, you can think and pray that may your
sickness is the substitute for all other sentient beings’ sicknesses. If
you are able to think like this, then of course, you can deal with anger
that arises from experiencing these painful sensations. In fact, it might
even possible for you to actually feel happy if you can think in this very
big way. This is what is being mentioned in the teaching. Whatever the
situation it might be or whenever it comes to problems, the extent of the
suffering that we are experiencing in that situation depends on our mental
perspective. Our mental perspective does make a big difference in
determining the extent of our suffering that we experiencing in that
situation. If it is anger, we have to deal with it. If it is desire or
attachment, we also have to deal with it.

[MLR page 113: 2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B Considering the suffering of the
individual [realms]
   1 The suffering of the three bad migrations
   2 The suffering of humans
   3 The suffering of demigods
   4 The suffering of gods
Next is the reflection on specific sufferings; which are the sufferings of
the three lower realms and that have already been explained before. Here,
is the explanation of the sufferings of humans, demi-gods and gods. You can
read this on your own.  We will start true origins on Thursday.
Student 1: For all the sections covered so far, how would we categorize all
these sections with respect to the four characteristics of true sufferings:
Impermanence, miserable, unclean and selfless?
Khen Rinpoche: These are the four erroneous conceptions. What do you think
are the four characteristics of suffering?

Student 1: Impermanence, miserable, unclean and selfless
Khen Rinpoche: The “unclean” should be “empty”. [Impermanence, miserable,
empty and selfless]
In order to establish true sufferings and the understanding of
impermanence, because it is impermanent it is in the nature of suffering.
Because it is in the nature of suffering, it is selfless. This establishes
true suffering.
If you want to elaborate the two kinds of self, then you have selfless and
empty. Then one would mean the emptiness of the permanent, unitary and
independent self and the emptiness of self-sufficient substantially
existent person. If not elaborating, you can condense them into three:
impermanence, miserable and selfless.
Student 2:  On the subject of impermanence, nature of suffering and
selfless, when one is enlightened would it be impermanent, blissful feeling
and the wisdom realizes emptiness?
Ven Gyurme: Isn’t that true cessation?
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah, no more suffering
Student 3:  Just now you said that suffering is in the nature of
impermanent and it is due to the changes in the cause that brought up the
aggregates; which is ignorance. Why are impermanent of suffering and
selfless are related.
Ven Gyurme: I said: Whatever is impermanence is not necessarily the nature
of suffering.
Khen Rinpoche:  What does the Buddha means when he says: “All composed
phenomena are impermanent?” Impermanence means that all composed phenomena
undergo momentarily disintegration; i.e. they undergo change in each and
single every moment.  What causes that to happen? The causes of composed
phenomena undergo momentary disintegration is none other than the cause
that has produces that phenomenon. The moment the composed phenomena come
into being, they come into being by having the nature of momentary
disintegration.
If we apply that to the aggregates, the aggregates are impermanent and are
also composed phenomenon, therefore it undergo momentary disintegration as
well.
What is the cause for it to undergo momentary disintegration?  The cause
for it to change in each and every single moment is none other than the
cause that has brought it about; which is ignorance.
What is the reason for the body and mind that we have change in each and
every single moment? There must be a cause. The cause is the same as the
cause that has brought about its existence.
What is the cause of the contaminated body and mind? The cause of the
contaminated body and mind is ignorance. Ignorance is an erroneous mind and
is a wrong conception.
While there is no self, ignorance apprehend the self. Things do not exist
in the way as being apprehended by ignorance. Although there is no self but
ignorance apprehend the self. In reality it is selfless.
It is in the nature of suffering because it is impermanent. It is selfless
because it is in the nature of suffering.
Because it is impermanent, it is in the nature of suffering.
Because it is in the nature of suffering, it is selfless.
Student 4: Can we say that to realize subtle impermanence and momentary
disintegration we meditate on the twelve links? In order to realize
emptiness, we need to realize subtle impermanence.
Khen Rinpoche:  The only way to establish subtle impermanence is first
through reasoning and the reasoning is what was brought up earlier. Having
said that, the nine points meditation on death and impermanence is not
specifically just on the meditation of the coarse impermanence. It is a
meditation on impermanence. If you understand subtle impermanence, it is
applicable there as well especially we can apply to how the time of death
is uncertain.
The meaning of subtle impermanence is momentary disintegration and that is
the real meaning of impermanence. The understanding of subtle impermanence
has to come from reasoning. For example, ageing, in the conventional sense
when somebody become old and becomes very apparent then we say that person
is ageing. But ageing itself does not happen overnight. Ageing is a
process. On the twelve links of dependent arising, right from the second
moment of birth, ageing starts.
Ven Gyurme: Why is it the cause that brings about the existence of the
phenomena is the very cause for it to disintegrate moment by moment?
Khen Rinpoche: We are trying to understand how the cause of the phenomena
that bring about the existence of something is the very cause for it to be
the nature of changing each and every single moment. Impermanent phenomena
do undergo change in each and every single moment. That change must have a
cause. The cause must be able to produce that phenomenon to be in the
nature of disintegrating moment by moment.
If I ask you a question: In order for something to come about there must be
a cause. Then the phenomenon comes about and for it to be disintegrated, is
there another cause for it?  Does the cause for it to change moment by
moment come after it is produced? What is the problem if you say that the
cause for its disintegration comes after its existence?
We have difficulty because whenever we think of disintegration we always
think about the gross disintegration that we can see. Here when we talk
about subtle impermanence we are talking about something that is not
obvious but subtle; how every impermanent phenomenon undergoes change in
each and every single moment.
A building does undergo change but it may not be obvious. But after fifty
or sixty years, then you can see the change. The process of building
changing does not happen overnight but the process of change happen over a
long period of time in each and every single moment. In each and every
single moment there is change. Then over a period of time due to
accumulation of changes, the change becomes obvious. In each and every
single moment, let us say the atoms and molecules that make up the building
is changing in each and every single moment. Over a period of time when
these small changes at the micro levels accumulate, then it comes a time it
become obvious. Then you can see the gross disintegration on the outside.
As long the phenomenon in question is produced from causes, the moment it
is produced and comes into existence, it is produced in the nature of
disintegrating momentarily. So the moment it is produced it is produced in
the nature of that will undergo change in each and every single moment. The
nature has to come from a cause. What is the cause other than the cause
that brings about the production of the phenomenon? So for all impermanent
phenomena the moment they are produced they also disintegrate. This is
something we have to think about as they are not obvious. Usually when we
think about impermanence, we always look at the obvious impermanence: the
gross or coarse impermanent. But here we are talking about the subtle
impermanence.

`

