Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson30.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.952595
================================================================================


The verse that we usually recite before class:
   Do not commit any non-virtuous actions
   Perform only perfect virtuous actions
   Subdue your mind thoroughly
   This is the teachings of the Buddha
Here we will learn about the meaning of the first line of the verse: ‘Do
not commit any no-virtuous actions.’ This line can refer to the practices
for a person of small capacity. ‘Do not commit any no-virtuous actions’ -
in order for us to do that, we must first understand what non-virtue is. We
must first identify what a negative action is. It is not possible to
enumerate each and every single negative action that can be committed. We
can just look at the main ones. The main non-virtuous actions that sentient
beings create can be subsumed into the ten non-virtues. Of these ten non-
virtues, let’s take killing as an example. In order to know when the
killing becomes a complete action, we have to look at the different
elements such as the perception/recognition, the basis of the action, the
motivation of the action, how the action is executed and how the action is
deemed to be complete.
‘Do not commit any no-virtuous actions’ means the Buddha is saying do not
commit any the non-virtuous actions regardless of whether it is a small or
a heavy negative action. It doesn’t matter if it is big or small non-
virtue. The point is not to commit any non-virtues. In order to explain why
we have to avoid all negative actions, we have to explore the presentation
of karma - actions and its effects.
In general, karma has several characteristics:
-Karma is definite. If you create an action, you will definitely going to
experience its results. If you engage in non-virtue, you will definitely
going to experience suffering. But it doesn’t end there. There’s more to
karma than that.
-Karma increases. For example, non-virtue increases day by day.
-Karma done is not wasted. Karma is such that once it is created, it will
never disappear on its own accord. You will definitely experience the
effects of the action that you have done.
The effects of the karma are in three ways:
   1. the fruitional effect,
   2. the concordant effect, and
   3. the environmental effect
Therefore, when we create just one non-virtuous action, we have to
experience the three effects.
You can see that just from learning about the practices for a person of
small capacity, in particular karma, it does makes a difference to the kind
of things that comes to your mind when you recite “Do not commit any non-
virtuous actions.” If one has studied these things, there are so many
things for you to think about; the depth and the breadth of one’s
reflection. If one has not learnt these things, then when you recite “Do
not commit any non-virtuous actions” the meaning will just become literal
and nothing much to think about. Your understanding is limited to that
couple of words. I am using this as an illustration on the difference
between having learned the Buddhadharma and not having studied the
Buddhadharma. Obviously there is a difference as there are so many things
to think about such that you are able to move the mind. It is important to
see that learning does make a difference. A lot of people always think;
“Studying has nothing to do with my practice. It is not important as it
does not make a difference”. A lot of people continue to think and feel
that way. The Buddha’s teachings are vast and extensive. It does not matter
what teaching you are talking about, even a couple of words on the Buddha’s
teaching and its meanings can be very deep and vast such that you can look
at it from many different perspectives. You can understand many different
things from just that couple of words. The Buddha’s teachings are that
profound. Even from this simple example of “Do not commit any non-virtuous
actions” you can see how you can actually explain all the practices for a
person of the small capacity in that one line. You have to see for
yourselves the difference of having studied the Buddhadharma and not
studied the Buddhadharma. You have to see the point for yourselves. Once
you see the difference then pay attention to your learning. You should
continue to generate the aspiration to be able to continue your learning.
As I mentioned before just reading the Buddha’s teaching creates a lot of
merits. Therefore you should read especially the course material, the root
text and whatever relevant materials. That is important. You believe that
there is benefit of reciting mantras. Actually it is no different when you
read your root text. You have to see the benefits and the purpose for
yourselves. Once you understand the point then apply yourself to the
learning.
The utmost important thing for us as individuals is to see the benefits and
the purpose of learning; only when we are convinced then we have the
determination to press on and that will translate into effort which will be
followed by benefits. Otherwise, nobody can do anything for us. If we do
not see the benefit and the purpose for ourselves; nobody can move us. Even
if the Buddha were to come directly in front of us, he will not be able to
do anything to us. Therefore this becomes the most important thing we can
do for ourselves.
On page 88 of the course material, there is a section that discusses the
difference between action and the path of action.
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1B Distinction between actions and paths of action
  Among them, the intentions in the mind are actions, but no paths of
  action. The seven actions of body and speech are actions, yet they are
  also paths of action, since they are also the basis for the intentions
  proceeding. The three, covetousness and so on are paths of actions, but
  they are no actions.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 227: Among these ten, intentions  are
actions, yet they are not paths of action. The seven  non-virtuous  actions
of body and speech are not only  actions  but  are  also  paths  of  action
because body and speech are the bases of the intended operation. The  three
mental non-virtues -covetousness and so on- are paths of action but are not
actions.]
Let’s take the physical and  verbal  actions  as  an  example.  During  the
motivation phase of a physical or verbal action, there is  a  thought  that
thinks; “I am going to do this.” So there is a mental factor of  intention.
At that time, that mental factor of intention is an action (or  karma)  but
it is not a path of action.
Why is it not a path of action? Because this  mental  factor  of  intention
itself is not the basis of engagement of a prior motivation;  therefore  it
is not a path of action. It is just action (or karma).
Here we are trying to establish the mental factor of intention. The  mental
factor of intention is karma/ action. We are discussing  about  the  mental
factor of intention but not just the mental factor of intention in general.
We are talking about a specific mental factor of intention -the  one  which
motivates the physical or verbal action. This particular mental  factor  of
intention is action but not paths of action.  Why  it  is  not  a  path  of
action? It is not a path of action because this particular mental factor of
intention is not the basis of engagement  of  a  motivation  which  existed
prior to it.
There are seven actions of the body and speech that have been  accumulated.
Those actions are actions. They are also  paths  of  action.  Why?  Because
these seven actions of the body and speech are the basis  of  the  intended
operation for the mental  factor  of  intention  during  the  time  of  the
motivation.
The three mental non-virtues -covetousness, malice  and  wrong  views-  are
paths of actions but not actions.
  -They are paths  of  action  because  they  are  the  basis  of  intended
operation for the mental factor of intentions which  existed  at  phase  of
motivation.
  -They not actions because they are  afflictions.  There  isn’t  a  common
basis i.e. there isn’t something that is both an action and an affliction.
Action or karma is a mental factor of intention. Affliction is  a  separate
mental factor. Therefore action and affliction are separate mental factors.


Student 1: How do you explain physical and verbal actions  to  be  a  mental
factor?
Khen Rinpoche: We cannot think action in English sense. Karma (in  Sanskrit)
and action (in English) means the same thing. We  have  to  understand  what
action/karma  is.  Karma/action  does  not  mean  any  physical  or   verbal
movement. Karma/action refers to the  mental  factor  of  intention.  Mental
factor of intention is the mental factor that moves the mind to  an  object.
When we think of action/karma, we  refer  this  to  this  mental  factor  of
intention. There is the mental factor  of  intention  at  the  time  of  the
motivation and at the time of the results.  The  actions  of  the  body  and
speech refer to the mental factor of intention at the time of the results.
Student 2: Why covetousness, malice and wrong views are paths of action  but
are not actions?
Khen Rinpoche: Covetousness is not an action but it is  a  path  of  action.
Why is it not an action? When we say that it is not an action, we  also  say
that it is not a  mental  factor  of  intention.  We  are  not  saying  that
covetousness  does  not  have  a  motivation.  It  has  a  motivation.   The
motivation exists prior to it. At the time  of  that  motivation,  obviously
there was a mental factor of intention. What is the  base  of  the  intended
operation? What is the basis of this  mental  factor  of  intention?  It  is
covetousness itself. Covetousness then becomes  the  base  of  the  intended
operation. So, that makes covetousness the path of action but it  itself  is
not action. Why? Because itself is an affliction. There isn’t anything  that
is both a mental factor of intention and an affliction.
Student 3:  Can  covetousness  which  is  the  path  of  action  become  the
intention for the motivation to steal? The  intention  of  stealing  becomes
the path of action now. Because  you  covet  something,  that  motivate  you
wanting to steal it. The intention to steal becomes a path of  action.  Then
you go ahead with the action.
Ven Gyurme: You are asking: Can covetousness become an intention?
Khen Rinpoche: The point  is  that  there  are  different  types  of  mental
factors. Intention is a mental factor. Afflictions are a separate  class  of
mental factor. For example, anger is  an  affliction  and  it  is  a  mental
factor. Is there something that is both intention and anger?  No.  Is  there
something that is both intention and desire? No.  Intention  is  a  separate
mental factor from the other mental factors such  as  anger  and  attachment
because they have different functions.  If  you  understand  that  they  are
different mental factors then you can understand  why  covetousness  is  not
intention.
Student 4: Of the six roots and twenty  secondary  afflictions,  where  does
covetousness belong to?
Khen Rinpoche: Covetousness may not be listed as a separate  mental  factor,
but is a derivative of attachment.     Malice/ill-willed may not  be  listed
as a separate mental factor, but it is a derivative of anger.
Student 5: For this case, intention here is non-virtuous mental factor?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 5: It follows that there is something that is  non-virtuous  but  is
not an affliction.
Ven Gyurme: Whatever is non-virtuous necessarily affliction?
Student 5: Seem to be.
Khen Rinpoche: Not the same
Student 6: What is the significance of actually making this  differentiation
between action and paths of action?
Khen Rinpoche: This discussion comes in Vasubandhu’s Treasury  of  Knowledge
(Abhidharma) where there is  quite  extensively  discussion  on  karma.  The
words ‘karma’ and ‘path of karma’ are there. I am sure what the  purpose  is
but because when these words appear, one has to  understand  the  difference
between them. Therefore there is this explanation  and  discussion  of  what
constitutes the paths of action and what constitute an action. We also  have
to understand how  is  the  mental  factor  of  intention  at  the  time  of
motivation and the mental factor of intention at the time  of  carrying  out
the action when the karma is actually accumulated.
At the time of the motivation, it is only  an  intention  but  not  path  of
action. In order for it to be path of action, you really have to do  it.  At
the  time  of  accumulation  of  action,  there  is  the  mental  factor  of
intention. That is what is referred to as karma.
Student 7: Based on this discussion, during the time  of  killing,  this  is
the path of action and it is an action, does that mean  that  at  that  time
there is no affliction. Intention and affliction cannot exist  at  the  same
time.
Khen Rinpoche: Who say that? Did I say that?
Student 7: You say that mental of intention and afflictions cannot exist  at
the same time.
Ven Gyurme: No! It is there isn’t anything that is both.
Khen Rinpoche: My point is cannot be the same but  can  exist  at  the  same
time.
Student 8: With regards to the completion of killing,  is  that  the  reason
why if I were to kill somebody and I were to die first, but because  of  the
intention being a mental factor, it cannot  be  complete  because  my  metal
continuum would have  to move on?
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
The main thing to think about is what makes it a path of  action.  In  order
for something to be a path of action, it has to be the base of the  intended
operation. At the time of the motivation, there  is  the  mental  factor  of
intention. That itself is not the base of intended  operation,  then  it  is
not a path of action. It is intention.
On page 89 of the course material, there is a discussion  of  the  criteria
that make any particular action powerful. We will not go through  them.  It
is just to know that the things that are  listed  here  can  influence  the
weight of an action.
A brief discussion of the criteria for powerful actions
The strength of actions is explained in terms of four  aspects:  recipient,
support, objects, and attitude.
(1) Strength in terms of recipient
  There is strength in actions directed toward  the  Three  Jewels,  gurus,
  those who are like gurus, parents, and the like, for, though  you  direct
  no intense thoughts toward them and do them only small harm or help,  the
  ensuing misdeed and merit is great.
In relations to these recipients, whether you do something to benefit  them
or you do something to harm them, even if the action is very small, because
of the recipients of the karma,  the  action  can  becomes  very  powerful.
Whether we do certain beneficial action or  harmful  action  towards  these
recipients, regardless the strength of the motivation, the recipient on its
own can make the action very heavy.
We have to remind ourselves that as we are in  constant  contact  with  the
objects that are listed here -the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  whom  we  have
faith in, the gurus, parents and the like, we  have  to  be  respectful  of
them. We have to be careful in relation  to  them  because  they  are  very
powerful objects.
If we get upset with our parents or harm them, because our parents are very
powerful object, the action that we  accumulate  will  be  very  heavy.  So
therefore we have to treat them well and respect them.
There are discussion of what are the kind of result we will get in  relation
to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and the Bodhisattvas, please read  on  your
own.
  The Sutra on the Magic of Final Peace  speaks  of  someone  who  does  as
  little as obstruct a bodhisattva's virtuous action  of  giving  a  single
  closed handful of food  to  an  animal.  Such  a  person  commits  a  sin
  immeasurably greater than someone who kills  all  the  living  beings  in
  Jambudvipa, or steals all  of  their  belongings.  Therefore,  take  this
  subject very seriously.
The point here is that you have to  be  careful  especially  when  you  are
mixing around with very powerful objects.  The  example  given  here  is  a
bodhisattva. The texts talks about the benefits of helping a bodhisattva or
even making a small  offering  to  bodhisattva  -  the  amazing  amount  of
benefits that one can get. It also talks about  the  unbelievable  negative
karma one gets just for interfering with the bodhisattva’s small action  of
giving some food such as stopping a bodhisattva  from  giving  food  to  an
animal, the karma is unbelievably heavy. As there is this danger, therefore
you have to be careful and not to get upset with others, not to cause  harm
others and not to create obstacles for people when  they  are  engaging  in
virtue. You do not know who  is  and  who  is  not  a  bodhisattva  because
bodhisattva’s can have countless emanations. To prevent that from  possibly
happening, it is better to be careful.
The essential point is to know the pluses and minuses because we cannot say
for certain whether a person is a bodhisattva or not. If  someone  were  to
ask us for something, we should always train ourselves to be able to  give.
We should not harm or get upset with anyone by thinking; “This  person  may
be a bodhisattva.” Therefore we should live our life and train our mind  in
such a way; as much as possible to give, not to harm and not to  get  upset
just in case we do meet with a real bodhisattva. If that particular  person
in reality happens to be a  bodhisattva,  then  we  will  get  unbelievable
benefits. However, if we engage in negative karma such as offensive  speech
and that person in reality is a bodhisattva, then it is said that the karma
is unbelievably heavy.  For  that  reason,  we  should  refrain  from  that
negative action.
We should also be able to take this teaching in this paragraph as an advice
for ourselves in particular of our own situation here. We are in  the  same
class mixing with one another and are going to see each other for a  while.
In reality,  it  is  really  difficult  to  say;  “This  person  is  not  a
bodhisattva.” We cannot say this as he/she maybe a bodhisattva.  With  that
in mind, we should avoid any ill feelings, offensive speech and also not to
lie to one another as well. Rather, to  respect  one  another,  to  have  a
harmonious relationship and to sincerely consider one another as friend and
to help one another.


Student 9: Can you explain how we can differentiate the difference  between
the weight of the karma and the strength of the karma? Also, in relation to
the ‘great strength  by  the  way  of  the  field  [strength  in  terms  of
recipient]’ under the criteria for powerful actions, how is that  different
from “basis” under the weight of the ten paths of action?
Khen Rinpoche: Not exactly sure, I don’t see any big difference between the
weight and the strength of an action. As for the difference between ‘basis’
and ‘recipient’, it is the same because under the ‘basis’ of  page  88,  it
says the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, the gurus and the like. In  this  context,
it is the same as the recipients. [There is strength  in  actions  directed
toward the Three Jewels, gurus, those who are like gurus, parents, and  the
like….].
This is the last class. We will continue with the text in end of Jan  2012.
From there we hope to finish the course material on  the  section  of  calm
abiding. Because we are having  a  break,  there  is  a  danger  of  losing
momentum and interest with the study due to the  absence  of  classes.   In
order to keep the momentum going, we’ll  have  two  discussion  classes  in
November and two in December. Please do not regard these discussion classes
as tax. There is no obligation for you to come. Please try to come  if  you
think it is helpful and it do benefit you. In that sense January will be  a
real holiday. Although we have no classes for the next two to three months,
please read your text of what we have covered  so  far.  Perhaps  on  every
Tuesdays and Thursdays evening, you should set some time  for  reading  and
revise what was covered in class. If you make a resolution now by  treating
all the Tuesday and Thursday of the next two to three months as class  day,
it will be easier to fulfill them. Whatever questions  you  may  have,  you
should write them down. This is just a suggestion. It will be good  if  you
do it.

Discussion classes on the following Thursday @ 7.30pm:  10 and  24  November
and 01 and 22 December

Advice on Final Lamrim Dedication
We us this prayer as a mean for single-pointedly aspiring and  praying  for
ourselves to be beneficial to others. Whatever we have learnt,  may  it  be
beneficial to all sentient beings as said in the prayer:
   “With my heart going out with great compassion
   In whatever direction the most precious teachings
   Have not yet spread, or once spread have declined
   May I reveal this treasure of happiness and aid.”
Let us pray and single-pointedly request that we ourselves maybe like  Lama
Tsongkhapa to be able to do extensive benefit work for the teachings of the
Buddha and for other living beings.


[End of first module]


The path of black actions explains the manner in which we  create  the  ten
non-virtues
There are 10 paths of action:
1 Killing
2 Stealing
3 Sexual misconduct
4 Lying
5 Divisive speech
6 Harmful speech
7 Meaningless speech
8 Covetousness
9 Harmful intent
10 Wrong views
 
The paths of actions are the basis of operation for the intention.
Intention is karma/action
Karma/action – the imprint made on the mind from actions motivated by
delusion, and the results of those actions.
Those done by the body and speech are actions
The 7 actions of the body and speech  are both actions and paths of
actions.
Those done by the mind (#8, 9 &10) are not action; but are paths of
actions.
As Geshela explained very clearly that covetousness is the base of
operation for the intention, therefore is the path of action.










