Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson49.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.325811
================================================================================


In the section in the persons of medium capacity, through reflecting the
Four Noble Truths and the twelve links of dependent arising then one
develops the wish to definitely want to be liberated from cyclic existence.
Thinking well of the truth of suffering is very important. The true
suffering finally refers to the contaminated/appropriated physical and
mental aggregates. These aggregates are by nature impermanent and subject
to have arisen from karma and afflictions; therefore they are in the nature
of suffering. As long as we continue to get the contaminated physical and
mental aggregates, that seems to be the nature of suffering, and as long as
we are not freed from them we will continue to experience suffering.
Therefore, there is a choice to be freed from these aggregates. This is the
essence of seeing suffering in the context of having these contaminated
physical and mental aggregates which are in the nature of suffering. This
is likened to having your hand stuck in the fire. If you are in that
situation and want to separate from the fire, likewise seeing the nature of
the contaminated physical and mental aggregates which are in the nature of
suffering, then one develop the wish to be freed from that.
Reflecting on the twelve links of dependent arising is also another method
for you to develop the desire to be freed from cyclic existence. Reflecting
on how the twelve links, starting from the ignorance and ending with ageing
and death, we see how the cycle is endless in itself and by seeing that one
develop the wish to be freed from samsara. So what you have to individually
do is to see for yourself how by reflecting on the Four Noble Truths you
are able to develop the wish to be freed from cyclic existence. Likewise,
from yourself, how by thinking of the twelve links of dependent arising is
a reflection that helps you to develop the wish to be freed from samsara.
It would be good if you can write out your thought and ask yourself. Here
we are still in the learning process so you have to see for yourself how
the process of reflecting on the Four Noble Truths helps you to develop the
wish to be freed from cyclic existence and likewise for the twelve links.
The point of this section is to help you to develop the mind of definite
emergence; the mind wanting to be freed from cyclic existence in particular
thinking of how one is stuck is samsara. Here in the Lamrim, after one has
develop well the mind of renunciation, the mind that definitely wish to
emerge from cyclic existence, then one is led into the training of the
practice of the persons of great capacity. On the basis of generating
renunciation, in this context here, one does not encourage or led the
cultivating of the three higher trainings with the goals of achieving
liberation. Of course on the basis of developing renunciation with the
determination to be freed from the cyclic existence, by practicing the
three higher trainings, one can achieve the liberation from samsara. Once
you have achieved liberation there is no turning back; it is irreversible.
However, in the Lamrim, it is not taught like that. In the Lamrim, after
one has developed renunciation, one is not led into the practice of the
three higher trainings with the intention of achieving liberation. Why is
it the case? Because if one does achieve liberation on the basis of having
renunciation by the practice of the three higher trainings, even if one
does achieve liberation, one has not exhausted all the faults, one has not
acquired every good qualities that one can possibly acquired, in the
perspective of your own interest you have not even fulfill your own
interest 100% because you have not fulfill your own welfare and you are not
able to perfectly fulfill the welfare of others. Even if one achieves
liberation from cyclic existence, one’s elimination of faults is still
incomplete and one’s acquisition or training of good qualities is still
incomplete. After having achieved liberation one day one still has to enter
the Mahayana path. The intelligent ones enter the Mahayana after they have
developed the determination to be freed/ renunciation.  If you enter the
Mahayana after you have developed renunciation then your own goals will be
achieved quicker and similarly, you will be able to achieve the aim of
others quicker.  The essence is on the basis of generating renunciation/the
determination to be freed then you enter the Mahayana path then it will be
quicker to accomplish your own aim because you have complete your own aim
in the fullest extent and are in the position to fulfill the aim of others
in a perfect way. Basically your goal and the goal of others will be
fulfilled much more quickly than if you practice the three higher trainings
and then achieve liberation. Even after having achieving liberation, come a
day you still have to enter the Mahayana; which take much longer time.
For a person of medium capacity, that person thinks about how he is
suffering from cyclic existence and how he continues to cycle in cyclic
existence. But if you shift the focus to others, thinking of how others are
like oneself suffering in cyclic existence and how they are also circling
in cyclic existence. This become a method to develop a great compassion.

1 Even for the achievement of one’s own entire welfare it is inappropriate
to disregard the welfare of others, therefore it is necessary to enter the
Mahayana from the start
[LRCM V2 page 13] After such extended meditation on  the  faults  of  cyclic
existence from various perspectives, you will see all  of  cyclic  existence
as a pit of blazing fire. Then you will  be  completely  consumed  with  the
desire  to  attain  liberation,  the  elimination  of  suffering   and   the
afflictions. If you learn the path of  the  three  precious  trainings,  you
will attain liberation, which is free of  cyclic  existence  and  is  indeed
irreversible, unlike the glory  of  high  status  within  cyclic  existence.
However, your elimination of faults and attainment of  good  qualities  will
be incomplete. Thus, you will not have accomplished your own  aims  and  can
only accomplish the purposes of others  in  a  limited  way.  Eventually,  a
buddha will exhort you, and you will have to enter the Mahayana. Because  of
this, intelligent persons should enter the Mahayana from the  beginning.  As
Aryasura's Compendium of the Perfections says:
   Once you have abandoned forever the two lower vehicles,
   Which possess no power to provide the welfare of the world,
   Enter the vehicle which the Conqueror Sakyamuni compassionately taught—
   This consists only of helping others.
The essence of the above paragraph is that after you have generated the
determination to be freed from cyclic existence, it is much better to enter
into the Mahayana right away.
Refer to the root text page 132 on the outline by Trijiang Rinpoche:“2
Accomplishing the welfare of others, because it is worthy of great beings
to accomplish it.”
The text: “It is the happiness and magnificence of beings, a being is
capable of it.” I think there are some problems with the translation.
Please take note of this.

2 Accomplishing the welfare of others, because it is worthy of great beings
to accomplish it
[LRCM V2 page 14] Here, you should use a great person's joy,  charisma,  and
strength to shoulder the responsibility of  others'  welfare,  for  focusing
only on your own welfare is a trait shared even with animals.  Consequently,
the fundamental orientation  of  a  great  person  is  to  focus  solely  on
achieving the happiness and benefit of others.
This paragraph is saying that to work for the happiness of others is what
defines a great person; whereas working for one’s own interest is something
that animals also do.  It is worthy of being wise to toils and strives for
the goal of protecting others from suffering.

3 It is worthy of beings and the wise to toil and strive for the goal of
protecting others from suffering and to strive accordingly
[LRCM V2 page 14]   Candragomin's Letter to a Student:
Domestic animals eat a mouthful of easily found grass,
And when tormented by great thirst, they happily drink water they find.
Here, those who make an effort at working for the welfare of others
Do so out of charisma, joy, and surpassing strength.
The  sun's  great  rays  shine  everywhere,  traveling  like  a  horse-drawn
chariot.
The ground supports the world without calculating the burden—
 Such is the nature of  persons  of  great  capacity,  who  lack  any  self-
interest;
They are consumed with whatever brings happiness and benefit to the world.
One who sees beings tormented  by  the  above-mentioned  suffering  and  who
hastens to act for their welfare is called a "person of great capacity"  and
an "adept."
[Merriam-Webster Dictionary]  Adept -very good at doing something that is
not easy
In this context here, what is considered to be a skilled person or adept or
great person is someone who strives to eliminate the suffering of other
sentient beings. Such a person is called a person of great capacity and
adept.

4 Having generated delight that there exists an entrance to the path that
accomplishes all your own and others’ welfare, you need to enter it

[LRCM V2 page 15]   Therefore, the Mahayana is the origin of all  the  good
of self and others; the medicine that alleviates all  troubles;  the  great
path traveled by all knowledgeable persons; nourishment for all beings  who
see, hear, remember, and come into contact with it; and that which has  the
great skill-in-means that  engages  you  in  others'  welfare  and  thereby
indirectly achieves your own welfare in its entirety.  One  who  enters  it
thinks, "Wonderful! I have found what I am looking for." Enter this supreme
vehicle with all of the "strength of an excellent person" that you have.
Someone is able  to  enter  into  the  Mahayana  by  generating  bodhicitta;
someone is able  to  enter  the  Mahayana  right  after  they  have  develop
renunciation. This person is very fortunate. By working for the  welfare  of
others, his own aim gets  fulfills  by  the  way.  I  guess,  basically  the
essence is that by having an opportunity to enter into  such  a  path  after
developing renunciation is very fortunate. Because of the  reason  mentioned
earlier one can see why one will be considered to be very fortunate  if  one
has enter into the Mahayana after  one  has  developed  renunciation  rather
than training in the three higher trainings to  achieve  liberation.  Having
said that, how does one actually generates the  bodhicitta  (the  spirit  of
enlightenment)?

[LRCM V2 page 15]   3) Training the mind in  the  stages  of  the  path  for
persons of great capacity
Training the mind in the stages of the path for persons of  great  capacity
is presented in three sections:
   1. Showing that developing  the  spirit  of  enlightenment  is  the  only
      entrance to the Mahayana
   2. How to develop the spirit of enlightenment –bodhicitta
   3. How to learn the bodhisattva deeds  after  developing  the  spirit  of
      enlightenment
[LRCM V2 page 16]   1) Showing that developing the spirit  of  enlightenment
is the only entrance to the Mahayana
Question: Given that you should enter the Mahayana  in  the  above-mentioned
manner, what is the entrance?
Reply: The Conqueror taught that there are no Mahayana vehicles  other  than
the perfection vehicle and the tantra vehicle. Whichever of  these  two  you
enter, the only entrance is the spirit of enlightenment.
The Mahayana mind generation is the entrance  to  the  Mahayana.   In  other
word, developing  bodhicitta  is  the  entrance  to  Mahayana.  If  one  has
developed this bodhicitta then one becomes a Mahayanist.  If  one  does  not
have bodhicitta one does not enter into the rank  of  Mahayanist  regardless
of what other qualities one may have.
[LRCM V2 page 16]   Once you have generated this spirit in  your  mind,  you
are recognized as a Mahayana practitioner  even  though  you  may  not  have
generated any other good quality. When you separate  from  this  spirit,  no
matter what other good qualities you  may  have—such  as  the  knowledge  of
emptiness, etc.—you lapse from the Mahayana,  falling  to  the  level  of  a
sravaka and the like. This point is taught in many Mahayana  scriptures  and
is also proved by reason.
What is the line that distinguishes a Mahayanist from someone who is  not  a
Mahayanist? Basically it is bodhicitta. If one has bodhicitta, then  one  is
a  Mahayanist.  Without  bodhicitta,  one  is  not  the   Mahayanist.   Once
bodhicitta is developed right away one  becomes  the  Conqueror’s  child-the
child of the Buddha. This person who has  this  newly  developed  bodhicitta
will outshine even the foe-destroyers who  has  eliminated  all  afflictions
and liberated from samsara.
[LRCM V2 page 16] The initial entrance into the Mahayana  is  determined  by
the development of this  spirit  alone.  A  subsequent  departure  from  the
Mahayana  is  determined  by  its  loss  alone.  Hence,  being  a   Mahayana
practitioner or not is contingent upon  the  existence  or  nonexistence  of
this spirit. You become a conquerors'  child  immediately  after  generating
this spirit.
The Life of Maitreya speaks of persons being bodhisattvas if they have this
spirit even though they have not trained in the bodhisattva deeds:
  O child of good lineage, although a precious  diamond  breaks,  it  still
  outshines all special ornaments of  gold.  It  does  not  lose  its  name
  "precious diamond," and it still removes all poverty.  O  child  of  good
  lineage, similarly, those who have developed the precious  diamond  which
  is the  spirit  of  enlightenment  and  the  aspiration  to  omniscience,
  although  they  lack  its  application,  still   of   the   sravaka   and
  pratyekabuddha. They do not lose the name "bodhisattva," and  they  still
  remove all the poverty of cyclic existence.
Next the text talks about the important of the person who is  practicing  to
be a Mahayanist; not so much on the dharma but he is practicing Mahayana.
[LRCM V2 page 16] Therefore it is not sufficient  that  the  teaching  be  a
Mahayana  teaching;  it  is  crucial  that  the   person   be   a   Mahayana
practitioner. Furthermore, functioning as a  Mahayana  practitioner  depends
solely on realizing the spirit of enlightenment. Hence, if you have only  an
intellectual understanding of this spirit, then you likewise  have  only  an
intellectual understanding of what it means to be a  Mahayana  practitioner.
If the spirit is completely  perfect,  then  the  Mahayana  practitioner  is
genuine, so strive for this.
Next the text goes on to explain how method and wisdom are  the  causes  for
achieving the full enlightenment i.e. to become a Buddha:
  -the method is bodhicitta
  -the wisdom refers to the wisdom realizes emptiness
So these are the two causes to achieve full enlightenment. Why is this so?
-By depending on the accumulation of the collections of merits one  achieves
the form body and through the  collections  of  wisdom  one  achieves  truth
body.
In general these  are  the  two  causes  –method  and  wisdom-for  achieving
enlightenment.
Method here refers  to  bodhicitta;  which  is  loosely  translated  as  the
altruistic intention to achieve the spirit of enlightenment.
Here bodhicitta is likened to the seed  of  the  enlightenment  whereas  the
wisdom realizes emptiness is not the seed. Wisdom realizes emptiness is  the
general cause of the three types of  enlightenment.  By  depending  on  what
kind of mind that is conjoining with:
  -if conjoin with renunciation – the mind with wisdom  realizes  emptiness
  become the  cause  for  Hearer’s  enlightenment  or  Solitary  Realizer’s
  enlightenment.
  -if conjoin  with  bodhicitta  –  the  mind  become  the  cause  of  full
  enlightenment.
So the wisdom realizes emptiness is the general cause of  enlightenment.  It
is bodhicitta that is the seed  of  enlightenment.  Without  bodhicitta  one
cannot achieve enlightenment.
An analogy: A barley seed is the specific cause of a barley sprout whereas
water, fertilizer, right temperature and so forth are only the general
causes for the barley sprout. Just like a barley seed is the specific cause
of the barley sprout, bodhicitta is the seed of the enlightenment.
[LRCM V2 page 17]
In regard to this the Array of Stalks Siltra says:
   O child of good lineage, the spirit of enlightenment is like the seed of
   all the buddha qualities.
Because you must fully comprehend this statement, I will  explain  it.  When
water, manure, warmth, earth, etc., combine with a rice seed,  they  act  as
the causes of the rice sprout. If they combine  with  the  seeds  of  wheat,
peas, etc., they act as the causes of  these  types  of  sprouts.  Therefore
these factors are the general causes of the sprouts. But  it  is  impossible
for a barley seed, though it combines  with  those  conditions,  to  be  the
cause of a sprout of rice, and so on. Thus a barley  seed  is  the  specific
cause of a barley sprout, and the water, manure,  and  so  forth,  that  are
linked with that seed become  the  general  causes  of  the  barley  sprout.
Likewise, the spirit of unsurpassed enlightenment  is  like  the  seed,  the
specific cause among the general causes of the  sprout  of  buddhahood.  The
wisdom that knows emptiness is the general  cause  of  the  three  types  of
enlightenment  [the  sravaka,  pratyekabuddha,  and  bodhisattva],  just  as
water, manure, etc. are the general causes of the sprouts.
Hence Maitreya's Sublime Continuum also states that:
    Aspiration to the supreme vehicle is the seed;
    Wisdom is the mother for generating the buddha qualities.
Thus the spirit of enlightenment is like the seed of  the  father,  and  the
wisdom which knows selflessness is like the mother.  For  example,  since  a
Tibetan father cannot have a boy who is Indian, Mongolian, and so forth,  he
is the specific cause of the child's lineage, whereas a Tibetan  mother  can
give birth to a variety of boys and is therefore the general  cause  of  her
child.
The bodhicitta is likened to the father and the  wisdom  realizes  emptiness
is likened to the mother. As long you know that bodhicitta is  the  specific
cause of enlightenment whereas the wisdom  realizes  emptiness  is  not  the
specific cause, then that is sufficient.
Next the text goes on to explain how the Mahayana and the Hinayana  are  not
differentiated by view but by conduct.
[LRCM V2 page 18]
And the  sravakas  and  pratyekabuddhas  also  depend  on  wisdom,  for  the
protector Nagarjuna, in the Praise of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  (Prajna-
paramita-stotra) says:13
The  path  of  liberation  upon  which  the  buddhas,  Pratyekabuddhas,  and
sravakas definitely rely Is just this. It  is  certain  that  there  are  no
others.
The perfection of wisdom  is  the  mother  of  both  Hinayana  and  Mahayana
disciples, for it is also  spoken  of  as  "mother."  Consequently,  do  not
distinguish Hinayana and Mahayana by the wisdom that knows emptiness but  by
the spirit of enlightenment and the  greatly  effective  bodhisattva  deeds.
Nagarjuna's Precious Garland says:14
Since the aspirational prayers, deeds,
And complete dedications of the bodhisattva
Are not explained in the sravaka vehicle,
How then could you become a bodhisattva through it?
Thus he says that you differentiate  these  vehicles  not  by  philosophical
view but by deeds. If, in this way, even the wisdom that knows emptiness  is
not a specifically Mahayana path, it goes  without  saying  that  there  are
other shared paths as well.
The Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated by the view – the wisdom
realizes emptiness.
The Mahayanist need the wisdom realizes emptiness. In order to actualize
the enlightenment of the Hearer (sravakas) and Solitary Realizer
(pratyekabuddhas), you also need wisdom realizes emptiness.
In order to achieve the enlightenment of the three vehicles, you need the
wisdom realizes emptiness. Why? In order to achieve any of these
enlightenments you need to abandon the afflictions.
In order to abandon the afflictions you have to abandon the root of
afflictions; which is the apprehensions of the self. In order to abandon
the apprehensions of the self you need the wisdom realizes emptiness. This
is the reason you need wisdom realizes emptiness to achieve enlightenments
of the Hearer, Solitary Realizer, or Bodhisattva’s vehicle. So the Hinayana
and Mahayana are not differentiated by the view. They are differentiated by
the deeds and are determined by whether there is bodhisattva accompanied
with the bodhisattva deeds.
Student 1:  For the Hinayanist, the method and wisdom aspects would be
renunciation and the wisdom realizes emptiness. So the mind of renunciation
conjoins with wisdom realizes emptiness. However for the Mahayana vehicle,
the mind that is conjoined with wisdom realizes emptiness is bodhicitta. In
order to reach there the Mahayanist need to generate the mind of
renunciation. Is this mind of renunciation is conjoined with bodhicitta?
(69:42-70:34)
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah
Student 1: If it is conjoined with bodhicitta both of these is the main
mind or the bodhicitta that is settled to be the main mind? (70:37-71:50)
Ven Gyurme; It is either whether you can have renunciation and bodhicitta
together or once you have bodhicitta the renunciation will be subsumed
under bodhicitta or is standing under its own?
Khen Rinpoche: The determination to be free –renunciation- and bodhicitta
are separate mind. A person who has bodhicitta would have renunciation; the
mind is there. It would be difficult to posit a person who has bodhicitta
but without renunciation.
Bodhicitta is a main mind. Renunciation, if you think about it, I would say
it is an aspiration, a mental factor.
Student 1: This determination to free can either be a main mind or mental
factor; is a main mind for the Hinayanist and mental factor for the
Mahayanist. For the Hinayanist what should the main mind for him?
Khen Rinpoche: It is clearer if we talk about the seed or the method. Just
as we talk about the seed or the method for enlightenment what would be the
seed or method to achieve the Hearer’s enlightenment?
Question: Just as bodhicitta is the seed of Buddhahood, what is the seed of
Arahathood? You have to posit the seed for Hearer’s enlightenment and the
seed for Solitary Realizer’s enlightenment. Is there a cause that is like a
seed for the Hearer and Solitary Realizer’s enlightenment?
(Some feedback from students)
Khen Rinpoche: If you say is renunciation, isn’t renunciation is the common
cause for all the three enlightenment? Even to achieve full enlightenment
you still need renunciation? Isn’t renunciation is the general causes for
all the three enlightenment?
(Discussion in between)
I would think what that student had said i.e. the renunciation that is
conjoined with the desire to achieve the Hearer’s enlightenment would be
the uncommon cause for the Hearer’s enlightenment and the renunciation that
is conjoined with the desire to achieve the Solitary Realizer’s
enlightenment would be the uncommon cause for the Solitary Realizer’s
enlightenment, I guess should be ok. Now I saying it seem all right to
posit this but this is something you have to think about.
Next is the explanation of how to generate bodhicitta. There are the three
parts:
1. The stages of training
2. The measure of development
3. The way to take it through a ritual
 1. The stages of the training
   a. The training based on the seven cause and effect personal instructions
      in the lineage descended from the Great Elder [Atisha].
   b. The training based on the teachings of the conquerors’ child
      Shantideva
These are the two instructions for developing bodhicitta:
  -the sevenfold cause and effect instructions which comes from Lama Atisha
  -the instruction of exchanging self and others coming from the
  bodhisattva great Shantideva
a. The training based on the seven cause and effect  personal  instructions
   in the lineage descended from the Great Elder [Atisha].
[LRCM V2 page 28] The seven causes  and  effects  are:  [7]  the  spirit  of
enlightenment from which perfect buddhahood arises; this spirit arises  from
[6] the wholehearted resolve;  this  resolve  arises  from  [5]  compassion;
compassion arises from [4] love; love arises from  [3]  the  wish  to  repay
your mothers' kindness; the wish to repay their  kindness  arises  from  [2]
recollecting their kindness; and the recollection of their  kindness  arises
from [1] recognizing all beings as your mothers.
The seven cause-and-effect going in order are:
   1. recognizing all beings as your mothers
   2. recollecting their kindness
   3. the wish to repay your mothers' kindness
   4. love
   5. compassion
   6. the wholehearted resolve
   7. bodhicitta
Altogether there are six causes and one effect.
[LRCM V2  page  28]   The  training  based  on  the  seven  cause-and-effect
personal instructions has two sections:
   1. Developing certainty about the order of the stages
   2. The gradual training
1' Developing certainty about the order of the stages
Developing certainty about the order of the stages has two sections:
   1. Showing that the root of the Mahayana path is compassion
   2. How the six other personal instructions are either causes or effects
      of compassion
a" Showing that the root of the Mahayana path is compassion
Showing that the root of the Mahayana path is compassion has three parts:
   1. The importance of compassion in the beginning
   2. The importance of compassion in the middle
   3. The importance of compassion at the end
This is something you should read on your own. It is not difficult. It is
giving the reasons why great compassion is important in the beginning, in
the middle and at the end. Subsequently there is an introduction to those
different elements that make up this instruction.
The instruction for generating bodhicitta such as the seven cause and
effect instruction is easy to understand but difficult to actualize. When
we talk about emptiness, just to get an understanding of emptiness itself
is challenging but it is said that realizing emptiness is relatively easy
than bodhicitta.
Going back to the discussion on the twelve links of dependent arising, for
the person who changes the intermediate state while in the intermediate
state, let’s say, for a person who accumulate strong karma to be born as a
human being, the projecting causes are there, the actualizing causes are
complete, the karmic imprint is nurtured by craving and grasping, then one
enter into the intermediate state of a human being. I think perhaps it is
better to say for the person who changes the intermediate state, all the
effects are already completed; both the projecting effects and actualizing
effects.
Student 2: Does that mean that the person who does not change the
intermediate state, we can also likewise assert that the effects get
completed in the intermediate state as well?
Khen Rinpoche: No
Student 2: If that is the case then how does one account for the
discrepancies between somebody get the effects completed in the
intermediate state and somebody does not get complete effect s in the
intermediate state?
Khen Rinpoche: If the conditions are present for the person’s intermediate
state change then all the effects are completed. If the conditions for the
intermediate state to change are not there then the effects are yet to be
completed.
Student 2: If that is the case then we also say that the projecting causes
and the actualizing causes have completed in the intermediate state as
well? When it changes in the intermediate state you have a new set of the
projecting causes and the actualizing causes.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that in the intermediate state, the
projecting causes and the actualizing causes are there?
Student 2: You are in the hell being intermediate state and change to human
being intermediate state, so you need the projecting causes and the
actualizing causes to project as human.
Khen Rinpoche: In the intermediate state, if the person is about to change
the intermediate state, of course you have the projecting causes and the
actualizing causes. But the projecting causes would have to come somewhere
in the past and the actualizing causes have to happen during the
intermediate state before he died and enter into another intermediate
state.
Student 2: If that is the case, then that intermediate state can be
considered as one life of the same cycle of the twelve links
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah
Student 3: The person actually dies in the intermediate state?
Khen Rinpoche: yes
Student 3: So the craving and grasping of the next rebirth is during the
intermediate state? If we do Jangwa for someone, doesn’t it we end up
killing that person?
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that the successful practice of Jangwa involves
the killing people in the intermediate state?















