Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 10.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.944573
================================================================================


Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Last week we don’t have class, probably you
all enjoy. I went to visit Rinpoche, supposed for just four days but it
happened to be seven days. Rinpoche wrote a postcard to everyone which says
‘My dear devoted students how are you? Please study the dharma and enjoy
the life with bodhichitta. Thank you very much.’ I was supposed to come
back on Wednesday. In the morning, I went to see Rinpoche and he wrote the
postcard. Normally he cannot write with his right hand but this one he
wrote with his right hand. He said that he is trying his best to recover by
exercising and doing whatever necessary.  That morning I went at 10 o’clock
to offer kata as my flight was at 1 o’clock. He wrote the postcard and I
was supposed to come out. But suddenly he checked with his dice (mo) and he
said not to leave now. So I had to change my ticket and the next day there
was a small ceremony. That is why we postponed the Thursday class. After he
wrote the postcard and look at it, he started to laugh at himself.
Rinpoche is extremely happy that many people are studying the buddhadharma
in Singapore. He always mentions that the whole point of having centers so
that many people can study Buddhadharma. He is extremely happy that there
are so many people joining the teaching. He said thank you to everyone in
ABC who have prayed for him and also performed many animal liberations.
Somebody teased me that my hair, now half of it is already white and now
having this new name (Khen Rinpoche) (the hair) will later turn to all
white. They also said that maybe full white will look nicer. At this moment
I need to do two jobs, here and in Kopan. I could not really reject their
request at this moment because Khensur Rinpoche is sick and (Lama Zopa)
Rinpoche is not feeling well. I’ve accepted their request but I am not sure
for how long.
As Lama Zopa Rinpoche has mentioned, and in particular, His Holiness the
Dalai Lama has emphasized in recent times, that it is important for all of
us to be the 21st century Buddhists. Just adopting Buddhism as a religion
and practicing it merely out of belief and faith or perhaps practicing it
as a continuation of one’s forefathers tradition or  staying as a Buddhist
by making simple prayers and being happy with that alone, His Holiness has
mentioned and emphasized many times, is not the way. This particular piece
of advice from His Holiness is something that we really need to remember
and keep it in the heart. Bearing that piece of advice in mind as much as
possible, we should pay attention to our learning and to our studies.
I think all of you are educated and have received a modern secular
education. You’ve gone through the whole system and, of course, studying
hard and taking exams was part of that system. You had finished with it and
were probably sick of it. Despite that, you have now developed this
interest to study the Buddha’s teachings and when I think about it, I found
it to be something to be amazed. It is really wonderful. All of you have an
interest to study and that is amazing, but having just an interest and some
determination from your side, that does not necessarily mean that you will
complete your studies. So it is important to work at it continuously. Just
having the interest and determination alone is not enough. In particular,
when you are doing something like this, in the course of your studies, one
may experience all kinds of problems and obstacles. There are some who are
not able to overcome those obstacles and some people drop out in the course
of their studies. So these things do happen. Therefore, having the interest
and determination alone does not necessarily mean that you will complete
your studies. You must gather the conditions for you to be able to finish
your studies. One of which is to make aspirational prayers and single
pointedly request to the Buddha or one’s special meditational deity for
success in your studies. When you make the single pointed request, it is
not be just for the success in one’s studies for this life, but you have to
continuously pray for to be able to meet these teachings –the extensive and
profound path to enlightenment- from life to life. So making strong
aspirational prayers for success in ones studies and practice is very
important; so do it continuously.
You can see that in order to be able to complete ones studies, many
conditions and factors must come together. Take for instance of my own
example; I never thought that I was able to complete my studies due to my
intelligence. I do accept and think that perhaps that there may be some
karma from my past lives. But I’ve made it a point to always make
aspirational prayers in the course of my studies. While studying in the
monastery, usually in the morning, we’ll have our morning prayers in the
main assembly hall starting from about 5.30am. I will make it a point to
pray in the assembly hall. If you know, in Sera Je Monastery, we have a
shrine dedicated to the most secret Hayagriva -the deity of the college. I
don’t think I have ever missed making prayers on a regular basis in front
of that shrine. This was what others did as well. It is common for the
monks studying in Sera Je to make prayers. I attributed my success of
having able to finish my studies to making prayers, in particular to
Hayagriva.
Therefore it is important to have the determination to continue the studies
and also to make constant aspirational prayers and request and also to
constantly accumulate the conditions for success such as doing the practice
of the seven-limbs. So if we do all these, then it helps to further
increase and strengthen our determination in our studies. In the process, I
guess one’s faith and devotion to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha will also
gradually increase.
In this Basic Program (BP), we have many different modules. So we will be
looking at different topics and texts. If you compare this Middle Length
Lamrim - the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment- to the other topics in
the BP, it is relatively less challenging. That is true. Some of the texts
in the BP are relatively more challenging. Because of that, in the future
when studying these texts, it is possible that you may think “what on earth
has this got to do with my life?” You may not see any relation or any
benefit to your life; “How can studying this benefit me?” At that time, it
is important to make aspirational prayers to be able to continue and to
change your way of looking at it by thinking that there must be something
in this because this is the Buddha’s teachings. Then you just have to work
at it.
Generally, I think it is normal that in the course of studies especially
when we are dealing with certain topics/texts, you may not see the
relevance to your life and its benefit. It is only at the end, after you
have finished with all the different topics and then looks back, you start
to see the relevance/benefit. This is the experience of quite a lot of
people. When they have finished with it, they say; “Oh! Yah! There is
something about this.”  But while they were doing it, perhaps they didn’t
realize how relevant it was.
As what Rinpoche has mentioned, we should approach our studies with
enthusiasm/delight. We should remind ourselves how fortunate we are to have
the opportunity and also the interest to want to learn/study these things.
We should remember that even to have an interest to study something
complicated/difficult like some of the texts in the BP is something very
fortunate. We should remind ourselves of that. Basically, we should try to
ensure that one remains a fortunate being. If one begins as a fortunate
being and in the process if one ends up as an unfortunate beings then it is
completely pointless. Would it be better if one starts off and remains as a
fortunate being? So, let’s all try to remain within the ranks of the
fortunate.

Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
Generally in life, whenever we have to learn something we have to depend on
a teacher/instructor. Likewise here, in wanting to proceed to the state of
enlightenment, we need to depend or rely on a spiritual teacher/ a virtuous
friend who is capable of guiding us and leading us to that state. That
being the case, we need to search and find that Mahayana virtuous
friend/teacher who is able to guide/lead us to the state of enlightenment.
What are the defining characteristics of a qualified Mahayana virtuous
friend who can lead us to enlightenment?  The qualities were stated by
Maitreya in his Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras. There are ten qualities.
   With respect to this, Maitreya says in his Ornament for the Mahayana
   Sutras:
        Rely on a Mahayana teacher who is disciplined, serene, thoroughly
        pacified;
        Has good qualities surpassing those of the students; is energetic;
        has a wealth of scriptural knowledge;
        Possesses loving concern; has thorough knowledge of reality and
        skill in instructing disciples;
        And has abandoned dispiritedness.
There is this quality of being thoroughly pacified and the quality of
having thorough knowledge of reality.
In the text, the quality of being thoroughly pacified is said to mean
possessing a higher training in wisdom and having thorough knowledge of
reality means having the realization of suchness/ emptiness.
This quotation comes from the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras. The view of
reality as expounded in this text is something that is common/ shared with
the Mind Only School (MOS) and the Middle Way School (MWS). Therefore, when
we talk about “selflessness” in accordance with these tenets, they make a
distinction in the subtlety between the selflessness of person and
selflessness of phenomena. That being the case here, the quality of being
thoroughly pacified means the higher training in wisdom and in this context
that is interpreted here to mean having the realization of the selflessness
of persons. Whereas having a thorough knowledge of reality is interpreted
here to mean having the realization of selflessness of phenomena; one can
say, for example, having the realization of selflessness of phenomena as
asserted in the MOS. But here in our context, one can also perhaps
interpret this from the perspective of the Consequence Middle Way School
(CMWS) - the highest school- that means taking the meaning of selflessness
of phenomena according to the view point of the highest school. So this is
one way of looking at the difference between these two qualities.
As a summary, there is a difference between the quality of being thoroughly
pacified and the quality of thorough knowledge of knowing reality.
The quality of being thoroughly pacified means having the realization of
the selflessness of persons.
The quality of thorough knowledge of knowing reality means having the
realization of the selflessness of phenomena.
Those of you who did the previous BP, you probably have an idea of what
I’ve just said. As for the newer students, I don’t think you understand
what I’ve just said but it is only a matter of time, slowly, it will become
crystal clear.

Furthermore it says that someone who has not disciplined himself, for that
reason is not in a position to discipline someone else. A spiritual master
disciplining others has to be someone who has first disciplined his own
mind. You may wonder: “Well then, in what way does it need to be
disciplined?” To accomplish anything at all that occurs to you and then
label it a realizational quality because it exists in the mind, is of no
benefit. This is why a system of mental discipline compatible with the
general teachings of the Jinas is necessary. That has been ascertained as
the three precious trainings, and therefore, ethical discipline and the
other two have been set forth. In this regard “disciplined” refers to the
training in ethical discipline. In the Individual Liberation it says:
   In accord with the unruly horse of the mind
   always wilfully straying away:
   a bridle strutted with hundred sharp nails -
   that’s individual liberation
Someone skilled at breaking in wild horses tames them by means of a good
bridle. The sense powers pursue wrong objects  like wild horses. Ethical
discipline subjugates them as one engages in inappropriate activities and
through many efforts makes one engage in what ought to be done. Someone
trained in it has likewise tamed the horse of the mind.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 71: It is said that those who have not
disciplined themselves have no basis for disciplining others. Therefore,
gurus who intend to discipline others' minds must first have disciplined
their own. How should they have been disciplined? It is not helpful for
them to have done just any practice, and then have the result designated as
a good quality of knowledge. They need a way to discipline the mind that
accords with the general teachings of the Conqueror. The three precious
trainings are definitely such a way. Therefore, Maitreya indicated them
with these three terms: "disciplined," "serene," and "thoroughly pacified."
With respect to what Maitreya said, "disciplined" refers to the training in
ethical discipline. The Sutra on the Vows of Individual Liberation  states:
      These vows of individual liberation
      Are the bridle set with sharp nails.
      With constant effort they are fit
      For the difficult-to-rein horse of the straying mind.
Also the Exegesis of the Discipline (Vinaya-vibhanga) states:
      This is the bridle for undisciplined disciples.
As is implied above, the senses pursue improper objects and, like wild
horses, lead you to engage in unsuitable actions. Just as a trainer tames a
wild horse with a good bridle, so too teachers learn ethical discipline to
control their senses and to turn toward suitable actions with great effort.
Hence, teachers have "disciplined" their minds, which are like wild
horses.]
The essence is that ‘disciplined’ means training in the ethics of the
vinaya. This means controlling ones senses such that one does not follow
after inappropriate objects and behavior; following after appropriate
behavior.  That is what it means to abide in ethics.

 “Calm” means having developed the training of concentration where, based
on mindfulness and introspection with regard to engaging in positive and
counteracting unwholesome behaviour, the mind abides in a state of inner
calm.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 72: "Serene" refers to having accomplished
the training of meditative concentration. Meditative concentration is a
mental state in which the mind remains peacefully withdrawn. This is
achieved by means of a reliance on mindfulness and vigilance in your
ethical discipline, turning away from wrongdoing and engaging in good
activities.]
The quality of serene means the means relying on mindfulness and
introspection constantly so that while one is aware to not engage in
inappropriate actions and one is aware that one should engage in proper
actions. These then lead to a stable mind. [Note: ‘Introspection’ sometimes
is translated as mental vigilance.]

 “Complete peace ” means that based on calm abiding of a serviceable mind
the training of wisdom has been developed through individual analysis of
the correct meaning [of reality].
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 72: "Thoroughly pacified"  refers  to  having
accomplished the training of wisdom. This is done by specifically analyzing
the meaning of reality in dependence on meditative  serenity,  wherein  the
mind becomes serviceable.]
The quality of thoroughly pacified means that being able to analyze with
reasoning to come to an ascertainment of the selflessness of person.
If you look at these three qualities -‘disciplined’, ‘serene’, and
‘thoroughly pacified’, essentially it is saying that the prospective
teacher needs to possess good behavior and a stable mind. But that is not
good enough, basically one needs wisdom, in particular, the wisdom that
under one’s own power be able to differentiate good from bad.

However, it is not enough merely to have developed - thus, by means of the
three trainings - the qualities of realization that act to tame the mind.
As the quality of scriptural knowledge is also needed, [we have] “rich in
scriptural transmissions” meaning that the three collections and so forth
have been studied extensively.
According to Geshe [Drom] Tonpa:
   For someone to be called a Mahayana guru, he must generate boundless
   understanding when he explains, and when he practices, he must show what
   is of benefit and direct significance in the last days of the teachings.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 72: However, to have only the good  qualities
of knowledge that come from disciplining the mind with the three  trainings
is not sufficient. Teachers must also have the good qualities of scriptural
learning. Therefore, "wealth  of  scriptural  knowledge"  refers  to  being
erudite concerning the three scriptural collections and the like.
Geshe Drom-don-ba said that when  the  "gurus  of  the  Mahayana"  give  an
explanation, they must cause their students to have a  deep  understanding.
When they are putting the teachings into practice,  they  must  demonstrate
what is helpful at a time when the teaching is on the  wane,  and  what  is
useful in the situation at hand.]

“Realization of suchness” refers to the special training in wisdom -
realization of the selflessness of phenomena. Alternatively, it is mainly
held to be manifest suchness. However, even if this is not present, it is
said that this [criterion] is also fulfilled by a realization through
scriptures and reasonings.
That being so, even if he has scriptural knowledge and realizations, it is
not enough for them to be inferior or equal to that of the disciple and
therefore someone with more qualities is needed.  In the Verses it says:
   People relying on someone inferior wither,
   those relying on one of their peers stay the same,
   those relying on leaders achieve excellence.
   Therefore rely on those ahead of you
   Possessed of discipline, perfect peace,
   and the most exalted wisdom if
   you rely on any such a lord,
   you even end up ahead of him.
That is why. Puchungwa said: “As I listen to the accounts of the saints, I
look up to them” and Tashi: “I take the old men at Radreng as a model.”
Accordingly, we need someone with more qualities as a model to look up to.
Those six properties like this are qualities you yourself attain [for your
own welfare].
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page  72:  "Knowledge  of  reality"  refers  to  a
special  training  in  wisdom  -  the  knowledge  of  the  selflessness  of
phenomena. In another way, it is said to be best if  the  teachers  have  a
perception of reality; but, if they do not have it, it  is  acceptable  for
them to know reality through scripture and reasoning.
Although teachers are endowed  with  these  good  qualities  of  scriptural
learning and knowledge, it is not enough for them to  have  good  qualities
that are equal to or lower than those of their students; instead, they need
qualities that surpass those of their students. The  Verses  about  Friends
says:
      People degenerate by relying on those inferior to themselves;
      By relying on equals, they stay the same;
      By relying on those superior, they attain excellence;
      Thus rely on those who are superior to yourself.
      If you rely on whomever is superior—thoroughly pacified
      And endowed with ethical discipline
      And exceeding wisdom—
      You will become superior even to those who are superior.
Pu-chung-wa said, "When I hear the stories of excellent persons, I  emulate
them."  Ta-shi  said,  "I  imitate  the  elders  of  the  Radreng  monastic
community."
Thus you must emulate those whose good qualities surpass your own.
These six qualities—being disciplined,  serene,  and  thoroughly  pacified,
having good qualities that surpass those of the  students,  the  wealth  of
knowledge  from  studying  many  scriptures,  and  thorough  knowledge   of
reality—are the good qualities obtained for oneself.]
“old men at Radreng” –‘old men” means someone senior or elder in Tibetan.
Perhaps in this context, it may be talking about the elders include holy
beings like Drom Tonpa who was not an ordained person; he was in the aspect
of a lay person.
These six qualities are obtained for oneself. For someone to be a Mahayana
virtuous friend/teacher, these are the six qualities that he/she should
possess.

B Positive qualities necessary for the welfare of others
The remaining ones are qualities for taking care of others. As they say:
   The Capable Ones do not wash away evil with water,
   they do not remove the suffering of beings by hand,
   they do not graft their realizations on others they
   liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature.
As is being expressed here, apart from taking care of others, having taught
them the path in an unmistaken manner, nothing can be done washing away
negativities with water and the like.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 73: The remaining qualities—being  energetic,
having skill in instruction,  possessing  loving  concern,  and  abandoning
dispiritedness—are the good qualities for looking after others.
Further, it says:
      Sages do not wash away sins with water,
      They do not clear away beings' suffering with their hands,
      They do not transfer their own knowledge to others;
      They liberate by teaching the truth of reality.
Thus, buddhas perform no action -such as "washing away  others'  sins  with
water"- other than looking after others  by  accurately  showing  them  the
path.]
Now is a question for the ‘elders’ of the class. Can negativities be
purified by water or not?
In this verse, Buddha himself says that the Buddhas do not purify the
negativities of sentient beings with water.
In the Nyung-na’s practice, there is a ritual where you take three sips of
water. When you take the first sip of water, you imagine that it purifies
the obscurations to liberation (afflictive obstructions), next sip is
purifies the obscurations to omniscience and the third sip is that you
realized Dharmakaya.
Page 167 of the Nyung Na sadhana (The Means of Achievement of the Eleven-
faced Great Compassion One, Avalokiteshvara)
"On the preparation day (the first day of the Fasting Ceremony), wash
yourself three times with this mixture and drink a little bit. Think that:
-the first washing purifies the afflictive obstructions,
-the second purifies the obstructions to omniscience, and
-the third, the state of dharmakaya is realized."
This is something to think about but it is very clear of what is being
written here:
      Sages do not wash away negativities/ sins with water,
      They do not clear away beings' suffering with their hands,
      They do not transfer their own knowledge to others;
      They liberate by teaching the truth of reality.
They liberate us by teaching the dharma and showing us the path, in
particular, they liberate by teaching us the meaning of dependent
origination.
The Buddha works for the welfare of those who are to be subdued by teaching
the dharma; in particular the teachings on dependent origination. What the
sentient beings have to do is to understand the teachings and ascertain it
in one’s own mind. That is how one is liberated from samsara/cyclic
existence. This is the approach of the Buddhist path.

Out of the four characteristics for this, “eloquent” means experienced with
regard to the stages of guidance and skilled at putting the meaning across
to the minds of those to be tamed.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 73: Among the four qualities of looking after
others, "skill in instructing disciples" refers to being  both  skilled  in
the process of leading disciples and adept at causing them to understand.]
“Skill in instructing disciples” refers to being both skilled in the
process of leading disciples and adept at causing them to understand. The
teacher can lead the respective disciples according to their paths and able
to give instructions to the point of whatever they need, skilled in doing
that.

 “Loving” means having a pure motivation to teach the Dharma and teaching
motivated by compassion without regard for material gain or respect.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 73: "Possessing  loving  concern"  refers  to
having a pure motivation for giving the teachings.  That  is,  the  teacher
teaches with a motivation of love and compassion  and  does  not  look  for
gain, respect, and so on.]
The Mahayana teacher must teach and be motivated by concern and love for
the listeners.

We need someone like Potowa [who] said to Chengawa: “Son of Lima, however
many explanations of the Dharma I have given, not once have I claimed the
applause as my own. There is no migrating being that is not pitiable.”
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 73: Bo-do-wa said to Jen-nga-wa, "Son of  Li-
mo, however many teachings I have explained, I have never taken pleasure in
even a single thanks. All beings are helpless." A teacher  should  be  like
this.]
This quality of possessing loving concern means that when you teach, you
should teach not motivated by desire or attachment. For example, you may be
looking for some kind of praise; ‘they will think I am so good and so
forth’. So, without that kind of thought and motivation, in particular one
must teach out of loving concern, with some concerns and love for the
listeners.

“Energetic” (“with energy”) means constantly delighting in the welfare of
others. That is what joyous perseverance is or energetic. It refers to this
mind that delights in virtue; having this constant delight in others
welfare. When a teacher teachers, the motivation should not be mixed with
anger.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 73: "Energetic" refers to constant delight in
others' welfare.]
So when the teacher teaches, the motivation should not be mixed with anger.

“Having abandoned discouragement” (“no more discouraged”) means not to
become weary due to explaining things over and over again, but rather to
bear the hardships of explaining.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 73: "Has abandoned dispiritedness" refers  to
never being tired of giving an explanation again and again—to  bearing  the
hardships of explaining.]
When we examine the teacher, the ideal/the best teacher is someone who
possesses all those ten qualities. But if one is unable to find a teacher
who has all the ten qualities then one look for the middling. Here it talk
about teacher as possessing the best defining characteristics, and next
will be the discussion of what constitutes the minimum qualifications and
the teacher possessing the middling qualifications.

2B4A-1B1B-2 Middling characteristics
Potowa said: “The three trainings, realization of suchness and a loving
heart - those five are the main thing. My master Shangtsun is not very
learned in everything, as he cannot bear disenchantment either, he does not
impress on his mind the kindness he received. However, as he has the above[-
mentioned] five, whoever is in his presence benefits.
Nyanton is by no means eloquent and each time he makes a dedication the
only thing he knows is that, again, nobody understood anything, but as he
has those five, people near him benefit.”
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page  73:  Bo-do-wa  said:  These  five  qualities
-loving concern,  knowledge  of  reality,  and  the  three  trainings-  are
foremost. My master Shang-tsun is not very learned with regard to  all  the
scriptures and cannot withstand dispiriting  circumstances.  Therefore,  he
does not even thank those who help him. However, since he  has  these  five
qualities, he is helpful to whomever is in his presence. Nyen-don does  not
have any skill in speech at all. Even when giving a single dedication of an
offering, he can only think, "None of these people here understands what  I
am saying." But, as he has the five qualities, he is  helpful  to  whomever
enters his presence.]

2B4A-1B1B-3 Minimum characteristics
A The actual minimum of characteristics
Even if it is difficult, due to the times, to find someone who has the
complete set of characteristics like that, it is said that you should not
rely on anyone whose faults are greater or whose faults and positive
qualities are equal, but on someone whose positive qualities exceed the
faults.
Here it stated the minimum qualifications of a Mahayana teacher. In
comparing the number of qualities versus the number of faults, that
person’s qualities should exceed those of the faults. In particular, that
teacher should emphasize the happiness of future lives more than happiness
in this life. In weighing the interest of others versus one’s self
interest, the teacher should emphasize the benefit of others’ welfare. This
is the minimum qualification that a Mahayana teacher should have.
Next is a very important from Lama Tsongkhapa.

B The expediency of association with the characteristics
Such a spiritual master bringing about complete liberation is a perpetual
root of aspiration. Therefore, those wishing to rely on a spiritual teacher
should be aware of them and make an effort looking for someone who
possesses the characteristics. Those wishing to have disciples rely on them
should also strive to acquire these characteristics.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page  74:  The  guru  who  helps  you  to  achieve
liberation is the foundation of your deepest aspiration. Therefore, you who
wish to rely on a guru should understand these defining characteristics and
strive to seek one who has them. Also, those  who  wish  to  have  students
should understand these characteristics and strive to possess them.]
Lama Tsongkhapa pays attention to stating this very clearly right at the
beginning of the teaching on the importance of relying on a qualified
teacher. The problem with a lot of people is that they miss out this point;
they don’t pay attention to it and run into a lot of complications later
on. If you need to depend on a teacher for guidance, you need to know what
kind of teacher you need; which means that you need to look for someone who
is qualified. In order to be able to look for this qualified teacher, you
must know what to look for. Therefore, right at the beginning, you should
be very sure of the defining characteristics that you must look for in a
teacher; understand the characteristics, ascertain them well and then check
whether the prospective teacher does possess those qualities. After you
have analyzed the prospective teacher of whether he/she possesses these
qualities and are confident after your analysis, then you takes that person
as your teacher, you devote to that person as your teacher and you rely on
that person as your teacher. As said in the Lamrim, after you have found
the teacher, you must rely correctly. By doing so, you establish the very
root of the entire path to enlightenment.
Therefore, from the beginning, you must know what are the defining
characteristics a teacher should possess, understand them and look for them
in the prospective teacher. Only when you are confident that he/she
possesses these qualities after you have done your analysis, only then do
you establish a guru-disciple relationship with the recognition from your
side that this person is now your guru. After you have developed that
recognition, from then on you have to devote correctly. You should pay
attention to whatever teachings or advice given by that person.
Sometime I do get people asking me; “Geshela, can I take this person as my
guru?” I will not say ‘don’t go’ but I will not say ‘go’ as well. Rather I
usually say: “What do you want to get from that teacher? Why do you want to
take that person as your teacher?” This is what I usually tell people.
People have a variety of reasons for taking on someone as a teacher. Some
people take on a person as their guru because that person is famous. There
are some who take a Lama as a guru when the Lama has the ability to heal
others by reciting mantras and blowing at them. They take the ability to
heal others as qualification. Everybody has their own reasons. Basically,
you have to know what you are looking for. If that person can give you what
you are looking for then it is up to you because you have to make your own
decision. If that person can give you what you are looking for then you can
relate to that person with love and respect. That makes sense. It boils
down to what you are looking for and whether that person can give you what
you are looking for.
In this context, we’ve been discussing the qualities of the Mahayana guru.
You must understand that we are talking about someone who can lead you to
enlightenment. If you are someone seeking out enlightenment, you have to
rely on someone who can bring you there. Someone who can bring you to
enlightenment is someone who possesses these ten defining characteristics.
If enlightenment is what you want, then you have to look for someone who
has these qualities and once you have found him/her, then you have to
devote to that person as your guru, from then on you have to devote
correctly. Then there will be ensuing great benefits.
Next is a discussion on the defining characteristics of the student
himself. What are the defining characteristics of a student who relies on a
guru who possesses those ten defining characteristics?
You should be aware by now there is a discussion session on Sunday at
1.30pm. As I have mentioned before, for those of you who have committed to
the program, it is very important to attend the discussion session.
(Geshela gave questions for discussion on  24 July 2011)
Student 1: Lama Atisha’s Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment say: “From the
seven types of pratimoksha vows taught by the Tathagata…” but in the
previous lesson, you mentioned that there are eight divisions of the
pratimoksha vows. Are the one day vows or fasting vows are something that
is added by Tibetan scholars after Lama Atisha?
Geshela: The eight pratimoksha vows are for:
   1. A fully ordained monk
   2. A fully ordained nun
   3. A nun [gelobma] in training for full ordination 
   4. A novice monk
   5. A novice nun 
   6. A male lay practitioner
   7. A female lay practitioner
   8. One day vows
If you include the one day vows, then you have the eight vows.
Student 1: With reference to the third quality of the teacher “thoroughly
pacified”, according to the commentary by Geshe Sopa; “thoroughly pacified”
refers to the highest insight into the nature of reality. He also talked
about the quality of a special kind of wisdom arising from investigating
the ultimate nature of the self and phenomena. He also talked about the
conjoining of a single-pointed concentration and the highest insight that
produces a superior kind of analytical wisdom. I don’t think that he is
talking about generating the wisdom realizing the selflessness of persons
alone. Please comment on that.
Geshela: If Geshe Sopa said the qualities of “thoroughly pacified” and
“knowledge of reality” are the same, then you should ask him why he said
that. I think it is difficult to say that these two refer to the same
quality; they must be different. That is why there are ten qualities and
“thoroughly pacified” and “knowledge of reality” are enumerated separately,
in particular, in the explanation of “knowledge of reality.”
Lama Tsongkhapa specifically refers “knowledge of reality” as special
training of wisdom. This means it set apart from the third quality
-“thoroughly pacified.”  There is room for discussion. It is important to
consult different opinions from various texts but the point is that every
individual must come to his/her own conclusion. I am not saying whatever I
say here is necessary the only right answer. It is for sure that some
commentaries make it easier to understand but at the end of the day, the
commentaries should help you to understand the intent or the position that
is stated in the root text itself i.e. whatever commentaries or
explanations must accord with the view of the root text.  It is important
to keep in your mind that the root text is the basis.


