Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson54.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.212082
================================================================================


Meditation practice: We will spend a couple of minutes to do some
reflection. The main thing is to generate pure motivation for taking part
in this session. As usual this is to be preceded by the practice of seven-
branch worship in order to accumulate merits and to purify all
obscurations.
At this time in our life we have all the favorable conditions; both outer
and inner. At such a time it is not sufficient just to have mere belief or
faith in the Buddha and his teachings, but rather we must gain knowledge
and understanding of the Buddha’s teachings. This can be done through
hearing and reflection. On the basis of hearing the teaching, we reflect as
much as we can so we can place very strong and stable imprints in our mind.

It is extremely important for us to gain faith in the Buddha; the faith
that comes from the knowledge and understanding. The faith that we have in
the Buddha comes from the knowledge and understanding become very stable.
Having gained such a stable faith, it will stay with us from life to life.
With this stable faith in our mind, there is always some hope for us to be
able to continue in our hearing, reflection and meditating on the Buddha’s
teachings in the future.
We have this human body, brain and intelligence. Our mind is still working
and alert. Our faculties are complete. So at such a time, it becomes very
important for us to make use of this opportunity and our intelligence to
listen to the teaching and to reflect on them as much as we can. By doing
so, we leave stable imprints in our mind. So, as much as possible, when you
are studying or listening to the teaching, please do so attentively. If you
are able to do this, then I think we have made this human life meaningful.
For us to really develop those realizations that are mentioned in the
teaching is a bit out of the way and difficult; but if we are able to leave
as much strong and stable imprints in our mind as we can from hearing and
reflecting in the teaching, I guess we can say that we have made our life
meaningful.
We have looked at the sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction for developing
the spirit of enlightenment/mind generation. In order to practice this
instruction right from the beginning, we must develop even-mindedness.
Developing even-mindedness is said to be the basis for practicing this
instruction. So that is very important. On the basis of having developed
even-mindedness, next we have to develop affection for all living beings.
That is very important. In order to develop affection for all sentient
beings, we have to practice the instruction of recognizing all sentient
beings have been our mothers, recollecting their kindness when they were
our mothers and then developing a wish to repay their kindness. So, by
practicing these three instructions will enable us to develop affection for
sentient beings and to develop the kind of love that sees everyone as very
precious and matter to us. After having developed affection for all
sentient beings, next we need to develop in our minds the intent or desire
to accomplish the happiness and the welfare of others. In order to achieve
that, we need to meditate on love, then compassion and then wholehearted
resolve.
By cultivating on love, compassion and wholehearted resolve, we develop the
intent on accomplishing the happiness and the welfare of all sentient
beings. After that come the development of bodhichitta or mind generation.
When the mind generation is cultivated, there arises the mind that is
intent on achieving full enlightenment. In order for the mind that is
intent on achieving full enlightenment to arise, we must have already
developed well the intent on accomplishing the welfare of all sentient
beings.
So, developing the intent on accomplishing the welfare of all sentient
beings becomes the cause for us to be able to develop the mind that is
intent on achieving full enlightenment.

|Basis                                    |Seven-fold cause-and-effect       |
|                                         |instructions                      |
|Even-mindedness/Impartiality for all     |1.Recognition of all beings have  |
|beings                                   |been our mothers                  |
|                                         |Remembrance of your mothers’      |
|                                         |kindness                          |
|                                         |3. Wish to repay our mothers’     |
|                                         |kindness                          |
|Affection for all beings                 |4. Love                           |
|                                         |5.Compassion                      |
|                                         |6. Wholehearted resolve           |
|Intent on accomplishing the welfare of   |7. Spirit of enlightenment        |
|all sentient beings                      |                                  |


When we talk about developing the mind that is intent on accomplishing the
happiness and welfare of all sentient beings, we first have to understand:
   1. What does it means by the happiness of all sentient beings?
   2. What is the welfare of all sentient beings?
   3. What is it that we are trying to accomplish?
The welfare and the happiness that we are talking here is not the temporary
happiness. We are talking about their nirvana.  Nirvana here refers to the
non-abiding nirvana, the final nirvana.
In order to be able to develop well the mind that is intent on
accomplishing the welfare of all sentient beings, at least we need some
understandings and some ideas on emptiness; which then allow us to
understand how all sentient beings can achieve nirvana/ liberation. In
fact, in order to develop the mind that is intent on enlightenment, we also
need some understanding on emptiness; particularly we need to develop an
understanding and conviction in:
   1. How the nature of our mind is clear light and
   2. How the stains/ defilements are just adventitious
Here you can see that there are a couple of issues we have to sort out in
order to be able to develop the realization of spirit of enlightenment.
Based on an understanding on emptiness, we have to see:
   1. How sentient beings, including ourselves, can achieve liberation and
      enlightenment.
   2. How it is possible and how we actually have the potential and ability
      to do so.
We need this conviction in order to be able to develop the real spirit of
enlightenment.
In the treatises, spirit of enlightenment/ mind generation is defined as
the mind that possesses two aspirations.
Mind generation has as its cause, the aspiration for the welfare of others
and assisted by the aspiration for enlightenment. It is mentioned in the
teachings that once the uncontrived mind generation arises, that person
will not feel any difficulty in working for the welfare of others. No
matter how difficult it is, that person doesn’t feel it. In fact, what
he/she feels is only enthusiasm. Those who have actualized this uncontrived
mind generation are also able to cultivate very strong joyous perseverance.
Hence, those who have the uncontrived mind generation, have great
enthusiasm and great joyous perseverance. With these, they are able to
accomplish many things for themselves and for others. In fact, they are
able to achieve many great things. With uncontrived mind generation, they
are also able to achieve the final fruit -the great enlightenment.
Spirit of enlightenment has two divisions:
   1. Aspirational mind generation
   2. Engaged mind generation
[LRCM V2 page48:] With respect to its subdivisions, Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds follows the Array of Stalks Sutra and says that it is
both aspirational and engaged:
   Just as one distinguishes
   Between wishing to go and going
   Similarly the learned should understand the division
   Of these two in accordance with this sequence.
The example given here is like having the wish to go somewhere and actually
acting on the wish i.e. one set off for the journey.
Aspirational mind generation is the mind that thinks; “I will achieve
enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings.”
Engaged mind generation, on the basis of bodhichitta, engages in the
bodhisattva deeds (or conducts).
In order to understand in an easier way;
Engaged bodhichitta is the mind that is directly conjoined with the
activity of engaging in the bodhisattva deeds. Aspirational bodhichitta is
the mind that is not directly conjoined with the activity of engaging in
the bodhisattva deeds.
Having said this, one might ask about the meaning “to be directly conjoined
with the activity of engaging in the bodhisattva deeds” verses “the mind
that is not directly conjoined with the activity of engaging in the
bodhisattva deeds.”
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Anybody has idea?
Take the example of giving. When you are actually engage in the act of
giving, the act has to be conjoined with a very strong thought of wanting
to achieve full enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. That
is what we mean by directly conjoined with the activity of engaging in the
bodhisattva deeds.
What is giving? It is the mind that wishes or willing to give.
At the time of the act of giving, the mind is accompanied by a very strong
thought to achieve full enlightenment. With these two together, that is
what it means by directly conjoined.
Essentially, the bodhisattva conduct is the practice of the six
perfections.
(The six perfections are: The perfection of generosity, perfection of
ethics, perfection of patience, perfection of joyous effort, perfection of
concentration and perfection of wisdom.)
When the bodhisattva is engaging in the practice of whatever perfection,
and at that time there manifest a strong thought of wanting to achieve full
enlightenment (omniscience); that is what it means by directly conjoined
with the activity of engaging in the bodhisattva conduct.
The boundary of the aspirational mind generation exists from the Mahayana
Path of Accumulation through the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
The boundary of the engaged mind generation exists from the Mahayana Path
of Accumulation through the end of the continuum of a sentient being.

|               |Meaning                             |Boundary                 |
|Mind generation|Is the Mahayana main knower that has|Exists from the Mahayana |
|               |concomitant with the intention to   |Path of Accumulation     |
|               |achieve full enlightenment in order |through the buddha ground|
|               |to accomplish the welfare of others |                         |
|Aspirational   |The mind that is not directly       |Exists from the Mahayana |
|mind generation|conjoined with the activity of      |Path of Accumulation     |
|               |engaging in the bodhisattva deeds   |through the end of the   |
|               |                                    |continuum of a sentient  |
|               |                                    |being.                   |
|Engaged mind   |The mind that is directly conjoined |Exists from the Mahayana |
|generation     |with the activity of engaging in the|Path of Accumulation     |
|               |bodhisattva deeds                   |through the end of the   |
|               |                                    |continuum of a sentient  |
|               |                                    |being.                   |


Student 1: (Ven Gyurme summarized) Does Buddha has bodhichitta or not?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Anybody has answer?
Student 1: (Ven Gyurme summarized) Is the mind generation and bodhichitta
the same or not?
We cannot posit bodhichitta and Mahayana mind generation to be the same
thing.  Whatever is bodhichitta, you have to say it is necessarily the
Mahayana mind generation. But whatever is the Mahayana mind generation is
not necessarily bodhichitta.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Is it new thing? Surprise? Not agree?
Student 2: Can we say Mahayana mind generation is not motivation and
bodhicitta is a kind of motivation?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I think both are not motivation.
In the treatises, engaged mind generation exists even on the buddha
ground*1, whereas aspirational mind generation exists through the end of
the continuum of a sentient being. Why is it this discussion?
For someone who is in meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness, does mind
generation exist in his mind or not? The answer is yes.
Which mind generation: Aspirational or engaged?  It is aspirational mind
generation.
Why? This is because it is not directly conjoined with the activity of
engaging in the bodhisattva deeds.
Engaged mind generation exists on the buddha ground*1. Buddha works for the
benefit of all sentient beings.
Question: Does Buddha have the intent on achieving enlightenment?
The engaged mind generation exists even on the buddha ground*1
Does Buddha have mind generation? Yes.
If Buddha has mind generation then we have to say Buddha has the intent on
achieving omniscience or enlightenment for the benefit of others.
But the Buddha has already achieved enlightenment. Does Buddha has mind
generation or not? Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You have to say yes.
Does Buddha have the mind that is the intent on achieving enlightenment?
You have to say yes.
Hasn’t Buddha already achieved enlightenment? Yes.
What is the problem with having the intent on achieving enlightenment when
you have already achieved enlightenment? For example, after you have
finished eating and with your stomach is still full, is there any problem
of having the wish to eat?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Something similar to this. I am not sure.
Think about this.
It is clear in the treatises that the Buddha has the mind generation but
Buddha does not have bodhichitta. Bodhichitta only exists in the continuum
of the bodhisattvas. Buddha is not a bodhisattva.
Definition of the Mahayana mind generation is the Mahayana main knower that
has concomitant with the intention to achieve full enlightenment in order
to accomplish the welfare of others.
Does the Buddha possess mind generation? Yes.
Does the Buddha have the intention to achieve omniscience? Yes.
Has the Buddha already achieved enlightenment? Yes.
Student 3: Does Buddha have engaged bodhicitta?
Khen Rinpoche: Strictly speaking, we have to say engaged mind generation.
Question: Does Buddha has the refuge or not?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): What do you think? Does Buddha have
refuge? Is Buddha Buddhist? He gives refuge to us but he doesn’t have
refuge.
In order for refuge to arise, one must have the fear of the lower realms
and cyclic existence. Is Buddha terrified of suffering? Does Buddha have
any fear of suffering or not?
Student 4: Engaged mind generation exist in buddha ground. Aspirational
bodhicitta exist through the end of the continuum of sentient beings. How
about engaged bodhicitta?
Khen Rinpoche: Engaged bodhicitta exist through the end of the continuum of
sentient beings.

*1: Note that engaged bodhicitta exist through the end of the continuum of
sentient beings. Buddha possess mind generation but does not have
bodhicitta. So on the buddha ground, there is Mahayana mind generation but
there is no bodhichitta

Student 4: Since both aspirational and engaged bodhicitta exist through the
end of the continuum of sentient beings, so what is their differentiation?
Khen Rinpoche: It boils down to the understanding of what it means when we
say “directly conjoined with the activity of engaging in the bodhisattva
deeds.” Going back to the example of giving, giving is the mind that
willing to give. In the process of giving, the mind of giving manifest. At
the same time the intention to achieve omniscience manifest and that is
engaged bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You are not listening carefully.
Bodhichitta and mind generation are not the same. Mind generation has a
bigger pervasion. If it is bodhichitta, it is necessarily Mahayana mind
generation.  If it is Mahayana mind generation, it is not necessarily
bodhichitta.
On the buddha ground, there is Mahayana mind generation but there is no
bodhichitta.
So, who has bodhichitta? Only the bodhisattvas.
Is Buddha a bodhisattva? No.
Is Buddha Mahayanist?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Is Buddha Mahayanist? Yes, don’t say no.
At the beginning, it is stated clearly that the entrance to the Mahayana is
the Mahayana mind generation. Whether a person is a Mahayanist or not
depend on whether he have mind generation. Therefore, we have to say that
the Buddha is a Mahayanist but not a bodhisattva. The Buddha has mind
generation but does not have bodhichitta.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It makes the two different. But sometimes
the two words become the same.
If we want to analyze the things to more details then you will have to
clearly make the distinction between these two.
Ven Gyurme: The question is how do you differentiate between aspiration
bodhichitta and engaged bodhichitta?
If it is directly conjoined with the activity of engaging the bodhisattva
deeds, then it is the engaged mind generation.
Question: How do you establish that a person has aspirational mind
generation?
Student 5: We have established that the pervasion of the mind generation
now exists on the buddha ground. Seem like now there are three aspects:
aspiring bodhichitta, engaging bodhichitta and mind generation and these
three are not the same. We have established the difference between mind
generation and bodhichitta. Now the qualm is what is the difference between
aspiring bodhichitta and engaging bodhichitta? Is it according to the root
text, someone with the vows and without the vows?
Khen Rinpoche: The difference between aspirational bodhichitta and engaged
bodhichitta boil down to the definition. Aspirational bodhichitta is the
mind that is not directly conjoined with the activity of engaging the
bodhisattva deeds. The thing to realize here is the meaning of directly
conjoined. For those of you who are from the previous Basic Program, do you
remember the discussion about a person on the Mahayana Path of Seeing? Does
bodhichitta exists in the wisdom of meditative equipoise of a person on the
Mahayana Path of Seeing?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Why it exists there?
Student 6: Because he is a bodhisattva.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It exists because he is a bodhisattva.
Someone who is on the Mahayana Path of Seeing in meditative equipoise
directly focusing on emptiness has bodhicitta in this mind. Is the
bodhichitta manifest or not? If you say no, are you saying that the mind to
achieve omniscience is not manifest?
For someone who is on the Mahayana Path of Seeing in the meditative
equipoise, only the mind realizing emptiness is manifest. Bodhichitta is
not manifest. Mind generation is not manifest.
Does this bodhisattva have mind generation? Yes.
What kind of mind generation does he have? Aspirational mind generation.
Why? Because it is not directly conjoined with the activity of the engaging
the bodhisattva deeds.
To make it easy, going back to Shantideva’s example, aspirational spirit of
enlightenment is just a thought that think; “I will achieve enlightenment/
omniscience”. Then at the actual time of engaging in the bodhisattva deeds,
that becomes engaged spirit of enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Simple as that. No need to think so much.
Just because of the older students,  that’s all. Just checking their
memory.
Next is the instruction of exchanging self and other.
[LRCM V2 page 51] b’ The training based on the teachings of the conquerors’
child Shantideva
The training based on the teachings of the conquerors' child Santideva has
three parts:
   1. Contemplating the benefits of exchanging self and other and the faults
      of not exchanging self and other
   2. The ability to exchange self and other if you accustom yourself to the
      thought of doing so
   3. The stages of meditating on how to exchange self and other
[LRCM V2 page 51] 1' Contemplating the benefits of exchanging self and
other and the faults of not exchanging self and other
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
    Whoever wishes to quickly protect
    Self and other
    Must exchange self for other.
    Practice this excellent secret.
Next, the quotation discuss about the benefits of exchanging self and other
and the faults of not doing so.
[LRCM V2 page 52]
      Whatever worldly joy there is
      Arises from wishing for others' happiness.
      Whatever worldly suffering there is
      Arises from wishing for your own happiness.
      What need is there to say more?
      Look at the difference between these two:
      Ordinary persons act for their own welfare;
      The Sage acts for others' welfare.
The text goes on to explain if we do not exchanging self for other, put
aside enlightenment, even to achieve happiness in this life is difficult.
[LRCM V2 page 52]
      If you do not genuinely exchange
      Your own happiness for others' suffering,
      You will not achieve buddhahood,
      And even in cyclic existence, you will have no joy.
Consider how being self-centered is the door to all suffering and being
other-centered is the basis of all excellence.
Here is something for you to think about. The argument here is that all the
happiness comes from cherishing others and all the problems and unwanted
sufferings come from cherishing oneself. So, you have to see whether this
is true or not.
[LRCM V2 page 52]  2' The ability to exchange self and other if you
accustom yourself to the thought of doing so
Take the example of your enemy becoming a friend. At first, when you heard
even the name of your enemy, fear arose. Later you were reconciled and
became such close friends that when this new friend was absent you were
very unhappy. This reversal resulted from familiarizing your mind with a
new attitude. So likewise, if you become habituated to viewing yourself as
you presently view others [with an attitude of neglect] and to viewing
others as you presently view yourself [with a cherishing attitude], you
will exchange self and other. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
      Do not turn away from this difficulty.
      Although you were frightened upon hearing someone's name,
      Now, due to the power of conditioning,
      You dislike that person's absence.
And also:
      It is not difficult to consider my body
      With the perspective I have toward another's body.
The text is saying that if we are accustomed to this way of thinking, then
it is really possible to exchange self for other. Then a qualm is raised:
[LRCM V2 page 52] Qualm: Since someone else's body is not your body, how
can you develop the same attitude that you have toward your own?
Reply: Your body was produced from your father's semen and your mother's
blood. Even though it was produced from a portion of someone else's body,
you conceive it to be your own by the influence of previous conditioning.
Similarly, if you become accustomed to cherishing another's body as you
presently do your own, you will view it with the same perspective that you
now have toward your own body. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
      Therefore just as you conceived "I"
      With respect to the drops of semen
      And blood of others, so you can be conditioned
      To cherishing others as you do yourself
Reflect thoroughly on the benefits of being other-centered and the faults
of being self-centered. Thereby you will produce from the depths of your
heart a great delight in meditating on the exchange of self and other. Then
recognize that you can actually generate it once you have become habituated
to it.
[LRCM V2 page 53]  3” The stages of meditating on how to exchange self and
other.
In the outline, it says:
   1. Removing obstacles
   2. The actual way on meditating on this
First, identify the mind of exchanging self and other.
[LRCM V2 page 53] 3' The stages of meditating on how to exchange self and
other
The phrases "exchanging self and other" and "making oneself others and
others oneself" do not indicate a training in an attitude which thinks "I
am others" or "Others' eyes, etc., are mine." They indicate a change in the
orientation of the two states of mind of cherishing yourself and neglecting
others, wherein you develop the attitude of cherishing others as you
presently do yourself and neglecting yourself as you presently do others.
Therefore Santideva's statement above that you must "exchange your own
happiness for others' suffering" means to view cherishing yourself as the
enemy and then to stop emphasizing your own happiness. In addition, you
must view cherishing others as a good quality, stop neglecting others'
suffering, and instead emphasize the removal of their suffering. In brief,
this statement means that you remove others' suffering while disregarding
your own happiness.
Here we are trying to identify the meaning of exchanging oneself and other.
Exchanging oneself for other does not mean that one becomes somebody else
and then somebody else becomes oneself. This will never ever happen. That
is not possible.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Possible?
Up to now, we have been cherishing ourselves. On one hand we have the
attitude of cherishing ourselves and neglecting others. Exchanging self and
other means to switch these two i.e. instead of cherishing ourselves, we
cherish others and instead of neglecting others welfare, we neglects our
own happiness.
Exchanging self for other means to cherish others and to disregards one’s
own happiness. You need to be aware that there is a practice of giving away
one’s happiness and taking on the suffering of others.
  -The practice of taking on the suffering of others is to reduce our self-
cherishing.
  -The practice of giving away our happiness to others is to increase the
thought of cherishing others.
The essential purpose of doing the practice of taking on the suffering of
others and dedicating one’s own happiness to others is to reduce the
influence of self-grasping in our life and to increase the thought of
cherishing others.
In order to be able to do this practice of taking on the suffering of
others and giving away one’s happiness, first one must be utterly convinced
of the faults of self-cherishing; self-cherishing is the essential enemy.
As it is said in the text, self-centeredness is the door to all suffering.
On the basis of having that conviction, we take on the suffering of others
in order to weaken our self-cherishing. With the conviction of how
cherishing others is the basis of all the excellence qualities and in order
to increase one’s consideration and the attitude of cherishing others, one
engages in the practice of dedicating one’s happiness to others. Whether it
is the practice of exchanging self and other or doing the practice of
tonglen (taking and giving), these practices are done on the basis of
seeing how eliminating other’s suffering is more important than one’s own
suffering and how other’s happiness is more important than one’s own
happiness.
You do see how challenging this practice is because it has to be founded on
the conviction and the realization that others are kind and precious. How
do you look at the person who is helpful to you? When something bad happen
to that person, you are unable to bear with it and you try to do something
for that person. Why do you have such reaction? It boils down of having the
feeling for that person who has been helpful to you.
When something bad happen to someone whom you do not have much connection
with or someone who hasn’t been really helpful to you, you do not really
feel anything i.e. you don’t feel as if you cannot take it. We are all like
that. So it is not easy. In order to be able to have the feeling of unable
to bear the suffering of others, first we must see how kind they are. We
must feel the connection with others that come from reflecting how there
isn’t anyone who hasn’t been our mothers; everyone has been our mothers not
just once but numberless times and they will continue to be our mothers in
the future. They have been kind to us. On the basis of this reflection in
relation to every sentient being, I guess, only then we will able to have
this special feeling of connection with everyone.
What we want is happiness and we need food, clothes and we want reputation.
For the food, where does the food come from? No matter how you think about
it or from which perspectives, the conclusion is that the foods come from
the existence of others. For those meat eaters, the food definitely comes
from somebody else. Even for those who are vegetarian, the food still has
to come through someone. So the food that we need comes from the kindness
of others. Similarly, the clothes that we wear, the good standing in
society or in the community or the good reputation that we all desire has
to come through the kindness of others. How are you going to be famous if
you are alone?
If we do think about it, then it becomes very clear that the happiness that
we desire come by depending on others. If we were to sincerely help someone
by giving some financial aids or something, a very special kind of
happiness will arises in our heart. I guess all of you have experienced
that. If we were to think of all the ten non-virtue actions that we have
created, basically those ten non-virtues arises from not respecting others
and particularly due to the very strong self-cherishing by placing so much
importance on our own happiness which becomes the cause for us to engage in
the ten non-virtues. After having committed the ten non-virtue actions, we
have to experience the result in the future by taking rebirth in the lower
realms such as in the hells and we have to stay there for very long time.
All these unwanted sufferings come from non-virtue. We have engaged in the
non-virtues motivated by our self-cherishing attitude; it all boils down to
the self-cherishing attitude.
If we look at all the positive qualities that we can achieve in both
temporary and ultimate including the realization of love and compassion up
to enlightenment, all these realizations come in dependent on sentient
beings and  cherishing others. They do not come from cherishing ourselves.
We have to figure it out for ourselves how self-cherishing is the door for
all sufferings and how cherishing others is the basis of all excellence. We
have to develop very strong conviction in this for ourselves and once we
have this very strong conviction, I guess slowly we can start to exchange
ourselves for other. Essentially this is an instruction for reducing our
self-cherishing and increasing our attitude towards cherishing others, and
by the way considering and respecting others.
The text then talks about the two obstacles in training the mind in
exchanging self for others. First you have to understand what are the two
obstacles and the antidotes to the obstacles. So please read the relevant
pages.
