Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 27.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.343115
================================================================================


In a sutra, the Buddha ask; “What are the benefits that accrue to an
individual just by recollecting the Buddha, without forgetting the Buddha,
remembering the Buddha and hold on to the Buddha’s name with faith and
devotion?” Compare the merits accumulated by this individual to someone who
makes countless offerings equal to the number of particles of the world of
the ten directions for a period of an eon, the merits of making these
offerings are relatively smaller. The teaching always talk about the
benefits of making extensive offerings but when compare to the merits that
one gained by having a single-pointed faith and devotion to the Buddha, it
is said to accumulate more merits. It is said that we accumulate even more
merits from hearing the teaching of the Buddha. The merits will be even
greater if we were to take the teaching to heart, reflect on it until we
gain an ascertainment and then familiarize with it in our mind through
meditation. So this is what being said by the Buddha in the sutra. We
should remind ourselves how incredibly fortunate we are to have this
opportunity now to learn and to reflect on this text which show the
unmistaken path that we are going to take. We should also remind ourselves,
we are accumulating merits/ virtues in the process.
We have been talking about the Three Jewels –the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha
and if we look at the Three Jewels from the perspective of the order of
generating them in our own mind, we first have to generate the Dharma Jewel
in our own mental continuum and subsequently become the Sangha and then
ultimately we will progress to become a Buddha. So in term of our personal
progression, this is the order of how we become the Buddha, Dharma and
Sangha.  We have to gain a thorough ascertainment on this. We have to
understand this. The actual refuge that protects us from the sufferings of
the lower realms and the sufferings of cyclic existence is the Dharma
Jewel. The Dharma Jewel is the actual refuge. When we talk about the Dharma
Jewel, we primarily talk about the realizational dharma. How does the
realizational dharma come into our own mind? It has to come about by
depending on the scriptural dharma. First we have to learn the scriptural
dharma and by putting them into practice, we then actualize the
realizational dharma. Just having some faith and belief in the scriptural
dharma alone is not sufficient because we have to learn and understand the
scripture dharma.
When we talk about the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, we can talk about the
causal refuge and the resultant refuge. The resultant refuge refers to the
goal that we want to achieve as the Three Jewels. We have to work at it to
generate in our own mind. In order to generate the resultant Three Jewels
in our own mind, we first have to learn and actualize the Dharma in our
heart. From here, you can see how important learning/studying and
reflection are. Studying and reflection become indispensable elements in
our quest to actualize the Dharma. We as individual have to see the reason
behind learning. Why should we learn/ study in order to practice? We really
have to gain an ascertainment on the need to study. By seeing this in our
own mind, then we should put in as much effort as possible to continue
learning. Let’s use the example of refuge and link it to our study and
reflection by looking at the prayer which we usually recite; “Sang gya cho
dang sog kyi chog nam la” –I go for refuge until I am enlightened to the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. After having done some studies on the topic of
refuge, if you think about the meaning while reciting the prayer, your
studies will at least help you to identify correctly whom you are going for
protection and refuge. It is not sufficient just to say the Buddha, Dharma
and Sangha. Due to having done some studies, you will have some idea in
your heart; “What is the Buddha, what is the Dharma and what is the
Sangha.” On the basis of this knowledge, if you reflect on this prayer
while reciting it, perhaps you will able to develop some special kind of
faith and devotion towards the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. This is just
using a simple example of refuge which we have already covered.
In order for genuine refuge to arise in our heart, two causes must be
present: fear of the sufferings of the lower realms combine with the faith
of conviction in the abilities of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha to protect
us from that fear. In order to develop this kind of feeling in our heart,
we first must know what are the two causes and that come from learning. On
that basis, we think about it and get some understanding. We have to
understand what are the sufferings of the lower realms if we were to reborn
there and how we have to endure with those sufferings. It is only by
thinking of the sufferings of the lower realms, we develop a genuine fear
and worry for our future. Only with this genuine fear we seek for help and
protection from our heart.
I am just using the example of refuge to highlight the huge difference
between having done some studies and reflection and not having done any
studies and reflection. If we have done some studies and reflection on the
meaning of refuge, when we recite the prayer we will be able to at least
identify correctly with whom we are going for refuge to –the Buddha, Dharma
and Sangha. For someone who has not done some studies and do not know much,
the person may recite the prayer with faith but I don’t think that person
is able to generate the kind of understanding of faith and devotion compare
to the person who has done some studies on refuge. Of course we have to
understand that by just studying alone does not necessarily mean we will
have stronger faith compare to someone who has not study. The point is that
we have to study and then reflect on what we have studied. Only then our
refuge become stronger than someone who has not study and does not reflects
on it. For someone who just mere study the topic on refuge but not
reflecting it, it is possible that at time his refuge may be weaker than a
person who has not done any study.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): What is the conclusion? To study or not
to study?
We do see some people who have done a lot studies but don’t seem to have
any faith and devotion (to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha).  We can compare
them to some elderly people who may not know much but the way they
prostrate and make offering to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, they show
unbelievable devotion. We can also see how some of these elderly show
respect and devotion even to the Sangha member –the way they bow and pay
respect. Some even pay homage to the feet of the Sangha member and yet
these people have not done any study. If we look at some of those who have
done a lot studies, their devotion is pale in comparison to these elderly
people. Forget about asking them to touch the feet of the Sangha member, it
is even difficult to ask them to bow to the Sangha member as sign of
respect.
My point is that study is important but study alone does not necessarily
mean that there is transformation. On the basis of learning, we must
reflect and gain an ascertainment in our heart. Only then we will be able
to see transformation in our mind. We will change for the better. We will
be able to quickly develop the experience and realization of the path.  If
you do what I have just mentioned, only then the benefits of having gone
for refuge as mentioned in the text will happen.
We have been looking at the general precepts that we should undertake after
having gone refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
2. The general precepts
There are six general precepts:
1. By recalling the distinctions and good qualities of the three jewels, go
   for refuge again and again
2. By recalling the great kindness of the three jewels, strive  to  worship
   them constantly and offer the first portion of your food and drink
3. Establish other living beings in this practice by considering them  with
   compassion
4. Whatever activity  you  engage  in,  and  whatever  your  purpose,  make
   offerings and supplications to the three  jewels,  forsaking  any  other
   worldly methods
5. After you have understood the benefits, go for refuge three times in the
   day and three times at night
6. Maintain your refuge and do not forsake the three jewels, even  in  jest
   or if it costs you your life
2. By recalling the great kindness of the three jewels,  strive  to  worship
them constantly and offer the first portion of your food and drink.
Here it has 10 sub-points.
     i. Constant offerings
    ii. The peculiarity that the collections are completed with little
        trouble
   iii. Impure offerings
    iv. The manner of respect when offering
     v. The need to exert oneself in making offerings
    vi. High status, paths, etc. are attained through making offerings in
        that way
   vii. How the size of offerings and so forth is a distinction to do with
        the mind
  viii. How to train in upright[ness with regard to] offering substances,
        following the masters of former times
  ix. Refutation of the manners of speaking [to the effect] that the way
      Bodhisattvas make offerings, having gained control over  material
      things, is impure
     x. How to make offerings with other vast things
x.  How to make offerings with other vast things
This outline is trying to explain on how to make our offerings extensively.
What should we think and do to make our offerings extensive? The way to
make our offerings extensive is adopting a wider perspective. For example,
when we make offerings to the Buddha, rather than thinking that we are
making offerings to just one Buddha, we should think that we are making
offerings to the numberless Buddhas in the ten directions.  In term of
duration, we can think we are making offerings like these for the rest of
our life; in fact up to enlightenment. With regard to the number of
offerings, rather than thinking that we just make whatever offerings that
are presented physically, we can mentally multiply these offerings and
think that we are making numberless of such offerings. As regards to the
quality of the offerings, we should think that we are making the best
quality offerings.
With regard to the attitude that we should adopt when making the offerings,
we should worship the Three Jewels with faith and devotion in our heart and
do it with a happy mind and enthusiastically. This will make a huge
difference to the result. At the end of such act of worship we should
dedicate the accumulated merits towards the achievement of full
enlightenment.
I guess the way to make our offerings extensively does not really depend on
how physically extensive our offerings are, but the main way to make our
offering extensively is through the mind by thinking in the way that I have
just explained. Yes, we need to accumulate merits but we have to be skilled
in doing so i.e. how to think to make it more extensive. I guess the result
of making offerings over time is that our devotion would increase more and
more, more efforts and more transformation of our mind. But it seems that
most people are not like that; the more offerings they made overtime, they
become less enthusiastic and have less devotion. If that happens, this show
that that person perhaps does not understand the point behind making
offering, the way making offering and may also show that the person has the
inability to correctly identify the object of refuge. At the end of day, it
all boils down to lack of faith. In the previous session in the section of
guru devotion, we talked about how faith is the forerunner of all
qualities. If we don’t have faith, then this will happens. As mentioned in
the Jewel Garland: “The person who has faith becomes a stable practitioner.
The dharma practice in his mind becomes stable”. When we use the word
‘refuge’, essentially we are talking about the faith of conviction in the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Once we have gained this faith of conviction in
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, this is the beginning of our practice. When
one has this genuine refuge, then one becomes a Buddhist. Then all other
qualities will follow. When we go for refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and
Sangha, we will not fall into the lower realms because the process of
closing the door to the lower realms has already begun.
3. Establish other living beings in this practice by considering  them  with
compassion
Ven Gyurme: “in this practice” means refuge.  “By considering them with
compassion” means considering these living beings with great compassion
i.e. motivated by out of concerns, you help them to practice refuge.
In order to do this, we ourselves must know the purpose of refuge. We must
know the reason for seeking the help and protection of the Buddha, Dharma
and Sangha. After knowing the reason, then motivated by sincere concerns of
other living beings, we try to lead them to take refuge.
4. Whatever  activity  you  engage  in,  and  whatever  your  purpose,  make
offerings and  supplications  to  the  three  jewels,  forsaking  any  other
worldly methods
After having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, the main
practice is to lead our life according to the law of karma. With that
conviction of karma, we lead our life accordingly. But life is such that
along the way we will meet with problems and difficulties and things may
not turn out the way we want them to be. We have to understand that this is
due to our own karma. Nevertheless, if there is anything we need to
accomplish, we should honor the Three Jewels i.e. we should entrust
ourselves to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
5.  After you have understood the benefits, go for  refuge  three  times  in
the day and three times at night
There are eight benefits of going for refuge
a. You are included among Buddhists
b. You become worthy to uphold all vows
c. You reduce and eliminate previously accumulated karmic obstructions
d. You will accumulate vast merit
e. You will not fall into the miserable realms
f. You will not be thwarted by human or nonhuman hindrances
g. You will accomplish everything you wish
h. You will quickly achieve buddhahood
a. You are included among Buddhists: You cannot really make the distinction
by looking at the external. The distinction is made inside. Depend on our
mind set, if we uphold the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha as our refuge single-
pointedly in our heart then we are Buddhist; otherwise cannot.
b. You become worthy to uphold all vows: If we have genuine refuge we will
be counted as Buddhist. With refuge then we become a suitable basis to
receive the pratimoksha vows, bodhisattva vows and tantric vows. Without
refuge in our heart, there is no way we can take and generate those vows in
our mind. In essence, without faith, there is no way we can take and
generate these vows in our mind.
c. You reduce and eliminate previously accumulated karmic obstructions:
With genuine refuge we reduce and eliminate the previously accumulated
karmic obstructions. There are accounts of how people who have prevented
themselves from going into the lower realms by taking refuge and how people
are able to take a rebirth as celestial beings/ worldly gods after having
gone for refuge.
As mentioned earlier on the benefit of having faith in the Buddha, even
just a simple devotion and real faith in the Buddha will accumulate more
merits than someone who makes countless offerings over a long period of
times. Of course, if we have faith, we accumulate powerful merits which
will eliminate the previously accumulated karmic obstructions.
d. You will accumulate vast merit: Just to have an idea the merits that one
accumulate after having gone for refuge, Aryasura's Compendium of the
Perfections states:
  If the merit of going for refuge took form,
  Even these three realms would be too small to contain it—
  A cupped hand cannot measure
  The great ocean, the storehouse of water.
e. You will not fall into the miserable realms: If one has vast amount of
merits then of course one will not fall into the lower realms.
f. You will not be thwarted by human or nonhuman hindrances: Essentially
the reason why we are having obstacles and things do not go in accordance
with our wish is due to lack of merits or the merit is not strong enough.
If you have genuine refuge, then you should have a lot of merits which you
will not be adversely affected by human and non-humans.
g. You will accomplish everything you wish: If you have genuine refuge in
your heart, then you will accumulate vast amount of merits and things then
will go your way. Everything will become successful.
h. You will quickly achieve Buddhahood: With genuine refuge you will
accumulate a lot of merits and this creates the causes such that you will
not be born in the place where there is lack of Dharma. Instead we will
born in the place with both internal and external conditions that enables
us to practice the Dharma. Through practicing the Dharma, we will quickly
achieve enlightenment.
These are the eight benefits of going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and
Sangha. We are advised to remember these benefits in our daily life. While
remembering these benefits in our mind we should go for refuge three times
in the days and three times at night. While we know the benefits of going
for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, we will collect the benefits
by making offerings, honoring and worship the Three Jewels. If we do not do
it, the opportunity will be wasted. So we should remember the benefits and
go for refuge three times in the days and three times at night.

6. Maintain your refuge and do not forsake the three jewels,  even  in  jest
or if it costs you your life
All of us consider our life to be very precious. Our body is also very
previous. We do a lot to protect our life and our body. It is said that
maintaining our refuge and faith in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is
something even more important. If we choose our life and our body over the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, something which is much more important, we will
not achieve any great purpose by forsaking the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
Here, we are to maintain our refuge even at the cost of our life. Why? The
text say:
  Inevitably you will lose your body, life, and resources. But, if you
  forsake the three jewels for the sake of these, you will suffer
  continually throughout many lives. Thus, you should repeatedly vow that
  whatever happens you will not forsake your refuge—not even mouthing the
  words in jest.
Eliminating inaccuracies [with respect to the precepts of going for refuge]
1 Refutation of that which is not a precept
  Former teachers have said that there is a precept that you should
  practice going for refuge to the tathagata of whichever direction you are
  going in. I have not seen a source for this.
When Lama Tsongkhapa says: “I have not seen a source for this,” he is
saying that; “I have not seen a source which says that if you are going
towards the West, then you should take refuge in Buddha, Dharma and Sangha
of that direction and if you are going towards the North, then you should
take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha of that direction. Lama
Tsongkhapa says that he has not seen a source for this. The point is that
it does not matter which direction you are going towards to, you just take
refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
2 The sources for the specific precepts
  I have presented the six general precepts in accordance with how they
  appear in Atisha's Commentary on the Difficult Points of the "Lamp for
  the Path to Enlightenment." The first three of the special precepts are
  explained in the sutras, the other three in Vimalamitra's Six Aspects of
  Going for Refuge.
3 The difference between degenerating and relinquishing [the precepts]
  How contravening these precepts cause weakening and forsaking of your
  refuge is explained as follows.
  Some assert that if you violate six of the precepts—the first three
  special precepts, plus the precepts of constantly going for refuge, not
  forsaking refuge even for the sake of your life, and making offerings to
  the Three Jewels - you have given up your refuge.
Lama Tsongkhapa says:
  However, an actual forsaking of refuge means that you have contravened
  the precept not to forsake refuge even for the sake of your life.
  Similarly, even if you do not forsake the three jewels, if you follow
  both them and a teacher, teaching, and community that are contrary to
  them, you contravene the precept not to acknowledge other refuges. Since
  you are not fully entrusting yourself to the refuge, you have forsaken
  it. I think that if these two do not occur, other contraventions of the
  precepts are just contraventions, but not causes of forsaking refuge.
The above paragraph is trying to explain: When do we forsake our  refuge  as
oppose to degenerating it? We lose our refuge if  we  contravene  the  sixth
general precepts: Maintain your refuge and do not forsake the Three  Jewels,
even in jest or if it costs you your life. One cause of  losing  our  refuge
is we forsake the Three Jewels.
The other cause of losing our  refuge:  you  hold  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and
Sangha as the ultimate refuge and at the same time,  you  are  also  holding
other entity as the ultimate refuge. When you are doing that, you have  some
doubt and not entrusting yourself  completely  to  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and
Sangha.
If we go against those precepts that are stated in  the  text  –the  special
precepts  and  the  general  precepts-  this  will   constitute   only   the
contravention but do not constitute the forsaking of the whole refuge.   For
example, if you forget to offer the first portion of your food and drink  to
the Three Jewels, that is a contravention  of  the  precepts  but  will  not
cause you to lose  your  refuge.  Essentially  refuge  gives  single-pointed
faith of conviction in the Buddha, Dharma  and  Sangha.  If  this  faith  of
conviction is weakened then one’s refuge will degenerate. If you  lose  this
single-pointed faith  of  conviction  in  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha,
basically you lose your refuge.
4 The advice not to  transgress  the  precepts  because  of  how  great  the
benefits are: being the entrance gate to the teachings etc.
  This being the case, going for refuge is the main door to the Buddha's
  teaching. If you go for refuge in a way that transcends mere words, you
  will not be defeated by outer and inner obstacles, for you are relying
  upon the highest power. Since good qualities develop easily and
  deteriorate with difficulty, they can only continue to increase.
  Therefore, it is extremely important, as previously explained, to uphold
  the refuges by means of fearing suffering, recalling the good qualities
  of the refuges, and so forth, and to make an effort not to transgress the
  precepts.
Essentially this paragraph is summarizing all the important points that we
have covered so far:
1. We should develop this fear of sufferings. In this context it is the
fear of the sufferings of the lower realms.
2. We should recall the good qualities of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
With these two causes, we single-pointedly entrust ourselves to the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha. After we have done that, we should make an effort to
live by this refuge guideline.
As mentioned in the text, there are so many benefits of going for refuge.
One of which is that we will not fall into the lower realms. This is
something which we have to think for ourselves. We have to understand why
we need to go for refuge. You have to read the text and think: “How does
the refuge protect me from the sufferings of the lower realms?” After
having read the text and thinking about it, if you develop the
ascertainment in your heart that it is so, I guess you have fulfilled the
purpose of having study this topic.
Student 1: Heard from someone saying that the Buddha actually manifest in
different forms to teach the disciples of different inclinations. For the
Buddhist, he manifest as the Buddha. For those who are not incline to
Buddhism he manifest into other form such as Jesus Christ who teach
Christianity or in the form other religious leaders. The main purpose of
teaching them is to practice ethics. Do their practice constitute as
Buddhist path; at least in the practice of ethics? Is it alright to take
refuge in Jesus?
Khen Rinpoche: Buddha does manifest in various forms to work for the
benefit of sentient beings. What if we view the object of refuge of other
religious traditions as being the manifestation of Buddha? With that view
in mind, it should not be any problem if we entrust ourselves to the Buddha
and take refuge.
Student 1: So we then can become Christian.
Khen Rinpoche: You are not regarding Jesus as Jesus. You view Jesus as the
manifestation of the Buddha and you still take ultimate refuge in the
Buddha. It is different from what we have discussed earlier which we
forsake our refuge by going for refuge to another entity other than the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. If you do that, you will lose your refuge. But
here, taking refuge by actively viewing Jesus as the manifestation of
Buddha i.e.relating that entity as the Buddha. This is not forsaking your
refuge.
Student 1: Is it true that as a Buddhist, we should not convert others out
of their religion?
Khen Rinpoche: Life is such that we cannot force someone to do thing that
he doesn’t want to do. But if the other party has the interest and the
conditions are suitable, you can encourage and help him. If he is not
willing then it is not going to work. As mentioned in the precepts, we
should consider them with compassion. If the situation is right, we can
introduce them refuge and encourage them to take refuge. Basically we do
not force.
Student 2: Buddha says that he does not wash our sins with water. However
Amitabha Buddha says that whoever hears his name at the time of death, he
will be reborn in the Pure Land. How can this be possible if the dying
person does not pray to Buddha, make any offering or taking any refuge?
From his side, he does not has any cause for the result to ripen to be born
in the Pure Land.
Khen Rinpoche: The Buddha possesses inconceivable qualities. If we look at
the qualities of his exalted body, exalted speech and exalted mind, it just
cannot fit our mind. Of course, whatever the Buddha says is also
inconceivable and has benefits as well. It is possible that the Buddha’s
speech has that power because of being inconceivable. Generally, from the
Buddha own side, the Buddha possess really inconceivable qualities and
unbelievable qualities exalted body, speech and mind. From the Buddha’s own
side, hearing the Buddha’s name has the inconceivable benefits. If we think
about it, it takes two hands to clap. If that person does not do anything
from his own side and has not even little bit of faith, to say that
everything is dependent on the Buddha i.e. the Buddha alone can do
everything, I think it is difficult to explain especially if we look at it
from the entire Buddhadharma. To say that everything is just from the side
of the Buddha, it can very difficult to explain and also quite difficult to
believe. As it take two hands to clap, to say that one can just go to Pure
Land just by hearing Amitabha Buddha’s name and his mantra without having
to do anything from one’s own side and with no cause, I personally think
that is difficult. Of course, this is an extremely hidden phenomenon.
It is stated in the teaching that in order to go to the Pure Land of
Amitabha Buddha, you must have the three causes:
   1. You must have irreversible faith
   2. You must repeatedly bring to mind the quality of the Pure Land
   3. You must make single-pointed request.
As mentioned in the teaching, only when these three causes come together,
then you stand a good chance of going to the Pure Land. With these three
conditions are present then we can really justify and explain. Of course,
when the three conditions come together, we accumulate merits and purify
our mind of obscuration. Having said this, we cannot deny that there is
benefit from propagating the benefits of reciting of Amitabha Buddha’s
mantra. Because when we talk about this thing, it interests a lot of people
and people start to gain some belief and then recite the mantra. When they
recite the mantra of Amitabha Buddha, definitely they will get some
benefits. Does it mean that just by reciting the mantra alone one will go
to Pure Land? Then this is something to think about and to analyze.



