Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 28.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.969080
================================================================================


It is said in one sutra that the merit of seeing any  representation  of  a
Buddha, be it a statue or a drawing of a Buddha, or even hearing  the  word
‘Buddha’ exceeds the merit  of  making  offering  of  divine  garments  for
millions of eons. If one can acquires so much merit  just  by  hearing  the
word ‘Buddha’ or just by seeing any representation of a  Buddha,  be  it  a
statue or a drawing, then it goes without saying that  those,  who  out  of
devotion to the Buddha, were to put their hands together and pay homage  to
Buddha, were to recite the praises of the Buddha or were to  make  offering
to the Buddha, will acquire even more merits. So, from  this  quotation  of
the sutra, you can understand the benefits you will get from coming to  the
center for class. You should never think that coming to  the  center  is  a
waste of time because just by coming to the center for class, you come into
contact with numerous representations of the Buddha’s exalted body,  speech
and mind - all the holy images. When  you  come  to  class,  you  hear  the
Buddha’s teachings. So can you imagine how much merit you  will  accumulate
by seeing the holy objects and by hearing the Buddha’s teachings? When  you
listen to the Buddha’s teachings, positive imprints will be  left  on  your
mental continuum. We also usually do prayers such as the prayers  of  going
for refuge and generating bodhichitta before class. So, whenever we do that
we get immeasurable benefits. We also make offering to the Buddhas. So  you
have to understand the benefits you will get  just  by  stepping  into  the
center. Keeping these benefits in mind and as much as possible, you  should
continue  to  come  to  the  center  to  continue  your   studies/learning.
Therefore, we have to realize for ourselves the benefits we will  get  just
by coming to the center. Sometimes when you are not mindful of  this  fact,
then perhaps it is possible you might wonder why you are at the center  and
wasting your time. You may have this kind of feeling. So, it  is  important
that you should not entertain such thought. From wherever you are,  as  you
take your first step towards the center, you should set your motivation  to
learn the dharma -the Buddha’s teaching. If you set off your  journey  with
that motivation,  you  already  accumulate  virtue  and  your  merits  will
commensurate with each and every single  step  you  take  on  your  journey
towards the center.
In the sutra, the Buddhas mentioned the benefits that one will get just  by
seeing  the  various  holy  objects  and  coming  into  contact  with   the
representations of the Buddha’s exalted body, exalted  speech  and  exalted
mind. So from this point of view, as much as possible, you need  to  remind
yourself that you  must  definitely  come  here.  If  just  by  seeing  the
representations of the Buddha can  have  so  much  benefit,  then  it  goes
without saying that if you  were  to  listen  to  the  Buddha’s  teachings,
studying and learning it. If you were to think about the benefits, I  guess
you really don’t have to talk about the benefits and the amount  of  merits
you  can  get  from  learning  the  Buddha’s  teachings.  The  purpose   of
accumulating the merits is for us to develop experiences  and  realizations
of the path as mentioned in the teaching. There is really no better way  to
develop these positive experiences  and  realizations  in  our  minds  than
learning and finding out what the Buddha’s teachings are.
Our purpose of coming here is to  learn  and  study,  therefore  it  become
important for you to read the course material. It does not  matter  whether
you understand exactly what you are reading. If you can understand what you
are reading, of course that is even better.   Definitely  there  is  virtue
just by reading the course material. Anyway you all accept that  you  still
recite the sutras such as ‘Golden Light Sutra’ even though  you  might  not
fully understand the meaning in it because you believe that there is virtue
just by reciting it. If that is the case then the benefit you can get  from
reading the course material,  which  may  not  be  of  greater  merit  than
reciting a sutra, at least we will get some merits. In fact, the merits may
be actually more because we are studying the Buddha’s teaching. If that  is
the case therefore you have to read the course material. The main thing  we
as an individual have to do is to try our best and putting  in  effort.  In
order to learn something many factors have to come together.  So  from  our
side, we should read and on that basis, we should think  of  what  we  have
read, reflect on it, discuss and so forth.
We have completed on the section of refuge. Is there any question? Whenever
I give you the opportunity to ask question, I am not asking you to think of
question here. The questions are those which you have really thought  about
before coming to class. In order to do that you must get into the habit  of
continuously thinking of stuffs, so you will have doubts and  qualms.  Then
when you ask the question,  your  doubts  and  qualms  will  be  eliminated
through the discussion. This is one of the best ways.
[Question raised in Lesson 27: This is with regard to the benefit of being
included among Buddhists. I can understand if you are a Buddhist with
relation to the other seven benefits, e.g., being a Buddhist is a basis for
all vows. But just being included amongst Buddhists, that being a benefit
on its own…A non-Buddhist may say, “So what.”]
(Khen Rinpoche’s reply): One question that was raised in lesson 27
regarding the benefit of taking refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha,
you are included among Buddhists. So, how is that a benefit? I don’t really
have an answer but I guess it is like going to a restaurant getting a
membership or VIP card which gives you some benefits.
Student: Can we say that since only the Buddha’s teachings have the
features of the Four Seals, it is the highest refuge and therefore it is of
great benefit to be amongst the ranks of Buddhists?
Khen Rinpoche: Of course the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  are  the  best  and
highest object of refuge. In term of the object, “Ýes” but in term  of  the
attitude in which you go for refuge, there are different levels;  there  is
the refuge of a person with small, medium and great capacity.
Student 1: In relation to the question on the benefit of taking  refuge  in
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is being included  among  Buddhists,  when  I
read the LRCM, the explanation seem to imply that one is included among the
Buddhists if you are someone who know how to take refuge and does not  give
up refuge. Is this a more specific way of explaining that benefit?
Khen Rinpoche: There is only one way in becoming a Buddhist;  there  is  no
such thing as real Buddhist  or  fake  Buddhist.  By  calling  a  person  a
Buddhist does not make him a Buddhist. A Buddhist is the one who  goes  for
refuge and must possess the causes of refuge in his mind. If you  have  the
causes of refuge in your mind and you go for refuge in the  Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha then you are included among Buddhists; otherwise  one  can  call
oneself a Buddhist but by definition one is still not a Buddhist.
Student 2: The text says that you go for refuge three times in the day  and
three times at night. Does this means reciting three times “I  take  refuge
in the Buddha, I take refuge in the Dharma, I take refuge in the Sangha” in
the day and at night?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 2: Just now it was mentioned “you have the causes of refuge in your
mind”, what are the “causes of refuge”?
Ven Gyurme: Two causes for going for refuge are:
   1. The genuine fear of the sufferings of the lower realms.
   2. The faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ abilities to protect you
      from that fear.

Developing the faith of conviction that is the root of all temporary
happiness and certain goodness
1'  Reflecting on karma and its effects in general
2’  Reflecting on karma and its effects in detail
3’  How you engage in virtue and turn away from non-virtue after you have
reflected on karma and its effects in general and in detail
1' Reflecting on karma and its effects in general
a” The actual way in which to reflect in general
b” Reflecting on the distinctions among the varieties of karma
a" The actual way in which to reflect in general
1" The certainty of karma
2" The magnification of karma
3" Not experiencing the effects of actions that you did not do
4" The actions you have done do not perish
1" The certainty of karma
In Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland:
  From non virtues come all sufferings
  And likewise, all miserable realms.
  From virtues come all happy realms
  And the joys in all rebirths.
All the pleasures and happiness that we experience in our mental continuum
starting from the smallest and slightest pleasures and happiness are the
result of virtue. It is impossible for them to arise from non-virtue.
Conversely, all the sufferings and unhappiness that we experience in our
mental continuum starting from the smallest and slightest sufferings and
unhappiness arise only from non-virtue. So, this is how karma is certain/
definite in this way.
All the happiness and sufferings that we experience:
 -do not arise without a cause i.e. they arise from causes
 -are not created by someone out there
 -do not arise from discordant causes
 -can only arise from the concordant causes
i.e. happiness can only arise from virtue i.e. from the concordant cause of
virtue, comes the concordant result of happiness. From the concordant cause
of non-virtue comes the concordant result of suffering.
Through thinking about this, we have to develop the conviction that with
all the varieties of experiences that we undergo in life; both happiness
and suffering can only arise from their own causes: from virtue comes
happiness and from non-virtue comes suffering.
Developing this conviction that the karma, in term of how certain action
leads to certain result is called the correct worldly view. When we talk
about correct view, this correct view sometime refers to as the conviction
in the working of karma; in this case karma is definite. If we manage to
develop this correct worldly view then we would have the basis for all our
wholesome activities and for us to engage in virtue. With this faith of
conviction in karma, we will establish the very foundation for all the good
things to come in the future.  Therefore we have to develop the
understanding of the certainties of karma; from virtue comes happiness and
from non-virtue comes sufferings. We should have develop a decisive
conclusion in our heart; “This is the case.” With this, the conclusion of
developing this faith of conviction in karma would be: “I must engage in
virtue and I must abandon non-virtue.” We, as individuals have to come to
that decision in our minds. With this faith of conviction of karma, the
decision is that “I must engage in virtue and positive action. I must
abandon non-virtue.”

2" The magnification of karma
In the Collection of Indicative Verses:
  Like a poison that has been ingested,
  The commission of even a small sin
  Creates in your lives hereafter
  Great fear and a terrible downfall.
By the way of example, here we see how karma increases. Even if we ingest
just a little bit of poison, once it gets into our body system, it spreads
and causes us suffering and eventually kill us. Likewise here, even if we
commit a small non-virtue, when it increases it will lead to our downfall.
Here, it uses the analogy of an external phenomenon of how things do
magnify and increase in this world. Of all the external examples, there is
no better example than poison. So, even a small amount of poison can lead
to a disaster such as killing someone. It is said that the workings of
karma which is inside us is even greater i.e. the increase in the effect of
an action is much greater than any external phenomena.
As in the next verse of the Collection of Indicative Verses:
  As when grain ripens into a bounty,
  Even the creation of small merit
  Leads in lives hereafter to great happiness
  And will be immensely meaningful as well.
Here, it uses the analogy of how one can get a bountiful harvest just from
sowing a couple of grains. Likewise, from a small virtuous action, one can
experience great positive results -happiness.
By depending on these worldly examples, you should strive to develop an
understanding of how karma increases. Once we have developed this
conviction then we need to make a decision: “Even if it is a very small
virtue, I must engage in it. Even if it is a very small non-virtue, I must
strive to abandon it”.
It is a difficult point to really understand how karma magnifies and
increases. The point is by using all these examples, we try to abandon all
these non-virtues and accumulate even very small virtues. How does karma
multiply? In the case of non-virtue, we possess all the causes for
enhancing our afflictions. Afflictions such as attachment are like
fertilizer that fuels the growths of the seeds of non-virtues i.e. they
continuously make these seeds of non-virtue which we have already planted
become stronger and stronger.
We can view this from a worldly example of our own common experience. Due
to a specific small condition, we may get upset with a particular
individual. Even the event has already over, but when we come into contact
with that person again, either by seeing that person or by hearing about
that person, we somehow are reminded of the unhappiness we had with that
person and the faults we see in that person. All these come to our mind and
we start to think about them. As the anger is always there in us, this
increases whatever unhappiness we have with that person; just like adding
fuel to the fire. In fact, right from the beginning, it was just a very
small condition that caused us to be upset with that person. From this we
can see that perhaps from a small moment of anger and when left unattended,
it can become bigger and bigger. If we sought to stop it right from the
beginning by doing something about it, perhaps it will not grow at all.
However when it is being left unattended, it starts to magnify into
something bigger. This causes more unhappiness to oneself and to others as
well.
In the case of non-virtue, I guess if you think about it in this way, you
can perhaps see how non-virtue does magnify because the causes for fueling
the growth of non-virtue -our afflictions such as anger and attachment- are
always there in our mind. If you think about this along this line, you can
see how non-virtue can magnify. You can see how something small can magnify
into something big; just like ingesting a small amount of poison can
actually kill a person. With this understanding, as much as possible, try
to abandon even the smallest non-virtue.
The opposite of non-virtue is virtue. As virtue is karma, it is supposed to
magnify as well. We have to figure how that actually work. In the case of
non-virtue, because the cause for fuelling non-virtue is there in the mind
but for all of us, the cause for fuelling virtue is hardly there. It is a
completely different case if you are already on the path, you have very
good refuge in your mind, or you already have bodhichitta. Then, of course,
it is quite easy to explain how virtues in those people’s mental continuum
can increase. But for us, how do we explain that the virtues in our minds
can actually increase. It is quite difficult for us to explain how the
virtue in our mental continuum can actually increase from on its own accord
without doing anything on our side. You have to think about it and if you
still cannot figure out the working of karma when comes to virtue, then at
the end of the day, the conclusion is that we should engage in whatever
virtue however small it is. We have to think how karma magnifies and how it
increase. If we think by using worldly example then there is something to
think about.

3” Not experiencing the effects of actions that you did not do
  If you have not accumulated the karma that is the cause for an experience
  of happiness or suffering, you will in no way experience the happiness or
  suffering that is its effect. Those who enjoy the fruits of the
  innumerable collections amassed by the Teacher need not have accumulated
  all of the causes of these effects, but they do need to accumulate a
  portion.
If we do not accumulate the causes to experience either happiness or
suffering, there is no way we will experience the effects; whether it is
happiness or suffering. In terms of us enjoying and experiencing the
benefits of the Buddhas’ accumulation of merits, from our own side, we also
need to accumulate the cause to enjoy. From the Buddha’s own side, the
Buddha has his own pure body, speech and mind. The Buddhas do give
teachings and have established their own pure land but the mere fact that
the existence of the Buddhas’ pure lands does not necessarily mean that
everyone will get to enjoy it. We also must have created and accumulated
the cause (merits and virtues) from our side in order to be able to utilize
it. I believe this is the explanation for “Those who enjoy the fruits of
the innumerable collections amassed by the Teacher need not have
accumulated all of the causes of these effects, but they do need to
accumulate a portion.”

4: The actions you have done do not perish
The King of Concentrations Sutra states:
  Further, once you have committed an action, you will experience its
  effect;
  And you will not experience the effects of what others have done.
The Bases of Discipline says:
  Even in one hundred eons
  Karma does not perish.
  When the circumstances and the time arrive
  Beings surely feel its effects.
Once a non-virtue is accumulated and if one does not purify that non-
virtue, for example, through confession, even for hundred eons later, that
non-virtue will still exists and will not disappear. When it ripens, it
will result as suffering.
In the case of virtue, if it has not degenerated by other causes (if it has
not weaken) that virtue will give rise to its effect – happiness- even
after a very long period of time such as hundred eons later.
These are the general characteristics of karma and you have to remember
these four points.
   1" The certainty of karma
   2" The magnification of karma
   3" Not experiencing the effects of actions that you did not do
   4" The actions you have done do not perish
By thinking of the third and the fourth general characteristics of karma:
“Not experiencing the effects of actions that you did not do” and “The
actions you have done do not perish”, what kind of decisions should we
make? With regards to non-virtue, we have to purify it through confession.
With respect to the virtues that we have already accumulated, we have to
try our best to engage by means and ways to ensure that these virtues do
not degenerate or not destroy by anger.  We should adopt correctly what
needs to be adopted and we should abandon correctly what needs to be
abandoned.
Next section is “Reflecting on karma and its effects in detail” which
discuss on the ten non-virtues. Please read up.
