Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 9.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.284012
================================================================================


Traditionally before the start of a teaching session such as this, we
recite the prayer of “going for refuge” and “generating bodhichitta”. What
is the purpose of reciting these prayers? Essentially, it is a mean for us
to adjust our motivation i.e. for us to set the correct motivation for
listening to the teaching and for explaining the instructions.
In the first two lines of that prayer, it shows going for refuge to the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. In order for the activity of listening to the
teaching and for explaining the instructions to become a Buddhist practice,
such an activity must be conjoined with going for refuge to the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha; hence the first two lines of the prayer.
Of the various teachings, there are Hinayana and Mahayana teachings. What
we are studying here is the teachings of the Mahayana (the Great Vehicle).
Therefore, in order for the activities of ours here to become a Mahayana
practice, our motivation must be that of a bodhichitta -generating the
altruistic intention; hence the third and the fourth lines of the prayer.
We often ask; “What is the benefit and what is the use of studying and
learning the Buddhist teachings; in particular what is the benefit of
studying and learning this classic text extensively?” You can answer this
question just by referring to this prayer that we recite before class. You
see what kind of thought comes up when you recite this prayer.
If one has done extensive learning and studies of the Buddhadharma, and
since one has already a good understanding, then with respect to what the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are, so when one recites the refuge prayer, one
is able to get some feeling from the heart; one is able to feel something
moves the heart then one actually has the refuge in one’s heart. If you
have a good understanding of what the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha actually
is, when you recite this refuge prayer, it moves your heart and you have
real refuge in your heart. If you have that kind of understanding and faith
in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha then naturally you will also aspire to
become the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. This aspiration to become like them
naturally arises. Of course, respect and appreciation for the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha will arises naturally.
What about bodhichitta? In relation to refuge, for whom are you taking the
refuge in Buddha, Dharma and Sangha? Essentially, it is for others, for
living beings and for sentient beings.
In the beginning of this text, Lama Tsongkhapa takes great pain to
eliminate many misconceptions that we have in our mind. He does so because
we all got stuck due to those misconceptions in our mind. The reason why we
are not able to engage in our studies and practices is because of those
misconceptions. Therefore, it is vital to eliminate them from the
beginning. With respect to learning the dharma, when one listens to the
teachings or when one explains the instructions or when one teaches the
others, if one doesn’t know how to listen and if one doesn’t know how to
teach, then there will be problems as well. We also need to know how to
actually listen to the teachings and how to teach.
One has to understand the essence of what was covered. Let’s say, with
respect to how one should actually listen to the teachings, one is advised
to listen to the teachings through abandoning the three faults of the
vessel and relying on the six ideas. From your own side, you have to see
whether you do actually possess any of the faults of the vessel. If you
realize that you do actually possess the faults of the vessel as mentioned
in the teachings, then from your own side, you have to eliminate those
faults. You should also check whether you actually possess the six ideas.
If any of the six ideas are lacking in your mind then you have to strive to
develop those six ideas in your own mind. At the very least, the motivation
that one should have for listening to the teachings is to subdue one own
mind and to have the thought of benefitting others. If one learns the
Buddhadharma then one is able to show the dharma to others and be able to
point out to others what they should discard and what they should
cultivate. In such a way, one is able to bring great benefit to others.
We are supposed to listen to the dharma with the mind of delight and
enthusiasm. In order for that to happen, we first have to contemplate on
the benefits of listening to the dharma. Therefore, there is a section in
the text that deals with the benefits of listening to the dharma. Likewise,
when teaching/explaining the dharma, we should do it enthusiastically as
well with delight. In order to make that happen, we should also contemplate
the benefits of teaching the dharma. When teaching/explaining the dharma,
the very minimum that one should do it with the mind of sincere concern and
love for the listeners i.e. one just want to help.
In the last lesson, we looked at a piece of very important advice. We study
and practice in order to eliminate the afflictions in our mind. But we have
to understand that if we practice half-heartedly or we listen to the dharma
half-heartedly, that is not going very far in helping us to achieve the
goal. Even if one listens and studies the dharma well, with respect to the
instructions, the teachings that you are going to listen to, you are going
to study and you are going to practice should cover the entirety of the
whole path. On top of that, one’s practice and one’s study must be
continuous like the constant flow of the river.
Although at the beginning, it is difficult for us to do a complete practice
but it is important for us to leave imprints in our mind which will enable
us to practice the complete path in its entirety.  This is connected to the
two characteristics of karma. The two characteristic of karma are:
   1. If we do not create the cause, we will not meet with the result.
   2. Once we create the cause, the result will not disappear on its own
      accord.
The need to leave an imprint in our mind is to be able to practice the
entire path in its entirety and is related to these two characteristics of
karma.
What we need is to ensure that from life to life, not just this life, in
all our future lives to come; we will have a good basis, basically the
right kind of rebirth so that we can continue in our study and practice. On
top of that, we need all the good qualities during this good rebirth such
as long life and the lack of sickness. These qualities such as long life
and the life that is not afflicted by sicknesses/illnesses are very
important and in fact are necessity for us to be able to continue our study
and practice. Having these qualities alone are not enough. On top of that,
we need to have devotion; or usually translated as faith. We need to have
wisdom as well. These are essential qualities in order for us to become a
suitable vessel for learning the dharma. These alone again are not
sufficient. On top of these, we need to have access to a qualified teacher
-a virtuous friend who guides us the path. That again is not enough. We
must ensure that we would be taken care of and to be guided happily by such
a qualified virtuous friend -a guru. On top of that, we need to be able to
engage correctly in the threefold activity of:
   1. Hearing the teachings
   2. Reflecting on the teachings
   3. Meditating or familiarizing ourselves with those teachings.
The teachings here are the teachings of sutra and tantra. At the end of the
day, what are we doing all these for? What we need at the end of the day is
to achieve the highest bliss; which is the unsurpassed state of
enlightenment.
All these things that I have mentioned so far are the things that we
actually need but they do not arise without a cause. We need to create the
causes now. One of the causes that we need to create is we need to study,
learn and read those important instructions that show the entire path
because we need to leave the imprint of having studying and learned all
these teachings that show the entire path. For our purpose here, if we are
able to learn, study, and reflect the lamrim - The Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment- well, we will be placing all these imprints in our minds.
By doing these, we will be creating the causes for all those things that we
have mentioned earlier to happen. If possible, it would be excellent if one
is able to engage in the practice of guru yoga everyday such as the guru
yoga of Lama Tsongkhapa called the Hundred Deities of Tushita. In short, it
is called Lama Tsongkhapa Guru Yoga. In that practice of guru yoga, if one
is able to recite a lamrim prayer -the prayer that contains the essential
points of the entire lamrim- such as The Foundation Of All Good Qualities,
then it will be very good because every time we recite the prayer, we think
about the prayer and reflect on the prayer, we are leaving an imprint of
the entire path in our mind. If possible it will be good to memorize the
prayer The Foundation of All Good Qualities; it is not long and it is not
difficult. It does make a difference. Once you have memorized it, you can
reflect on it. When we talk about reflecting on such a prayer, you do not
need to put aside a special time for it. You can do it in the course of
one’s daily activities because once you have memorized it, you can reflect
on it anywhere such as when you are travelling. On the basis of having
memorize the prayer and if you can reflect on it, it will leave a very
strong and powerful imprint on your mind.
We also need to learn, study, and rely on an unmistaken
teaching/instruction such as the Lamrim - The Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment. That is important especially at this time having obtained a
favorable condition and rebirth for the study and the practice of the
dharma. Even at this juncture when we have obtained this perfect
opportunity, if we are unable to put the entire path into practice or put
everything that is mentioned in the teachings into practice, at least we
can leave the imprints of having learned and studied the entire path -the
Lamrim- as much as possible. As and when we are able, we should think about
what we have learned and meditate on it. That will leave very strong
imprints on our minds.
We often ask: Is it okay to take initiation? When is the good time to take
initiation?
The answer in general is this: of course, it is important to take the
opportunity to leave the imprint of having learned and studied the tantric
teachings on our mental continuum. But the main thing is your motivation.
If your motivation for taking the initiation and for learning tantra is
looking towards enlightenment and to be able to meet with the tantric
teachings from life to life, then it is okay. Of course, one also needs
unshakeable faith in the tantra. You also need that kind of faith towards
not only the tantric instructions but also towards the gurus who give you
those tantric empowerment and teaching. You will need all these conditions.
But the essence is that your wish to learn tantra and to take the
initiation and so forth must really be looking towards for enlightenment.
If you are looking for enlightenment for others, then taking tantric
teachings become a condition. If one has such a motivation, then it is
alright to engage in tantric practice.

Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
Next is: how to lead the students with actual instructions.
Explanation of the stages by which a student of the actual instructions
should be guided
2B4 The stages by which a student should be guided through the actual
instructions
A The root of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher   (How to rely
on the teacher ,the root of the path)
B The stages of how to train the mind once you have relied   (How the
students train their minds after having relied on the teacher)
2B4A The root of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher
1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating (developing) certainty
2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain it
2B4A-1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty
A The need for relying on a spiritual master since all good qualities
depend on him
B The actual way to rely
2B4A-1A The need for relying on a spiritual master since all good qualities
depend on him
First: As all goodness, starting off from the development of a single
positive quality and the decrease of a single fault in the mind of the
disciple has its root in the sublime friend, the way to rely on him is
important in the beginning.

[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 70: Thus, the excellent teacher is
the source of all temporary happiness and certain goodness, beginning with
the production of a single good quality and the reduction of a single fault
in a student's mind and eventually encompassing all the knowledge beyond
that. Therefore, the way you initially rely on the teacher is important. ]
The importance of relying correctly on the teacher is not something that is
peculiar only to Buddhism. In general, whatever we want to learn, whatever
skill we want to pick up, we have to rely on the teacher even in the
secular study in term of modern education and acquiring knowledge by
relying on the teacher is very important. Here Lama Tsongkhapa is
emphasizing on the need to rely correctly on the teacher. Since it is so
important to rely correctly on the teacher, then with respect to the kind
of teachers that one relies on, what kind of the defining characteristics
(what kind of qualities) should that teacher possess?
2B4A-1B The actual way to rely
1 Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous spiritual friend

2 Characteristics of the one who relies
3 The way he relies on him
4 The benefits of reliance
5 The drawbacks of not relying
6 Summary of the meaning of these [points]
In this regard there are six points:
   1. The defining characteristics of the teacher to be relied upon
   2. The defining characteristics of the student who relies upon the
      teacher
   3. How the student relies upon the teacher
   4. The benefits of relying on the teacher
   5. The faults of not relying on the teacher
   6. A summary of the meaning of the previous five parts
2B4A-1B1 Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous spiritual
friend
A Identification of a “guru”
B His characteristics
The text goes on to identify what the lama is. Lama in Sanskrit is guru.
2B4A-1B1A Identification of a “guru”
First: Although, generally speaking, in terms (from the view point) of the
individual vehicles, a lot is said [about this] in the [Buddha’s] excellent
words along with the commentaries, here (the explanation) only a virtuous
spiritual friend guiding on the path to Buddhahood, the Mahayana, by
gradually guiding on the path of the three [types of] beings, will be
presented.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 71: However, the following is a
description of a teacher who instructs you in the stages on the paths of
the three persons of different capacities and guides you to the Mahayana,
which is the path to buddhahood will be presented.]
Now, the text is discussing the defining characteristics of the guru who is
capable of leading you on the complete Mahayana path to Buddhahood.
2B4A-1B1B His characteristics
1 Highest characteristics
2 Middling characteristics
3 Minimum characteristics
2B4A-1B1B-1 Highest characteristics
A Good qualities he himself needs
In Ornament of the Sutras it says that the disciple needs to rely on a
spiritual teacher possessed of ten properties (qualities):
        A spiritual teacher with discipline, calm, complete peace,
        more qualities, effort, rich in scriptural transmissions,
        who has thoroughly realized suchness, is eloquent,
        loving, and no more discouraged - on that one rely!
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 71:
      Rely on a Mahayana teacher who is discicplined, serene, thoroughly
      pacified;
      Has good qualities surpassing those of the students; is energetic; has
      a wealth of scriptural knowledge;
      Possesses loving concern; has thorough knowledge of reality and skill
      in instructing disciples;
      And has abandoned dispiritedness. ]
The ten defining qualities are:
1. Discipline – The Mahayana teacher must have disciplined themselves
   through the practice of ethics.
2. Serene - The Mahayana teacher must have pacified his own mental
   distraction through the practice of concentration; therefore making his
   mind serene. (Translated literally from Tibetan is pacified but a better
   translation is serene; which means have the condition of calm and
   pacified.)
3. Thoroughly pacified indicates a quality that comes from the training in
   wisdom. Because of having trained in wisdom, the teacher pacifies his
   own mental afflictions such as the three mental poisons.
4. Having good qualities surpassing those of the students - The Mahayana
   teacher must possess qualities that exceed or surpasses those he is
   going to teach.
5. Energetic -The Mahayana teacher should be energetic, put effort,
   enthusiastic about accomplishing the welfare of others and helping
   others.
6. Having a wealth of scriptural knowledge means having heard and learnt
   extensively all the different teachings.
7. Having thorough knowledge of reality – this can mean having the
   realization of selflessness of phenomena; in particular having the
   realization of emptiness as explained by the highest Buddhist
   philosophical school -the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS)/
   Prasangika Madhyamaka.
   What is the difference between having knowledge of reality and the third
   quality, thoroughly pacified?
   Perhaps one takes having thorough knowledge of reality to mean having an
   understanding or realization of emptiness in accordance with the CMWS;
   whereas being thoroughly pacified is a quality arising from training in
   wisdom; perhaps it can mean the realization of reality or emptiness as
   presented in the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS) and all the schools
   below that.
   As these two are related to wisdom so there must be a difference. One
   can explain the difference between these two qualities from the manner
   of realizing emptiness. Perhaps one can relates thoroughly pacified to
   realizing emptiness inferentially whereas having thorough knowledge of
   reality can perhaps means having direct perception of reality
   (emptiness) rather than inferential understanding.
8. Having skill in instructing the disciples means the teacher has skill in
   putting across the instructions to the listeners (students) and is
   skilled in guiding them according to their abilities.
9. The teacher should possess loving concern means possessing sincere love
   and concern for the disciples that are to be guided.
10. The Mahayana teacher should have abandoned dispiritedness means the
   teacher should not be discouraged of having to explain things over and
   over again because the students fail to understand.
With respect to the Mahayana teacher, of course there are different in
degree of qualification and competency. Ideally, the Mahayana teacher is
the one who possess all these ten defining characteristics. If you look at
the Lamrim, it is wonderful. Lama Tsongkhapa explained clearly what kind of
teacher we should rely upon. We have to know what to look for in a teacher.
In the case of a Mahayana teacher, we need to know these are the ten
qualities and on the basis of knowing these ten qualities then you have to
search for a teacher who actually possesses these qualities.
Furthermore it says that someone who has not disciplined himself, for that
reason is not in a position to discipline someone else. A spiritual master
disciplining others has to be someone who has first disciplined his own
mind.
If one has not subdued one’s own mind then how is it possible to actually
discipline or subdue the mind of others? This is very important. Therefore,
anyone who is aspiring to be a Mahayana teacher must first subdue his own
mind.
You may wonder: “Well then, in what way does it need to be disciplined?” To
accomplish anything at all that occurs to you and then label it a
realizational quality because it exists in the mind, is of no benefit. This
is why a system of mental discipline compatible with the general teachings
of the Jinas is necessary. That has been ascertained as the three precious
trainings, and therefore, ethical discipline and the other two have been
set forth
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 71: It is said that those who have
not disciplined themselves have no basis for disciplining others.
Therefore, gurus who intend to discipline others' minds must first have
disciplined their own. How should they have been disciplined? It is not
helpful for them to have done just any practice, and then have the result
designated as a good quality of knowledge. They need a way to discipline
the mind that accords with the general teachings of the Conqueror. The
three precious trainings are definitely such a way. Therefore, Maitreya
indicated them with these three terms: "disciplined," "serene," and
"thoroughly pacified."]
It is quite common that there are some people who profess to be teachers
who supposedly have done some practices or have done some retreats. Then
after having done that practice then they “advertise” to the people
proclaiming that: “I have done such and such a practice, I have achieved
realization, I have clairvoyance, I can see this and that, I see this
Buddha and this deity”; they claim to have all these abilities. Of course,
if in reality they do really possess these qualities, then it is well and
fine, but what if they do not possess these qualities? The point is this
day people just run after such so-called teachers when they hear about
their qualities. They believe in it and they run after them. Or people
choose their teacher just because they are famous and well-known or are
said to have such a realization; but looking for teacher in such a way is
wrong. If we rely on those so-called teachers who proclaim to have whatever
realizations but do not actually possess them, then there is not much
benefit for us.
So what kind of teacher we should rely on?  The text says very clearly that
we should rely on a teacher who has disciplined his mind in the way that
accord with the general teachings of the Buddha. What is this way? The
three precious trainings or higher trainings are definitely such a way;
therefore these three terms: disciplined, serene and thoroughly pacified.
The teacher must be ethical, pure and living in ethics. He must be someone
who does not possess a lot of mental chatter –distraction- and someone who
has trained in wisdom.
Student 1: At the bottom of page 20, for the quality of realization of
suchness, it says: ‘However, even if this is not present, that is the
direct realization of emptiness it is said that this [criterion] is also
fulfilled by a realization through scriptures and reasonings.’ That sounds
like an inferential realization of emptiness. It seems to be saying that
under the realization of suchness either the realization of the
selflessness of phenomena or an inferential realization is acceptable but
they are all under that same criteria which is under the realization of
suchness.
Geshela:  This text translates it as realization of suchness and the
alternative translation is knowledge of reality. Therefore knowledge of
reality and realization of suchness means the same thing. The text reads:
“Realization of suchness” refers to the training in wisdom - realization of
the selflessness of phenomena.” Actually realization of suchness should be
referred to as special training in wisdom; which is the realization of
selflessness of phenomena.
As I have explained earlier, we take this realization to mean the
realization of selflessness of phenomena that as explained by the CMWS.
Alternatively, it is said to be the best if the teacher has a perception of
reality; “perception” here means direct realization of emptiness. The text
does say that however, even if this is not present, it is acceptable for
the teacher to know reality through scriptures and reasonings. If you say
that this is acceptable, then you have to be able to differentiate between
this option which is acceptable, and the third quality – thoroughly
pacified, then how are you going to explain?
Here we are trying to see the difference between the two qualities: the
quality of being thoroughly pacified and the quality of knowledge of
reality or realization of suchness/emptiness. As both qualities are related
to wisdom, then what is the difference between these two?  There are
different ways to interpret the difference. The quality of being thoroughly
pacified refers to having an understanding of emptiness from the
perspective of AMWS (the second highest school) and all the schools below
that. Whereas knowledge of reality (or realization of suchness) refers to
the special training in wisdom; “special” here refers to the realization of
emptiness as presented by the highest school, the CMWS.
For those who have not studied some of these things will find it difficult.
This is not a problem, but those of you who have studied this should not
find any problem. For those of you who did the previous BP, when I say “the
quality of thoroughly pacified is related to having the view of emptiness
from the AMWS and below” and “the realization of suchness is about the
realization of emptiness according to the CMWS”, you should have some ideas
on the distinction of the presentation of selflessness and so forth. Those
who have not studied this before, don’t worry. You are not to be blamed.
You have to understand that the Lamrim - The Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment- condenses the essential points of the subject matter of the
three scriptural collections into such a text like this. Therefore, without
having done some of these studies, one will not be able to understand every
single thing that is mentioned here. It will come, so don’t worry. The
point is not to lose heart as the subject matter will come.

