Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson32.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.877369
================================================================================


In order for us to learn the teaching of the Buddha and to have success in
our practice, then having wisdom become very important; in fact it is
indispensable. So wisdom is very important. In order for us to develop this
wisdom, one way is to make request to Manjushri. So we should try to
visualize Manjushri in the space in front of us and on that basis we recite
the praise and make request.
Try to visualize Manjushri in the space in front of you and make a
heartfelt request for your dharma learning and to be able to complete them
and your practice to be successful. The request has to be from the heart
and you really have to feel it. If you make a special request then it will
make a difference. One of the reason for making this heartfelt request is
that if it is from the heart, it will move the heart, then it will really
help in generating a very strong determination. This determination will
also see your studies and practice become successful. A lot of time, in
fact, a lot of people are wondering: “What is the point of making prayer?
What is the benefit?” The practical benefit is that by visualizing the
special deity of wisdom, when you are making request to this particular
deity you are basically expressing the desire to be like him. If you have
that kind of determination; “I want to be like you and please help me,”
then that make a difference because it strengthen your conviction and
determination. This is one of the real practical benefits. Just making
request and praying to Manjushri alone without any determination from your
side, it will not going to bring you any practical real benefit. So you
should pray and have that determination. On that basis of that
determination then you have to work hard to learn, study and reflect on the
teaching. If you learn and study the teaching, then without taking a long
time you definitely will be able to develop wisdom and to become like
Manjushri. So prayer alone is not sufficient. Just praying and without
doing anything and wishing that  you are going to be like Manjushri, I
think this probably not going to happen.
You visualize Manjushri in the space in front of you. The visualization is
supposed to make of light. So Manjushri’s exalted body is orange in color.
He wields a sword in his right hand and holds a volume of text in his left
hand. He is in the nature of light.
On the basis of that visualization, you can mentally present all sorts of
beautiful offering substances to Manjushri. After that, you can visualize
light rays and nectar coming from Manjushri flowing into you purifying you
of all your negativities and obscurations in particular your ignorance –
the unknowing mind. After that, again you visualize light rays and nectar
coming from Manjushri flowing into you and thinking that you receive this
special blessing to have success and to actualize all the realizations of
the path to enlightenment; that you receive the special wisdom to be able
to do so.
Do this visualization and practice for a couple of minutes. After that we
will recite the Praise to Manjushri   and the mantra of Manjushri.
The glorious Chandrakirti said:  “At the time when you have the choice and
the ability, when you have the control and independence, whatever you wish
to do, you should do it. Otherwise, come the time when you lose that
independence, you don’t have any choice and you lack the capacity to do it,
then it is too late.”
This particular advice from the glorious Chandrakirti can also be applied
to anything on whatever we want to do. It is not just on our dharma studies
but also when we have the opportunity, time, ability, capacity and the
freedom to do something that we want to do. If we don’t it then come the
time when we lose the ability to do so, or when we lose our option to do
so, then it is too late because even we want to do by then, we are not
going to do anything. In particular with respect to our learning the
perfect teaching of the Buddha at this moment in time in our life when we
have some interest to find out more about the Buddha teachings and to learn
the Buddha teaching, at this time we have to take the opportunity and
putting in effort. Of course there will be challenges and it is not easy.
If we still have this interest and if we don’t put in the effort, then when
we lose the interest, it will be difficult for us to continue learning.
In general, just to have the interest to learn the Buddha’s teaching is
very difficult. It is even more difficult to have the interest to want to
know the Buddha’s teaching an in-depth manner i.e. to learn the Buddha
teaching more deeply. On top of that, it is even more difficult to practice
the Buddha teaching. We all are lucky and fortunate to be able to have the
interest in the Buddha’s teaching and to want to hear, to study, to reflect
the Buddha’s teaching. We are all very fortunate. So we should continue to
learn it. At this time when all the conditions are there for us to learn
the Buddha’s teaching we should not take it for granted that thing will
always remain the same because things do change.
At this time you have people who can teach you and from your own side you
have the interest and have the ability to learn. Your faculties are still
working. So when the conditions are there, we have to make use of the
opportunity to try. We should not think “I will do it in the future.”  We
should not procrastinate. Why? Because we never know what will happen as
things are not certain.

The Varieties of Karma
(ii) Distinctions of weight
   (a') The weights of the ten paths of non-virtuous action
   (b') A brief discussion of the criteria for powerful actions
    (1') Strength in terms of recipient
    (2') Strength in terms of support
    (3') Strength in terms of objects
    (4') Strength in terms of attitude
We have been talking about the practices of a person of small capacity.
Going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha become the integral part
of such a person practice. On the basis of having gone for refuge to the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, we need to live our life in according to the
training of the precepts of having gone for refuge. If we are able to live
our life according to the precepts of refuge then it is said that we will
get a good rebirth.
Another key integral and a very important practice of the person of small
capacity is the law of cause and effect; i.e. living our life in according
to the law of cause and effect. In the text, this particular outline is
called developing the faith of conviction i.e. developing the faith in
karma in action and their consequences. In general, what we need to do is
to develop this conviction that all virtuous actions will result in
happiness whereas non-virtuous action will result in suffering. Once we
have developed such a conviction or certainty about karma then we would
develop the correct worldly view. On the basis of having develop this faith
of conviction in karma then we live our life according to this conviction;
we will know what are the actions we need to abandon and what are the
actions we need to adopt. If we live our life correctly in such the way
then we will create the causes to have happiness from life to life. In the
text in the presentation of karma it talks about black and white actions
(bad and good karmas). The text also discuss the criteria for the strength
and the action; what are the action that are considered as powerful and
what are the action that are considered as not powerful. There are going to
be a discussion about the effect i.e. what are the some of the results of
certain actions. When talk about the black action (negative karma) this
text primarily discuss on the ten paths of non-virtuous actions. In the
discussion of these ten paths of non-virtuous actions in the text, there is
a discussion about the basis, perception, attitude and so forth.
In the last lesson we talked about the criteria for powerful action. What
make an action particularly powerful? An action can be powerful by
depending on the:
   1. Recipient of the action
   2. Support / actor
   3. Object
   4. Attitude
Today we will talk about the “Strength in terms of attitude.” Now we
discuss on how one’s attitude can make a particular action either powerful
or weak.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 235: (4') Strength in terms of attitude
The Heap of Jewels Sutra mentions all of the living beings in the universe
of three billion world systems each making a stupa of the Buddha as large
as Mount Meru, and each paying reverence to it in all their actions for ten
million eons. It says that far greater than the merit from that is the
merit in a bodhisattva's throwing just a single flower toward a stupa with
an attitude that is imbued with a desire to attain omniscience.]
When we talk about accumulating the collections of merits and wisdom one
very thing that you need to keep in mind is that it is primarily a mental
activity. These collections are both primarily accumulated by the mind. The
main thing is not about how the action looks externally but it depends on
the attitude. If you were to make an offering motivated by a desire to
achieve full enlightenment for the benefits of sentient beings, because
this attitude is so vast, even externally you are offering something very
small, the merit that you accumulate are immeasurable. This is because of
the attitude i.e. whether you accumulate powerful merit or not, this
depends on the attitude or the motivation. It is not determine primarily by
the external action i.e. how do you look or the object involved.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 235: Understand that,  in  the  same  manner,
there are variations in  the  amount  of  merit  you  accumulate  from  the
perspective of differences in attitude such  as  focusing  on  superior  or
inferior goals, or focusing on your own or others' interests.]
If you were to make an offering motivated  by  a  desire  to  achieve  full
enlightenment for the benefits of all sentient beings,  the  merits  become
immeasurable. If you were to make an  offering  motivated  to  achieve  own
individual liberation from cyclic existence, you do accumulate  merits  but
the merits are lesser.  Let’s  say  that  you  were  to  make  an  offering
motivated by a desire to get a good rebirth, the merits that you accumulate
will become lesser. So depending on the mental perspective and the type  of
goal, the merits accumulate commensurate with that. Similarly, if you  were
to make an offering motivated only by  the  desire  to  benefit  others  or
motivated by others interest or fulfilling others interest, then the merits
would be much stronger as compare to making an offering motivated by  one’s
own interest.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 235: The  amount  varies  as  well  from  the
perspective of the strength or weakness of your  attitude,  whether  it  is
brief or long-lasting, and so on.]
Let’s say you  perform  an  action  motivated  by  the  desire  to  achieve
enlightenment and if the motivation is very strong, the ensuing merits that
you accumulate from that action is much stronger compare to having the same
attitude of having the desire to achieve enlightenment but  the  motivation
is not that  strong.  Of  course,  the  ensuing  merits  would  be  weaker.
Similarly, if you have  that  attitude  for  a  long  period  of  time,  as
mentioned in the text, the attitude that is long-lasting, that commensurate
with the length of the attitude, the merits would be stronger.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 235: With  regard  to  wrongdoing,  afflicted
attitudes that are strong and long-lasting have greater strength]
We all want to accumulate merits. We believe that it is good for us and  it
leaves virtuous imprints in our mind so we will have good result. So far we
can see that it is very clear that  having  a  positive  attitude  is  very
important and that make our action very  powerful;  particularly  having  a
good heart and good motivation. That is very important. It is not  so  much
on the external. Of course we do accumulate merits by making offerings  but
if we do it just for our own interest then the merits are much smaller. All
of us want to accumulate merits and it is essential that we  have  to  know
how to do it well. Here the attitude is very  important.  If  you  make  an
offering, even the offering is small, but with a good  motivation  that  is
not for yourself but to benefit others,  the  merits  that  you  accumulate
would be very powerful. So it is all about knowing the know-how on  how  to
accumulate the merits. If we know that then in each and every single second
we can accumulate a lot of merits easily. This is the essential point. This
is in line with the overall presentation of the teaching. The  emphasis  is
on  the  mind;  adopting  the  positive  mental  perspective  of   virtuous
motivation. That is main  thing  that  determine  whether  that  particular
action is powerful or not.
With regards to wrong doing or negative action such as the ten non-virtuous
actions, the attitude behind those ten non-virtuous actions, let’s  say  is
very strong, then the ensuing negative result, which is suffering, will  be
much stronger. Whereas another person may engage in any  of  the  ten  non-
virtuous action but if his or her  attitude  may  not  as  strong  and  the
afflictions behind the action is not that strong, that  person  will  still
accumulate negative karma but is not as powerful as the negative karma of a
someone whose afflictions are very strong.
Similarly, the longer these afflictions last, if they are always  there  in
one’s mind, then of course the negative actions are  more  powerful.  After
knowing all these we should put them into  practice.  Whenever  we  have  a
chance to engage in virtue and to accumulate merits,  make  sure  that  the
attitude is good and do it with a good heart, with virtuous motivation  and
think big. Then if we find ourselves in accord with some negative action we
should try our best to reduce the strength of the afflictions  behind  that
action and also to reduce the intensity of afflictions and the duration  in
which the afflictions manifest. By doing so, we  can  reduce  the  negative
action. With regards to wrong doing the afflicted attitude that are  strong
and long lasting has greater strength.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 235: Among these, hatred  is  very  powerful.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds:
   All the good behavior—
   Generosity, offering to the sugatas and the like—
   Amassed for a thousand eons
   Is destroyed by a single moment of hatred.]
Here the teaching say that all the merits  that  had  been  amassed  for  a
thousand eons through giving to sentient beings, through making offering to
the Buddha, keeping ethics, developing concentration and so forth, all  the
merits accumulated for such a long period of time of a thousand eons can be
destroyed just by a single moment of very strong anger/hatred.
[Alt translation LRCM  V1  page  235:  Anger,  moreover,  toward  spiritual
companions and, even more, toward conquerors' children is very weighty. The
King of Concentrations Sutra:
    When people have malice toward each other,
    Learning and ethical discipline cannot protect them from its fruition,
    Concentration does not protect them, nor can living in solitude;
    Generosity does not protect them, nor does offering to the buddhas.]
Note: spiritual companions means people who are living in ethic
Anger is very destructive. A single moment of anger can destroy so much
virtues / merits accumulated over a long period of time. If you think about
it and use example that we can relate to, a single moment of anger can
destroy a relationship or friendship that was built over a period of thirty
to forty years. We have seen this happening. Such good relationship between
friend or couple that was built up over long period of time, as long as
thirty to forty years, can be destroyed by a short moment of intense hatred
or anger; not even 2 minutes or 5 minutes but just one heartfelt strong
anger/ hatred. Basically, we should try to restrain our anger and not
letting it to become so powerful. Particularly be careful not to develop
such a strong hatred or anger towards karmically powerful object because if
we really get upset or angry at karmically powerful object, first the
negative karma is very strong and it also destroyed lot of merits. We have
to pay attention to these essential points.
Next is the presentation of the effect of the ten path of action. When
there is an action, there is a basis and you create the action and then the
action is completed. When these three come together what kind of effect
will there be?

(iii) An exposition of the effects
  (a') Fruitional effects
  (b') Causally concordant effects
  (c') Environmental effects
The presentation of the three effects is:
   (a') Fruitional effects
   (b') Causally concordant effects
   (c') Environmental effects
There is also a presentation of four effects:
   (a') Fruitional effects
   (b') Causally concordant behavioral effects
   (c)  Causally concordant experiential effects
   (d') Environmental effects

(a') Fruitional effects
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 236: Each of the ten paths of action depends
upon a basis of the three mental poisons that occur in three strengths:
small, medium, and great. Therefore, there are three fruitional effects for
each action. In the Levels of Yogic Deeds it says that through each of the
great forms of the ten non-virtues—killing and so forth—you will be reborn
in the hells, through each of the ten medium forms you will be reborn as a
hungry ghost, and through each of the ten small forms you will be reborn as
an animal. The Sutra on the Ten Levels, however, speaks of the effects for
the small and medium forms in reverse.]
For example: The action of killing:
- is a very powerful, one will be reborn in the hell.
- is of medium strength, one will be reborn as hungry ghost
- is small act, one will be reborn as animals
However, the Sutra on the Ten Levels speaks of the effects for the small
and medium forms in reverse;
-the medium form of killing, will lead to animals rebirth
-the small act of killing will lead to hungry ghost rebirth
In term of the rank of the lower realms, we usually talk about the hell
beings, the hungry ghosts and then the animals realms. But the Sutra on the
Ten Levels is saying the hell beings, the animals and then the hungry
ghosts realms.
The order of arrangement depends on the criteria that the arrangement is
made. If you arrange the order in according with wisdom or intelligence
that the beings possess, then comparing the intelligence of a hungry ghost
to an animal, the hungry ghost is said to be of more intelligent. It is
said that some hungry ghosts are able to understand and receive teaching.
So from the perspective of intelligence, as the hungry ghosts are more
intelligent than the animals, then we have the arrangement of the hell
beings, the animals and then the hungry ghosts.
From the perspective of the intensity of the suffering that they experience
the usual order of arrangement is -hell beings, hungry ghosts and animals.
This is in according with the intensity of the suffering that they
experience.  The hungry ghosts experience much more suffering than the
animals.

(b') Causally concordant effects
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 236: Even when you are reborn from the
miserable realms as a human, [you still experience the effects of non-
virtuous actions] as follows:
[as a causally concordant effect of killing,] a short lifetime;  [as an
effect of stealing,] a lack of resources; [from sexual misconduct,] an
unruly spouse; [from lying,] much slander; [from divisive speech,] loss of
friendships; [from offensive speech,] hearing unpleasant words; [from
senseless speech,] others not listening to your words; and [from
covetousness, malice, and wrong views] respectively, predominance of
attachment, hostility, and confusion.]
For example: The action of killing, when we engage in the act of killing,
the result of causally concordant effect of killing is a short lifetime.
Even when you are reborn from the lower realms as a human, because of
having killed in the past, as by killing we have shorten someone’s life, we
will have a short lifetime. The result commensurate with what we had done
in the past i.e. having shortened someone’s life, we will have a short
lifetime. Therefore this is called causally concordant effect.
If you have to experience an effect which is similar to what you had did in
the past, this is called causally concordant experiential effects.
You also have causally concordant behavioral effects. Even when you are
reborn from the lower realm as a human, because of having killed in the
past, and the imprint left on our mind, we have the tendency to killed i.e.
 the liking to  killing. Naturally we want to engage in the action of
killing.
Here we can see that whenever we engage in one action of killing, there are
four effects that are to be experienced:
   1. Fruitional effects of going to the lower realm
   2. Causally concordant experiential effect - Even when we are reborn from
      the lower realms as a human being, we have to experience a short life.
   3. Causally concordant behavioural effect: Naturally we have the tendency
      to kill; we find it easier and have the liking to kill. Because of the
      habituation of killing and if we engage in killing again, again we
      accumulate fresh negative karma which then again take us to the lower
      realms and circling in the lower realms.
   4. Environmental effects
If we gain an understanding of how this one action of killing can has all
these effects and think about it and then develop the conviction that these
effects are really true, naturally we will put a stop and end to killing.
As for the environmental effects, from the non-virtuous action of killing,
such things in the external environment as food and drink, medicine, and
fruits will have little strength.
The environmental effects of killing are that the foods and drinks that are
available to you will not be nutritious. The medicine that you take does
not help you.
So far we have been just talking about the non-virtuous action of killing.
Each of the ten non-virtuous actions has these three effects (fruitional
effect, causally concordant effect and environmental effect).
Continue from stealing, sexual misconduct and so forth, each of them has
their fruitional effects. The fruitional effects are divided into great,
middling and small.
The causally concordant effects of the ten non-virtuous actions. Even when
you are reborn from the miserable realms as a human, you still experience
the effects of non-virtuous actions as follows:
-as a causally concordant effect of killing, a short lifetime
-as an effect of stealing, a lack of resources
-from sexual misconduct, an unruly spouse
-from lying, much slander
-from divisive speech, loss of friendships
-from offensive speech, hearing unpleasant words
-from senseless speech, others not listening to your words
-from covetousness, malice, and wrong views respectively, predominance of
attachment, hostility, and confusion

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 237: (c') Environmental effects
For the environmental effects,  from the non-virtuous action of killing,
such things in the external environment as food and drink, medicine, and
fruits will have little strength, be ineffective, have little potency and
power, or, being difficult to digest, will induce illness. Hence, most
living beings will die without living out their expected life spans. The
environmental effects of stealing are that you will have few fruits, the
fruits will not be perfect, will change, or will be partially spoiled.
There will be severe droughts or torrential downpours. The fruits will dry
up or disappear. The environmental effects of sexual misconduct are living
where there is excrement and urine, mud, filth, unclean things, many evil
smells, misery, and discomfort.
The environmental effects of lying are that any work that you do in fields
or on boats will not flourish; there will be no harmony among your workers,
and for the most part they will be deceitful; and you will be fearful and
have many causes to be afraid. The environmental effects of divisive speech
are that you will be in a place that is bumpy, craggy, uneven, and
difficult to traverse; and you will be fearful and have many causes to be
afraid. The environmental effects of offensive speech are that you will be
in a place that is full of logs, thorns, large rocks, sharp stones, and
many broken bricks; that lacks waterfalls, lakes, or ponds; is rough, drab,
arid, salty, barren, vile, and is a place of dangerous animals; and you
will have many causes to be afraid. The environmental effects of senseless
speech are that you will be in a place where fruit trees do not bear fruit,
bear fruit at the wrong time, or bear no fruit at the Proper time; the
unripened appear to be ripe; the roots are not strong; the tree does not
last long; there are not many comforts such as parks, groves, and pools;
and you will have many reasons to be afraid.
The environmental effects of covetousness are that all excellent things
will deteriorate and diminish every year, every season, month, and even
each day, and will not increase. The environmental effects of malice are
that you will be where there are epidemics, injury, and infectious
diseases; quarrels, and many disputes with opponents' armies; lions,
tigers, and the like; poisonous snakes, scorpions, and many fireflies; and
harmful yaksas, robbers, and the like. The environmental effects of wrong
views are that you will be in an environment where the best and principal
sources of resources will disappear; where unclean things will appear to be
most pure, and misery will appear to be bliss; and where you will have no
home, protector, or refuge.]

   1. Virtuous actions and their effects
Here is the discussion of the negative action; what make them heavy or
light and what are their results.
Next is the discussion of virtuous action and their effect.
The ten virtuous actions are completely opposite to the ten non-virtuous
actions.
Example, the opposite of killing is restraining from killing.
How does one accumulate the virtuous action of not killing? You have to
engage in the act of not killing. In order for the engagement to come about
you must have the thought in your mind “Killing is bad” and you are
convinced that killing is bad. Then you must bring that act to completion
i.e. on the basis of knowing that killing is bad, you make the decision; “I
will not kill at all.” When you have this thought, then you accumulate the
virtuous action of not killing.
In order to accumulate the virtuous action of not killing, you must have an
understanding and conviction in your mind that killing is bad. You then
must complete the action by making the decision “I will not kill.” Only
when these two factors are present in your mind then you will accumulate
the good karma of not killing.  A lot of people do not have this proper
understanding and thinking that by not doing anything is not killing. This
does not help the person to accumulate the good karma of not killing. For
example, when there is a danger of you engaging in the act of killing but
because you are able to restrain yourself on the basis of knowing that
killing is bad and with conviction, you make the decision to stop the act
of killing. Only then you create the good karma – the virtuous action of
not killing. Just by sitting there and not engaging in the act of killing
does not mean that you are engaging in the act of not killing and then
accumulate the good karma of not killing.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 238: (i) Virtuous actions
The Levels of Yogic Deeds says that virtuous actions include the physical
actions of those who reflect on the faults of killing, stealing, and sexual
misconduct and have a virtuous attitude. They have also carried out the
performance of correctly restraining themselves from these non-virtuous
actions and have brought this restraint to culmination.]
So this is how one accumulates the virtuous karma of not killing.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 238: It states that the same can be said for
the four vocal actions and the three mental actions, the difference being
to substitute "vocal actions" and "mental actions" for "physical actions."
Therefore, apply to each of the ten actions the four aspects of basis,
attitude, performance, and culmination. This is illustrated in the
following example of the path of action of giving up killing. The basis of
giving up killing is another living being. The attitude is seeing killing's
faults and desiring to give it up. The performance is the activity of
having correctly restrained yourself from the killing. The culmination is
the physical action of completing the correct restraint. Understand the
others in this way as well]

   2. (ii) The effects of virtuous actions
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 238: There are three types of
effects—fruitional, causally concordant, and environmental. The fruitional
effect is that you are born as a human, a deity of the desire realm, or a
deity in one of the two upper realms through small, medium, and great
virtuous actions, respectively. You should take the causally concordant and
environmental effects to be the opposite of those of the non-virtuous
actions]
The effects of these ten virtuous actions also have three types of effects
- fruitional, causally concordant, and environmental.
The ten virtuous actions come in different forms – powerful, middling and
weak.
For the fruitional effect is that of good rebirth.
A weak virtuous action will lead one to be reborn as human being.
A middling virtuous action will lead one to reborn as god in the desire
realm.
A powerful virtuous action will lead one to reborn in the form and formless
realms.
The causally concordant effect, for example, not killing will be one has
long life.
One born as a human being with long life is the result of having abandon
killing. That is the causally concordant experiential effect. For the
causally concordant behavioral effect, because of having abandon killing in
the past, then in the next life, out of habituation one will have the
liking of not killing.
The environmental effect is one born in the place where you will enjoy good
foods and drinks, good medicine and so forth.
There are also other classification presentations of karma:
-the different between projecting and completing karma
-karma whose result you will definitely or only possibly experience
There are four possibilities between karma that is created and accumulated:
1 Karma that is created but not accumulated
2. Karma that is accumulated but not created.
3. Karma that is both
4. Karma that is neither
Please read about these and think about it.  Please give the following
illustrations of:
1 An action that is created but not accumulated
2. An action that is accumulated but not created
3. An action that is both  accumulated and created
4. An action that is neither accumulated nor created

The answer is in the text. So I request you to read.
























