Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson46.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.097407
================================================================================


Meditation on Manjushri
Bring Manjushri to your mind and visualize him as clearly as you can. Then
place your mind on Manjushri. On that basis, performs the seven-branch
worship.
Today I will give you a brief introduction to the twelve links of dependent
origination by using the wheel of existence (Wheel of life). There is a
history background behind the wheel of existence. During the time of
Buddha, King Udayana gave a present to King Bimbisara.  King Bimbisara
thought that he should return a present in kind but he didn’t know what to
give; so he sought the Buddha’s advice. The Buddha advised King Bimbisara
to draw this wheel of existence in accordance with his explanation. He then
offered it to King Udayana. It was said that upon seeing this wheel of
existence, many subjects of King Udayana were able to liberate themselves
from samsara.
This wheel of existence shows three things:
   1. The causes of circling in cyclic existence
   2. The kind of environments into which one is circles into
   3. The manners in which one circles in cyclic existence
1. The causes of circling in cyclic existence
As discussed recently, the true origins of cyclic existence is action/karma
and the afflictions.
In this wheel of existence:
-the first circle (in the center) shows the afflictions. The three
creatures in it symbolize the afflictions.
-the circle outside of that is divided into two half: a white background
and a black background; which show white karma and black karma.
-These two circles collectively show the causes by which we circle in
samsara.
2.The kind of environments into which one is circles into
The next circle shows the six types of transmigratory beings.
3. The manners  in which one circles in cyclic existence
The outer most concentric ring shows the twelve links of dependent
origination; starting from ignorance and ending with birth and death.
|The wheel of  cyclic   |Three main categories      |Symbolization             |
|existence              |                           |                          |
|1st Circle - Inner most|Causes of circling in      |Three creatures symbolize |
|circle                 |cyclic existence           |afflictions               |
|2nd Circle -Outside of |                           |White and black karma     |
|1st circle             |                           |                          |
|3rd Circle – Outside of|Environmental which one    |Six types of              |
|2nd circle             |born into                  |transmigratory beings     |
|4th Circle - Outer most|Manner in which one circles|Twelve links of dependent |
|circle                 |in cyclic existence        |origination               |


What are the causes of circling in cyclic existence? Afflictions
In the inner most circle, the three mental poisons are symbolized by the
three animals:
   1. Pig symbolizes ignorance
   2. Snake symbolizes anger
   3. Rooster symbolizes attachment
In the drawing, notice that the snake and the rooster is shown to be
issuing forth from the mouth of the pig; this symbolizes that ignorance
(bewilderment) is the root of the other two.
However in some other drawing of the wheel of existence, you may see the
rooster is issuing forth from the pig’s mouth, and from the rooster’s
mouth, it issue forth the snake. They are kind of connected to one and
another. This shows that ignorance gives rise attachment and attachment
give rise to anger.
Karma is motivated by the three mental poisons. Due to the three mental
poisons, one accumulates either white karma or black karma. This is shown
in this drawing.
If you look at the figures in the second concentric circle, on the left,
you can see the three figures which are shown to be moving in the upward
direction. I think this represent the intermediate state beings.
In the LRCM, it is stated clearly that for those intermediate state beings
going on to a good rebirth move in the upward direction and those
intermediate state beings heading for the lower realms move in the downward
direction. As discussed recently, we saw how the intermediate state beings
will actually have the shape of the body that they will take rebirth. If
one is to be reborn as a human being, one enters into the intermediate
state of a human being and will look like a human being. However if one is
going to the lower realms, for example, one is to be born as an animal, in
the intermediate state one will have the shape of an animal. This is
symbolized by the second concentric circle.
From the intermediate state, one then moves on to the next rebirth. One
takes rebirth in one of the six types of transmigratory beings; as shown in
the third concentric ring (from the center).
Of the six types of transmigratory beings, there are:
- three of the good realms and
- three of the lower realms.
These are represented by the six quadrants. However, sometimes instead of
six, only five quadrants are drawn. If it is divided into five quadrants
that mean the demigods are subsumed under the gods.
However, if you separate the gods and demigods, then you will have six
quadrants.
When the god realm is subdivided, there are:
   1. the realm of the desire realm gods
   2. the realm of the gods of the form realm
   3. the realm of the gods of the formless realm
The desire realm gods are subdivided into six levels.
In terms of the environment, the form realm has seventeen divisions.
For the formless realms, they are four types.
The third concentric circle shows the environments in which one is reborn
in the cyclic existence. It includes all the environments in the cyclic
existence up to the Peak of Cyclic Existence (the highest state of
existence one can achieve in samsara).
The outer most circles shows the twelve links of dependent arising;
starting from the link of ignorance and ending with aging and death.
In the drawing, the first link of dependent arising is the factor of
ignorance, symbolized by an old blind man hobbling along. As this person is
old and blind, he will never ever get to where he wanted to go; he cannot
find any sustenance such as food or drink, any enjoyment; he is unable to
avoid dangerous places and may fall over the cliff and then has to undergo
suffering. So this old man is analogous of ignorance. Because of ignorance,
we end up experiencing all kinds of suffering.
Ignorance is mainly refers to not knowing the ultimate nature of reality or
not knowing the suchness of phenomena. Because of not knowing the ultimate
nature of phenomena, one accumulates all sorts of karma.
Motivated by ignorance, one accumulates karma. In the drawing, this is
symbolized by a potter. When the potter makes earthenware, he can create
anything he wants. So this figure is analogous of the second link –the
compositional activity. Here it also refers to as accumulating the
projecting karma.
Compositional activity, compositional action and projecting action/karma
mean the same thing. Just as a potter makes different kinds of things,
likewise due to the different kinds of karma accumulated, one takes on the
different kinds of body: good or bad; one has different life experiences
and, one has different kinds of enjoyment: small or great.
The next link is the link of consciousness which refers to the contaminated
mental consciousness upon which the impression of the karma accumulated is
left upon or it refers to the basis of infusion of the karma that is
accumulated.  When you accumulate karma, an impression of that action is
left on the mental continuum i.e. the imprint of that action is left on the
mental consciousness. The mental consciousness upon which the imprint of
the action is left is this link of consciousness. This does not refer to
all consciousness.
You have to at least be able to explain to people what does the link of
consciousness means. Even for those who have heard this before, it may
sound easy but it is not so straightforward because if I were to ask you
some questions then the complexity of the issue will arise clearly. For
those of you hearing this for the first time, at least you have to know
what does the link of consciousness refers to.
The consciousness is symbolized by a monkey. As you know, monkey leaps
about and does not sit around in one place. Monkey is active and jumps
around. This is like the ordinary mind. Even one wants to stay focus on
something but somehow the mind is unable to remain on that chosen object;
instead it is distracted to all kinds of other objects. Just as a monkey
moves from one tree to another, the consciousness moves from one life to
another.
So these three -ignorance, compositional activity and consciousness-
collectively are called the projecting factors.
Earlier we have the causes of the projection. Now we are looking at the
results of the projection which start with the fourth link: name and form.
Name and form refers to the five aggregates; which is the result of
projection. Among the five aggregates:
“Form” refers to the form aggregate.
“Name” refers to the four aggregates other than form; which are feeling,
discrimination, compositional factor and consciousness. These four
aggregates are not form and they cannot be the objects of sense power; but
rather they are objects of the mental sense power.
These four -feeling, discrimination, compositional factor and consciousness-
 can only appear to the mind via a name or term; they are not the objects
of the sense power.
From the time the five aggregates come into existence and up to and before
the six sources (the fifth link) are developed, the five aggregates which
exist during this time fall within the link of name and form.
Name and form does not refer to the five aggregates alone. They refer to
the five aggregates from the time it is established up to and before the
six sources are developed.
(Question inaudible)
Ven Gyurme: You can’t say that. You are really a fetus. The whole nine
months you are fetus, right? This refers to the time when the consciousness
enters and the five aggregates are established; but up to the time before
the six sources are developed, the aggregates during this time are name and
form.
The fourth link - name and form - is symbolized by people travelling on a
boat.  This link of name and form usually refers to five aggregates (the
physical and mental aggregates); from the time it is established up to and
before the six sources is developed. The five aggregates that this
individual has, while in the intermediate state prior to this rebirth,
would probably have to be subsumed under this link.
Just as one needs to travel on the boat to get from one side of the shore
to the other, similarly in order to enter into the birth state, one has to
pass through the intermediate state. From the basis of having the five
aggregates during the intermediate state, one enters into the birth state.
There will be a time when the six sources will come into existence and that
is the start of the link of the six sources.
The link of the six sources last from the time the six sources come into
existence up to the time before the arising of the six consciousnesses
which depend on these six sources.
(Question inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (Spoke in English): It is still in the womb. Not after born.
Go heaven you still have to come down. In the womb also have feeling;
feeling like to come out.
The fifth link -the six sources- start from the time the six sources are
established. The six sources or the six sense powers are the empowering
conditions for arising of the six consciousnesses.
From the time these six sources arise up to the time before the six
consciousnesses arise is the link of the six sources.  In the drawing, the
six sources are symbolized by a house that has six windows but is empty
inside. This is the analogous of the time when the six sense powers have
already established but the six consciousnesses are yet to manifest.
When the sensory object, the sensory power (sensory faculty) and the body
are coming together, consciousness then arise. This is refers to as the
link of contact.
The sixth link -contact - is symbolized by a couple in embrace. By
embracing, feeling arises; so this is analogous of how from the link of
contact, comes the link of feeling.
When the sensory object, the sensory power and the body are coming
together, consciousness arises. This is called the mental factor of
contact; which distinguishes the object into pleasant, unpleasant or
neutral. Corresponding to contact discrimination of the three types of
object (pleasant, unpleasant or neutral), pleasant feeling, unpleasant
feeling or neutral feeling arise.
The time when this feeling arise upon contact discrimination of the three
kinds of object is known as the link of feeling.
The seventh link- feeling - refers to the time when the mental factor of
feeling is manifest in a strong way; be it pleasant, unpleasant or neutral.
The link of feeling is symbolized by a person whose eye is pierced by an
arrow. When a person’s eye is pierced by arrow, there is intense and very
strong painful feeling which makes it difficult for the person to think of
some other objects; as the mind is just completely absorbed in that
feeling. Likewise, when the strong feeling of either pleasure or suffering
arises, our minds are completely absorbed such that we are unable to think
of anything else.
The four links -name and form, six sources, contact and feeling- are the
results of projection.
The three causes of projection: ignorance, compositional activity and
consciousness and the four results of the projection (or projected
factors): name and form, six sources, contact and feeling - makes up one
set of cause and effect relationship. So from the three projecting causes
you have the four projected results.
Next is the eighth link of craving which essentially is attachment. Craving
refers to that feeling which nourishes the potential of the karmic imprint
that was left on the consciousness. In the drawing, craving is symbolized
by an alcoholic, someone who just drinks without any measures. Like an
alcoholic, the attachment can never be satisfied; the more you drink, the
more you are caught up in it and this leads to stronger desire. So, craving
is liked that. It nourishes the imprints of the action/ karma that was left
on the mental continuum and makes it stronger.
Next is the ninth link of grasping. Grasping is essentially the derivative
of attachment; perhaps it is stronger than craving. It is stronger form of
attachment; yearning and wanting something. The link of grasping is
symbolized by a monkey plucking fruits. Normally when monkeys grab a piece
of fruit, they start to eat but before they could finish it, their hand
grab for another one.
We have the latent propensity of a karma (karmic imprint) that was left on
the mind and is nurtured by craving and grasping. This karmic imprint is
nurtured to the point where it is almost ready to bring forth its result
and this time is known as the link of potential existence.
The tenth link of potential existence is symbolized by a pregnant woman who
is about to deliver; maybe the labor pain has already started.
The links of craving, grasping, potential existence are called the causes
of actualization.
Next, you have the last two links: the link of birth and the link of aging
and death.
The eleventh link of birth refers to the consciousness initially enter into
the next rebirth. In the drawing, this is symbolized by a new born baby who
has just come out from the mother’s womb.
The link of aging and death is symbolized by a person carrying a corpse on
his back and walking.
The links of birth and aging and death are the results of actualization or
the actualized factors.
Of the twelve links of dependent origination:
-the first three are the projecting causes, the next four are the projected
results.
This is one set of cause and effect relationship.
Then there are three which are the causes of actualization, and the two
which are the results of actualization. This is another set of cause and
effect relationship.
|Projecting Causes  |Projected       |Causes of          |Results of          |
|                   |Results         |actualization      |actualization       |
|1.Ignorance        |4.Name and Form |8.Craving          |11.Birth            |
|2. Compositional   |5. Six sources  |9. Grasping        |12. Aging and death |
|activity           |6. Contact      |10. Potential      |                    |
|3. Consciousness   |7. Feeling      |existence          |                    |


If you look at the twelve links of dependent arising, in order for a
particular result to manifest, how many causes must come prior to it? You
need ignorance to start with.
The farmer needs a piece of land to plant the seeds. The farmer here is
analogous of ignorance. The seeds which he plants are the compositional
activity. The field which he plants the seeds in is the analogous of the
consciousness, the basis of infusion. However, this does not necessarily
means the crops will grow but it just means that it is made possible for
the crops to grow. Likewise, with ignorance, compositional activity and
consciousness alone doesn’t mean that you are going to have result.
Craving and grasping now come into the picture. Craving and grasping
nurtures the imprint, the seed of the karma that was left on the mental
continuum. When the latency of that karma is nourished to the extent that
it is powerful enough and about to bring forth its result, that state is
known as potential existence.
The farmer who works in the field adds fertilizer to nurture the seeds and
also ensuring that there is enough water to the point the seeds would
certain to grow, ripen and harvest. .
This is analogous of ignorance, compositional activity and consciousness as
the projecting causes.  Then nurtured by the actualizing causes: craving
and grasping, the seed of the karma that was left on the mind is nourished
and nurtured to the point where it is certain to bring forth a result. That
time is known as potential existence.
Craving, grasping and potential existence are the three actualizing causes.

So there are three projecting causes and the three actualizing causes.
The seed is nourished and nurtured to the point where it is certain to give
the result - the sprouts.
The seed sprouts and become the seedling; this happens externally.
Internally, with the projecting causes together with the actualizing
causes, at the time of potential existence, the seed of the karma is
nourished to the point that it is certain to give rise to the result and
the result is name and form, the first link.
The seed sprouts become the seedling. Overtime, it grows and develops into
shoots. Likewise, after the five aggregates are established, the link of
name and form, then come a time the six sources develop.
The seedling then becomes a full plant and starts to flower. That is
likened to the link of contact.
When the flowers transform into fruits, this is liked moving from the link
of contact to the link of feeling. The fruits left on the plant will then
start to rot, this is liked the link of aging and death.
The question from one student is where does the link of birth fit in? The
link of birth and the link of name and form are about the same thing. What
Khen Rinpoche said was: “It looks easy at one hand but if you think about
it, it looks complicated. So, does it look easy or complicated?”
Student 1: Referring to the link of consciousness is there a specific term
used for this particular link of consciousness which is the basis of
infusion of the dormant karmic tendency in the teaching of Highest Yoga
Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: When we talk about the link of consciousness, I guess you
should be aware that there are different assertions of consciousness that
is the basis of infusion for the karmic latent propensity, the link of
consciousness we are discussing here is about the consciousness that is the
basis of infusion. When you engage in an action, that action leaves an
imprint on the mind. We are talking about what is the mind that receives
this imprint. Different Buddhist tenets have their own views. There are
people who assert that it is the mental consciousness that is the basis of
infusion. While there are others who assert that it is the mind basis of
all that is the basis of infusion. If you bring tantra into the picture, in
tantra we talk about a subtler consciousness that is the basis of infusion
as the coarse consciousness does not go on to the next life. So it is only
the extremely subtle mind does that i.e. go on to the next life.
Student 1: The answer would be the most subtle mind.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah
Student 1: The second question: regarding to the qualms that brought up in
the Lamrim Chenmo page 319, it mentioned about the two instances of these
two sets of causality that was being mentioned just now. However the qualms
did not give the reasons why the qualms came out in the first place. For
instance, one set of cause and effect relationship other than two, it said
it is incorrect to claim that the actualizing factors occur after the
establishment of the projected factors. But it doesn’t give the reason for
this qualm. Also, if there are two sets of causalities then the qualm will
be that there will be no projecting factors and so on. Also did not give
the reasons for this claim. Could Khen Rinpoche explain the reasons for
these qualms?
Khen Rinpoche: Not now, next time.
Think about these twelve links dependent arising based on what I have said
today. If you have anything that you do not understand then you can bring
it up. You can ask me the next time round.
Student 2: There are two ways of presenting the twelve links of dependent
arising, the scriptural way and the experiential way. The sequences are
different. (Audio file 107.25 to 111)
Ven Gyurme: The example started with the farmer and that is your so called
experiential way. That is how in general how the twelve links is
experienced.
It is not so straightforward. In this wheel of existence, the twelve links
is presented in certain orders. Why is it presented in that orders?
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody have good answer I am offering lunch. Only the
senior one, the new one no needs to think.
Question: What is the reason for presenting the twelve links in this order
starting from ignorance, compositional activity, consciousness and so forth
in that particular order. Why?
Student 3: It is explained down here, the reflection liked something to do
with the reflecting in the forward process and the reverse process to
understand the ways to cease the progression of the twelve links……(Audio
file 112.25- 11)
Khen Rinpoche: From the point of practice how should it go?
Student 3: The more detail example, I will go back and research. I know it
is the forward process and the reverse process. When you meditate on
forward process, you understand how one is the cause for the other even
though it is not in the correct sequence. (Audio file 114 - 114.50)
Khen Rinpoche: The forward process is starting from ignorance only. Because
of ignorance, compositional activity arises; from there, then
consciousness; from consciousness then name and form. Is this the forward
process?
Student 3: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Is it exactly like this the forward process?
Student 3: In terms of cause and effect relationship, no. Just like the
four noble truths, True Suffering is taught first but True Origins occur
first (Audio files 115.38-116:25)
Khen Rinpoche: Meditating on the forward process is not for stopping the
cyclic existence?
Student 3: Both of them. Maybe…(Audio files 116.30-116.52)
Khen Rinpoche: Go and sleep. Check in your dream.


