Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson48.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.334745
================================================================================


We have finished with the four noble truths and also the presentation of
the twelve links of dependent arising. If you have questions pertaining to
these topics, you can bring it up right now.
Student 1: I have a question about the projected result. At the time of
death, there are actualizing causes of craving and grasping that nourish
the karmic imprint to be born as a human being. After that is the projected
result. Is this projected result refers to the aggregates of the bardo
being?  After the nourishment of the karmic imprint, then the person dies
and become the bardo being. (Audio files: 12:26 – 13:12)
Ven Gyurme: I think it was covered.
Student 1: Can explain again?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that the name and form refers only to the
aggregates of the bardo being?
Student 1: Yes, I was wondering whether there are two sets of name and
form: one during the bardo being’s aggregates and one is when the
consciousness enters the womb.
Khen Rinpoche: The link of name and form usually starts when the
consciousness move on to the next rebirth.
Student 1: Move on to the next rebirth means consciousness goes to the womb
or……?
Ven Gyurme: You take rebirth not necessary always in the womb. That is why
I said next rebirth.
Khen Rinpoche: Generally speaking, most of the time the link of name and
form refers to the birth existence i.e. when the consciousness transition
takes rebirth. During the explanation, I did mentioned the aggregates of
the intermediate state being would be subsumed by this link.
Ven Gyurme: Just now you were asking whether there is one link or two links
of name and form?
Student 1: Name and form in projected result and name and form in the
actualized result?
Ven Gyurme: What is your next question?
Student 1: (Ven Gyurme summarized):  Due to craving and grasping, the karma
to go to the lower realms ripens and I enter into the intermediate state of
a hell being. You create merits for me. My intermediate state then changes
into the intermediate state of a human being. How to explain the twelve
links in this case?
Khen Rinpoche: If we take the position of the lower Abidharmakosha then it
is easy: the intermediate state cannot change.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  May be somebody answers. What do you
think about the question?
Student 2: Maybe when the intermediate state being die and take rebirth,
there is also actualizing cause. The projecting karma is being activated so
that is a change. Remember they die every seven days and take rebirth?
(Audio files: 20:19 –20:55)
Ven Gyume: You are saying that intermediate state can only change after
every seven days even if you do puja?
Student 2: I think so. Maybe.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Not necessary seven days. Between the
seven days, any time can be change.
Student 2: (Audio files: 21:11 – 21:34)
(Inaudible feedback from other students)
Student 2: I think once it takes name and form, the cycle is almost
completed. For example, even if you go straight away into a fetus, the
fetus can die if it is aborted. (Audio files: 21:51 – 22:40)
Ven Gyurme: It is not completed between name and form and six sources. If
the six sources do not develop, before that it can die. Are you saying
there is a twelve links without the six sources?
Student 2: From what I read, the book says name and form and existence
happen at the same time. Immediately when the consciousness goes into the
ovum straight away is a form. Once there is a form, there is progressing
aging and then it can die. So, it is completed. (Audio files: 22:51 –
23:25)
Ven Gyurme: Six sources?
Student 2: One source, just the form. My question is in the book, it says
that name and form and existence occur simultaneously…
Khen Rinpoche: Number ten (link-existence)?
Student 2: After grasping and craving, it activates the karma and that the
potential karma become what you called a realized karma. That means
definitely you will take rebirth.
Khen Rinpoche: It is not possible because there are the three projecting
causes, four projected results, three actualizing causes and two actualized
results. The link of existence is a cause whereas the link of name and form
is an effect. As the cause has to precede effect, so in that sense they
can’t be simultaneous because cause and effect don’t happen simultaneously.
Student 2: So the book is wrong.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Any book says that? I don’t think so.
Must be your book; joking.
Khen Rinpoche: Existence and name and form do not happen simultaneously.
But if there is a translation problem which translates existence to be
birth then maybe there is something to think about because the link of
birth and the link of name and form happen simultaneously i.e. the very
first moment of name and form is birth.
Sometimes the word “coming into existence” to mean birth is used. If that
is the case, then the word “existence” would not mean the link of
existence, the English word “existence” would mean “coming into being” or
“coming into birth”. The link of existence - the tenth link, what is it
exactly? It is karma. Between cause and effect, it is a cause; it is an
actualizing cause. As cause and effect cannot exist together, therefore
existence and name and form don’t happen simultaneously.
For example, a person’s karma to be born in the lower realms is nurtured by
craving and grasping. As a result, he enters into the intermediate state of
a lower realms being. Let’s say something is done to change his
intermediate state. If his intermediate state does gets change then saying
that one cycle of the twelve links of dependent arising have to be finished
in the maximum of three life times may run into a little bit of problem.
Student 3: (Ven Gyurme summarized): Is the presentation of twelve links
helps us develop an understanding of emptiness or renunciation of samsara?
(Audio files: 30:55 – 32:11)
Khen Rinpoche: One can meditate on the twelve links of dependent arising
while on the path that is shared with the person of small capacity.
Similarly, one can meditate on the twelve links of dependent arising in the
context of the path of the person of medium capacity. Going by this, one
can also say that one can meditate on the twelve links of dependent arising
in relation to the path of the person of great capacity.
By thinking of how one takes rebirth in the lower realms through the twelve
links, this is something that can be reflected by a person of small
capacity. If one does a good reflection of the twelve links of dependent
arising in the context of person of small capacity, it is possible to
develop a sincere strong interest or desire to get a good rebirth as a
human or god.
By using the twelve link of dependent arising to reflect on how one circles
in cyclic existence, this can become a practice of person of medium
capacity. Through this, one can develop renunciation and desire to be free
from cyclic existence; which then leads one to develop an interest or
desire to achieve liberation.
Using this as a basis to understand how one circle in cyclic existence by
using the twelve links of dependent arising, similarly, if you think of how
other sentient beings are also circling in cyclic existence based on the
presentation of twelve links, one can develop altruistic intention/
bodhichitta; then comes the desire to achieve Buddhahood.
The twelve links of dependent arising is an instant of dependent arising on
the level of causality: cause giving rise to the effect. With this
understanding as a condition, it can help us to understand the subtle
dependent arising; how all phenomena are devoid of existing inherently.
Student 3: (Ven Gyurme summarized): How does the division of the twelve
links of dependent arising into two instances of causality help one develop
renunciation and emptiness?  (Audio files: 39:07 – 40:53)
Khen Rinpoche: Basically are you saying why is that a need to divide the
twelve links into these two sets of causality?
Khen Rinpoche: I put you on notice that whenever I get a question, the
question is not just directed at me. You have to understand that the
question is for everyone so all of you have to play a part by figuring out
your own answer. Whoever asks a question, you should pay attention to the
question and see if you know the answer or not rather than waiting for me
to answer. That would not be helpful.
Ven Gyurme: The question is: Why can’t we have just one set of causality?
Why do we have two sets of causality? Why do we need to talk about
causality in the first place?
Student 4: So that you know that how something is being created in the past
results in what you are suffering right now. In such, if you continue to do
that kind of thing again, you will (get that) result in the future; you
kind of seeing the cycle continue. What is projected in the past result in
what it is right now. What is being actualized and then happen that when
you actualized, you  continue to create the projected cause again and then
you actualize it in the future.
Student 5: (Audio files: 46:21 – 48:00)
Khen Rinpoche: If you summarize that question even further, Why do we need
to divide things into projecting causes and actualizing causes? Basically,
why there are two instances of causality?
Student 5: To help us understand that one cycle of twelve links can only be
completed in minimum of two lifetimes. The projecting factors and the
actualizing factors in one lifetime, minimum, and the projected factors and
the actualized factors in the subsequent lifetime.  To help us to
understand that this twelve links is completed in that chronology of two
lifetimes. You can’t complete within one lifetime. To explain the actual
sequence of what is happening in reality.
Khen Rinpoche: How is that a reason to establish the thesis that needs two
instances of causality? The causes are divided into two sets: projecting
causes and actualizing causes. Why do we need to divide causes into these
two? If that is the case, then your answer which is: “Because it shows that
one cycle of the twelve links of dependent arising can be finished in the
minimum two lifetimes”, how does that prove or show the need?
Student 5:  (Audio files: 51:29 – 52:18)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  You are going some other place.
Khen Rinpoche: The very essence of the question is: Why do we need to
divide causes into: projecting causes and actualizing causes?
Student 6: The reason of why there are two sets of causes because the two
sets of causes are different. I was thinking about the analogy that Khen
Rinpoche gave us about the farmer where ignorance is likened to a farmer,
the compositional factor is likened to a seed and consciousness is likened
to a field. Those are the projecting causes. The farmer may plant his seed
in a field but if he didn’t do anything beyond that such as put the
fertilizer, then nothing will happen. That is why another set of what is
called the actualizing causes are required. Using the same analogy, those
actualizing causes are craving, grasping and then leading to potential
existence. Craving and grasping are likened to water and fertilizer to
nurture the seed and make it flourish and grow. Then the birth comes and
the name and form and that sequence of links four, five, six and seven then
arises. That is why there are two different sets of causality. (Audio
files: 53:05– 56:07)
Khen Rinpoche: I got what you said. If you have to summarize that answer
into a punch line, you just have to say a few words or one sentence then
that is the answer. Do you want to try?
Student 6: The projecting causes cannot give rise to its projected effect
without the function of the actualizing causes. They may work together but
you can’t just have one set because having one set of causality -
projecting cause and effect- it doesn’t work. You need to actualizing
causes to energize the projecting causes to give rise to the projecting
effects. Obviously the actualizing effects as well. . (Audio files: 53:47–
58:11)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Getting longer.
Khen Rinpoche: The effects of one cycle of twelve links of dependent
arising must be preceded by its own causes. But within the categories of
causes that are different divisions; there are different causes. It is to
highlight that.
The reason why there are two instances of causality here is because there
are difference causes. Different causes have their own different potential.

As I have mentioned earlier, what is the function of the three projecting
causes?
-The function is to make the effect conducive to arise; whereas the
function of the three actualizing causes not only make the effect conducive
to arise but it makes the effect definitely to arise.
Having say that, if the actualizing causes function is to make certain the
arising of the effect, then in the case of a karmic propensity for taking
rebirth in the lower realms, when that karmic propensity is nurtured by
craving and grasping then it is certain that the lower realm beings’
aggregates were be projected or impelled. If that is the case, then you
have to say that the intermediate state cannot be change, isn’t it?
This is something to think about because you have both the projecting
causes and actualizing causes present then the result would have to come.
Let’s say a being’s negative karma is to be born in a lower realm and is
nurtured by craving and grasping then the potential existence. The person
enters into the intermediate state of a lower realm being. As mentioned in
the teaching, the intermediate state being possesses the shape of the next
rebirth that he is going to take. In fact, the intermediate state being has
all the five sensory faculties. Having said that, is that considered as a
completion of the twelve links already?
As the intermediate state being has all the five sensory faculties and
bearing the resemblance to the kind of body he will get in the next
rebirth, can that be considered to be a completion of the twelve links?
If you say the intermediate state can change and at the same time you say
that the twelve links is not completed, already having the six causes, are
you saying that in the future life the imprint that will cause the person
to go to the lower realms has to be nourished and nurtured by the craving
and grasping again?
If you say that is possible. then the assertion that the twelve links of
dependent arising has to be completed within the maximum of the three
lifetimes fall apart.
Student 7: Going by your explanation, then probably you have to say that
the being in the bardo state would have died already. Let’s say if I am
destined to go to the lower realm and now as a bardo being, somebody
dedicate all the prayers and my karma changes to go to another realm. Is it
considered that this bardo being actually died. If it is not, then the
twelve links would not have been completed? (Audio files: 66:58– 67:32)
Ven Gyurme: In order to change the intermediate state do you have to die in
the intermediate state?
Student 7: (Audio files: 67:39– 67:54)
Khen Rinpoche: If the intermediate state does change then the intermediate
state being has to die and reborn again into another intermediate state.
For someone in the intermediate state of a lower realm, let’s say
intermediate state of a hell being, and in order for that intermediate
state to change into the intermediate state of a human being, the being has
to undergo death. There must be a process of changing from one intermediate
state to another; which means before the intermediate state being dies the
imprint to be born as a human being must be nurtured by craving and
grasping before he dies and changes the intermediate state.  So, how many
lifetimes already?
Student 7: If you consider that the bardo being, that itself as a lifetime.
That cycle has already been completed. The earlier cycle of the twelve
links of the person being born as hell being has already completed. (Audio
files: 69:44– 70:04)
Ven Gyurme: Why is it completed? Has he received the aggregates of the hell
being yet?
Student 7: Bardo being is actually birth and also name and form. That
itself is already a complete twelve links. Actually there is also death
within the bardo state? (Audio files: 70:09– 70:31)
Ven Gyurme: That is a lot of suffering as the hell intermediate state
being? Is it burning?
Khen Rinpoche: For a person who is in the intermediate state of a hell
being and whose intermediate state is going to change to that of a human
being, while he is in the intermediate state of a hell being, the six
causes have already finished and he has the six results. Are the six
results already completed while in the intermediate state of a hell being?
That is something we have to think about.
Student 7: It should be considered as already completed because there is
already birth and name and forms and have all the senses. (Audio files:
72:01– 72:25)
Khen Rinpoche: The intermediate state being does possess a complete set of
sensory faculty. If we say that all the six results already completed in
the intermediate state, will it be okay or not?
Student 7: I think it should be ok.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Kelvin says ok but Cecilia said not ok.
Why do you (Cecilia) say not okay?
Khen Rinpoche: From the perspective of someone (who is in the intermediate
state of a hell being) is going to change into the intermediate state of a
human being, is that twelve links of dependent arising completed? What is
the reason for you say that the twelve links cannot be completed while in
the intermediate state?
Student 8: The links of name and form, six sources and so forth do not
pertain to the bardo state but to the actual rebirth that the person is
going to take as a human being.  (Audio files: 75:02– 76:13)
Khen Rinpoche: After entering into the intermediate state of a hell being,
the six links which are the results starting from the name and form, the
six sources, contact, feeling, aren’t they all there?
Student 8: (Audio files: 76:44– 77:31)
Khen Rinpoche: Student 8 says the twelve links are not completed in the
intermediate state and student 7 says there are. Of course you are talking
from the perspective for someone who changes intermediate state during the
intermediate state.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  What other people think?
[Khen Rinpoche asks opinions from some senior students: Most people vote
for student 7.]
In the case of a person who is going to the lower realm but changes the
intermediate state, if you say the twelve links are completed, then it is
same as saying that he will not have to experience the suffering or the
results of something that he did. It would seem that one will not have to
experience the result of the projecting karma that one accumulated in the
past for going to the lower realms.
If you say that all the twelve links are completed within the intermediate
state, it is the same as saying that the result is experienced.
If you say that twelve links are not completed in the intermediate state,
which means in order for the same cycle of twelve links to complete, the
actualizing causes must come again. Then the assertion that the twelve
links of dependent arising of one cycle must be completed within the
maximum of three lifetimes again falls apart. It seems that you need four
lifetimes; maybe more because after that again interrupted.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Twelve links become more complicated
now.
Student 9: For example, for an action of killing of goat, one end up to
have five hundred lifetimes of being a goat, so how many cycles of twelve
links are there?(Audio files: 83:00– 84:17)
Ven Gyurme: Is either one cycle or more than one cycle right?
Student 9: Yes or is it because it is multiplying it becomes many cycles?
If that is so, maybe you can explain how it is die in the bardo state as
karma multiply and you still have the karmic seeds there. (Audio files:
84:25– 84:52)
Ven Gyurme: She was saying that one action of killing can result in many
lifetimes rebirth in the lower realms right, is it one cycle of twelve
links or every lifetime is a cycle of its own?
Student 10: (Audio files: 85:43– 87:30)

According to Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge (Abhidharmakosa), one
projecting karma will only results in one rebirth. I recall that in the
case of someone having to take five hundred rebirths as the result of one
action, one projecting karma will only results in one rebirth and the other
remaining rebirths are the results of the completing karma. However, in the
higher Abhidharmakosa, Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge, it is not
necessarily so because one action can have more than one result. In the
Compendium of Knowledge, it is stated that one action can project one
rebirth or more than one rebirth.
[LRCM V1 page 240] In Asanga’s Compendium of Knowlwdge:
   1. There is karma where a single action projects one body
   2. There is karma where a single action projects many bodies
   3. There is karma where many actions project a single body
   4. There is  karma where many actions project many bodies
Anyway this is quite complicated. So this is something for you to continue
to think about.
In the forward process of twelve links of dependent arising, after feeling,
comes craving. Does craving necessarily occur after feeling? If there is
feeling, does craving necessarily arise?
This is the question for the seniors. If there is a feeling, does craving
necessarily come about? How do you account for the forward process of the
twelve links of dependent arising after feeling, there is no craving?
[Inaudible from student]
Ven Gyurme: We crave for the pleasurable feeling and we crave to avoid
unpleasant feeling. Then there are some people who crave for neutral
feeling (equanimity).
Student 11: Not all feeling produces craving. (Audio files: 95:01– 95:07)
Khen Rinpoche: If you say not necessarily then how do you account for the
author from feeling come craving? If there is no craving then the next one
is grasping. Isn’t it the case in the twelve links, from feeling ( craving
(  grasping and ……….
Student 11: Your question was does all feeling produces craving? (Audio
files: 95:50– 95:54)
Ven Gyurme: The question is: Is it necessarily from feeling comes craving
or not?
Student 11: Yes, I think so.
Khen Rinpoche: If you have feeling, do you necessarily have craving?
Student 11: No
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Example.
Student 11: I may feel I like you but I don’t crave for you. Craving is a
very strong form of feeling which not necessarily arises unless you have
very strong delusion. (Audio files: 96:28– 97:06)
Khen Rinpoche: You say that from feeling, craving does not necessarily
arise right?
Student 12: Correct.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it the case because of ignorance, you will definitely
accumulate karma. The karma then is infused in the consciousness and then
the order goes on.
Because of ignorance then there is compositional activity. Likewise because
there is feeling, then come grasping.
If you have the ignorance that belongs to the twelve links, don’t you
necessarily accumulate karma? I am not talking about ignorance in general.
Student 11: Is there such thing of ignorance of the twelve links?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Of course. There is no such a thing?
Ven Gyurme: The twelve links is for accumulating karma in samsara, right?
Khen Rinpoche: If you have the ignorance of the twelve links, you
definitely accumulate karma, right? Because you accumulate karma definitely
the imprint has to be left somewhere, therefore you have link number three
(consciousness). If there is feeling then craving is necessarily there. Do
you agree or not?
Student 11: No. (Audio files: 100:58– 101:07)
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is actually in the LRCM.
Student 12: The experience of craving definitely comes from feeling in the
sequence of the twelve links. The craving which is the actualizing factor
and feeling that give rise to this craving are not in the same cycle but
are the result from some other cycle. (Audio files: 101:33– 101:52)
Khen Rinpoche: This we accept. But my question is: feeling is the condition
for craving to arise. Basically as long as there is feeling, there is
craving. That is the question, do you accept or not?
Student 12: We are talking about the boundary of feeling within the twelve
links.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  That is different.
Ven Gyurme: We are just talking about the feeling.
Student 12: Generally?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Yes. When you have feeling, do you have
craving or not?
Student 12: (Audio files: 102:59– 103:09)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): The answer is in LRCM. For those senior
one, I am just asking to see whether you read or not.
Student 13: [LRCM  V1 page 318]: The statement in a sutra that "craving is
caused by feeling" means that feelings accompanied by ignorance cause
craving. Where there is no ignorance, craving does not occur, even if
feelings are present.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): The answer is there.
The questions that are raised in the discussion are mainly directed to the
older students. So, those of you who are new, don’t get discourage. The
older students have been learning the dharma for many years, seven to eight
years, and still have so many doubts and many things unresolved. So, don’t
get discourage. This goal of conducting this discussion -question and
answer- is not to discourage people but is to encourage everyone to pay
more attention, to think more and to increase your interest. I think I have
mentioned before about my personal experience. I had studied for seventeen
to eighteen years but if I have to compare of what I know versus of what I
do not know, the things that I do not know outnumber the things that I
know. This doesn’t make me discourage but, in fact, it makes me want to
find out more. When come to dharma, until we become a Buddha, there is
always something that we do not know. Only after we have achieved
enlightenment then we can say we know everything. So everyone is in the
same situation. You have to remember this: until we have achieved
enlightenment, there is always something to know and because of that, we
just have to continue to learn. Not knowing should not be a condition or a
cause to get discourage. In fact, it should be a condition for us to work
harder and to find out more about what we do not know. If you have that
desire then definitely you will place more imprints. With that imprints, it
will make your life in the future easier. Otherwise, if you use your not
understanding at the present moment as the reason to get discourage and
then you give up, you stop planting or putting any positive imprints in
your mind. Therefore, you just have to try your very best and to try as
hard as you can to leave as many strong imprints as you can in your mind.
In doing so, you will make your life in the future easier. It will become
easier and easier. If you think about this, just take our situation here,
the same thing is taught to everyone but there will be individuals who just
get it and there are some who may take a longer time. What is the reason?
If we have to analyze and break down all the reasons, at the end of the
day, we probably have to say that it is due to imprints; whether lack of or
abundant of. Just keep this in mind, we just work hard and try your best.



