Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson44.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.080033
================================================================================


Meditation on Manjushri
Visualize Manjushri in the space in front of you. Then develop heartfelt
devotion toward Manjushri and perform the seven-branch worship. After that,
do the visualization of the flow of nectars purifying all your obscurations
and developing your wisdom. Try to do this with concentrated mind.
As you know that we usually do a short meditation on Manjushri before
class. We bring Manjushri to our mind and then perform the seven-branch
worship and then make heartfelt prayer.  It is important to make this
heartfelt prayer because it does make a big difference to our studies. We
make this heartfelt prayer in order to pacify obstacles that may arise in
the course of listening to the teaching during the session. We also make
heartfelt prayer so that we can understand the dharma when we learn and
study. So, it is very important to make heartfelt prayer on the basis of
single-pointed faith. We make strong prayers with single-pointed faith to
free obstacles and to have success in our studies and to learn the dharma.
This makes a big difference to you all. So when we make prayer, we need to
make heartfelt prayer all the times.  As we have talked about karma
recently, the prayers should be strong, heartfelt and enduring. So, it is
very important to pray and to learn the dharma in a strong and powerful way
and to sustain that over a long period of times. If we do this, we will
definitely be able to leave many virtues imprints on our mind. You come
here to learn the dharma. Even in the case when nothing much happens, but
if you work at it, definitely this will make a difference for you to know
the dharma in your future lives. We do pray but perhaps at times, our
prayer is not very heartfelt; the prayer we made may not be strong and
enduring. We may not feel any positive effects from such prayer. So
whatever we do, such as study and learning the dharma, we need to put in
effort, do it well, and sustain that over time.  Only then we will see the
result. However, if from our side we do not have the strong wish to learn,
of course, we may not achieve much.
When we were looking at the truth of suffering, we talked about the
suffering aggregates.  The suffering aggregates are primarily the
contaminated/appropriated physical and mental aggregates that we have
inherited.  Because of having these contaminated aggregates, when we meet
with the slightest of the conditions, suffering is readily produced and we
experience suffering almost immediately.
It is said that our suffering aggregates -the contaminated physical and
mental aggregates- are in the nature of suffering. Why do we say it is in
the nature of suffering? At any particular time when suffering is not
manifest, we will not experience any unpleasant sensation or feeling.
Because the suffering aggregates are in the nature of suffering, whenever
we meet with the slightest of the conditions, suffering is readily
produced.
What are the causes that produce these suffering aggregates? If you do
analyze, various conditions come together into producing these suffering
aggregates. As we create all sorts of actions, these contaminated actions
produce the suffering aggregates. This was discussed in the truth of origin
of suffering.
These contaminated physical and mental aggregates are the result of
contaminated actions. From where do these contaminated actions arise? In
the first place, why do we engage in these actions? On the basis of the
mistaken apprehension of those which are by nature suffering and unpleasant
to be pleasurable and pleasant, we get emotionally involve with the object
and attachment then arise. From attachment, we engage in all sort of
contaminated actions. Because of attachment to the happiness of this life,
we engage in non-virtues such as killing and so forth and because of these
actions we are thrown into the miserable or lower realms. On top of that,
because of attachment and the desire to experience enjoyment in the future
lives, we engage in certain actions such as generosity which are motivated
by the wish to experience happiness or enjoyment in the future lives. These
karmas are meritorious which causes us to get a rebirth as a human, or a
desire realm god.
There are persons who may not be attracted to the external desirable
objects, but rather they are attached to the bliss that arises from the
meditative concentration. Driven by the attachment to the bliss that arises
from the meditative concentration, they accumulate the karma that would
throw them into the form and formless realms.
As mentioned in the teaching, because of attachment one goes to lower
realms, because of attachment one is born in cyclic existence and rebirth
of the six types of beings in cyclic existence comes from attachment.
Attachment arises due to mistakenly apprehending that is suffering to be
pleasurable. How does this happen? If you do analyze, attachment arises due
to holding on to the ‘I’ to be very important and precious. If you do
analyze it deeper, why do we hold the “I” or self as so important? This
boils down to what we have discussed earlier i.e. the view of the
transitory collection; which is the strong sense of “I” being self-
sufficient and being independent from the aggregates -the body and mind.
So, in short, true suffering refers to the contaminated physical and mental
aggregates that arise from the true origin of sufferings; which are
primarily actions, karma and the afflictions.
If you look at the actions that are accumulated, they are motivated
primarily by attachment. If we take the position that ignorance and the
view of transitory collection are the same, the ignorance is the ignorance
apprehending a self of a person and this ignorance is the root from which
attachment arises.
How does contaminated body and mind arise from ignorance? This is something
that is very important for us to think about. We have to see it for
ourselves of how all sufferings include the suffering of the body and mind
come from ignorance. At the end of the thinking process, we should have the
understanding at our heart that all these sufferings come from ignorance.
Through thinking, we should see, understand and experience for ourselves
how ignorance is the source of all the problems; including the suffering of
the body and mind. Only then, we can talk about ignorance in details and
then identifying what exactly ignorance is. We then start to look at
whether there is any antidote to ignorance and then analyze whether
ignorance can be weakened by applying this antidote. If we start to think
about all these, this is where we start with the next truth: the true
cessation and true path. If we proceed in such a way, we will arrive with a
perfect understanding.
If we analyze in such a way and on the basis of seeing from our own
experience of how ignorance is indeed the root of all our problems, we will
come to the true path and true cessation. Then from our heart, we will come
to recognize the actual refuge is the true path and true cessation which is
called the Dharma Jewel. On the basis of having identified what ignorance
is, we will see that ignorance can be removed by cultivating true path in
our mind. Then, we will really feel; “This is my refuge, my actual refuge”
and also come to an understanding of what Dharma Jewel is.
If we do understand how the dharma -true path and true cessation- is the
actual refuge, then we will understand that the real protection does not
come from outside but comes from inside of us. If the protection can come
from outside, then it would absurdly follow that we don’t have to do
anything. Of course that is not possible. So the real protection has to
come from the inside of us i.e. by generating the true path in our mind.
That is the reason why the Buddha says; “One is one’s protector” which mean
that we are the one who has to protect ourselves and we are our own savior.

Coming back to “karma that is intention” and “karma that is the intended
action.”
Who is the one that accumulate projecting karma? Everyone else except the
superior beings or the aryas.
Why do the superior beings not accumulate projecting karma? This is because
they have seen the truth directly.
When one sees the truth directly, does it mean that ignorance is destroyed
right there and then? No, it is not immediate.
When one sees the truth directly initially, at that time the superior being
has not overcome ignorance completely but that superior being does not
accumulate fresh projecting karma. Why? This is because when he has
realized the truth directly the ignorance in his mind is weakened to the
extent that it does not have the power to create an action that will
project a new rebirth in cyclic existence. In order to accumulate an action
that is strong enough to project a rebirth in cyclic existence, the
projecting cause – ignorance- must be powerful.
As said in many treatises such as Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom and
Vasubandhu’s Abidharmakosha that once the truth is realized or seen
directly, henceforth one will not accumulate projecting karma.
Question: After having realized emptiness directly, does that person take
on a rebirth due to karma and afflictions?
The reason why I bought up this question is to see whether you have really
read the text or not. As stated clearly in the text they do take rebirth
due to the power of karma and afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Looks like only three to four people read
the text.
Question: How the superior beings who have realized the truth directly
still take rebirth due to karma and afflictions?
Student 1: Even though they do not accumulate new projecting karma, because
of having accumulated projecting karma previously which has not been
exhausted yet, they will still be reborn due to the past karma that they
have accumulated.
Khen Rinpoche (Spoken in English): Okay, good. You have passed.
Student 2: Can I say that it cannot happen i.e. they cannot take rebirth?
If they have realized emptiness directly, they no longer grasp at
phenomena. According to the twelve links, even though they have the
projecting karma but they are not activated. So, they cannot take rebirth.
Khen Rinpoche: Lama Tsongkhapa says: “Once you have perceived reality i.e.
selflessness, you may still be reborn in cyclic existence by the power of
the former karma and afflictions but you will not accumulate any new karma
that can impel such rebirth”. Are you saying that what Lama Tsongkhapa had
said is not true?
Student 2: He is only said we will not accumulate any new projecting karma.
Khen Rinpoche: We accept that you will not accumulate any new negative
karma but you will still be reborn in cyclic existence by the former karma
and affliction.
Student 2: Previously they have projecting karma but in order for the
projecting karma to work, to propel them to new rebirth, at the time of
death, they must have grasping and craving, right?
Ven Gyurme: Why no grasping?
Student 2: Because you have realized emptiness.
Ven Gyurme: So they don’t have ignorance?
Student 2: I see.
Khen Rinpoche: It is clear that even aryas do take rebirth by the power of
their former karma and afflictions.
Question: Explain how.
Although it is not in this text but there are an explanation of the levels
for the superior beings:
   1. The stream enterer
   2. The once returner
   3. The non-returner
   4. The foe destroyer
Of these four superior beings, the first two -the stream enterer and the
once returner- will still take rebirth in the cyclic existence under the
former karma and afflictions.
The non-returners do not take rebirth under the karma and afflictions.
In the Abhidharmakosa, it is clearly stated that due to karma and
afflictions, some stream enterers have to take another seven rebirths in
the cyclic existence.
How you die and are reborn
This is explained in five parts:
   1. Causes of death
   2. The mind at death
   3. Where heat gathers
   4. How you reach the intermediate state after death
   5. How you then take rebirth
Causes of death
Various causes are mentioned:
   1. One die due to exhaustion of lifespan
   2. One die due to exhaustion of merit
   3. One die due to not avoiding danger
[LRCM Vol I page 307] Death from the exhaustion of  your  life  span  means
dying after you have used up all of the life span  that  was  projected  by
your previous karma; as the time has come, you die. Death  from  exhaustion
of your merit means, for example, dying  deprived  of  the  necessities  of
life. There is also death from failure to avoid danger, in regard to  which
the sutras list nine causes and conditions for premature death: overeating,
eating something indigestible, eating without having digested the  previous
meal, failing to expel undigested food that has accumulated in the stomach,
intestinal obstruction, not relying  on  specific  medicines  for  specific
illnesses, failing to understand the  distinction  between  accustomed  and
unaccustomed activities,  untimely  death  [i.e.,  accidental  death],  and
engaging in sexual intercourse.

The mind at death [LRCM Vol I page 308]
(a) Dying with a virtuous mind
Those who die with virtuous minds, whether through remembering on their own
or through being reminded by others, turn their minds to virtues, such as
faith, for as long as coarse discrimination [ordinary types of
consciousness] remains. In the case of death for those who have cultivated
either virtue or non-virtue unequally, they either remember on their own,
or are reminded by others, what they have become accustomed to do
repeatedly in the past, and this becomes extremely powerful. Their minds
then become absorbed in this and forget all else. If they are equally
familiar with both virtue and non-virtue, then they cannot stop remembering
what they remember first, and cannot engage their minds in anything else.
Those who have cultivated virtue seem to pass from darkness into light; as
they die various pleasant and attractive images appear as though in a
dream. They die comfortably, and, at the point of death, intense feelings
of suffering do not arise in their bodies. For those who are currently
doing what is right, the final agony of death is minimal.
(b) Dying with a nonvirtuous mind
Those who die with nonvirtuous minds, whether through remembering on their
own or through being reminded by others, remember non-virtue, such as
attachment, for as long as coarse discrimination remains. At the point of
death, they experience intense physical pain. When those who are currently
cultivating non-virtue die, they experience signs foretelling the effects
of the non-virtue they have engaged in. As if in a nightmare, many
unpleasant images appear to them. They seem to pass from light to darkness.
When those who have committed serious nonvirtuous actions observe these
unpleasant signs, they experience physical pain and their hair stands on
end. They shake their hands and feet, void urine and excrement, reach up
toward the sky, roll their eyes back, drool, and more. If they have been
moderate in their non-virtue, then not all of these things will happen
-some will and some will not. Wrongdoers suffer terrible agony at the
moment of death; such agony is found everywhere that beings are born,
except among deities and hell-beings.
At the time of death, whereupon discrimination will become unclear, beings
are attached to the self with which they have long been familiar. After
that, through the influence of attachment to the self, they think, "I am
ceasing to exist," and they crave embodiment. This causes the intermediate
state. Attachment to the self also occurs among stream-enterers and once-
returners, but as they investigate it with wisdom they reject it rather
than assent to it, the way a powerful person dominates a weak person.
Attachment to self does not occur among non-returners.
(c) Dying with an ethically neutral mind
Those who are currently cultivating neither virtue nor non-virtue, or who
have done neither, do not remember virtue and non-virtue, either on their
own or at the urging of others. At death they have neither pain nor
pleasure.
When you die with a virtuous mind, it lasts as long as there is coarse
discrimination, but once subtle discrimination is activated, the virtuous
mind stops and becomes an ethically neutral mind. At this point you cannot
retrieve the virtue with which you had become familiar, nor can others
remind you. As the same holds true for nonvirtuous minds, all minds of
death are ethically neutral after the onset of subtle discrimination.
Vasubandhu's Treasury of Knowledge Auto-commentary says that both virtuous
minds and nonvirtuous minds are clear, and thus incompatible with the
cessation of coarse consciousness at death
The text talks about the mind of death on the coarse level and on the
subtler level.
At the time of death when the coarse consciousness is still operating, the
mind can either be:
   1. Virtuous
   2. Non-virtuous
   3. Ethically neutral
At the time of death when the coarse consciousness is still manifesting, if
one has been accustomed to virtuous state of mind when one was alive, then
due to that familiarity and under one’s power, one is able to bring about a
virtuous state of mind. If not, at the time of death, it is possible to
develop a virtuous state of mind by being reminded with the help of others.
When people are on the verge of dying or when they are about to pass away,
we have the methods to help them such as reminding them of the virtuous
thought, reciting mantras for them to hear, encouraging them to think about
Buddha and so forth. These are the ways to help the dying person to bring
about a virtuous mind. At the time when a person pass away and the coarse
consciousness is not manifest i.e. the coarse consciousness becomes subtle
and if that person’s mind is virtuous, it will make a difference as it help
that person to get a good rebirth.
It is the same for the non-virtuous mind at the time of death. At the time
of death, non-virtuous mind can arise due to familiarity or habituation to
those negative thoughts when one was alive. Or there are people around the
dying person causing him/her to think of the negative thoughts at the time
of death. For this reason, it is better not to cry in the presence of the
dying person because the dying person may worry and develop attachment.
This is not good for the dying person. Therefore we should encourage or
advise friends or relatives of the dying person not to cry in the presence
of the dying person but rather should do things to help the dying person to
develop positive thoughts.  If one dies with a non-virtuous mind, one will
not get good rebirth.
It is said that if one do not recall virtuous or non-virtuous mind either
through one own power or through being reminded by others, then dying with
the mind that is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous does happen.
Question: If we die with a virtuous mind, we are very likely to have a good
rebirth. If we die with a non-virtuous mind then we probably going to get a
bad rebirth. If one dies with a mind that is neither virtuous nor non-
virtuous, what kind of rebirth will one get?
Student 3: I think the karma that is most familiar with before they die
will ripen first. I think there is a sequence for this: the heaviest, most
familiar etc. but I can’t remember the sequence.
Ven Gyurme: If it is heaviest first, then regardless to the state of mind
at the time of death, it is going to ripen any way.
Khen Rinpoche: I guess it will be alright to say that if one dies with an
ethical neutral mind then the kind of rebirth that one will get is
dependent on one’s karma that is more powerful. Perhaps maybe it is alright
to say this but I am not exactly sure and have to analyze it.
At the time of death, when there is still coarse discrimination in the
mind, then it is possible to have virtuous mind, non-virtuous mind or
ethical neutral mind. But when the coarse mind becomes subtle, then from
the perspective of sutra, the subtle mind at the time of death is only
neutral; there is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous mind because in order
for the mind to be either virtuous or non-virtuous, the mind has to be
alert to engage the respective objects. At the time of death when the mind
is subtle, it lacks the ability to be alert to engage with the object.
Therefore, from the perspective of sutra, the subtle mind is ethically
neutral. However from the perspective of tantra, the subtle mind at death
can be transformed into virtuous mind.
At the time of death, whereupon discrimination will become unclear, beings
are attached to the self with which they have long been familiar. After
that, through the influence of attachment to the self, they think, "I am
ceasing to exist," and they crave embodiment. This causes the intermediate
state.
Here it means that at the time of death, due to our attachment to our own
identity -our self as a person- fear arises, thinking; “I am going to
disappear and become nothing” and craving for embodiment arises. This
craving causes the intermediate state.
Where heat gathers
Among those who are currently cultivating non-virtue, consciousness leaves
the body coming down from the upper parts, which become cold first. When it
reaches the heart, it leaves the body. The consciousness of someone who is
currently cultivating virtue leaves coming up from the lower parts and the
body becomes cold from the lower parts. In both cases consciousness leaves
from the heart. The point at which consciousness first enters the
fertilized ovum becomes the body's heart
How does one enter into the intermediate state? At the time of death, the
consciousness gathers at the heart. Once the consciousness leaves the body
from the heart the intermediate state is established.
How you reach the intermediate state after death
The intermediate state is established due to attachment. The establishment
of the intermediate state is said to be simultaneous with the exit of the
consciousness from the body.
As the consciousness leaves from that spot, the heart, you die and reach
the intermediate state immediately, just as one arm of a balancing scale
tips up when the other arm tips down. Furthermore, the being of the
intermediate state possesses the complete set of sensory faculties -such as
eyes- as well as the form of the body it will have in the realm into which
it will be reborn. Until it takes rebirth, its vision is unimpeded, like
divine vision [a type of superknowledge], and its body as well is
unimpeded, as though it had miraculous powers. This is stated in the
Abidharmakosha.
Here it talks about the appearance of the intermediate state being
definite. If one is to be born as a human being in the next life and when
one is in the intermediate state, one will has the appearance of a human
being. You need to know the intermediate state being have the appearance of
the kind of rebirth that it will take.
There are different explanations on this. One explanation states that in
the intermediate state, one will has the appearance of one’s previous life.
 But Lama Tsongkhapa says that this is incorrect. He asserts that in the
intermediate state, one will have the appearance of the rebirth that one
will take i.e. if you are going to born as a human being; you have the
appearance of human being during the intermediate state.
I think the explanation is like this. The projecting karma that causes one
to take that intermediate state and the rebirth which come after that is
the same. I guess, because of this, if one is going to reborn as a human
being, one will have the appearance of human being when one is in the
intermediate state.
Anyway, this is something to think about. Lama Tsongkhapa did say very
clearly that in the intermediate state, one will have the appearance as the
kind of rebirth that one is going to take.
According to Vasubandhu’s Abidharmakosha, the lower Abhidharma, once one
has entered into the intermediate state of a particular rebirth, one will
definitely have to take that kind of rebirth; that means the intermediate
state cannot change. But Arya Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge, the higher
Abhidharma, holds that the intermediate state can be changed. Lama
Tsongkhapa follows the Compendium of Knowledge i.e. one’s intermediate
state can be changed. For example, if the relatives of the deceased were to
engage in very strong and powerful virtues and then dedicated to the
deceased, then it is possible for the deceased in the intermediate state to
change and to get a good rebirth.
It is said that intermediate state beings see one another and those with
divine vision can also see the intermediate state beings. When we talk
about divine vision, there is pure divine vision and impure divine vision.
The impure divine vision refers to those people who inherit it from birth
i.e. they are born with this divine vision. It is said that they cannot see
the intermediate state beings. Only those who develop the divine vision
through the power of meditation achieve the pure divine vision can see the
intermediate state beings.
For those who are taking rebirth from the formless realm into the form and
the desire realms have to go through the intermediate state. But for those
who are going to reborn in the formless realm from the desire and form
realms, there is no intermediate state.
What is the lifespan of the intermediate state beings? The maximum lifespan
is forty nine days. This doesn’t mean that one has to stay there for forty
nine days but one can remain in the intermediate state for up to forty nine
days. The intermediate state beings have to die after every seven days.  Of
course, it is possible for the intermediate state being to take rebirth
before the seventh day. If the intermediate state being does not take
rebirth on the seventh day, it has to die and reborn into the intermediate
state again. If it doesn’t take rebirth, it just has to go on to the first
seven, second seven and so on but definitely within the forty nine days.
When we talk about the intermediate state being’s lifespan, it is from the
perspective of human being. So from the perspective of the human being, the
way to count the forty nine days is in term of human being’s day. In
general, this is how you count the unit of time of the intermediate state
being. However there is also another explanation on the unit of time of the
intermediate state being; which is dependent on the kind of rebirth that
one is going to take. So when we talk about the day, the number of day is
from the perspective of the kind of realm that one is going to take rebirth
in. So it may not be a human day, it can be animal day, insect day, hell
day and so forth. If you think about it, it seems that you have to say that
the length of the day is dependent on the kind of rebirth that one is going
to take. For example, if one is going to take rebirth in the hell realm,
then one has to spend the maximum of forty-nine hell days as the
intermediate state being.
Note: Amendment to page 121 of the Middle Length Lamrim text:  2B4B-2B2B-
1B2B-3B2A [The appearance due to a virtuous mind] should read as: For those
who have created virtue it is like going from thick darkness into light. At
the time of death, various pleasant dream-like forms appear to them, they
die happily, and even the interruption of life is of very minor severity.
Student 4:  As mentioned just now that the life span of the intermediate
beings is from the perspective of the kind of realm that one is going to
take rebirth in. As the day of the hell realm is so long, it seem that many
beings will target as an intermediate being of the hell realm and be
suspended there. Do I not understand that correctly?
Khen Rinpoche: I did not say it is certain. Regarding the intermediate
state, one view is the forty-nine days of the human being. Perhaps it may
also be the forty-nine days of the realm in which one is going to take
rebirth in. There is an explanation by some masters, perhaps it is Guntang
Rinpoche, who did say that the way you posit the forty-nine days is from
the perspective of the rebirth that one is going to take.
Your point is that if the forty-nine days is not from the perspective of
the human days but from the perspective of the rebirth that one is going to
take such as hell being, then the intermediate state is going to be very
long. But you haven’t thought about it the other way round. For a hell
being who is going to be reborn as a human being, from which intermediate
state you are going to count; 49 hells being’s day or 49 human’s day?
Student 4: (Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Earlier on you said that it is not right to posit the 49
days of the rebirth that one are going to take.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Your reason is the bardo being is too
long. Your answer is that, isn’t it? That’s why must consider human day.
That is your reason, isn’t it? No?
Student 4: (Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: What is wrong with staying too long in the bardo? Anyway,
you are going to stay in hell for a long time. Actually the longer you stay
in the intermediate state, it is safer because once you reach hell is hell.
So no worries. That is why it is called a transit visa.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So, you have long transit, it is better.



