Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson43.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.158652
================================================================================


Meditation on Manjushri
Bring Manjushri to your mind. Think of Manjushri and offers him the seven-
branch worship. Do the practice of receiving the flow of nectar which
purifies all your negativities and obscurations and also increase your
wisdom.
Remember the four permutations between karma accumulated and karma created
that we have discussed before?
   1. Karma that is created but not accumulated
   2. Karma that is accumulated but not created
   3. Karma that is both created and accumulated
   4. Karma that is neither created nor accumulated
It is important to understand the meaning of “to accumulate the karma”.
This is something to think about.
So under what condition karma is accumulated.  In order for karma to be
accumulated:
   -that action has to be done in a powerful way
   -there is a strong effort behind it and
   -that action has to last for quite a while
If the action is not very forceful and is done for a very short period of
time, then that karma is not accumulated.
In order for that action to be fully ripened i.e. for the result of that
action to materialize, one must first accumulate the karma for it. If the
karma is not accumulated then it will not ripen.
We have to move our mind in the direction of virtues. There are so many
kinds of virtues that one can engage in. Let’s take generating faith in the
Buddha as an example. In order for us to accumulate strong karma in
relation to having faith in the Buddha, our faith in the Buddha must be
strong and must last for a long time. If we are able to generate that kind
of strong and enduring faith in the Buddha, then we accumulate the karma.
When this karma is accumulated, strong imprints are left in the mental
continuum.  By using this as an example, if we have strong and enduring
faith then we accumulate karma. This action will leave strong positive
imprints in our mental continuum such that we will experience the fruition/
effect from life to life experiencing the positive result of that action.
If we are able to accumulate such virtuous karma that leaves strong
imprints on the mental continuum, then for sure, we will experience the
causally concordant effect of that action.
Causally concordant effect can be divided into:
    -causally concordant experiential effect
    -causally concordant behavioral effect
We will definitely be able to experience these two effects.
By using the example of having faith in the Buddha and in relation of
thinking about the Buddha, in order to accumulate this strong karma we
first must have faith in the Buddha; not just faith but a faith that is
strong and enduring. How that strong and enduring faith does arise? Without
which we will not accumulate karma. Strong and enduring faith in the Buddha
can only arise on the basis of knowing who the Buddha is. It arises on the
basis of knowing in your heart that enlightenment of the Buddha does really
exist and it is not just some fairies tales; it is an existence. If you
have this, then you have strong and enduring faith which then enables you
to accumulate strong virtuous karma.
In order for us to know who the Buddha really is and what a Buddha is,
Buddhahood is a possibility and so forth; that must be preceded by an
understanding and knowledge which come from learning the dharma. So you see
the point of studying is important and why learning and reflecting the
dharma is important. It is important for us to understand this otherwise it
is possible for us to think that all these learning are only intellectual
trip. But this is not the case. So this is something we have to think for
ourselves.
What does it mean to accumulate karma? How karma is accumulated? We have to
think about it especially in relation to virtues because we not only want
to do virtues but we also want to accumulate virtues. In order for the
karma to ripen in the future and to experience the positive result of the
virtuous actions which we have been engaging in, then we have to think
about the best way to accumulate karma as karma has to be accumulated. In
order for the karma to be accumulated the attitude behind the action has to
be forceful, strong and powerful. It is not for a short time but it has to
be enduring. What is it in our mean to do that? So this is something for us
to think about and then put them into our practice. In the example of
having faith in the Buddha, if we don’t accumulate the karma but just have
little bit of faith which is not strong and enduring, then whether we do
accumulate karma or not is a big question mark. Even we do accumulate the
karma but if it is not strong and forceful and also does not last for long
time, we have to think whether the effect of that action will actually
arise in the future or not.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I have some kind of good examples. If  you
have to wake at 5 o’clock and you must wake up at  5  o’clock,  then  before
you go to bed you have a strong thinking “I have to wake up (at 5  o’clock)”
then somehow you will wake up even  before  that  (time).  This  is  my  own
experience. I woke up at 3 o’clock, 4 o’clock. So that show with the  strong
mind to wake up and before you go to bed (thinking)  “I  need  to  wake  up”
then that (leave the) strong imprint in your mind. You may fall asleep  like
a dead for 2 to 3 hours but somehow because of the imprints, it push you  to
wake up. If you don’t think it seriously; “I have to wake up  at  5  o’clock
tomorrow”, you will fall asleep to 6 o’clock or  7  o’clock  and  you  won’t
wake up at 5 o’clock. This is some kind of examples of the way  of  thinking
that leave imprints in your mind. I put in this way for good  understanding.
Sleeping is like a dead; when you die from this life and goes to next  life.
Waking up is like the next life. With a strong imprint, when you die and  go
to next life, you can wake up with the understanding of  the  importance  of
leading a virtuous life. When you don’t know  this,  you  would  have  spent
this life sleeping and the next life sleeping as well.
When it comes to placing strong imprints on our mental continuum, the
imprints can actually move on to the next life. We really have to think
about that and what we can do about this. If we don’t put these strong
imprints in our mind that will actually move on to the next life and
manifest itself, then thing become quite difficult. In order for us to
leave strong imprints in our mental continuum then the virtuous action that
we engage in has to be strong and enduring.  As we carrying on with our
life then we really have to examine whether we are engaged in leaving
strong imprints on our mental continuum. When it comes to engaging in
virtues and whenever we do that we have to try to ensure that when we
engage in those virtues the action is strong and enduring. If we do that
then these imprints will move on with us to our future lives. If this is
so, we would have made our current life meaningful.
When the text discuss on the four permutations between karma accumulated
and karma created, the example of killing which is non-virtues is being
used. We just have to substitute the example with a virtuous action and the
process is the same. In relation to virtues, it becomes very important for
us to understand when the karma is accumulated and how it is being
accumulated. We have to understand the essential and then implement it.
[LRCM Vol I page 301] The faults of the afflictions
When an affliction arises, at first it completely afflicts your mind,
causing you to err with regard to what you are observing, reinforcing your
latent proclivities, and causing the same sort of affliction to recur. It
may harm you, others, or both; it leads to misdeeds in this life, in future
lives, or in both. It creates experiences of pain and anguish, as well as
the sufferings of birth, and the like. It takes you far from nirvana, your
virtue is destroyed and your resources are depleted. In society you feel
apprehensive, joyless, and devoid of confidence, while your notoriety
spreads in all directions, and excellent persons such as teachers and
protectors rebuke you. You die with regret, your aims unfulfilled, and
after death you are reborn into a miserable realm.
The faults of the afflictions are highlighted in  the  quotations  from  the
two texts:
  -The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras
  -Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
[LRCM Vol I page 301]  As the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras says:
  Through afflictions, you destroy yourself, destroy other beings, and
  destroy your ethical discipline.
  After you have ruined your joy, you are shunned; your protectors and
  teachers rebuke you.
  Disreputable, you will be reborn in a leisureless condition.
  You suffer great anguish in losing the virtue you had or have yet to
  attain.
The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras says that because of afflictions, we
destroy ourselves and others are harmed and destroyed as well. Because of
our afflictions, we also destroy our ethical discipline. Because of
destroying this, we will be reborn in a lesisureless condition and whatever
good qualities will degenerate. Also it becomes an obstacles and hindrances
to us to gain new quality.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
   Enemies such as hatred and craving
   Have neither feet nor hands,
   And are neither brave nor intelligent.
   How, then, have they enslaved me?
This verse is saying that we are the slave of our afflictions.  Due  to  the
afflictions, we have lost our independence and we are under their control.
   While they dwell within my mind,
   They are pleased to do me harm.
   They are not to be endured without anger-
   Tolerance of them is ridiculous!
   Even if all the deities and demigods
   Should rise up as my enemies,
   They cannot lead me or force me
   Into the fires of the Unrelenting Hell.
   But this powerful enemy, the afflictions,
   Casts me in an instant into fires
   So hot that if they met even Mount Meru
   Not even ashes would remain.
Our afflictions lead us to so much suffering. For the external  enemies,  no
matter how powerful they may be, they can never ever make us  going  to  the
hell realm but our afflictions can. The afflictions enslave us and  we  lose
our independence totally. The afflictions throw us  into  the  lower  realms
and the miserable states of existence. If that is the case, then we have  to
work at destroying the afflictions. So this is the essential advice.
   The enemy that is my afflictions
   Has lasted a long time, without beginning or end.
   No other enemy has the power
   To last for such a long time.
The verse is saying that the enemy -our afflictions- have  been  around  for
very long time.
   Given appropriate service and attention
   Everyone helps you and makes you happy,
   But if you serve your afflictions
   They only inflict further suffering.
The afflictions have been harming us since the time without  beginning.  The
verse is saying that we should not befriend the  afflictions.  The  more  we
become friend with the afflictions the more harm we will receive from  them.
Because the afflictions have been with us for  very  long  time  i.e.  since
time without beginning, therefore  the  afflictions  are  not  going  to  be
destroyed just by cultivating the antidote for a short period  of  time.  In
order to destroy the afflictions we have to work at the antidote for a  long
time. The verse is saying that we should not befriend  the  afflictions  but
rather we should vanquish/destroy the afflictions. The more we are  able  to
conquer the afflictions the  closer  we  are  moving  in  the  direction  of
happiness.
We may wonder: “Why we  have  to  really  think  about  the  faults  of  the
afflictions? Why we have to know the characteristics and definitions of  all
those afflictions? Why do we need to do all these?
The answers are given in the text.
You must have an understanding that accords with what Gon-ba-wa said:
  To eliminate afflictions, you must know the afflictions' faults, their
  characteristics, their remedies, and the causes for their arising. After
  you have recognized their faults, regard them as defective and consider
  them enemies. If you do not recognize their faults, you will not
  understand that they are enemies. Therefore, it is said that you should
  reflect on this, following what is said in the Ornament for the Mahayana
  Sutras and Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.
And also:
  Study Vasubandhu and Asariga's texts on knowledge as well in order to
  understand the characteristics of the afflictions. At the least, study
  Vasubandhu's Explanation of the Five Aggregates. Once you know the root
  and secondary afflictions, then when any attachment, hostility, or such
  arises in your mind-stream, you can identify it -thinking, "This is that;
  now it has arisen"—and fight the affliction.
I think quite a number of people are wondering why we need to elaborate  the
discussion about the afflictions: their definition, divisions and so  forth.
The purpose of doing this is because by knowing afflictions,  we  will  know
hostility, attachment, ignorance, pride, doubt and those afflicted view  and
the terminology. By learning all these, we can be very exact when  comes  to
identifying the afflictions in the mind and also knowing the  antidote  that
can counteract those afflictions. That is why it  is  important  for  us  to
learn the Buddhist philosophy such as the presentation of  the  afflictions.
The purpose of extensively studying the afflictions in details  is  so  that
we can be very clear with regards to the divisions of the  afflictions  such
that when they arise in our mind we can eliminate them: “This is  that;  now
it has arisen and this is what I need to do.” The whole point is to  have  a
tool in our hand so that we can identifying them correctly and do  something
about it. We have to know the afflictions in order to  deal  with  them.  We
need to deal the afflictions because they cause us suffering.  So  in  order
for us to deal with suffering, we have to deal with the  causes  that  bring
about suffering; which the affliction is. To deal with  the  afflictions  we
have to know them well such that we can identify them correctly. It  is  for
that reason people do engage in extensive study of the Buddhist  philosophy.
So it is important for you to see  the  point  why  people  engage  in  such
studies. A lot of time people are wondering about the point of studying  all
these and thinking that there is no need to study all these.
We have been discussing about afflictions for quite a fair bit. What is  the
context in which we are discussing this?  We  are  talking  about  the  Four
Noble Truths in particular  true  origins.  We  are  examined  this  in  the
context of the truth of origin of suffering. Up to here  is  the  discussion
on afflictions. Next is how karma is accumulated.
How you thereby accumulate karma
    1. Identifying the karma that you accumulate
    2. How you accumulate karma
1. Identifying the karma that you accumulate
(a)   Karma that is intention
(b)   Karma that is the intended action
What is karma that  is  intention?  Intention  is  mental  karma,  a  mental
process that moves and urges the mind with which  it  is  associated  toward
objects.
What is karma that is the intended action? This is the physical  and  verbal
action motivated by intention. There are four Buddhist tenets on  this.  The
Vaibhashikas (Great Exposition School) consider the intended  action  to  be
form. For form, there are two types:
  - the perceptible form (revelatory form)
  - the imperceptible form (non-revelatory form)
Example of revelatory form: by looking at the  mannerism  of  an  individual
one can infer the person is upset or angry.
Example  of  non-revelatory  form:  by  looking  at  the  mannerism  of   an
individual one cannot tell the intention of that person.
For the ten non-virtuous actions, seven (body and speech) are both  path  of
actions and actions while the three (mental) are path of actions.
For a physical and verbal action, during the motivational  phase,  there  is
an intention. That intention –the mental factor that moves the mind  towards
its object - is  the  karma  that  is  intention.  This  intention  is  then
expressed in form of action, either physical or verbal action, and  the  act
that is being carrying out take on  a  form.  That  is  karma  that  is  the
intended action.
According to the Vaibhashikas:
- the karma that is intention is the mental factor
- the karma that is the intended action is a form
However for the other tenets -The Sutra School, the  Mind  Only  School  and
the Middle Way School (includes the CMWS)- it would be  incorrect  to  posit
the karma that is the intended action as form. To them, karma  that  is  the
intended action has to be posited as mental factor.
For all the schools above the Sutra School assert that at the time when  the
physical or verbal action is carried  out,  there  is  a  mental  factor  of
intention. For them, they consider this mental factor  at  that  time  (when
the physical or verbal action is carried out) to be the karma  that  is  the
intended action.
Therefore, the Sutra School, the Mind Only School and the Middle Way  School
consider the karma that is the intended action to be a mental factor.
The Vaibhasikas divide physical and verbal karma into two types, the
perceptible and the imperceptible, and hold that both types always have
form.
Vasubandhu refutes this, asserting that physical and verbal karma are
intentions that work along with perceptible physical and verbal behavior;
thus, both forms of karma [intention and intended] are actually intentions.
Illustration of karma that is intention: at  the  motivational  phase  of  a
physical or verbal action, there  is  mental  factor  that  moves  the  mind
towards its  object.  Therefore  karma  that  is  intention  exists  at  the
motivational phase of a physical or verbal action.  With  that,  let’s  say,
you engage in the physical or verbal action such as you  decide  to  kill  a
living being. At the time of carrying out the action of killing, the  action
manifest in a particular manner.
For some people, they consider the very physical act of killing  to  be  the
karma that is the intended action; which is form. However there  are  others
who say: “No, karma that is the intended action cannot be a form”. For  them
to be the karma that is the intended action, at  the  time  of  the  act  of
killing, there is mental factor that move the mind towards its object.
We have to get use to these technical terms. It is  all  well  and  easy  to
just talk about their meaning and gives examples without using these  terms.
One of the reasons we stick to these technical terms is to  prepare  us  for
our  studies  of  Buddhist  philosophy.  When  you  look  at  the   Buddhist
philosophical  texts,  everything  is  very  precise.  The  words  are  very
precise. That is why the terms are very specific. These are the  terms  that
are used in the texts. If we don’t get use to these terms now, then  in  the
future we may face problem when we  look  into  the  Buddhist  philosophical
texts. At time it is quite challenging to learn  these  technical  terms.  I
guess it is a matter of getting used to it.  If  you  read  one  times,  two
times and after a while you will just learn  them.  As  we  are  looking  at
these terms for the first time, it is not correct to  expect  to  understand
them correctly after hearing them for the first time. This is not  going  to
happen to anyone. If you get discourage just because  you  did  not  get  it
right after hearing for the first time, this  kind  of  expectation  is  not
right. We just have to become more familiar  and  accustomed  with  some  of
these technical terms which are difficult. We have to accustom to the  terms
and keep them in the mind because different teachings  and  different  texts
are linked to one another. With regards to these  two  kinds  of  karma,  we
need to know what they are.
We have to understand the current discussion of karma in the context of  the
second noble truth: the true origin of suffering. In relation to  the  karma
that project rebirth in cyclic existence,  there  is  a  discussion  of  the
three types of  karma:  virtuous,  nonvirtuous  and  ethically  neutral.  In
general, these are the three types of karma.
When we talk about the projecting  karma  that  throws  us  the  rebirth  in
cyclic  existence,  then  there  is  meritorious,   non-   meritorious   and
invariable karma.
[LRCM Vol I page 303] In general, karma is of three types: virtuous,
nonvirtuous and ethically neutral, but here we are concerned only with the
first two. Virtuous karma is of two types, contaminated and uncontaminated.
I will only discuss contaminated virtuous karma, of which there are two
types: that present in a noble being's mind and that present in an ordinary
person's mind. Only the latter need concern us here.
Nonvirtuous karma is karma that is non-meritorious.
Meritorious karma is virtuous karma in the minds of beings of the desire
realm.
Invariable karma is contaminated virtuous karma in the minds of beings of
the form or formless realms.
[LRCM Vol I page 303] Similarly, the Treasury of Knowledge says:

  Merit is the virtuous karma of the desire realm. Invariable karma
  produces the higher [deities'] realms.
Why is it called invariable karma? In the desire realm,  karma  that  should
bear fruit while you are a deity may instead bear  fruit  while  you  are  a
human, an animal, or a hungry ghost; thus, its effect is  variable.  In  the
higher [deities'] realms, karma that should bear fruit at  a  certain  level
does not mature at levels other than that; thus,  it  is  invariable.  Thus,
the Treasury of Knowledge
  Why? Because the fruition of karma
  On these levels is not variable.
What gives rise to the effect  of  karma  is  feeling.  What  we  desire  is
pleasant feeling. We desire pleasant sensation and the feeling  arises  from
the contact with object of certain pleasant form or pleasant  sound  and  so
forth. Due to our attachment for  the  pleasant  sensation,  we  enjoy  this
object and accumulate  non-meritorious  karma  which  then  throws  us  into
miserable realms.
There are individuals who desire birth as human being or  a  god.  Motivated
by this desire, they accumulate the karma that causes them to  have  such  a
rebirth. The karma that they accumulate is called meritorious karma. Due  to
accumulating of meritorious karma, they will be reborn as human  and  desire
realm god.
There are also individuals who are not  so  inclined  towards  the  pleasant
sensation and feeling  that  arises  due  to  enjoying  the  five  desirable
external objects  but  rather  they  are  more  interested  in  experiencing
pleasant feeling inside mentally;  especially  pleasant  feeling  associated
with concentration. Motivated by that desire then they engage in the  action
that accumulates karma that will cause them to be reborn  in  the  form  and
formless. That karma that they accumulated is called invariable karma.
These individuals are  attached  to  pleasant  sensation  and  feeling  that
arising from concentration. Then they accumulate the projecting  karma  that
will cause them to be born in the first, second and third concentrations.
There are also individuals who have even gone  and  transcended  the  desire
for the bliss that arising from concentration.
There are individuals who become  attached  to  the  feeling  of  equanimity
without  being  attached  to  even  the  blissful  sensation  arising   from
concentration. Those individuals accumulate the karma  to  be  born  in  the
fourth  concentration  which  is  of  the  form  realm.  They  also   create
projecting karma to be born in the formless realm.
The text then goes on to discuss the types of person who accumulate karma.
Once you have perceived reality—that is, selflessness -you may still be
reborn in cyclic existence by the power of former karma and afflictions,
but you will not accumulate any new karma that can impel such rebirth.
Hence every ordinary person -from the highest level of the supreme stage of
the Mahayana path of preparation on down – accumulates karma that impels
rebirth in cyclic existence.
Those who  have  direct  realization  or  perception  of  emptiness  do  not
accumulate projecting karma.
Those who have realized emptiness directly  and  perceive  reality  directly
are called aryas or superior beings.
Those who have not perceived emptiness directly are called ordinary  beings.

So arya or  superior  being  does  not  accumulate  projecting  karma.  Only
ordinary beings do.
Who is the one who accumulate projecting karma? Answer: Ordinary being.
Accordingly, when those who are under the influence of afflicted ignorance
and the the view of the transitory collection become physically, verbally,
or mentally involved in nonvirtue, killing, for example- they accumulate
non-meritorious karma. Those who perform virtuous acts within the desire
realm- such as practicing generosity or maintaining ethical discipline
-accumulate meritorious karma. Those who cultivate meditative states -such
as calm abiding -at the level of the meditative stabilizations of the form
realm or the formless absorptions accumulate invariable karma.
In the next session we will cover on how one dies and is  reborn  in  cyclic
existence. Read on this before the next class.
Exam date: 3 June 2012 (Sunday) at 1.30pm
Class will continue after Wesak Day. No class on 31 May 2012 (Thursday)
Materials to be covered for the exam: All up to the day of the exam.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Exam will be easy; not  so  difficult  but
that doesn’t mean don’t need to study now. Last time  some  of  the  student
requested me to lead some meditation. I suppose to lead meditation  on  this
Sunday but I don’t think I can do it this Sunday. The  plan  is  to  do  two
sessions of guided Lamrim meditation but due to some problem and  difficulty
at my side, I cannot. Maybe some other time.

Discussion Class on Sunday (25 March 2012)
Q1: The negativities are purified  through  the  applications  of  the  four
powers, is there an order in the applications of the  four  powers?  If  so,
what?  What is meaning of the phrase: karma is purified?
Q2: What is the purpose of  explaining  the  path  of  a  person  of  medium
capacity after the path of a person of small capacity?
Q3: Quotation  from  Dharmakirti:  “Because  the  aggregate  is  impermanent
therefore it is  miserable.  Because  it  is  miserable,  it  is  selfless.”
Explain how it is miserable due to impermanence. Likewise,  explain  how  it
is selfless because it is miserable.
Q4:  Give an illustration of cyclic existence.
Q5: What is the view of the transitory collection?  Is  there  a  difference
between the view of the transitory collection and ignorance?

For reference: Extract from ILTK BP program






