Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 24.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.367897
================================================================================


At this time, from our own side, all the favorable conditions for
practicing and pursuing the paths are there. Moreover, the favorable
external supporting conditions are also present. At such time like this
when we have some faiths and have some interests, therefore it is important
that we should persevere and put in effort to continue our studies and
practices. We usually procrastinates our studies and practices thinking
that we will do it tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. In that way, we all
are the same. In order to stop ourselves from procrastinating our studies
and practices therefore there is this reflection on the death and
impermanence. There are three roots and each root has three supporting
reasons which then give us nine points to reflect on. The three roots are:
 1. Death is certain
 2. The time of death is uncertain
 3. At the time of death nothing helps except the dharma.
By reflecting on death and impermanence in such a way, it acts against
procrastination or postponing our practices. By reflecting on death and
impermanence, we are able to persuade ourselves to enter into virtuous
practices; be it studying or doing whatever virtuous practices or the daily
recitation. By remembering and being mindful of death and impermanence, at
the end of reflecting these nine points, we should arrive at the
conclusions in our own heart and mind; “I must practice the dharma. Not
only that I must practice the dharma, I must start to practice the dharma
right now and I will only practice pure dharma”. These are the conclusions
that we should arrive at after having reflecting on death and impermanence.
Then on the basis of these conclusions, we carry out whatever practices.
However, it is not easy to produce such experience or realization on death
and impermanence in our heart as Lama Tsongkhapa says in the text: “It is
not easy”. Nevertheless, if we cultivate the conditions such as
accumulating merits, purifying our mind of obscurations and making single-
pointed request to the guru deity and from our own side, we work hard and
strive at the meditation, even the experience and realization that we think
are impossible will happens. Why? This is because of the fact that things
are impermanent and can be changed.
We all have a human life of freedoms and endowments. We have talked about
the eight freedoms and the ten endowments. We also know that this life of
freedoms and endowments will not last forever. Come a time, it will end and
for sure we will have to die. Then what happens at the time of death? Do we
disappear into nothingness? The answer is “No”. Life continues after death.
As said in the teaching, we either go on to a good rebirth or to the bad
rebirth. It is in this context we are now going to the next main outline:
“Contemplating what will occur in our future life: the happiness or
suffering of the two types of beings”. After death, we will either get a
good rebirth or bad rebirth but do we actually have a say over where we are
going? Do we actually have the control? The answer is “No, we don’t have
the control”. Then what determines the kind of rebirth we are going to get
in the next rebirth? Basically, a good rebirth or a bad rebirth will be
decided by our karma; depending on whether it is virtuous karma or non-
virtuous karma. If the non-virtuous karma in our mental continuum is more
powerful than the virtuous karma, then we will be reborn in the lower
realms in our next life. If we are going to be reborn in the lower realms
in our next life, what kind of sufferings are we going to experience there?
Here the text is going to talk about this.
At this particular point in time of this text, it is of vital important to
contemplate/ reflect on the sufferings of the lower realms because by
reflecting on the sufferings, it reduces our arrogance, pride and so forth.
It is important to reflect on the sufferings because when we reflect on the
sufferings, we will think about the causes of suffering. If we are able to
see that suffering is the result of non-virtue, we will be able to refrain
from committing non-virtue i.e. we will be able to restrain ourselves. Also
by reflecting on suffering, we will come to develop the dislike for
suffering and come to develop the wish to be freed from suffering. When we
have this wish to be freed from suffering then the wish to achieve
happiness will naturally arise. With that wish, we will start to think
about the causes of the happiness that we are looking for. By seeing that
virtue is the cause of happiness, we will naturally put in effort into
creating virtue and the positive endeavors. In fact, we will actually do it
happily. By reflecting on the different kinds of sufferings that we will
have to experience and based on the personal experience of how it is like,
we will then be able to empathize with others who are suffering. In that
sense, having the knowledge of suffering on the personal level, it is
helpful in developing the sense of empathy for others and, in particular,
develops compassion for others. In this context here, when we reflect on
the sufferings of the lower realms that we will have to experience if we
were to be born there in the next life, we will then develop a wish to be
freed from such suffering. With this wish, naturally there is a desire to
have a good rebirth in our next life.
By reflecting on how we ourselves have already accumulated such powerful
negative karma and how that will definitely ripen as a lower realms rebirth
in our next life, and if we are able to see and really feel it, then
naturally we will look for protection. That is when refuge comes in. With
the feeling that we are in trouble if we do go to the lower realms in our
next life, then real refuge will come strongly in our heart. So these are
the very important points as to why reflecting on suffering is important.
From here, we can see how it is important to reflect on suffering even if
you just think about refuge. In order for us to have pure and real refuge
in our heart i.e. we really look for help and protection, we first must
have the wish to be freed from suffering. As the minimum to have pure
refuge, we should be motivated by the real fear of sufferings of the lower
realms. Without this real fear of the sufferings of the lower realms, it is
not possible to have refuge at all in our heart. In fact, it is impossible.
In order for us to be able to take pure refuge in our heart, we must have
the fear of suffering.  In this context, it is the fear of the sufferings
of the lower realms if we are to be born there in our next life. Therefore
it is vital that we first must reflect on the sufferings of the lower
realms.
Therefore, for the purpose of generating the fear of the sufferings of the
lower realms, the text describes the various kinds of sufferings that are
found in the lower realms:
 1) The suffering of the hell realm
 2) The suffering of the animal realm
 3) The suffering of hungry ghost (preta) realm
In this text -the Middling Stages of the Path to Enlightenment- we are
asked to think about:
 -the suffering of the hell realm
 -then the suffering of the animal realm, and
 -then the suffering of hungry ghost realm
But the order is slightly different in other Lam Rim texts in which we are
asked to think about:
 -the suffering of hell realm
 -then the suffering of the hungry ghost realm, and
 -then the suffering of the animal realm
That order is arranged primarily in accordance with the intensity of the
suffering associated with those realms. Since the suffering of the hell
realm is the greatest, so we are asked first to reflect on the suffering of
the hell realm, then the hungry ghost realm and then the animal realm. That
order is made on the perspective on the intensity of the suffering.
Here in this Lam Rim text -the Middling Stages of the Path to Enlightenment-
 the order is slightly different. We are asked to think about the suffering
of hell beings, then the suffering of the animals, and then the suffering
of the hungry ghosts. This order is made on the perspective of the
intelligence of these beings in general. Since it is said that the hungry
ghosts are more intelligent than the animals, so from that perspective, we
will reflect on the suffering of the hungry ghosts after having reflecting
on the suffering of the animals.
If you look at their relative abilities to practice the dharma, I guess the
hungry ghosts are in the better position to practice the dharma than the
animals. Do you understand why here in this text, the sufferings of the
animals are discussed before the sufferings of the hungry ghosts?
Contemplating the suffering of the hell denizens
There are four divisions of hell:
   1. The eight hot hells
   2. The eight cold hells
   3. The neighboring/ adjoining hells
   4. The occasional hells
The eight hot hells:
1. The Reviving Hell
2. The Black Line Hell
3. The Crushing Hell
4. The Howling Hell
5. The Great Howling Hell
6. The Hot Hell
7. The Extremely Hot Hell
8. The Unrelenting Hell (Avici Hell)
There is a description of the sufferings found in these eight hot hells.
For example, the Reviving Hell/ Hell of Continual Revival: In the first of
those eight -the Reviving Hell, beings come together and stab each other
with various weapons emerging through the power of their karma. Whenever
they faint and collapse on the ground a voice rings out from the sky, “You
shall come back to life!” Upon that they stand up again and start stabbing
again as before, due to which they experience immeasurable suffering.
What about the lifespan of the beings who are reborn in this first hell
-the Reviving Hell? It is said that fifty human years is a single day for
the deities of the Heaven of the Four Great Kings [lowest of the six types
of deities in the desire realm], thirty of these is a month, and twelve of
these is a year. Five hundred such years is the life span of these deities.
Taking all of that as a single day, thirty such days as a month, and twelve
such months as a year, the life span of the hell denizens in the Reviving
Hell is five hundred such years. [Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand page
372: 1.62 x 1012 human years]
The beings reborn in the first hot hell – the Reviving Hell- would have to
undergo the suffering of being attacked, faint and collapse on the ground
and then revive. They have to go through that whole process over and over
again for very long period of time. As we look at the suffering of the
second hot hell, then down to the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and
eighth hot hells, the sufferings of each hell becomes increasingly more
intense. Not only that there are much more sufferings, the lifespan of the
beings in the subsequent hells become increasingly longer i.e. the lifespan
in each subsequent hot hell becomes double that of the previous hell.
The eight cold hells:
   1. The Blistering Hell
   2. The Popping Blistering Hell
   3. The Chattering-teeth Hell
   4. The Whipping Hell
   5. The Moaning Hell
   6. The Splitting Water-Lily Hell
   7. The Splitting-like-a-Lotus Hell
   8. The Great-Splitting-like-a-Lotus Hell
The suffering of the each subsequent hell from the first one is
increasingly greater and the lifespan also become increasingly longer.
Contemplating the suffering of animals
The powerful animals kill weaker ones. Worldly gods and humans exploit the
animals. Since others control them, animals have no independence, and they
are harmed, they are beaten, and they are killed. The animals experience
different kinds of sufferings. Some have very long life and it is said that
some animals live for a long period of time; perhaps as long as an eon.
Contemplating the suffering of hungry ghost
[LRCM Vol 1 page 171: Those who are exceedingly miserly are born as hungry
ghosts. These beings are hungry and thirsty, and their skin, flesh, and
blood are desiccated, giving them the appearance of burnt logs. Their faces
are covered with hair, their mouths are extremely dry, and their tongues
lick their lips constantly]
There are three types of hungry ghosts:
   1. The hungry ghosts who have external obstacles to obtain food and drink
   2. The hungry ghosts who have internal obstacles to obtain food and drink
   3. The hungry ghosts who have obstacles within the food and drink
The hungry ghosts who have external obstacles to obtain food and drink:
When these hungry ghosts approach the body of water likes springs, lakes
and ponds; they are obstructed externally by beings holding swords, long
spears and short spears from drinking or partaking the food. They also see
water as pus and blood. Therefore, they lose the desire to drink it.
The hungry ghosts who have internal obstacles to obtain food and drink:
these beings have mouths as small as the eye of the needle and their mouths
spew flames. They have goiters and big bellies. Even when they do obtain
food and drink without others preventing them, they are unable to ingest
food or drink.
The hungry ghosts who have obstacles within the food and drink: Those
called “The Fire Garlanded One” or “Possessing a Garland of Flames" are
burned because whatever they attempt to eat or drink bursts into flames.
Those hungry ghosts who are called “Filth-Eaters” can only ingest dirty,
stinking, harmful, and despicable things, and so they eat feces and drink
urine. Some of these hungry ghosts, unable to make use of clean and
wholesome food and drink, cut their own flesh and eat it.
The sufferings of these individual lower realms are described in the text.
You should read those descriptions on your own and think about the
sufferings that are described there. Think about how great the sufferings
are and you should also have the idea for how long the beings in the lower
realms will have to suffer. As mentioned in the text, the distance between
us and these sufferings of the lower realms is not very big; the distance
is as near as one breathe. If we think of ourselves in relation to these
sufferings, we have to think about how all of us have already accumulated
the causes for such rebirth.  In our daily life, in each and every single
day, we are accumulating the causes to be born in such realms. We have been
accumulating such causes every day for the whole of our life. This is not
all. What about all our past lives? We also had accumulated the causes for
rebirth in the lower realms in all our past lives. If we do really sit down
and think about our own life and our own situation, we will realize that we
have accumulated numerous causes to be born in the lower realms. Currently
we are accumulating the causes to be born in the lower realms as well. If
we think about it, it is almost for sure that we will continue to
accumulate the causes for the lower realms. It is definite like that in the
past, present, and future. If that is the case, if we were to die now, then
it is very likely that we will be born in one of these lower realms. If we
realize this, then obviously we do have the real fear. If we do have this
real fear, I guess that will really persuade ourselves to really do
something about it through practices.
If we do actually think about the sufferings of these lower realms, it is
really quite difficult for us to figure it out and understand them with our
mind; it is something inconceivable. The lifespan itself is also difficult
to fit into our mind. We have to understand what lead to these sufferings.
The cause is none other than our own mind i.e. our own mind is the cause of
such sufferings. If our mind is in a particular state that causes us to
accumulate non-virtue, then the result of such non-virtue will be such
suffering that was described here. Whatever kind of sufferings that we have
to experience in the lower realms in our next life includes all the
problems which we now have primarily arisen from our own mind.
In the Cloud of Jewels Sutra, the Buddha says; “If you have control over
your own mind, you have control over all phenomena. Non-virtue will lead to
suffering. ”
Shantideva in his famous text “Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds”says:
“What is it that created the burning ground, the hell guardians and the
terrifying weapons of hell? It is none other than our own mind.”
This is an important point. It is important to gain an understanding of
what Shantideva have said. Essentially, what he meant was that all these
sufferings of the lower realms arise from the non-virtuous mind. It is the
non-virtuous mind that gives rise to suffering. Therefore it is very
important to gain an understanding that all these various degrees of
sufferings arise from the mind itself - the non-virtuous mind or the
unsubdued mind. The more non-virtuous the mind is the more suffering that
will arise as a result. It is important to have the understanding that all
these sufferings that are described here do exist.
Even when we think about the good things, there are also many good things
that are beyond our comprehension and are difficult for us to conceive,
although we may believe them. It will come a point in time in the text that
describes the Buddha’s qualities. For example, it is said that when we
describe the qualities of the Buddha’s exalted mind, the Buddha’s exalted
mind is omniscience. There is nothing that the Buddha does not perceive
directly. Whatever the Buddha’s mind perceives, the Buddha’s exalted body
is there. Wherever the Buddha’s exalted body is, the Buddha’s exalted
speech is also there. So if we really think about it, this is something
that is inconceivable. But you have to understand that this is possible and
again, this depends on the state of mind. In this case, the more subdued
the mind and the more qualities the mind is, then the result will be
correspondingly greater. Basically, this same principle also applies to
sufferings. The more unsubdued the mind, the more non-virtue the mind is,
the resultant sufferings would be greater. Therefore you have all these
different realms.
We can also use our own common experience to gain an understanding on this.
At times when we are upset or when we are angry, we view the world and the
people around us in a certain view. When we are upset, even those people
whom we normally consider to be pleasant or friendly will appear to be
unpleasant. In fact, when our mind is really unhappy, everything appears
unpleasant. This is not just an appearance but we do actually experience
it. Where does this experience come from? It comes from the mind because
when the mind is upset, the mind sees the surrounding and the people in
different ways. The appearance and the experience are created by the mind.
On the other hand, when the mind is calm and happy, we look at others and
the world around us in the different ways. They appear to us completely in
a different way - happy and pleasant. So these things do happened to us and
from this we can see that how things appear to us and how we experience
things around us dependent on the state of our mind.
A lot of times, all our fear and worries are created by ourselves. For
example, some people who are very sick react to the sickness in a negative
way and they become unhappy. They have fear and worry about what is going
to happen to them. But there are people who have the same sickness look at
it as something wonderful. Why is there a difference? It is the mental
perspective. From this, we can see that the mental perspective does make a
difference. If our mind is not subdued, the more unhappy we are, I guess
there will be more suffering. When the mind is unsubdued, it seems that
everything can be the cause for us to be unhappy. I guess this is really
due to the mental perspective. By thinking along this line, perhaps we can
see how the mind does have an impact on the kind of experience we will have
in our next life. The more unsubdued the mind is, perhaps the more
suffering we will experience. We have to think about how the lower realms
are the result of our own non-virtuous karma which is created by our own
unsubdued mind. Then we will come to an understanding of how the lower
realms are actually possible. Once you see that possibilities and once you
have the understanding of the sufferings that are found in the lower realms
and develop the fear for those sufferings, then you need to start avoiding
non-virtue and, as much as possible, give up non-virtuous action however
small it is. The essence of this reflection is to understand how our mind
is the creator of all our sufferings, especially the non-virtuous mind, and
how suffering is the result of our non-virtuous actions. By reflecting on
this, then we start to avoid non-virtue and to give up non-virtue. Here the
text talked about the inconceivable lifespan of these lower realms and the
point is that when the mind is unhappy, even though we may suffer for only
a short period of time, but during that time it seems to be forever. At
times when we are happy, it does not seems to last and always feel that it
is too short. We can think about our own common experience. When we are
unhappy for a short period of time, but the feeling is like the whole day.
That is this feeling and appearance. In term of the lifespan for the lower
realms, it describes the hell realms as unbelievably long. So that is the
experience and appearance to the mind.
Next lesson, I will start on the topic of going for refuge to the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha.
[pic]
