Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 22.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.437249
================================================================================


We have been talking about how someone is to be led on the path by using
the Stages of the Path of the Three Types of Persons. So you have to
understand the purpose of following this method. If you remember, a person
of small capacity needs to overcome the current preoccupation with the
happiness and affairs of this life alone. Literally in Tibetan, it means to
reverse the attraction to the happiness of this life. That person has to
reflect well on the suffering of the three lower realms i.e. how to bear
with the suffering if he ends up in the lower realms in the next life.
Through this reflection, if one realizes that one definitely would not be
able to bear the suffering in the lower realms, then one has to develop an
interest in one’s future rebirth with the desire to get a good rebirth. One
would have to train to create the causes for a good rebirth by practicing
the Buddhadharma. It is by practicing the Buddhadharma that would prevent
oneself from going to the lower realms. This is the minimum that one should
do.
The persons of small capacity need to reflect well on the different kinds
of sufferings that one would have to endure if one is reborn in the lower
realms. Through this reflection, the persons of small capacity would
develop the genuine interest of wanting to get a good rebirth in the next
life by training in the causes for achieving it.  Let’s say that the
persons get a good rebirth, is that sufficient and does one stop there? No.
The next step is to reverse the attraction even to the happiness of the
future lives i.e. to overcome the idea of having good rebirth is good. The
persons do that by bringing to mind all the problems of cyclic existence
and to reflect how one would have to suffer in cyclic existence. Through
this reflection, one overcomes the attraction even to the happiness of
future lives.
You can see that, in the first stage, one reflects on all the different
kinds of sufferings that one would have to endure if one is reborn in the
lower realms in the next life. In the second stage, one reflects that even
if one has a good rebirth, one is not free from suffering; one is tormented
with problems while in samsara. In the first and second stages, one
reflects on one’s own suffering.
After having think through and reflect well, then one move to the third
stage by switching one’s attention to the suffering of others. Instead of
focusing on our own suffering, we look at the suffering of others. Then we
begin to understand how others are also experiencing the same kind of
sufferings that we have reflected upon. From this reflection, we are then
in a good position to really be able to generate some real love and
compassion for others.
The teachings are clear about the fact that if one thinks: “From the
beginning, I am a person of great capacity. I am a Mahayanist and
practicing the Mahayana teachings. Therefore reflection on the suffering of
the lower realms and samsara are not necessary for me. I would just
practice the Mahayana teachings right from the beginning”.  So, what does
the teaching say about this kind of person? This person would not be able
to even practice bodhichitta; forgetting about generating bodhichitta.
Therefore, without training the mind in the first and second stage, there
is no way one can even practice the Mahayana path. Now you can see why it
is so important to train in the stages of the path of the three types of
persons. By doing the reflections in the three stages, one comes to the
point when one can develop real love and compassion. With that as the
basis, one is really able to practice and generate bodhichitta. Once
bodhichitta is developed, one is set on the path to accomplish omniscient/
full enlightenment.
Remember about the question that was brought up in the last session?
The qualm: If you think that you are a person of great capacity or a
Mahayanist, then right from the beginning, you can do away with all the
practices of the persons of small and medium capacity.
So what happens to this person?
This person will never be able to do a good practice of the Mahayana Path.
This person does not even able to generate the realization of the lower
paths and this person is left with nothing. Therefore there is a need to
train gradually.
First, there is a need to train in the path that is shared with the persons
of small capacity.
Then we train in the path that is shared with the persons of medium
capacity.
Only then, we train in the path of the persons of great capacity.
If we train our mind and carry out our practice in such a way, then our
practice will become perfect.
Therefore one of the outlines in the text says: “Why students are led in
stages using the trainings of the three types of persons”.
If one possess a human life that is characterized with the eight freedoms
and ten endowments, then how to take full advantage of a human life of
freedom and endowment?
The actual way to take full advantage of a life of leisure and opportunity
 1. Training the mind in the stages of the path shared with persons of
    small capacity
 2. Training the mind in the stages of the path shared with persons of
    medium capacity
 3. Training the mind in the stages of the path for persons of great
    capacity.
These three major outlines are telling us how you can take full advantage
of this perfect situation. You start by training the mind in the path
common to the person of small capacity. Then you train your mind in the
stage of the path of common to the person of medium capacity. Only then do
you train your mind in the stages of the path of the person of great
capacity. You undertake this training only you have gained an overview or
general presentation of the entire path.
 1. Training the mind in the stages of the path shared with persons of
 small capacity
   1) The actual training of thought for a person of small capacity
   2) The measure of the attitude of a person of small capacity
   3) Clearing up misconceptions concerning the attitude of a person of
      small capacity
  (1) The actual training of thought for a person of small capacity
   i. Developing a state of mind that strives diligently for the sake of
      future lives
  ii. Relying on the means for achieving happiness in the next life
        i) Developing a state of mind that strives diligently for the sake
 of future lives
     a) Mindfulness of death, the contemplation that you will not remain
        long in this world
     b) Contemplating what will occur in your future life: the happiness or
        suffering of the two types of beings
   a) Mindfulness of death, the contemplation that you will not remain long
   in this world
      1) The faults of not cultivating mindfulness of death
      2) The benefits of such cultivation
      3) The kind of mindfulness of death you should develop
      4) How to cultivate mindfulness of death
(1) The faults of not cultivating mindfulness of death
If we do not cultivate the mindfulness of our own coming death and having
the feeling; “I will live for a very long time,’ then we will be only
interested in achieving the happiness of this life and in eliminating the
sufferings of this life alone. This is what happens when we do not
cultivate the mindfulness of our own coming death. If we do not remind
ourselves of our own death, that means we will continue to think that we
will live forever. Based on that world view, we will work only for the
happiness of this life and to eliminate the sufferings of this life.
If we are just thinking of this life alone, how can we actually think about
our future lives? There is no mental space for that, isn’t it? We will not
even think about what we will become in our next life i.e. the interest in
our future lives will not arise. If that is the case then we will not even
think about liberation and enlightenment. Therefore it is even difficult to
practice the dharma. These are the faults of not contemplating about our
death.
There are also other consequences if we do not contemplating about our own
death. Although we may perchance/ perhaps engage in studying, reflecting
and meditating on the dharma, what we are doing are mainly for the sake of
this life alone if we are not mindful of our own death. Without this strong
mindfulness of death, if we engage in retreat or do whatever practices, we
will not get any results from it and whatever virtues we may accumulate
will be very weak. Moreover, our practice will be involved with wrongdoing,
infractions and negativities which are the causes for us to go lower
realms; as if we are accumulating causes to go to lower realms.
Even if we try to develop a real interest in our future lives happiness and
creating causes for good rebirth, but due to lack of mindfulness of our
coming death, we tend to procrastinate. When we procrastinate, again we go
back to our same old self focusing on the happiness of this life alone.
The essence is that if we are not mindful on our own death, we will get
completely caught up in the affairs of this life alone. With this kind of
world view, our whole life will be mixed with wrongdoing coming under the
influence of afflictions and our actions will throw us into the lower
realms. Our life will be completely opposite to dharma. These are the
faults of not cultivating mindfulness of death.

(2)  The benefits of cultivating mindfulness of death
The benefits of cultivating mindfulness of death are:
  -we will develop a sincere interest for our future lives
  -we will have interest in virtues and our virtues will be strong
  -we will probably accumulate less wrongdoing
The Buddha mentioned in The Great Final Nirvana Sutra:
  Among all reapings, the autumn harvest is supreme. Among all tracks, the
  track of the elephant is supreme.
  Among all ideas, the idea of impermanence and death is supreme because
  with it you eliminate all the attachment, ignorance, and pride of the
  three realms.
Here the track of the elephant is an analogy. As the elephant does the work
for us, so if we follow after the track of the elephant which is very clear
and big, then it is easy to travel. Similarly, meditating on impermanence
and death will ensure that our dharma practice and the path will be smooth.
Similarly reflecting on impermanence and death is praised for being the
hammer that instantly destroys all afflictions and wrongdoing. It is also
praised for being the gateway into the instantaneous achievement of all
virtue and goodness.
It is said that the thought; “I will not die yet” is the door to which all
the problems come; whereas the thought thinking that “I will die” is the
source of all the goodness.
Among many people, there is this wrong conception of having the idea that
meditation on death and impermanence is the instruction only for people who
are beginners or don’t know much about dharma and also thinking that it is
not something that everyone needs to do. Lama Tsongkhapa says that this is
not like that at all:
  Consequently, you should not think that this is a practice for those  who
  do not have some other profound teaching to cultivate in meditation.  Nor
  should you think that although this is something  worthy  of  meditation,
  you should cultivate it just a little at the beginning of the  meditation
  session because it is not suitable for continuous  practice.  Rather,  be
  certain from the depths of  your  heart  that  it  is  necessary  in  the
  beginning, middle, and end, and then cultivate it in meditation.
It is said here the reflection of death and impermanence is important in
the beginning, in the middle and in the end.
In relation to the person of small capacity, in order to overcome the
current preoccupation with the affairs and happiness of this life alone, he
has to think about death and impermanence. Without which there is no way to
overcome that preoccupation.
For a person of medium capacity, he must develops renunciation i.e. develop
the idea; “I must definitely get out of this cyclic existence”. In order to
produce that kind of intention, he must reflect on impermanence. Without
the reflection on impermanence, there is no way to produce that thought.
Similarly the person of great capacity also needs to reflect on
impermanence.
So, you can see how meditation on impermanence and death is important at
the beginning in all these different contexts.
If you look at it from another view, reflection on death and impermanence
is important at the beginning. Why? Because it is only after having
reflecting on death and impermanence well, you would sincerely want to
practice the dharma and entering into path.
Then in the middle, when you are going about your practice, it is the
meditation on death and impermanence that sustain your practice and making
you want to continue.
At the end, this reflection on death and impermanence is that which makes
you complete your practice and bring everything to close fulfillment.
We have to think whether what the text has been saying so far is true or
not. The text says that we have to reflect on:
 - how by nature we are impermanent and
 - how we are definitely going to die
The teaching is saying that:
 -if we are mindful on our own impermanent and death, we will have all
these benefits.
 -if we do not reflect on death and impermanence and are not mindful all
the time, we will experience all these faults.
Meditating on death and impermanence is an inward exercise and we have to
look at ourselves and our own life. We have to see whether what is being
said here is true or not; especially about the faults. If it is true, then
we just have to do the practices.

(3) The kind of mindfulness of death you should develop
I think it is a common shared experience that when something frightening
happens in our life, we turns to dharma and motivated by the fear of
impending death, we then really look at dharma.  Although we say we should
be mindful of our own death but what exactly do we mean? As Lama Tsongkhapa
says:
  For those who have not practiced the path at all, the fear of death
  manifests itself as the worry that they will be separate from their
  relatives and so forth.
Is this the kind of mindfulness of death that we need to develop? The
answer is no. When we say we develop the mindfulness of death, it is not
about creating the fear of everything will be lost. Why this is not
considered to be the mindfulness of death? Because without practicing it,
we have already experienced it.
  Therefore, do not develop this here.  What,  then,  should  you  develop?
  Certainly nothing of your body, which you appropriated through karma  and
  afflictions, shall survive death. This may frighten  you,  yet,  for  the
  time being, you cannot stop it. However, you should  fear  death  if  you
  have not secured your welfare in future lives by putting an  end  to  the
  causes of the miserable realms and establishing the causes of high status
  and certain goodness.
Here in this context, what kind of fear of death should we cultivate?
We should fear of having to die without having done anything positive.
We should fear of having to die having accumulated so many causes for the
lower realms
So these are the kinds of fear of death that we need to cultivate.
Can these particular kinds of fear of death be stopped?  They can be
stopped. Why? If we do practice the dharma, we don’t need to fear these
kinds of death.
We should be afraid of having to die:
  - without having created the causes of good rebirth.
  - having led the life of creating only causes for lower realms.
These are the kinds of fear that we need to produce in ourselves. Based on
having these kinds of fear, then what should we do? As much as possible, we
should try our best to live a life accumulating the causes for good
rebirth. Having done our best, at the time of death, we will not be afraid
because we know that we have done what we can and having the confidence
thinking; “I will definitely not going to the lower realms”.  If you have
this confidence then there is no fear. The great Kadampa master of the past
has said:
 “Now we need to be frightened by death. At the time of death, we should be
fearless”.
If we live our lives accumulating the causes of future happiness, good
rebirth and at the same time we confess whatever negativities that we have
already accumulated with the application of the four opponent powers, then
this is the best preparation we can do for our coming death. So at the time
of death, this preparation is actually the best “powa;" –the transference
of consciousness. You also don’t need people to perform prayers for you. If
we lead our whole live just creating non-virtues and at the time of our
death, I think it is quite difficult to have good result by just having
people to perform prayer for us.
By developing these kinds of fear of death then we will want to engage in
dharma practice. Although we need to stop taking rebirth once and for all
under the influence of karma and afflictions but for the time being, this
is beyond us and that is not going to happen soon. Definitely we have to
die.

(4)  How to cultivate mindfulness of death
Cultivate this  by  way  of  the  three  roots,  nine  reasons,  and  three
decisions. The three roots are:
   a) death is certain;
   b) the time of death is uncertain; and
   c) at the time of death nothing helps except religious practice.
These are three roots and each of the three roots has three reasons so,
altogether making the nine reasons. At the end of each root, there is a
decision. Therefore there are three decisions.

a) The contemplation that death is certain
Meditation on the certainty of death has three aspects:
    1. the Lord of Death will definitely come, and therefore cannot be
       avoided;
    2. our lifetime cannot be extended and constantly diminishes; and
    3. while you are alive, there is little time for religious practice.

1 The contemplation that the Lord of Death will definitely come, and
therefore cannot be avoided
Here the meditation on the certainty of death is to bring to mind that
death is something that cannot be avoided. If you think about it, it
doesn’t matter what kind of body you can have, whether is a body of human
being, worldly god or naga, there will come a time when you have to die.
So, no matter what kind of body you can assume, you still have to die.
It doesn’t matter where you are born, whether it is on the north, the
south, the east, the west, up in the space or under the ground, death is
certain.
It doesn’t matter what is the time of birth or when you are born, whether
in the summer, in the winter, in the spring or in the autumn, you still
have to die.
As death is certain, you cannot escape by fleeing from death. It doesn’t
matter where you go, you still have to die. Even if you have a lot of power
and authority in the world, you still have to die.
Even all the money and all the possessions cannot turn away death as well.
No mantra can turn death away. There isn’t any magical potion that can stop
death as well.
Do you have the idea that you are definitely going to die? We know that we
are going to die but do we actually need to meditate on it? Is it necessary
to reflect on the certainty of death since we know that we are going to
die?
(Student reply inaudible)
Therefore it follows that there is no need to meditate on this and we can
do away the first root, do away the three reasons and do away with the
first decision also.  So there is no need to meditate on this. When
somebody asks you; “Will you definitely die?” You definitely say; “Yes”. So
that is the first reason.

2. The contemplation that our lifetime cannot  be  extended  and  constantly
diminishes
Next is the contemplation that our lifespan cannot be extended and
constantly diminishes
Our lifespan is predetermined by one of our past actions. Let’s say in the
past we have accumulated the cause with the action that we will live, at
the longest, a hundred years. Thus, the maximum is no more than this.
It doesn’t mean that if you have the karma to live for a hundred years, you
necessarily can live for a hundred years. You may have the predetermined
lifespan of a hundred years but if you meet with obstacles along the way,
you may die earlier. Or if your merits run low along the way and the merit
to sustain your life is not there, you may die before your predetermined
lifespan.  Even if you do live your full lifespan of a hundred years, that
is about it. That is nothing you can do to add on to that. That is why it
says our lifespan cannot be extended.
Let’s say we are a person who can live for a hundred years. But since the
day of our birth, with each and every single day, our lifespan is
decreasing every moment. It is constantly diminishes and becoming shorter.
  Thus, starting from the moment that you enter the womb, you do not remain
  for even an instant, but go headlong toward the next lifetime. Therefore,
  even your intervening life is exclusively consumed in a procession toward
  death led by the messengers, sickness and  aging.  Consequently,  do  not
  rejoice in the thought that while you are living you are  stationary  and
  not moving toward the next lifetime. For example, when falling  from  the
  top of a high cliff, the time of falling to earth through  space  is  not
  enjoyable.
    As cited  by  Chandrakirti  in  his  Commentary  on  the  "Four  Hundred
Stanzas":
    Hero of humans, beginning from the first night
    Of entering a womb in this world,
    One proceeds daily, without delay
    Into the presence of the Lord of Death.

3. The contemplation of the certainty of death such that even while you are
alive there is little time for religious practice.
We will continue in the next lesson

Student 1: (Question summarized by Ven Gyurme) Even if you do not create
any virtues at the time of death, you just think of Amitabha, then
everything will be taken care of. So there is no need to worry.
Khen Rinpoche: If you remember in the section on the human life of freedoms
and endowments, at that section in the end we are advised to reflect on the
four points. The second one is: we have the ability to practice the dharma.
Why? Because we are endowed with both the external condition: the spiritual
friend, the teacher and the internal condition: the human life of freedoms
and endowments.
In that section, it talks about the ability to practice the dharma but it
doesn’t just talk about the teacher.
You also need to have the condition of human life of freedom and endowments
to practice. If you don’t have the freedoms and endowments, for example, if
you are dogs or pigs or any animals or if you are in the lower realms, you
can’t practice the dharma even if the Buddha is directly present. Nothing
can be done. Therefore, it gives two reasons:
      -the external condition: teacher and
      -the internal condition: human life of freedom and endowments.
In the case of going to Amitabha Pureland, of course, it is possible to go
there but it is not so straight forward. It is not as if we can just sit
around and do nothing and wait for Amitabha to come to deliver us. It is
not like that and it is not so straight forward. You need to be familiar
with the Pureland. You also need to have very strong aspiration of wanting
to go there. Based on that, you create the causes and accumulate the
merits. You also need a single pointed faith in Amitabha. These are all the
internal conditions that come from your side. If you have these then it is
possible for Amitabha standing there welcoming you.
Student 2: Is there any case when there is timely death or all deaths are
untimely?
Khen Rinpoche: Not all deaths are untimely death; which means there is some
deaths that are timely.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English:  Some deaths are at the right time  to  have
accidents; some are not the right time.
It is hard really for us to say, this person dies due to lifespan running
out or due to untimely death. Of course, it is possible to determine the
cause through astrology but as to whether that astrology is accurate in the
first place, it  is another question.

