Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 23.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.445435
================================================================================


What are the benefits of cultivating mindfulness of death and impermanence?
What  are  the  faults  of  not  cultivating  mindfulness   of   death   and
impermanence?
We have already seen them in  the  text.  In  short,  if  we  cultivate  the
mindfulness of our death and impermanence, this cultivation open up all  the
other paths and make us to be able to actualize those paths.
If we do not cultivate the mindfulness of our death  and  impermanence  then
whatever virtues we  create  do  not  become  ideal  and  we  also  tend  to
continuously accumulate negativities. Of all the people gather here in  this
hall, there are some  learning  the  Lamrim  –the  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment- for the first time  and  hearing  this  topic  on  death  and
impermanence for the first time while there  are  others  who  have  already
heard such an explanation before. So there  is  a  wide  range  of  students
here. For those of you who are  hearing  this  topic  for  the  first  time,
please pay attention, listen well and try to understand  of  what  is  being
explained. For those of you  who  have  heard  the  teaching  on  death  and
impermanence before,  then  you  should  bring  up  to  the  next  level  by
reflecting on what is being said. You  should  use  your  intelligence  with
logic and reasoning to arrive at a definite ascertainment of this topic  and
to produce certainty in your heart regarding this topic. For  those  of  you
who have already gained an ascertainment of this topic,  then  this  is  the
time for  you  to  meditate  and  familiarize  yourself  of  what  you  have
ascertained.
How are we supposed to cultivate the mindfulness of  our  death?  We  should
cultivate this by way of the nine reasons. In the last  session  we  started
with the first root: “The contemplation that  death  is  certain”  which  is
supported by three reasons:
1" The contemplation that the  Lord  of  Death  will  definitely  come,  and
therefore cannot be avoided
2" The contemplation that our lifetime cannot  be  extended  and  constantly
diminishes
3" The contemplation of the certainty of death such that even while you  are
alive there is little time for dharma practice
We have completed with the first two (1” & 2”) reasons. We will  briefly  go
through the two reasons.
The first reason: “The contemplation that the Lord of Death will  definitely
come, and therefore cannot be avoided.”  We will  definitely  die.  This  is
something that cannot be avoided because there is  nothing  out  there  that
can enable us to overcome death. There is no condition  whatsoever  that  is
within our means to overcome death. That makes us definitely going to die.
The second reason: “The contemplation that our lifetime cannot  be  extended
and constantly diminishes.”
Our life span is something that cannot be extended. Not only  it  cannot  be
extended, it is constantly diminishing. Sometime we do not need to think  of
too many things but it is enough to just thinking about the actual  reasons.
For example, the second reason shows that our death is certain  because  our
lifespan cannot be extended. On top of that, it is  constantly  diminishing,
basically, moving closer to death with each and every single moment.  If  we
do contemplate on even just this small little point  well,  our  heart  will
move and we do get some kind of insight.
The third reason: “The contemplation of the certainty  of  death  such  that
even while you are alive there is little time for dharma  practice”.   While
we are alive, there is  little  time  for  practice.  As  the  great  master
Kuntang Rinpoche said: “For the first 20 odd years of our lives we  did  not
get to practice the dharma. Then we spent the  next  20  odd  years  of  our
lives thinking of doing the practice the dharma i.e.  kept  on  thinking  of
doing the practice in one of these days. On the last 20 odds  we  look  back
at our lives thinking; “I did not get the good opportunity to  practice  the
dharma well”. Then at the end of our life, we have to die with  such  regret
in our heart.”  What Kuntang Rinpoche had said is basically the  description
of our situation now as we all are like that. Even if  we  are  destined  to
live for a hundred years, still our lives turn out to be the one  that  what
Kuntang Rinpoche has described. We may have  this  long  life  but  we  will
still have to die with the regret that we do not get to practice the  dharma
well.
If we think about this, most people, for the first  20  odd-years  of  their
life, they do not think of  practicing  the  dharma.  Then  what  about  the
remaining years of one’s  life  when  one  get  old?  By  that  time,  one’s
physical and mental strength would have deteriorated such that even  if  one
wants to practice, one will not be able to do it because the body is like  a
burden and the mind is not as sharp  and  the  memory  is  not  as  good  as
before. So the only real time to do any real practice  is  during  the  good
year; which is the middle part of  one’s  life.  But  if  you  look  at  the
majority of people, they have already spent half of their time sleeping  and
whatever time is left,  if  one  may  have  the  interest  to  practice  the
teaching but one might meet with all sorts  of  difficulties  and  obstacles
such as one get sick, spirit harms and so forth. In  that  sense,  there  is
not much time left for one to practice the dharma. If this is the  story  of
your life, then you will end the story of having to die  without  practicing
the dharma.
So, by reflecting on these three reasons, then you come to gain a  certainty
in your heart that you will definitely going to die. Once you  have  reached
this certainty with the feeling in your heart, then what you should  do?  At
the end of the reflection if you do feel that death is definitely  going  to
happen to you and you definitely have to die, then you must make  the  first
decision: I must practice the dharma!
  This being the case, the wonders of this life will be  mere  memories  at
  the time of  death,  like  waking  up  and  remembering  the  pleasurable
  experiences in a single dream. Think, "If the  enemy,  death,  is  surely
  approaching and cannot be stopped, why should I delight in the  delusions
  of this life?"  Then decide that you must practice the teaching and  make
  many heartfelt pledges to do so. The Garland of Birth Stories:
        Alas, afflicted and worldly persons,
        I do not like unstable things.
        Even this glorious white water lily
        Will become a memory.
By reflecting on these three reasons, you should arrive at the conclusion
in your heart that death will definitely happen to you and you will
definitely die. If you have this kind of conclusion arrive at your heart,
then what you should we do next?  You should generate the determination and
the decision to practice the dharma. That is the contemplation that death
is certain.

b" The contemplation that the time of death is uncertain
We are definitely going to die but as to when that  will  happen  to  us  is
questionable. There is no certainty with  regards  to  our  time  of  death.
There are three reasons that we  are  supposed  to  think  of  in  order  to
generate the understanding that the time of our death is uncertain.
The three reasons are:
1" The contemplation that the  life  span  in  this  world  (Jambudvipa)  is
uncertain
2" The contemplation that the causes of death are very many and  the  causes
of life few
3" The contemplation that the time of death is uncertain  because  the  body
is very fragile
The first reason: the life span in this world (Jambudvipa) is uncertain.
According to the Buddhist cosmology which talks about  the  different  world
systems, we are in the Southern continent – Jambudvipa. There is a  Northern
continent –Uttarakuru. It is said that human beings living in  the  Northern
continent have a definite lifespan of a thousand years. If one is born as  a
human being in Northern continent,  one  definitely  going  to  live  for  a
thousand years. For the Eastern and  the  Western  continents,  in  general,
human beings in these two world systems have  an  average  lifespan  of  500
years. It is almost  certain  that  they  will  live  for  a  full  lifespan
although it is possible that some of them may  die  before  500  years.  For
human beings in our world system, the Southern  continent  –Jambudvipa-,  it
is said that our lifespan is  highly  uncertain  as  there  is  no  definite
lifespan. If we look at the lifespan of human beings in this world of  ours,
there are people whom live for 100 years  and  also  some  live  beyond  100
years. There are people who die as young as at the  age  of  10  years  old.
The range is very big. It is not guaranteed that one will only die when  one
is getting older. There are people who die when they are still young.  There
are also many old people who are still around. So there is no  fix  lifespan
in this world. If you  look  at  our  present  era  of  Shakyamuni  Buddha’s
teaching, even the founder of the teaching in this  era  who  is  Shakyamuni
Buddha had passed into paranirvana.  Numberless great masters, scholars  and
practitioners who came after Shakyamuni Buddha such  as  many  great  Indian
scholars like Nagarjuna were already dead. They are no longer here  now.  In
Tibet, there are many great practitioners, masters and scholars as well  but
only their mere names remain with us. If we look at  our  contemporary,  the
people of our generation –our virtuous friends and teachers –a lot  of  them
were already dead. We see them dying and we hear them dying.  If we look  at
our friends, relatives and our loved ones of this life,  how  many  of  them
had already departed? By thinking  on  these  various  examples,  we  should
realize that we  are  exactly  at  the  same  situation  as  them.  Whatever
happened to all these peoples will definitely going to happen to us; we  are
definitely going to die. On top of that there is no  real  guarantee  as  to
when that will happen.
Although  we  see  our  contemporary  –whether  our  loved  one,  relatives,
friends, colleagues etc. - are dying but our heart is  not  moved.  Although
we see so many people dying, we never ever think that will happen to us.  We
don’t have that type of  feeling  in  our  heart  and  our  mind  is  really
stubborn. Even when we think of death, at the end of the conclusion we  have
the feeling that other people are dying and they  are  definitely  going  to
die; but we never ever arrive  at  the  conclusion  for  our  own  impending
death. The point of using others as example –how others  are  dying-  is  to
lead an example to own existence and our situation and then  learn  from  it
telling ourselves that thing that happened to others  will  also  definitely
going to happen to us. That is the point. There is no real benefit  by  just
looking at how other people are dying. That itself has no benefit.
The second reason: The contemplation that the causes of death are very  many
and the causes of life few.
Through reflecting on this reason, we should  come  to  understand  how  the
time of our death is uncertain. There are many conditions for death. We  get
interferences from human beings and human beings may harm our lives. We  may
also receive harm from non-human which includes many beings such as  worldly
gods, nagas, landlord spirits and so forth. Even insects, germs and  animals
can also harm our lives. There are also many  different  kinds  of  diseases
and sicknesses that can cause us to die. We also receive harm from the  four
elements - earth, water, fire and wind - which can take away our  life.  Our
body is constituted of the four elements -earth, water, fire and wind.  When
the elements of our body are balanced we feel strong  and  healthy.  If  the
four elements are imbalanced whereas some  are  in  excess  and  others  are
deficient, then we will develop  different  kinds  of  sicknesses.  Some  of
these sicknesses do take away the life of people. So,  actually  the  danger
is innately present within us and not as if they are  outside  of  us.   The
very thing that can take our lives away is present within us-  we  have  the
causes of death right there. Sometime we may get the idea that our  body  is
very strong and healthy. At this time we may think; “There is nothing  wrong
with me and I am not going to die.” This thinking is  superficial.   If  you
really  think  about  the  situation  of  our  body  and  how  our  body  is
constituted  by  the  four  elements  and  as  soon  as  we  meet  with  any
unfavorable conditions and once there is  imbalanced  of  the  elements,  we
will start to experience problems.
In Nagarjuna's Precious Garland says:
    You dwell among the causes of death
    Like a butter lamp standing in a strong breeze.
If we put a butter lamp in the open area and there is a strong wind  blowing
from all directions. We do not really know  how  long  the  butter  lamp  is
going to last as there is no way of telling. Likewise,  there  are  so  many
external and internal conditions for us to die. There is no way  of  telling
when we will die.
Since life itself is headed toward death,  the  conditions  for  life  would
offer no security even if they were numerous.
The Precious Garland:
    The causes of death are many,
    Those of staying alive, few.
    These too become causes of death.
    Thus, always practice the teaching.
There are many causes  and  conditions  for  dying.  Furthermore,  even  the
conditions that are necessary to sustain life sometime turn  up  to  be  the
causes of our death. For example, food is something that sustains  life  can
causes us to die. People  do  die  from  food  and  die  from  medicine.  By
reflecting on how the causes of death are very many and the causes  of  life
few, then we should come to understand how  the  time  of  death  is  really
uncertain.
The third reason: The contemplation that the  time  of  death  is  uncertain
because the body is very fragile
Your body is very fragile, like a water bubble. Therefore, it does not  take
much damage to destroy it. Your life could be taken even by  something  that
you only imagine to be harmful, like being pricked by a  thorn.  Hence,  you
can very easily be overcome by any of the causes of death.
The Friendly Letter says:
    If not even ash will remain when the physical world—
    The earth, Mount Meru, and the seas—
    Is burned up by seven blazing suns,
    What need is there to mention humans, who are so very frail?
After contemplating that the time of death is indeed  uncertain  because  of
these three reasons, then one should  make  the  second  decision:  “I  must
practice the dharma now.”
After you have reflected in this way, you should resolve  that  since  there
is no certainty as to when the Lord of Death  will  destroy  your  body  and
life, you will practice the teaching right now, without  assuming  that  you
still have time. Make this pledge many times from the depths of your  heart.

Furthermore, the lord of yogis, Sri Jagan-mitrananda, says:
    Lord of the Earth, while this borrowed body
    Is still healthy, without sickness or deterioration,
    Take full advantage of it,
    Acting in order to end your fear of sickness, death, and deterioration.
    Once sickness, aging, deterioration, and the like occur,
    You might remember to practice, but what can you do then?
This piece of advice here is very important and is something  that  we  must
keep in our heart. This is because the quotation that we just read out is  a
description of our own situation. Most people are  like  this.  When  things
are going well, they are happy. When the body is  strong  and  healthy,  one
will never think of the dharma. Even when one thinks  of  dharma,  one  will
think “I will do it later.”  Comes the time when we start  to  age  and  get
sick, only then we remember the dharma. By that time it is  too  late.  What
can we do then? This is advising us to practice the teaching  while  we  are
still strong and healthy.
So there are three roots in cultivating the mindfulness of death
   1. Death is certain
   2. The time of death is uncertain
   3. At the time of death nothing helps except dharma practice
It is said that the second root -the contemplation  of  the  uncertainty  of
the time of death- is the most important of the three  roots.  This  is  the
very thing that will redirect your mind, so work hard at it.

c" The contemplation that at the time of death nothing helps except dharma
practice
The three reasons are:
    1" Friends will not help
    2" Resources will not help
    3" Your body will not help
The first reason: Friends will not help at the time of our death
At time of death, even if you have a huge entourage  and  many  loved  ones,
friends and relatives, you will not be able to bring even one of  them  with
you. Comes the day when you die, even though you may have many  friends  and
relatives, they cannot do anything for you. You have to leave  all  of  them
behind. You have to go on to the next life alone.
The second reason: Our possessions and resources will not help at  the  time
of our death
However much monies, resources and possessions, even you happen to  own  the
whole world, at the time of death, you have to leave all  these  behind  and
you have to go to the next life alone. You  cannot  even  bring  one  dollar
along or even a small piece of possession. You can bring nothing  along.  As
the great Kadampa master of the past had said: “When  the  king  died,  they
leave behind the entire kingdom. When the beggar died he leaves  behind  his
walking stick”.  The beggar who owns nothing except the walking stick  which
is his only possession has to leave it behind as he  cannot  take  it  along
whereas the king who owns the whole kingdom also has to  leave  behind  them
as well. So no matter who we are, we have to leave  everything  behind  when
we die.
As it is  also  mentioned  in  the  teaching  that  if  you  do  own  enough
sustenance that keeps you alive for hundred years but at the time  of  death
you have to leave it behind because you cannot eat everything when you  die.
Basically you have to go to the next life with an empty  stomach.  Even  you
own enough garments and clothing such that you  can  wear  a  new  piece  of
cloth every single minute for the rest of your life,  but  at  the  time  of
death, you have to leave them behind and go naked.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: In our tradition, when a person died,  there
is no cloth on the body. Even there is clothing it must be  removed  because
it is difficult to burn the cloth in the fire as  there  is  no  electricity
for burning as we burn the body with the fire from the wood. If the body  is
wrapped with cloth it is difficult to burn the body. So,  all  clothes  have
to be removed for easy burning. In Singapore, the death body dresses  better
than when the person is alive. The body is washed and then  there  is  make-
up. Some even have diamond piece put inside the mouth.
The third reason: Even our body is of no help to us at the time of death
We cherish our body so much and we spend a lot of time and  effort  to  look
after it. At the time of death, we have to leave our body here and  move  on
to the next destination.
Our friends and loved ones are of no use at the time of death; neither  does
our wealth have any use. Even this body of  ours  has  to  be  left  behind.
Being the case, then what is that we can bring along and  what  can  benefit
the mind? It is only the Dharma.  This is the way to  be  mindful  of  death
and impermanence.
We contemplate by ways of the  three  roots,  nine  reasons  and  the  three
decisions. There are three roots and each  of  the  three  roots  has  three
reasons. At the end of  contemplating  each  root,  we  have  one  decision.
Therefore at the end we have three decisions. By  coming  to  class  and  by
doing the reading, at the end of it,  you  should  have  this  idea  how  to
cultivate the mindfulness of death and impermanence. You  have  to  remember
these points.
Summary
1st root: The contemplation that death is certain
The three reasons:
   1" The contemplation that the Lord of Death will  definitely  come,  and
   therefore cannot be avoided
   2" The contemplation that our lifetime cannot be extended and constantly
   diminishes
   3" The contemplation of the certainty of death such that even while  you
   are alive there is little time for dharma practice
Decision: Death is definite. Therefore I must practice Dharma.

2nd root: The contemplation that the time of death is uncertain
The three reasons:
   1" The contemplation that the life span in this  world  (Jambudvipa)  is
   uncertain
   2" The contemplation that the causes of death  are  very  many  and  the
   causes of life few
   3" The contemplation that the time of death  is  uncertain  because  the
   body is very fragile
Decision: The time of my death is completely  uncertain;  therefore  I  must
practice Dharma now.

3rd root: The contemplation that at the time of death nothing helps except
dharma  practice
The three reason s:
   1" Friends will not help
   2" Resources will not help
   3" Your body will not help
Decision: As nothing but the Dharma will help me at the  time  of  death,  I
must practice Dharma purely.
