Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson33.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.911249
================================================================================


Meditation on Manjushri:  in the space in front of you, visualize Manjushri
in the nature of light.  With your mind abides on that visualization, try
to develop some clarity and some factors of stability. Then on that basis,
you can visualize:
   1. Presenting all kinds of offerings to Manjushri
   2. Make request prayers to him to be able to develop wisdom
   3. Then visualize that you receive light rays and nectars from Manjushri
      purifying you of all your ignorance and then developing your wisdom.
It is extremely important:
   1. To make aspiration prayers to the special deity Manjushri continuously


   2. To always set a good motivation
   3. To dedicate our merits at the end
These three things are very important. These are things that we should do
all the times and you have to keep this in mind. In our context, we are
here trying to learn the Buddha’s teachings. Along the way we are bound to
meet with challenges as there are all kinds of obstacles - both external
and internal obstacles. Before these obstacles come it is important to
avert them. So these three things are very important:
   1. Making single-pointed request
   2. Always having a good motivation
   3. Dedicating the merits for success
If we do not do these three things continuously, there is a possibility of
the obstacles may arise, then it will obstruct our learning.
In the course of our study and learning the teachings of the Buddha, we
will meet with challenges and obstacles, which may be either the external
or the internal obstacles. Of the two, the main obstacle is the internal
obstacle; which comes from the inside. The biggest internal obstacles are:
    -coming under the control of laziness and
    -losing the interest in learning the Dharma
Initially you may have some interest to learn the Buddhadharma but somehow
along the way obstacles may arise and even that little interest is gone.
Therefore, it is very important to avert the obstacles before they do
arise.
As I have mentioned earlier in the class, the three things are very
important:
1. Generating a strong motivation at the beginning
2. Dedicating the merits
3. Making single pointedly request
The whole point of generating a strong motivation and dedicating the merits
is to help on the practical level of developing or strengthening your
conviction and determination to learn.
When we talk about setting motivation it is not just about reciting some
prayers. Setting motivation has to be done from the heart i.e. it has to be
heartfelt. You are motivated from your heart thinking; “Yes, this is what I
want to do and this is what I will do.” It does make a difference when it
moves your heart. So these are some of the things that you need to do
regularly.
Student 1: Regarding white karma, the fact that it is called karma, is it
still in the nature of suffering? If it is, then how do we ordinary human
beings go about to achieve pure actions which are not in the sufferings
nature?
Khen Rinpoche: You have to think about the meaning of karma and not the
English word “action” (for karma). Action or karma is not necessarily in
the nature of suffering. What is karma? Karma is essentially a mental
factor that is concomitant with a main mind. In simple English, which is
not very accurate, it is a particular mental factor that accompanies a main
mind. What it does is it moves that main mind to engage in a particular
object.
In that sense, karma is not necessarily in the nature of suffering. But in
this particular point in the Lamrim, we are talking about actions that are
motivated by the afflictions. So actions that are motivated by afflictions
can be either virtuous or non-virtuous. The discussion here is that the
white virtuous actions are motivated by the afflictions. Here, because we
are talking about the action/ karma that causes us to circle in samsara, we
are talking about that karma that project/ throw us either into a good
rebirth in samsara or a miserable rebirth. Anyway, actions that cause us to
circle in cyclic existence are motivated by the afflictions.
You have to keep in mind that our discussion of karma here is in the
context of the practices associated with a person of small capacity.
Student 2: On page 238 of LRCM, “The fruitional effect is that you are born
as a human, a deity of the desire realm, or a deity in one of the two upper
realms through small, medium, and great virtuous actions, respectively”. If
we do small virtuous action we are born as human realm and if we do medium
and great virtuous action, we are born as deity of the desire realms  Does
it mean that if we do medium or great virtuous actions, there is a
possibility that we won’t have the precious human rebirth?
Khen Rinpoche: Here we are talking about the situation in cyclic existence
i.e. the kind of rebirths that are found within the cyclic existence. If
you look at the three supposedly good realms of higher rebirth: human, god
in the desire realm and the god in the upper realm, the happiness
experience by the god in the desire realm is definitely much more than the
human being. The happiness experience by the god in the form and formless
realm is more blissful i.e. better than the happiness experience by the god
in the desire realm. So, there is a difference in the level of happiness
that they experience while still in samsara. If there is a difference in
the happiness, which is the result, then there must be a difference in the
cause. It is said here that the great virtuous action one is reborn as the
god either in the form or the formless realm. But just by doing the great
virtuous action alone will not lead you to reborn as one of those gods in
the form or formless realms. What you definitely need is to have obtained
calm abiding and one of the actual concentrations to be reborn as one of
the gods in the form and formless realms. Otherwise, without calm abiding
and without having achieved one the actual concentrations, even if you
create great virtuous action you will not be born there. Having said that,
it does not mean that you will necessarily have to be reborn as the god in
the form and formless realms after having achieved calm abiding and one of
the actual concentrations. Even if you have achieved those concentrations,
I guess, due to your own prayer you need not take rebirth as one of those
gods.
The order that is presented in the text is: human, god in the desire realm
and god in the form and formless realm. Perhaps that is in terms of the
happiness that is experienced.
However, if you were to look at these three rebirths from the perspective
of them being suitable basis for generating the path in the mind, then of
the three, the best basis is the human rebirth. The next best basis is the
god in the desire realm and then follows by the god in the form and
formless realms. The order is reverse (from the happiness that is
experienced.)
I am not exactly sure but if you think about it, perhaps one can say that a
great virtuous action lead one to be born as human being considering that
human being is the best basis for producing the path in the mind. I am not
exactly sure but if you think about it and analyze, perhaps we can say
this.

(c) A presentation of other classifications of karma
Other classifications of karma are presented in two parts:
     1. The distinction between projecting and completing karma
     2. Karma whose result you will definitely or only possibly experience
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 239: (i) The distinction between projecting
and completing karma
Although the karma that projects a rebirth into a happy realm is virtuous
and the karma that projects a rebirth into a miserable realm is non-
virtuous, there is no such certainty with regard to completing karma. Non-
virtuous actions create even in the happy realms such effects as not having
complete limbs, fingers, or sensory organs; and having an unpleasant color,
a short life span, many illnesses, and poverty. Further, virtuous actions
create consummate wealth even for animals and hungry ghosts.
This being the case, there are four sides to the relationship between being
projected and being completed.
Among lives that are the result of virtuous projecting karma there are both
results from virtuous completing karma and from non-virtuous completing
karma.
Among lives that are the result of non-virtuous projecting karma there are
both results from non-virtuous completing karma and from virtuous
completing karma. Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge says:
 Understand that virtuous and non-virtuous actions project and bring to
 completion birth in the happy realms and the miserable realms. Projecting
 karma projects a fruition. Completing karma is that by which, in a
 rebirth, you experience the wanted and unwanted.]

There are different ways of classifying karma -projecting karma and
completing karma.
Projecting karma can either be virtuous or non-virtuous:
1. Virtuous projecting karma leads one to a good rebirth in cyclic
   existence.
2. Non-virtuous projecting karma leads one to a miserable rebirth in the
   lower realm.
Those karmas that will project/throw a rebirth in the lower realms are for
certain non-virtuous projecting karma.
Those karmas /actions that will throw us into a good rebirth in cyclic
existence are virtuous projecting karma.
Even though we may reborn as a human being but in that life we may
experience all kinds of problems such as having incomplete faculties,
having unpleasant appearance, short lifespan, many different kinds of
sicknesses and may be poor. It is a virtuous projecting karma that causes
to have a good rebirth as a human being.
Even though we are born as human being but in our life we may experience
all these kinds of problems and sufferings, illnesses, sickness, poverty,
our whole life is being filled by the completing karma. This is the result
of non-virtuous completing karma.
For example, an animal is the result of non-virtuous projecting karma
having rebirth in the lower/miserable realm, but there are animals that
live quite a good life which is completed by virtuous completing karma.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I heard in the news, some pets are richer
than the owner. There is one news, when the person passed away then he put
all the money in the dog’s name for many million dollars. I am not sure how
the dog is going to use the money.
There are four permutations between projecting karma and completing karma:
1. Virtuous projecting karma and non-virtuous completing karma
2. Non-virtuous projecting karma and virtuous completing karma
3. Virtuous projecting karma and virtuous completing karma
4. Non-virtuous projecting karma and non-virtuous completing karma
If you think about it, you should be able to figure out examples for each
of these permutations.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 239: (ii) Karma whose result you will
definitely or only possibly experience
The Levels of Yogic Deeds:
  Karma whose result you will definitely experience is that consciously
  done and accumulated.
  Karma whose result you are not certain to experience is that consciously
  done but not accumulated.
The same text sets forth the distinction between having done karma and
having accumulated karma:
  What is karma that you have done? An action that you have thought about
  or that you have consciously set into motion either physically or
  vocally.
It continues:
  Karma that you have accumulated is that not included among the following
  ten types of actions: actions done in dreams; those done unknowingly;
  those done unconsciously; those done without intensity or not
  continuously; those done in error; those done forgetfully; those done
  without wanting to; those naturally ethically neutral; those eradicated
  through regret; and those eradicated with a remedy.
  Karma that you have accumulated is the remaining actions, the ones not
  included in these ten types of action. Karma that you have not
  accumulated is just the ten types of actions indicated above.]

Another classification of karma is:
1. Karma whose result you will definitely experience
2. Karma whose result you may possibly experience.
Let’s talk about karma done and karma accumulated.
Between about karma done and karma accumulated, there are four
permutations:
1. Karma done and accumulated
2. Karma not done and accumulated
3. Karma done and not accumulated
4. Karma neither done nor accumulated
Of these four, the karma that is both done and accumulated and karma that
is accumulated but not done is karma whose result you will definitely
experience.
For the karma that is done but not accumulated and karma that is neither
done nor accumulated is karma whose result you will only possibly
experience.
Example for karma that is done but not accumulated is that you killed
someone in the dream. While dreaming it is possible that you say something
bad about someone in your sleep. That is karma that is done but not
accumulated.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): If you are not so happy so it is good to
say bad things in the dream. You get benefit; you have done what you want
to do but no karma is created. Make sure you do in a dream but not during
the day time.
Example for karma that is accumulated but not done is if you always
entertain the thought of killing someone for a long period of time. Due to
the force of that thought, which is a very powerful wish, then you
accumulated the karma. In this case, harboring a strong continual intention
to kill someone, you accumulate the karma but the karma is not done. In
order for karma to be done, in this case, you actually have to physically
carrying out the act of killing.
For the karma that is both done and accumulated, basically all the three
-the preliminary, the actual part of the action and the conclusion- are
complete. We have talked about these earlier during the ten non-virtuous
actions.
Then this leads us to the last permutation: karma that is neither done nor
accumulated which you are supposed to come out with illustration.
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody, give me one example, this supposed to be homework?
Anybody can give an illustration for karma that is neither done nor
accumulated? In the first place, is there such karma or not?
What about giving an example of karma that is neither done nor accumulated
that is not related to a dream but while you are awake?
In the earlier example of the karma that is accumulated but not done is
entertaining the thought to kill for a long period of time, because of  you
entertaining the thought of killing for a long period of time,  you are
actually accumulated the karma for killing.
However sometime you may have the thought of wanting to kill someone which
arises briefly. You recognize it and stop that thought. The thought arises
to kill someone is there briefly, you put a stop to it and then it goes
away. You generate regret. So that is an action/ karma. Perhaps this can be
an illustration of the karma that is not done and not accumulated.
You should have a rough understanding of what is karma that is done and
karma that is accumulated and the different permutations between these two.
You have to be able to come out with the example of karma that is
accumulated and not done and karma that is done but not accumulated.  If
you look at the text, it seems that in order for something to be karma that
is done, it has to be carry out either physically or verbally whereas it is
not necessarily so for karma that is accumulated.
Question: While you are abiding in Nyung-Nay (a fasting retreat) and on the
second day, you make a promise not to drink.  Let’s say you drink something
on that day because you forgot you are not supposed to drink.  Do you
accumulate karma or not?
Student: Done but not accumulated.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So, is it ok to do?
If you say that, there are a lot of people who accumulated all sort of
karma because they are ignorance; they don’t know. So just because they
don’t know then it follows that they don’t accumulate any karma? If that is
the case then it better to not know the Buddha’s teachings then to know the
Buddha’s teachings, right?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Then how?
There are many things to think about. People who create all different kinds
of karma without knowing what they are doing, do they actually accumulate
karma or not? Let’s say people forgot that they are not supposed to do
certain things but they do it, do they accumulate karma? It is not there in
the Middle Length Lamrim but it is in the Lam Rim Chen Mo which gave some
examples.  It is seems that they are classified as karma that is done but
not accumulated.

[Alt translation  LRCM  V1  page  239:  The  Compendium  of  Determinations
presents four  permutations  between  karma  done  and  karma  accumulated.
Killing that is karma which you have done but not accumulated  is  seen  in
the following cases: that done unknowingly, that done in a dream, that  not
done intentionally, that which another person forced you to do against your
will, that done only once and  then  regretted,  that  much  lessened  upon
assuming a vow to give up killing after overcoming the desire  to  kill  by
means of a deep understanding of its faults, that  whose  seed  you  weaken
before  its  fruition  can  start  by  means  of  separating  from  worldly
attachment, and  that  whose  seed  you  have  actually  destroyed  with  a
supramundane path of elimination.
Killing that is karma that you have accumulated but have not done  is  seen
in the following case: you investigate and analyze for a long time in order
to kill a living being, but you do not kill it. Killing that is karma  that
you have done and accumulated is seen in all the killing  not  included  in
the previous two permutations. Killing that is karma that you have  neither
done nor accumulated is whatever is not included in the above three.
Also understand in the same way, as appropriate, the  non-virtuous  actions
from stealing through  senseless  speech.  The  three  mental  non-virtuous
actions do not have the second permutation. Within the  first  permutation,
there are no mental actions that are not intentionally done nor  are  there
any that you are forced by another to commit.]
Student 3: I just want to clarify about the fourth permutation -karma that
is not done and not accumulated- the illustration was of a fleeting thought
of doing something but didn’t actually do it. I am actually thinking more
of the example of somebody who never thought of killing anybody and
therefore never kill anybody, so you don’t do that and you don’t accumulate
that karma. Does the fourth permutation have to be even a thought that
appear in that person’s mind?
Khen Rinpoche: The illustration given in the text is the act of killing and
how an act of killing can have four permutations. The act of killing that
is both karma that is accumulated and done, karma that is accumulated but
not done, karma that is done but not accumulated and  karma that is neither
done nor accumulated. Here it has to be karma. By using the act of killing,
there are four permutations. It cannot be something that is not karma.
Student 4: What is the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) assertion of
physical and verbal actions? In the tenet root text it says that CMWS
asserts that physical and verbal action has form, so does it necessarily
only form or both form and mental action?
Khen Rinpoche: Physical and verbal actions are asserted to be non-
revelatory form by the Great Exposition School GES and CMWS.
Student 4: So according to CMWS, the physical and verbal actions are not
mental factor?
Khen Rinpoche: The point here is it is something to think about whether it
is karma or not? According to CMWS, physical and verbal actions are both
instances of revelatory form and non-revelatory form.
Revelatory form here means that judging from the person’s physical or
verbal actions, you can roughly infer his or her motivation. So that is a
bit coarse.
Non-revelatory form means that if you look at the action and you cannot
really tell what the motivation is behind it.
The thing to analyze is whether these two are karma or not. If it is form
then it is necessarily not a mental factor but the question now here is, if
it is action/karma, is it necessarily a mental factor? So that is the thing
to analyze.
Student 4: In other words, one can accumulate karma not through the mental
factor of intended action because the karma that is accumulated is the
intended action. The physical or verbal intended action that is the basis
of intended operation of the previous motivation. If that is the case then
that intended operation which is the basis of the prior motivation at the
attitude phase that is mental factor and at the performance stage there is
an intended operation; which is the result. So it must necessarily be also
a mental factor because the cause was a mental factor.
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say if we assert that karma is necessarily a mental
factor, so there is karma at the causal motivation phase and at the time of
the result. In terms of physical and verbal actions, we are doing a
physical or verbal action. At the time when the action is being performed,
there is a mental factor, right? That is the mental factor at the time of
result. If we assert that karma is necessary a mental factor then that is
the karma. So, karma refers to that mental factor; not how the action
manifests, not the physical or verbal part of it. If we say that karma is
necessarily a mental factor, it is not a problem, right?
Student 4: There is assertion from CMWS stated that there is physical and
verbal karma that is non-revelatory form which is a form but not a mental
factor. So there are two types of karma then.
Khen Rinpoche: It is basically how we talk about it, it is not a problem.
Karma is a mental factor. So for physical and verbal action at the time
when the action is performed, there is a mental factor. So that is karma.
The action  -the physical and verbal activity- are also given the name
karma but if you were to press and analyze is it karma, then it is not.
Student 4: The criteria for the type of action are to have basis of
intended operation. In order for it to be a fully qualified type of action,
it must be a basis of intended operation. If that is the case, then the
category listed in the text in the root as path of action, for example,
namely basis perception prior motivation, are this mere nominal path of
action and not fully qualified path of action?
Basis, attitude, performance and culmination are listed as path of action
but we were also told that for a path of action to be fully qualified it
must be a basis of intended operation of a prior motivation. Can we say
that these are merely nominated?
Khen Rinpoche: They are talking about the difference between path and
action in the context of ten non-virtuous actions, right?
Student 4: Lama Tsongkhapa explained that the path of action is these four:
basis, attitude, performance and culmination in four categories. We don’t
call this path of action? So the basis, attitude and culmination are not
path of action. So only the performance itself which is the basis of
intended operation, that one is the actual path of action. Can we say that?
Venerable Gyurme: We don’t have the Tibetan Lam Rim Chen Mo here.
Student 4:  If the basis of intended operation is a result of a prior
intention that is a motivation and if the motivation is a virtuous one, for
example to benefit others, would that means the physical and verbal
intended operation which is the result would be necessary be the virtuous
karma that is accumulated?  Even though this intended action may be labeled
as killing?
Khen Rinpoche: Even if the motivation is good, let’s say if we say
something harsh, still it is no virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche (Spoke in English): I think it is non-virtuous. Your good
motivation of killing someone is still killing.
Student 4: That means there will be a result that is discordant with the
cause.
Khen Rinpoche (Spoke in English): You kill someone is still negative even
you have good motivation
Student 4: The intended operation, the performance, is a karma that is a
basis of intended operation of the cause, the prior motivation. Because the
cause is virtuous it will result in a non-virtuous intended action.  So
that is a virtuous intention that will result in a non-virtuous intended
action. There can be the result that is discordant to the cause. A virtuous
thing can lead to a non-virtuous thing.
Ven Gyurme:  Is killing a virtuous karma or not?
Student 4: The answer is no.
Ven Gyurme:  Basically you are saying the motivation is virtuous then the
intended operation necessarily is virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche: I think not necessarily so.  If you look at the time of the
cause, let’s say the motivation is compassion; it is a good reason for
doing it. But at the time of committing the action, the thought of killing
is manifest.
At the time when you are committing the actual deed of killing a person,
even your motivation is good but at the time of killing the person, the
mind of killing is manifest. That is considered to be a non-virtuous
motivation.
The act of killing is one karma. At the time of the result, that is when
you are creating that act, there is the mind of killing which is non-
virtuous. You have to say the act is non-virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche (Spoke in English): Killing is only a negative action; not
virtuous action. Beginning part (the motivation) is virtuous but later part
(the act of killing) becomes negative. The later part becomes negative so
the karma becomes negative.
The next section is quite straight forward and you should read it. I don’t
think it is difficult. It talks about the eight special characteristics
that one can have as a human being. After that, there is the topic of
purification - purifying negative karma through applying the four opponent
powers.
Today summary: We looked at the difference between projecting karma and
completing karma. We also looked at the difference between karma done and
karma accumulated and the different permutations between them. What you
have to do is to put in effort based on what we have discussed today to get
a clearer idea of the discussion. You should do it by reading and engaging
in discussion.
There is a discussion in the LRCM (page 240) which is not in the Middle
Length Lam Rim -the discussion about whether a single action project a
single rebirth or whether a single action can project many rebirths.
Basically there is a different assertion between higher Abhidharma and
lower Abhidharma. This is not in the Middle Length Lam Rim but those of you
who have the book - Lam Rim Chen Mo and if you have interest, you should
look at that.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 240: The Treasury of Knowledge  explains  that
a single action  projects  a  single  rebirth  and  does  not  project  many
rebirths. There are many completing actions, but many projecting actions  do
not project a single body. The Treasury of Knowledge:
      One projects one rebirth;
      Those that bring about completion are many.
 The Compendium of Knowledge:
  There is karma where a single action projects one body.  There  is  karma
  where a single action projects many bodies. There  is  karma  where  many
  actions project a single body. There is karma where many actions  project
  many bodies.
The commentary explains Asanga's four types of  karma,  respectively,  as  a
single instant of an action nourishing a seed of only  a  single  lifetime's
fruition; that action nourishing a seed of many lifetimes'  fruitions;  many
instants of an action again and again nourishing a seed for  just  a  single
body; and many mutually dependent actions repeatedly  nourishing  seeds  for
the many bodies of a succession of lifetimes.]
