Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 18.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.376963
================================================================================


What we have covered in the previous session [What to do in between
meditation sessions] are important points. You should not think that what
we have covered in the previous session is of little significant. Those are
important points and we need to keep them in our mind.
In order to be able to engage in a good meditation practice, we must
restrain our sensory faculties. If we do not restrain our sensory faculties
then afflictions such as attachment and anger may arise. If they do arise,
they will interfere with our meditation. If we really wish to do a good
meditation practice, as advised by the teaching, we should abandon the
hustle and bustle of our lives and to stay in isolation. Even if we are in
physical isolation, we still need to remain vigilant. It doesn’t mean that
when we are in physical isolation, we will necessarily develop virtuous
state of mind. It is not necessarily so. Why? Because afflictions such as
anger and attachment do arise from within the mind, therefore it is
important to remain vigilant with whatever we do with our body, speech and
mind.
We need to have an alert mind in order for our meditation practice to go
well. One of the conditions for having an alert mind is to adopt an
appropriate diet; in term of the amount of food that one consumes and so
forth. Since we have to eat daily, it is important for us to remember the
advices from the different teachings on the kind of attitudes we need to
have while we are eating.  We should regard the food we eat as medicine and
we are taking the food in order to sustain our body. Since the food that we
eat come in dependent on other sentient beings and through the kindness of
other sentient beings, therefore when we pray, we should pray for and
dedicate to sentient beings. It is important that when we eat, we should
not be motivated by afflictions such as hostility or attachment. These are
the very important instructions.
Next is the advice with regards to sleep. As we should engage in virtue all
the time, we should not be sleeping at the wrong time. We should strive in
virtue. When it is time for us to sleep, we need to know how we should
sleep and in what kind of posture. The point is that we should transform
our sleep into virtue. We need to sleep in order to rest our body. But if
we think about it, the time that we spend on sleeping take up about half of
our life. This is a huge portion of our lifespan. Therefore we should make
it meaningful. As mentioned in the teaching, we should fall asleep within
the virtuous state of mind. Therefore we should generate a virtuous state
of mind before we fall asleep and then try to fall asleep within that
virtuous state of mind. If we are able to do this, then the entire sleep
become virtuous. If we are able to do this for our whole life, then we will
make a huge ‘profit.’
We need to understand these various points and then put them into practice
as much as possible. We need to familiarize ourselves with these different
attitudes and thoughts so we can move our mind in that direction.

2B4A-2B The reason why [meditation] needs to be sustained by means of two
modes of sustaining
This section deals with the reason why meditation needs to be sustained by
two ways. The two ways are:
   1. Analytical meditation
   2. Stabilizing meditation

2B4A-2B1 [The two modes of sustaining]
A The reason why both analysis and placement are necessary for meditation
Second: In Ornament of the Sutras it says:
  Here, first of all, proper mental attention arises in dependence on study
  and from proper mental attention, again, the exalted wisdom with the
  meaning of pure reality as its object arises.
That is to say that from proper mental attention, through wisdom arisen
from reflecting the meaning of what has been studied, the wisdom arisen
from meditation directly realizing the meaning of pure reality arises. In
the Ornament of Direct Realization, too, it says:
     For the four aspects of ascertainment,
     the paths of seeing and meditation,
     repeated reflection, assessment, and certainty
     are the path of meditation.
That is to say there are [types of] repeated reflection, assessment, and
certain understanding (“certainty”) that constitute the paths of meditation
of Mahayana Aryas.
The quotation from Maitreya’s Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras highlights
the stages of entering into the Buddha’s teachings. Maitreya says that,
first we need to hear the teaching. From hearing the teaching, we develop
the wisdom arising from hearing. Based on that, we need to reflect on what
we have heard. From reflection comes the wisdom arising from reflection.
Then we need to familiarize our mind by meditating on what we have
ascertained. Through meditation comes the wisdom arising from meditation.
These are the stages in which we enter into the Buddha’s teachings.
There is a saying that whatever you are going to put into practice you have
to hear the teaching from someone else.
We hear the teaching so that we can delineate it clearly in our own mind.
But hearing the teaching alone is not sufficient. After we have heard the
teaching, we need to analyze and reflect on what we have heard. We need to
analyze it by using scriptural authorities and reasonings in order to
arrive at a definite ascertainment of that particular object/topic for
ourselves. This definite ascertainment is that which arises from
reflection.
The object of meditation, whatever it may be, arrives through the process
of hearing and reflection. Through hearing and reflection, we remove doubts
or qualms that we may have pertaining to that object of meditation. Once we
have removed all the doubts and qualms pertaining to that object of
meditation, which means that after we have ascertained it, we then meditate
on the ascertainment that we had gained. That is what we called meditation.

As regards to the way in which we familiarize ourselves with what we have
ascertained, there are two:
   1. Analytical meditation: by using the wisdom of discernment to analyze
      with what we have ascertained.
   2. Stabilizing meditation: we do not engage in analysis with respect to
      the object of meditation.
From this you can see that the more you hear the teaching, the greater will
be your wisdom arising from hearing. The more you reflect on what you have
heard, the greater will be your wisdom arising from reflection. Then the
more you meditate with what you have ascertained, the greater will be your
wisdom arising from meditation.
What is the benefit when our wisdom arising from meditation becomes
extensive? The greater our wisdom arising from meditation, the benefits
are:
- when comes to stopping faults in our mind, we have more methods to stop
  these faults.
- when comes to developing good qualities, we have more methods and more
  wisdoms to develop those good qualities.
If you think along this line, are you able to see how important hearing and
reflection is to the practice of meditation? Are you able to see the
relationship within these three: hearing, reflection and meditation?
Is study an obstacle to meditation?
Summary:
From hearing, the wisdom arising from hearing is developed.
From reflection, the wisdom arising from reflection is developed.
Whatever ascertainment you have arrived at through hearing and reflection,
there is an object that you have ascertained. That object is the object of
meditation in which you meditate on. With regards to the ways to meditate
on the object of meditation, there are two ways: analytical meditation and
stabilizing meditation.
In the Compendium of Trainings it also says:
  Thus you should practice meditation, continuously giving away, guarding,
  purifying and increasing your bodies, possessions, and merit in all kinds
  of ways.
With regard to the meditations that should be done according to the
statement, for all four activities - giving away, guarding, purifying and
increasing - with respect to each of the three - body, possessions and
roots of virtue, there are both analytical meditations sustained through
analysis by means of discriminating wisdom and placement meditations, which
are to place [the mind] single-pointedly without analysis.
[Note that discriminating wisdom is translated as wisdom of discernment.
Placement meditations is translated as stabilizing meditation]
In the practice of giving away your body, in the meditation, you regard
your body as a boat and you give your body away to benefit other sentient
beings.
You need to guard/protect your body. That means you should not give away
your bodies for insignificant reasons.
In order to guard against attachment, you purify the body by meditating on
its ugliness.
Increasing or enhancing your body refers to the practice of ethics whereby
you will be able to obtain good rebirths in the future.
With regards to the possessions, there are also four activities - giving
away, guarding/protecting, purifying and increasing/enhancing.
In the practice of giving away your possessions, there is the practice of
protecting your possessions such that they do not go to waste.
Purifying your possessions is abstaining from wrong livelihood.
Increasing your possessions mean dedicating all the root of virtue that you
have acquired from the act of generosity. Increasing your possessions can
mean the practice of giving and it can also mean dedicating the root of
virtue.
With regards to the merits, there are also four activities - giving away,
guarding/protecting, purifying and increasing.
In the practice of giving away your merits means dedicating your root of
virtue to others
Guarding/protecting your merits means protecting your merit against anger.
Purifying the merits means with the bodhichitta motivation, you dedicate
the root of virtue to become the cause for achieving enlightenment.
Increasing the merits means rejoicing in the root of virtue.
These are the four practices of giving away, protecting, purifying and
enhancing in relation to the three- body, possessions and merits. The
purpose of citing this quotation is to establish the fact that when we talk
about meditation, meditation is not restricted to stabilizing meditation.
As meditation involves analysis as well, there is analytical meditation. In
order to substantiate this point, quotations from the great Indian masters
such as Arya Asanga and great bodhisattva Shantideva are used.

B Identification of analysis and placement
Now if you ask what are the paths of analytical meditation and what are the
paths of placement meditation - for meditations such as the cultivation of
confidence in the spiritual teacher, the preciousness of the freedoms and
endowments and how difficult it is to find them, death and impermanence,
karma and its effect, the faults of cyclic existence and the cultivation of
bodhicitta, analytical meditation is necessary. For each of them minds of
great strength and the ability to subdue the mind for a long time are
necessary, because, if they are absent, their counterparts, disrespect and
the like cannot be prevented and because the generation of these minds
depends on nothing but the meditation analyzing them by investigating them
individually time and again. To illustrate, just as intense attachment
arises, if you meditate on an object of attachment a lot, exaggerating its
pleasant features, in the same way intense aversion arises, if you think of
many unpleasant features with regard to an enemy. Hence, in regard to
meditating these paths, it is the same, whether or not the aspect of the
object appears clearly, but the mind’s mode of apprehension has to be
intense and long-lasting, which is why you should do analytical meditation.

In the context of practicing calm abiding, which enables one to place [the
mind] on whatever single object one wishes - since someone whose mind
cannot stay on a single object will not be fit for mental quiescence if he
analyses again and again, it is necessary to practice placement meditation
for that.
If indeed there are two forms of meditation -analytical meditation and
stabilizing meditation- what kind of practice involves in analytical
meditation and what kind of practice involves in stabilizing meditation?
Analytical meditation is done for the following topics: cultivating faith
in the virtuous friends, the human life of freedoms and endowments and the
difficulties of obtaining such a human life, death and impermanence, karma
and its effects, the faults of cyclic existence and the generation of
bodhichitta (altruistic intention). These practices are cultivated through
analytical meditation.
Let’s take the cultivation of faith as an illustration.
In order for faith to arise in our heart, we must engage in analytical
meditation. Without analytical meditation i.e. without thinking about
things, by just bringing up the object faith and staring at it will not
bring any feeling of faith.
Rather faith arises through analysis i.e. when we think about things and
brings about the relevant reasons and logics.
The kind of faith that we need to produce is a very strong one which
actually move our heart. In order for such forceful kind of faith to arise,
we must engage in analytical meditation. Without which, such forceful and
heart moving faith will not arise. What happens when we are able to produce
such forceful faith?  When such powerful faith arises in our heart, its
opposite -disrespect- will be stopped.
To summarize, in order to have forceful and heart moving faith to arise in
our heart, we must think of those reasons that promote the cultivation of
this kind of faith.
In the text, there is an example to illustrate this point. When our mind
turns to a pleasant object –an object of attachment- and by thinking over
and over again on that pleasant object, an intellectual acquired attachment
will arise.
When we think about something or someone that we don’t like -an object of
hostility- and by thinking over and over again on that object, a forceful
sense of hostility/ anger arise.  Therefore by thinking over and over
again, forceful states of awarenesses will be developed.
What kind of practice involves in stabilizing meditation? If you are
practicing to achieve calm abiding/ meditative serenity then you need to
engage in stabilizing meditation.  If you engage in analytical meditation
when you are practicing calm abiding/ meditative serenity, it will hinder
the development of calm abiding.
You have to understand that analytical meditation, in general, does helps
in the development of calm abiding. This will come soon. But at the time
during your own spiritual development when you are trying to achieve calm
abiding, you do not engage in analytical meditation to achieve calm
abiding. Rather, you should engage in stabilizing meditation when you are
doing the practice of calm abiding. This does not mean that analytical
meditation does not help in the development calm abiding i.e. analytical
meditation does not harm your achievement of calm abiding.
In fact you are supposed to read the text beforehand so that when I talk
about the important points in class, you can check whether your conclusion
does match what I have said. Sometimes I do read the text but if we read
the text in class, it will take forever. My current approach will only be
useful if you do your part -you have to read the text and think about it.
So when I give you the summary in the class, you see whether it does match
your understanding. If you don’t prepare beforehand and when you hear
something like this, which is a summary, and if you want me to summarize on
my summary then it is going to be a bit tricky.
Summary: There are two forms of meditation:
   1. Analytical meditation
   2. Stabilizing meditation
What kind of practice involves in analytical meditation and what kind of
practice involves in stabilizing meditation?
We have listed the kind of practices that require analytical meditation.
When it comes to stabilizing meditation, it is done primarily to achieve
calm abiding. You need to memorize these points as it will form the basis
of thinking so that there is something for you to think about and to
analyze.
Why do I need to perform analytical meditation for this topic? Why is it a
problem to do analytical meditation if I want to engage in calm abiding?

2B4A-2B2 Refutation of the misconception asserting that although there are
both analytical and placement meditations, one single person does not
practice them
Although some who do not know this approach claim that, if you are a
scholar, you should only do analytical meditation while sadhus should only
do placement meditation this is not so, for it is necessary to do the two
one by one - because the learned, too, need to achieve calm abiding and
sadhus, too, need to achieve strong confidence in the spiritual teacher
and the like. Therefore the understanding that repeated analysis by means
of discriminating wisdom belongs to the context of listening and reflecting
and not to the context of practice is inadmissible.
There is a misconception that an individual does not need to practice both
kinds of meditation- analytical meditation and stabilizing meditation i.e.
certain people just need to practice one kind whereas others need to
practice the other kind. There is this misconception that the scholars only
do analytical meditation whereas those meditators who have abandoned
external distraction and live in isolation only need stabilizing
meditation.
Lama Tsongkhapa says that this is a misconception and it is wrong to say
that. Lama Tsongkhapa says that both the scholars and meditators need to
engage in both analytical and stabilizing meditation. Why?  When the
scholars need to achieve calm abiding/ meditative serenity, the scholars
need to engage in stabilizing meditation. For those meditators who live in
isolation, in order for them to develop a very strong faith in their
teacher, they have to engage in analytical meditation.

2B4A-2B3 Refutation of the misconception asserting that all conceptions
apprehend signs
The understanding that all conceptions apprehend signs and therefore create
obstacles to enlightenment has the fault of not discriminating between
improper mental attention, the conception of true existence, and proper
mental attention, the conception of reality.
Here is another misconception. There are some people who claim that all
conceptual thoughts are harmful because they prevent you from achieving
enlightenment or omniscient. This is a misconception, therefore this need
to be abandoned. Why is it a misconception?  There are many different kinds
of conceptual thoughts.
There are conceptual thoughts that are incorrect mental attention such as
apprehending the self and phenomena as truly existent/ inherently existent.

There are conceptual thought that are correct mental attention such that
the way they apprehend reality is exactly in accordance with how it exist
and such conceptual thoughts are valid cognitions.
Because of not knowing how to differentiate between correct and incorrect
mental attention, then such a misconception arises thinking that all
conceptual thought are harmful.  The way to overcome this misconception is
to understand that there are different kinds of conceptual thoughts –some
are positive and some are negative.
We need to stop those negative one because they are incorrect mental
attention. Such conceptual thoughts are what we called wrong
consciousnesses. The positive conceptual thoughts are the conceptual
thoughts that apprehend the object in accord with how they actually exist
in reality.
We will be looking at the presentation of mind in more details in one of
the future BP modules.

2B4A-2B4 Refutation of the misconception asserting that if you do a lot of
analytical meditation prior to the arising of concentration, it becomes an
obstacle
The idea “it is necessary to achieve the non-conceptual meditative
stabilization capable of placing the mind on a single object in whatever
way it pleases and, if you do a lot of analytical meditation before, it
will become an obstacle to the arising of [that] meditative stabilization”,
is not upheld in the present instructions. To illustrate, similarly, when a
smith burns gold or silver in the fire and washes it in water again and
again, all the impurities are removed and it becomes very supple and
workable, whereby it can subsequently be made into any jewellery like
earrings at will. Likewise, just as at first the mental afflictions, the
secondary afflictions, and faulty conduct emerge on the occasion of
meditating on black actions and their results and the disadvantages of
cyclic existence, by meditating on such disadvantages again and again with
the wisdom of individual investigation, the mind will become completely
tormented or disenchanted; therefore it is like burning gold in a fire.
Similarly, just as the mind turning away from the black side and the
defilements being purified emerges on the occasion of [meditating on] the
positive qualities of the spiritual friend, the great meaning of the
freedoms and endowments, the positive qualities of the Three Jewels, white
actions and their results, and  the benefits of the mind of enlightenment,
by meditating on these positive qualities again and again with the wisdom
of individual investigation, the mental attention of the mind becomes
moistened or sincere, whereby it is like washing gold with water. Through
the mind approaching the white side and delighting in it, the mind is
moistened by virtuous dharmas. When it has been transformed in that way,
whatever you wish to achieve, calm abiding or special insight, if you fix
upon it, you will achieve it without difficulty. That is why such an
analytical meditation is the best means of achieving non-conceptual
meditative stabilisation. That is how Arya Asanga also put it:
   By way of analogy, when a smith or his skilful apprentice burns gold or
   silver in a fire and washes it with water a couple of times in order to
   discard all impurities and slag, it becomes supple and workable for this
   and that ornament, whereby this is directly perceived. In this regard,
   through the know-how that accords with this of the smith or his skilful
   apprentice, any manner of ornament desired is then made, with their
   smith’s tools . Likewise, when a yogi does not turn toward impurities
   and slag such as covetousness, he thereby gets disenchanted and turns
   away from unhappy afflicted states of mind, and approaches manifest joy
   in the virtuous side, thereby becoming manifestly joyful. In that case,
   that yogi definitely trains his mind in either the side of calm abiding
   or the side of special insight, such that it is thoroughly applied to
   this and that, rests in its natural state, is immovable and unwavering,
   and  also moves for the sake of perfectly achieving whatever purpose he
   has contemplated.
Furthermore, the main adverse conditions for the mind staying with an
object of meditation continuously are twofold: laxity and excitement. If
you have a strong and constant awareness that sees the positive qualities
of the Three Jewels etc., it is quite easy to overcome laxity, for many
valid sources say that its antidote is to uplift the mind by looking at
positive qualities. If you have a strong and constant awareness that sees
the disadvantages of impermanence, suffering, and so forth, it is quite
easy to overcome excitement, because, since excitement is a distracted mind
belonging to [the category of] attachment, many texts praise
disillusionment as its antidote.
Here is another misconception which says that if we do a lot of analytical
meditation, it will obstruct our attainment of calm abiding. In order to
achieve calm abiding/meditative serenity, the mind must be made
serviceable. The way to make the mind serviceable is to engage in
analytical meditation. Therefore analytical meditation is that which makes
the mind serviceable.
What should we reflect on? It is mentioned here that we should
reflect/analyze over and over again on the faults of our afflictions/
negative emotions and the faults of samsara/cyclic existence. We need to
reflect on these points over and over again until we are disenchanted with
cyclic existence and afflictions. When your mind is disenchanted with
cyclic existence, it really helps to control the negative emotions, it
lessen the mental excitement and all the different kinds of distractions.
Again when we apply logic and reasoning to our reflection on the topic of
guru devotion, cultivating faith in the virtuous friends, thinking about
how wonderful to have achieved this human life of freedoms and endowments,
thinking about all the positive effect of virtuous actions, thinking about
the benefit of bodhichitta and so forth, you will be able to produce faith
and happy mind. When your mind is happy and uplifted, it helps to acts
against laxity.
Now we can see that with analytical meditation, it makes the mind
serviceable because with analytical meditation on these various topics, we
are able to stop large extent of excitement and laxity (mental sinking).
When the mind is made serviceable in such a way that it is not so
influenced by excitement and laxity, that person is in a very good position
to achieve calm abiding/ meditative serenity.
From what we have been discussed so far, I hope now you can see that
analytical meditation is very helpful to the development of calm abiding.
Analytical meditation done prior to achieving calm abiding is very helpful.
Therefore when people say that analytical meditation is not necessary and
is harmful to your practice of calm abiding, you can see that that
statement is wrong. It has no basis or whatsoever. As in the text: “When it
has been transformed in that way, whatever you wish to achieve, calm
abiding or special insight, if you fix upon it, you will achieve it without
difficulty. That is why such an analytical meditation is the best means of
achieving non -conceptual meditative stabilization”. The details are in the
text. You should read it over and over again.
You have to understand that this is not a creation of Lama Tsongkhapa. What
he has said so far has its source in the teachings of the great Indian
masters. You can see the quotations from the teachings of the great Indian
masters in the text. Lama Tsongkhapa is merely explaining the intent and
elaborating on it.
Also in the text: “Furthermore, the main adverse conditions for the mind
staying with an object of meditation continuously are twofold: laxity and
excitement   If you have a strong and constant awareness that sees the
positive qualities of the Three Jewels etc., it is quite easy to overcome
laxity, for many valid sources say that its antidote is to uplift the mind
by looking at positive qualities. If you have a strong and constant
awareness that sees the disadvantages of impermanence, suffering, and so
forth, it is quite easy to overcome excitement, because, since excitement
is a distracted mind belonging to [the category of] attachment, many texts
praise disillusionment as its antidote”.
Earlier in the text, there was a major division of the outline: “the ways
to rely on the virtuous friend”. Next is “the stages of how to train your
mind after you have relied on the virtuous friend”.  You can say that this
is the actual body of the text.
Student 1: What is the difference between reflection and analytical
meditation?
Khen Rinpoche: First you have to ascertain the order: in the beginning that
is hearing, only then reflection and then meditation.  In the three-fold
activity of hearing, reflection and meditation, reflection precedes
meditation. What reflection does is to achieve a stable ascertainment and
understanding with regards to the chosen object. Analytical meditation
comes after reflection.
Student 1: I can’t distinguish between reflection and analytical
meditation. Meditation is also a form of thinking so what are the
differences in such two different thinking?
Khen Rinpoche: Analysis is reflection. During the time of reflection, you
engage in analysis. What is the difference between reflection and
analytical meditation? In fact, when you are reflecting, you are almost
always analyzing. When you are talking about meditation, meditation comes
after reflection. You can meditate while doing analysis i.e. meditation
through analysis. That is what you called analytical meditation. If you are
talking about analytical meditation, it can only come after reflection.
Analysis does happen during reflection. While there is analysis during
reflection, there is no meditation. What is the meaning of meditation? You
repeatedly familiarize yourself with what you have already ascertained but
you have not ascertained the object during reflection.
That is why I often say it is very important to have questions. Not only
just question, you can also ask question on the answer to that question. It
is very useful and it does help everyone. I really think this is the best
way to approach your study when you have questions. In the first place, in
order to have a question, you must have been thinking about the subject.
Only after thinking about things and you have questions then you can post
your questions. If you are not satisfied with the answer to your question,
obviously you will have more questions until you get a satisfactory answer
or you have ascertained it. The understanding that arrives at the end of
this process will stay in the mind for a long time and you will not forget
it and it is very stable.
The next section is the topic of human life of freedoms and endowments. It
is not a difficult topic and it is very straightforward. That entails
identifying the human life of freedoms and endowments, how precious it is,
what you can achieve with it and the difficulty of achieving such a
rebirth. Although it is a fairly straightforward section but this doesn’t
mean that you don’t have to read it. Ideally, you should read it two to
three times, if not, at least once. You read it and you also have to think
about what you have read. This is the homework.



