Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 20.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.428698
================================================================================


2B4B-2 How to take the essence: the three beings’ mode of applying the path
A Generating certainty with regard to the general presentation of the path
B The actual way of taking its essence
The second one has two points: Generating certainty with regard to the
general presentation of the path and the actual way of taking its essence.
Now we are at the section on “How to take full advantage of a life of
freedom and opportunity” and it has two parts:
   A. How to develop certain knowledge of a general presentation of  the
      path
   B. The actual way to take full advantage of a life of freedom and
      opportunity
For “How to develop certain knowledge of a general presentation of the
path”, we will base our discussion on the given chart (see below).
The Buddha gave a variety of teachings. While he was on the path, he worked
hard to accumulate the collection of merits and wisdom for a very long
period of time –the three great countless eons. Why he did that? Who he did
it for? He accumulated the collection of merits for us sentient beings in
order to achieve full enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings. How
does the Buddha benefit us sentient beings? Remember the statement that;
“The Buddha liberates by teaching suchness”?  Primarily, he benefits
sentient beings by giving teachings and all the Buddha’s teachings are
included in the path of the three types of person.
The Buddha works for the benefit and welfare of sentient beings. The goals
of sentient beings can be categorized into:
   1) The provisional goal
   2) The final goal
Provisional goal is to enable sentient beings to attain high status; which
means good rebirth.
Final goal is to enable sentient beings to attain definite goodness; which
includes both liberation and full enlightenment.
Therefore when provisional and final goals are elaborated, there are three
goals.  All Buddha’s teachings are meant for us sentient beings to achieve
either the goal of high status, liberation or full enlightenment. These are
the three goals that one can achieve. As such, in term of the person
achieving these goals, it can be categorized into the three types of
person:
   1. The person of small capacity
   2. The person of medium capacity and
   3. The person of great capacity
The first type of person is known as the person of small capacity. In
general, the person of small capacity refers to:
1. Those seeking only the happiness of this life
2. Those seeking the happiness in future lives.
In this context, the person of small capacity is not referring to the first
one -those seeking only the happiness of this life. Here the person of
small capacity refers to as the person of genuine small capacity, which is
the second one -those seeking the happiness in future lives.
In order to be the person of small capacity, you need to have the
preoccupation or interest of seeking the happiness in future lives. But
that alone is not enough. In order to be the person of small capacity, that
person must also have entered an unmistaken path and method that would help
him to achieve the happiness in future lives.
A person of genuine small capacity is the one who is strongly motivated to
achieve the goal of high status -good rebirth- and also actively creating
the causes to achieve that goal of high status. Although the path of the
person of genuine small capacity involves many practices, the primary
practices are:
   1. Going for refuge to the Three Jewels
   2. Practicing the morality/ethics of intentionally avoiding the ten non-
      virtuous actions
The practices of going for refuge to the Three Jewels and practicing the
morality of intentionally avoiding the ten non-virtuous actions are the
primary practices of a person of genuine small capacity and these practices
are also need to be done by the person of great capacity. This path is the
path that is shared with the person of small capacity. Then what is the
unshared path? The path of a person of great capacity is the path that is
unshared.
Question to student: Is there an unshared path of a person of small
capacity? (Shared and unshared paths are also translated as common and
uncommon paths respectively)
(Some students gave some answers)
Student 1: Yes, aspiration to achieve good future rebirth alone
Khen Rinpoche: Good. If you say by practicing the ethics of avoiding the
ten non-virtues with the specific intention of only achieving a good
rebirth, is this the unshared path of the person of small capacity?  Yes,
it is. Why? This is because the person of medium capacity or the person of
great capacity does not practice such a path -to achieve a good rebirth
alone. In the earlier section of the greatnesses of Lamrim teachings, it is
mentioned that the person of great capacity who is practicing the Mahayana
Path must also practice the Hinayana path but needs not necessary practice
everything that is included in the Hinayana Path. What is the illustration
that is given in the text?
Student 1: Aspiration for liberation alone
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. From this you can see that we should not feel satisfied
thinking that we know the subject after having just studied whatever
subject matter once. If we do think like this then it is a mistake. We
should not be satisfied just looking at it once but we should look at it
over and over again because there will be always things that we have not
yet fully understood. In order to highlight this point, that is why I am
asking question in class. These questions are aimed at those who have done
the study in the past and are not directed to those who have not done the
Basic Program.
A person of genuine small capacity has very strong interest to achieve a
high status -good rebirth. He is engaging in an unmistaken method to
achieve this goal. The unmistaken method is primary going for refuge to the
Three Jewels and living in an ethical way of life intentionally avoiding
the ten non-virtuous actions. What is the result of his practices? It is
high status -good rebirth.
There is an unshared/uncommon path of a person of small capacity. There is
also a path that is shared with a person of small capacity.
Ven Gyurme:  When we say shared, we have to say path shared with a person
of small capacity. But when we use the word unshared, we cannot just say
path unshared with the person of small capacity. There is an
unshared/uncommon path of a person of small capacity and there is a path
that is shared with a person of small capacity. The English is very
important.
Next, we look at what a person of medium capacity is. A person of medium
capacity is seeking to achieve only liberation from cyclic existence. He is
someone who is disenchanted with cyclic existence/ samsara and has the
feeling of definitely wanting to get out of samsara. With this motivation,
this person engages in the method that will lead him to achieve liberation
from cyclic existence.
What does he need to do in order to achieve this goal? First, he needs to
generate renunciation. [Renunciation is the determination to be freed from
samsara]  On that basis, he needs to practice the three higher trainings.
This is the training of a person of genuine middle capacity.
Generating the thought of renunciation and practicing the three higher
trainings also constitute the path that is shared with a person of medium
capacity. This is a path that is shared. This is something that the person
of great capacity would also need to practice. Therefore it is common/
shared.
If there is a path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, then
there must be also an unshared path of the person of medium capacity, isn’t
it? The unshared path would be generating the thought of renunciation and
practicing the three higher trainings with the intention of achieving only
liberation from cyclic existence. By putting this into practice the person
of medium capacity would then achieve the liberation from cyclic existence.

The Hinayana Path can be divided into two:
   1. The path of the Hearers
   2. The path of the Solitary Realizers
With regards to the liberation that is achieved, you can posit two Hinayana
liberations:
   1. Liberation that is achieved by the Hearers
   2. Liberation that is achieved by the Solitary Realizers
The details of the Hinayana path, Hearers path, Solitary Realizers path and
their differences will be covered in the future modules such as Buddhist
Tenets.
Next, we look at what a person of great capacity is. A person of a great
capacity is someone who is motivated by great compassion and concern for
sentient beings because of unable to bear the sufferings of sentient beings
and wishes to free all sentient beings from their sufferings. In order to
achieve that, the person aims to achieve the state of full enlightenment.
In order to achieve this goal of full enlightenment, the person of great
capacity would engage in the practice of the six perfections and/or the
yoga of the two levels/ stages.
The goal of the person of great capacity is to achieve the state of full
enlightenment (Buddhahood) so that he/she can liberate all sentient beings
from sufferings. In order to achieve this goal, this person cultivates the
Mahayana path. The Mahayana path is the method to achieve the state of full
enlightenment.
The Mahayana path can be divided into two:
   1. Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana)
   2. Mantra Vehicle (Vajrayana)
In order to achieve full enlightenment, you need to enter the Mahayana
Path. From the chart, you can see that there are three different Mahayana
Paths.
   1. Path of the Perfection Vehicle
   2. Path of the Three Lowers Tantras
   3. Path of the Highest Yoga Tantra
These are the three different Mahayana approaches.
Let us look at the person who is traversing on the path of the Perfection
Vehicle. What does he practice?
   1. First, he develops bodhichitta (altruistic intention)
   2. Then he generates the wish to achieve enlightenment that comes with
      commitments.
   3. Then he takes on the engaged bodhisattva vows
   4. Then he trains in the six perfections
These are the stages of a person who is traversing on the path of the
Perfection Vehicle. In essence by depending on the union of method and
wisdom this person will achieves full enlightenment.
The Perfection Vehicle being a method/ path to achieve full enlightenment
but it is a path that requires accumulation of the collection of merits and
wisdom over a very long period of time, in general, over a period of three
great countless eons.
The Mahayana path of the Three Lower Tantras is a path to achieve
enlightenment. The main practice of the Mahayana path of the Three Lower
Tantras is to cultivate the two yogas:
   1) Yoga with sign
   2) Yoga without sign
In order to be able to do these practices that person must receive great
initiation of the relevant class of tantra. Before receiving the
initiation/empowerment, the person must take the bodhisattva vows.
In the Three Lower Tantras, there is no talk of achieving enlightenment in
one lifetime in one body.  Nevertheless, it is a path that is much quicker
than the Perfection Vehicle. While traversing the path of the Three Lower
Tantras, one needs not take the period of three great countless eons in
order to finish the accumulation of collection of merits and wisdom because
there are special methods which speed up the accumulation of both
collection of merits and wisdom. In general, it is a much quicker path than
the Perfection Vehicle.
Then you have the path of Highest Yoga Tantra; which is also a way to
achieve enlightenment. In order to enter and practice this path, one has to
receive the relevant initiation/ empowerment. When taking an initiation of
the Highest Yoga Tantra, one has to take and abide by the bodhisattva vows
and the tantric vows. On that basis, one engages in the practices of the
two stages:
   1. Generation stage
   2. Completion stage
Through these practices then one achieve full enlightenment. The path of
the Highest Yoga Tantra is a method to achieve enlightenment much quicker
than the path of the Three Lower Tantras. It is said that one can achieve
the state of full enlightenment in one lifetime and in one body by
depending on the path of the Highest Yoga Tantra. In the path of the
Highest Yoga Tantra, there are special methods on how to quickly accumulate
the collection of merits and wisdom.
I give you this short explanation because we are now at the outline: “How
to develop certain knowledge of a general presentation of the path”. To
have an overview, I said what I have to say today. This is just to give you
a rough understanding of the whole scheme of things. In order to be able to
go into the details of what I have just explained, you need to finish the
entire Basic Program.
Student 2: (Question summarized by Ven Gyurme): Can someone who has entered
the path of the Three Lower Tantras switch to the other path?
Khen Rinpoche:  If you don’t have an overall understanding of all the
treatises and you hear this explanation, you may run into some
difficulties. In response to your question, we can say that after you have
entered the path of the Three Lower Tantras, you can switch over to the
path of the Highest Yoga Tantra and then achieve enlightenment. It is
definitely possible.
The path of the Perfection Vehicle is a Mahayana Path can leads one to
enlightenment. So by depending on this vehicle you can achieve
enlightenment. But from the perspective of the Highest Yoga Tantra, by
depending on the path of the Perfection Vehicle alone, one cannot achieve
enlightenment. One must practice tantra and within the four classes of
tantra, one must definitely practice the Highest Yoga Tantra.
If you don’t have the overview of the entire framework of all different
scriptures then that might be difficult to understand. You may think; “How
can it be?”. This is something which we will come into the conclusion
slowly. We need to continue to look at the different modules of the Basic
Program and through looking and studying them, discussing, analyzing and
doing investigation, only then we will be able to have some kind of
conclusion or ascertainment.
Student 3: How does renunciation of present life fit into the person of
small capacity who intends to achieve high status i.e. high rebirth in the
next life.
Khen Rinpoche:  The primary goal of the person  of  small  capacity  is  the
happiness of future lives as he considers that is more  important  than  the
happiness of this life. By comparing the happiness  of  this  life  and  the
happiness of future life, he  places  more  emphasis  on  the  happiness  of
future life lives because he is seeking for another good rebirth.   As  such
the person of small capacity does not renounce the happiness  of  this  life
completely. He does consider the happiness of this life as important but  he
does not place as much emphasis on this as he is focusing on  achieving  the
happiness of future lives.
Student 3: The practices of Tibetan master talking about renouncing the
eight worldly concerns, how does it fit into the picture for someone who is
intend on cultivating the high status; even for those who are shared.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, the practice of reversing the attraction to this life
is the practice of a person of small capacity because he is primarily
interested in the happiness of the future lives. He places more important
on the happiness of future lives than the happiness of this life. But what
interferes with putting more emphasizes on the happiness of next lives?
They are the eight worldly concerns. So therefore in order to be able to
place more emphasize on the happiness of future lives you have to do
something with eight worldly concerns and that fall under the practices of
reversing the attraction to this life. There are different methods for
doing that.
Student 3: Can I say that it is subsumed under going for refuge to the
Three Jewels? By having this mind set, automatically you are reversing the
attraction of current life?
Ven Gyurme: He is saying that if you have refuge in your mind, have you
automatically reverse the attraction to this life’s happiness alone?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, we have to reverse the attraction i.e. to get rid of
preoccupation with the happiness of this life alone. There are means or
methods to overcome that and we need to strive in those methods. You
yourself are afraid of the sufferings of the three lower realms. You have
the faith that the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha that can protect you from the
sufferings of the lower realms sufferings. This is what constitutes the
refuge of the person of small capacity.
In order to have refuge, you need to be fear of sufferings. As you don’t
want to suffer in the lower realms, the fear of the lower realm means you
want a good rebirth. The goal of a person of small capacity is high status
i.e. good rebirth, isn’t it? So in order to be able to achieve that good
rebirth, that person must first weaken the current preoccupation with the
happiness of this life alone. If he does not weaken the current
preoccupation with the happiness of this life alone, then there is no way
for him to achieve that good rebirth. So it is in this context therefore
there is a need to reduce the preoccupation with the happiness of this life
alone. It is for this reason there is the meditation on death and
impermanence. So when we start with the actual practice of the Lamrim, one
of the very first meditations is the reflection on the death and
impermanence. That is the method to reduce the current preoccupation with
the affairs and happiness of this life alone.
One of the main reasons why there is such a strong preoccupation with the
happiness of this life alone is basically the innate feeling that
everything will remain constant and everything will not change. In Buddhist
technical language, it is called the apprehension of permanence. In order
to overcome this, therefore there is the meditation on death and
impermanence.
Student 4:  (Question summarized by Ven Gyurme)   Are there any difference
between:
      -the higher training in ethics and the perfection in ethics,
      -the higher training in concentration and perfection of concentration
and
      -the higher training in wisdom and perfection in wisdom?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, there is. Just by having the wisdom realizing
emptiness, it doesn’t make it a perfection of wisdom. In order for it to be
a perfection of wisdom, it must be conjoined with the bodhichitta
(altruistic intention); whereas the higher training in wisdom need not
necessarily be conjoined with bodhichitta.
Student 5: In one of the ten endowments, “being born in the central region”
means that you are born in an area where in the four types of followers who
are active. Who are the four types of followers?
Khen Rinpoche: How do you measure or by what criteria do you say that the
Buddha’s teachings exist in the world?
There are three scriptural collections: vinaya, sutra and Abidharma. The
Buddha’s teachings exist in this world if the higher training in ethics
exists -whether the teachings do exist in the world or not depend on
whether the higher training in ethics do exist or not. In order for the
higher training in ethics to exist there must be practitioners of it. The
main practitioners are the ordained persons. I would think that the four
types of person refer to the fully ordained monk, the fully ordained nun,
the novice monk and the novice nun.
Student 6: (Question summarized by Ven Gyurme) When do they acquire the
name of a person of medium capacity and when do they acquire the name of a
person of great capacity? Is it when they enter the respective path or even
right from the beginning when they start their practices?
Khen Rinpoche: When a person develops the uncontrived aspiration for
liberation.
Student 6: At that point, will the wisdom arisen from reflection where
there is ascertainment for that?
Khen Rinpoche: In order to be a person of medium capacity, you need to have
developed an uncontrived aspiration for liberation. This uncontrived
aspiration for liberation must be preceded by hearing, reflection and
meditation.
Student 6:  In that case, you can’t call them person of medium and great
capacity from the outset?
Khen Rinpoche: I think in order to be a person of middling capacity you
would have developed an uncontrived aspiration for liberation. If you are a
person of great capacity you would have developed an uncontrived
bodhichitta. That means you would have the realizations of those.
Otherwise, if we call ourselves one of these three capacities, I am not
exactly sure whether that will work or not. We are here to study, to
reflect and to meditate with some intention of wanting to achieve the full
enlightenment, I guess we can call ourselves belonging to the type of
person of great capacity but I don’t think we can call ourselves a person
of great capacity. I don’t know. You can think. I am not sure.


[pic]


