Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 6.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.176092
================================================================================


Lama Tsongkhapa says in his “In Praise of Dependent Origination”
35
Alas! My mind was defeated by ignorance;
Though I’ve sought refuge for a long time,
In such an embodiment of excellence,
I possess not a fraction of his qualities.
36
Nonetheless, before the stream of this life
Flowing towards death has come to cease
That I have found slight faith in you –
Even this I think is fortunate.
This is the expression of Lama Tsongkhapa own life experience. He is saying
that since he was very young, he has been reciting the refuge prayer: “I go
refuge to the Buddha, I go refuge to the Dharma, I go refuge to the Sangha”
for whole of his life but he has not been able to realize the specific
qualities of the Buddha in having taught the meaning of dependent
origination. Lama Tsongkhapa was someone who has studied extensively the
work of the great Indian masters of the past. In particular, he paid a lot
of attention to those texts composed by the great Indian masters dealing
with the subject matter of dependent origination. Through extensive
studying and reflection on these texts, Lama Tsongkhapa realized that in
this world of ours, it is only the Buddha who has taught correctly on the
meaning of dependent origination.  Having extensively heard, reflected and
meditated on the meaning of dependent origination, Lama Tsongkhapa himself
had realized what dependent origination is.  He was especially captivated
by the Buddha’s explanation on dependent origination. He developed very
strong and deep faith and devotion in the Buddha; the one whom he has been
going for refuge to. So Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that he is able to find
such faith and devotion in the Buddha before his life come to an end. He
felt he was very fortunate.
Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that although he has been reciting the refuge
prayer since he was young, it was only upon seeing the special qualities of
the Buddha’s enlightened speech in particular his enlightened activities of
having taught the teaching on dependent origination, he developed more
faith than what he had developed before. It is not that Lama Tsongkhapa did
not have any faith in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha prior to his
realization of dependent origination. He is saying that after he has
realized dependent origination, his faith in theBuddha has grown
tremendously. This is what has happened to Lama Tsongkhapa himself. He has
developed such faith towards the Buddha on the basis of having studied
extensively and reflected on the teachings of the Buddha. It has to be the
same for the rest of us. Therefore it becomes very important for us to
study, to learn and to critically think about what the Buddha has taught.
So it is very important to engage in the extensive learning of these
classic texts/ great treatises. The more we study these great treatises and
the more we analyze them and, when we see for ourselves how really true of
what the texts are saying, definitely we will also be able to generate that
same kind of faith towards the Buddha that Lama Tsongkhapa himself had
generated. As I have always said in the past, the more we learn the
Buddha’s teachings our faith in the Buddha will increase. That is the
purpose. The whole point of studying extensively the Buddha’s teachings,
our faith towards the Buddha can increase. The more we understand the
Buddha teachings, we can see how wonderful and how true they are, then, of
course, naturally our faith in the person who has taught the teachings will
increase. So this is an extremely important point. If we are able to
develop the faith that arises through understanding then we would have
fulfilled the purpose of having been born as a human being in this life.
It is stated in the teaching that faith precedes all the virtuous dharma.
So faith is like the door. So without the faith, it is difficult for there
to be any virtuous dharma. Without faith, this virtuous dharma does not
arise. Faith is likened to a mother; without a mother there can’t be a
child. Likewise, without faith, there is no virtuous dharma. Once we
develop the faith that arises from understanding, then all the other
qualities will naturally come about. I always see that studying extensively
the Buddha teachings is a condition for developing this faith. Therefore
this is what we are doing here. So it is important we all ensure that this
happen. We are doing this in certain way to increase and strengthen our
faith.

Stages of the Path
In the last two lessons, we have been trying to eliminate all the different
kinds of wrong views with regards to the teachings. For example, we did
discuss on how the Mahayana teaching and the Hinayana teaching are not
contradictory. Having said that, you yourself must understand the reasons
that show the Mahayana teaching and the Hinayana teaching are not
contradictory. As a support to the reasons being employed, then we have to
bring the scriptural authorities. We should be able to know what are the
sutras that support the facts that the Mahayana teaching and the Hinayana
teaching are not contradictory. For example, what did Maitreya says about
this and what did Buddha himself says about this. At the end of the day, we
have to be able to trace these assertions that the Mahayana teaching and
the Hinayana teaching are not contradictory back to the Buddha himself. We
should be able to account for this on the basis of the reasons and also be
able to show that the Buddha himself has actually mentioned this clearly in
his own words. We need to employ logic and reasoning. It is not sufficient
to say that the Buddha has said this and that. If you compare the use of
logic and reasoning and scriptural authorities, logic and reasoning is more
important, but you must be able to show that, at the end of the day, your
reason does not differ from what the Buddha has mentioned. We should be
able to link to an authentic source.
Geshela spoke in English: Just now someone showed me how she did the
exercise on how the Mahayana teaching and the Hinayana teaching are not
contradictory. She wrote down the reasons. In order to support that, she
wrote down the quotation of the sutra of what Shakyamuni Buddha has said.
She also wrote down what Maitreya has said. I found the exercise she did is
very good. She read the text and then took the reasons from the text. When
we read the text, the text does not make it clear on the reason and you
have to find out the logic and reasoning of why the Mahayana teaching and
the Hinayana teaching are not contradictory. I think this is a very good
way to do your own exercise. It is helpful if you do like that.
There is another huge misconception with regards to the Paramitayana and
the Vajrayana. Many people think that these two are contradictory and has
nothing to do with one another i.e. Mahayana Sutra and Mahayana Tantra are
contradictory. We need to eliminate this huge misconception. In order to
eliminate this, we have to prove that this is not so. What are the reasons
that are stated in the text that Mahayana Sutra and Mahayana Tantra are not
contradictory? What are the scriptures sources? If you can extract this
from the text and write it down, then it would be useful. But the main way
to eliminate all these misconceptions is to use logic and reasoning. If you
can quote the scriptures sources, then it is good. If you cannot quote
exactly those verses, it is alright because the main thing is to understand
the logic and reasoning.
In the last lesson, we also talked about another huge misconception. It is
very common for people to think that there is no need to study extensively
in particularly to those great treatises because they are not meant for
practice, but only for talk.  I think this misconception exist in most
people. They have the idea and believing that studying these great
treatises is not necessary for practice because these texts are not meant
for practice; these texts do not show the point for practice. This is a
huge misconception. You have to understand what this huge misconception can
do to you. If we regards these great treaties, which actually contain
instructions to be put into practice, as something that are not meant for
practice, then we will not have any regard/ respect for those teachings;
especially if we think that these texts are meant for talk only and has
nothing to do with our practice, then we will not see the instructions in
these texts as something that we should adopt. In fact, we will think that
is something to be discarded. Then we end up criticizing and looking down
on those texts. When we start to think these great treatises in such a way,
then there is a danger of creating an extremely heavy negative karma of
abandoning the dharma. These are the consequences.
These great treatises show the unmistaken instructions that we have to put
them into practice. Although that is the reality, but we are not able to
realize that those texts actually contain the instructions for practice.
This is our problem for not realizing that. In order to realize that these
texts actually contain the unmistaken instructions for practice, we have to
devote our body, speech and mind to understand those texts. This is what
Lama Tsongkhapa says in this text.
There is one very big mistake that people made. There are people who
despite having studied the dharma for very long time, 10 years or 20 years,
but when it comes to practice, they start to look elsewhere for something
to practice i.e. suddenly they do not know how to practice despite having
studied for 10 or 20 years. This is one of the biggest mistakes that anyone
can make.  When we learn the Buddhadharma, there are things that we learn/
study/hear about the Buddhadharma. When we learn/ study/hear about the
Buddhadharma, we are supposed to reflect of what we have learned/
studied/heard about the Buddhadharma. It is not as if you are reflecting on
something other than what you have learned/ studied/heard. It is not like
that. There is a relationship between hearing and reflection. We learn/
study/hear the teaching so we can get something out of it. We should
reflect or critically analyze on what we have heard/ learned so as to
induce genuine ascertainment i.e. to induce real understanding of what you
have heard/learned. At the end of the reflection process, we gain a
thorough ascertainment of what we have heard/learned/ studied. That very
same knowledge that we have gained through ascertainment is the very thing
that we should meditate on. Meditation means familiarizing our mind with
what we have ascertained. So here, we can see that hearing, reflection and
meditation are connected.
There are people who propagate the view that if you use your wisdom of
discernment, or if you use your brain to think about Buddhadharma, it will
harm your meditation practice. This is because when you think, all sorts of
thought that come to your mind will harm the meditation practice. Therefore
you should not think because thinking with using your brain is not
meditation; it is an obstacle to your meditation. So when you meditate, you
should not think. This is because when you meditate, you are supposed to
get rid of all thoughts. So they believe that meditation must be like
sitting there without any thought. Actually, this is what most people think
what meditation is. To them, meditation is to gain some peace. In order to
gain some peace, therefore you have to stop thinking. If meditation is just
about gaining inner peace through stopping all thoughts, then Lama
Tsongkhapa says that is a mistake and is wrong. Lama Tsongkhapa says that
there are two types of meditation:
   1. There is analytical meditation
   2. There is stabilizing meditation
Lama Tsongkhapa places great emphasis on analytical meditation and
emphasize how important it is.
In the process of analytical meditation, what do you analyze?   You analyze
on the teaching that you have already delineated and have come to
understanding from hearing and reflection. Here Lama Tsongkhapa is using an
analogy of showing the horse the racecourse. This is to highlight of what
we have been discussing. The purpose of showing the horse to the racecourse
is for it to be familiar with. The whole point of learning the dharma
through hearing and reflection is that so we can meditate on what we have
heard and what we have reflected on.  Coming back to the analogy of the
horse, it would be ridiculous to show the horse one racecourse and then
race on another. Similarly, if you are learning the dharma through hearing
and reflection, it would be ridiculous for you to meditate on something
else completely different. Now you see the threefold activities of hearing,
reflection and meditation are interconnected. What you should meditate on?
You should meditate on the teaching that you have learned through hearing
and reflection; not something else. Therefore these three are
interconnected. In order to substantiate this point, Lama Tsongkhapa quotes
the great Indian master Kamalasila’s three Stages of Meditation:
 Further, what you meditate on with the wisdom arisen from meditation is
 just that which you know with the wisdom that has arisen from study and
 reflection. You do not meditate on something else. This is similar to how
 you show a horse a racetrack, and then race it there.
The quotation from Kamalasila’s three Stages of Meditation is to show that
what Lama Tsongkhapa has said so far is not his own creation. This
quotation can substantiate what Lama Tsongkhapa is saying. What this great
Indian great master Kamalasila says can ultimately be traced back to the
Buddha because he is elucidating the Buddha’s intent.
The Lamrim -Stages of the Path to Enlightenment- is the personal
instructions of the great masters. By depending on the personal
instruction, the Lamrim, one will be able to see all the scriptures as
instructions for practice.
C Indication of analytical meditation as a means of making all teachings
appear as instructions
Thus, through summarising all the topics of paths set out in the excellent
teachings and commentaries - starting from how to rely on a spiritual
teacher up to calm abiding and special insight - they are all condensed
into stages of practical application in terms of performing stabilizing
meditation where stabilizing meditation is required and analyzing with the
wisdom of individual investigation where analytical meditation is required.
Thereby, these instructions guide you so that all the excellent teachings
dawn on you as instructions. Then the certainty develops that they should
be understood as supreme instructions, and the misconception that they
should be understood as mere background [knowledge] for the Dharma rather
than as actual instructions is completely reversed.
Here we are talking about the sutra teaching. The sutra teaching contains
many words of the Buddha and the commentaries are that clarifying the
intent of those words of the Buddha. The main points of all these teachings
are condensed into the path of the three types of person of different
capacities. If we understand that the Lamrim, which show the practices for
the three types of person, are meant for any individual to practice, then
we will realize and understand the essential points of the entire
Buddhadharma. So if we are able to understand how that all the essential
points of the Buddha’s sutric teaching (the words of Buddha himself and the
commentaries that elucidate the intent of those words) contain in the
Lamrim, then we understand that this Lamrim is actually an instructions for
everyone who want to achieve enlightenment. If one is able to see this,
then without many difficulties, one will be able to appreciate the tantric
teaching of the Buddha in the future.
If you are able to realize that through the Lamrim, all the essential
points of the Buddha’s teaching are contain in the Lamrim and they are
meant for all individuals to practice to achieve enlightenment, then the
huge misconception that we have discussed earlier will be eradicated. What
is this misconception? The misconception thinking that these great
treatises are only for talk but not for practice. That misconception will
be eliminated.
Now we are talking about the four greatnesses of the Lamrim.
First greatness:  The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-
contradictory
Second greatness:  The greatness of enabling one to understand that all of
the scriptures are instructions for practice.
2B2C-3 The greatness of allowing you easily to discover the Jina’s
intention
Third: the greatness of allowing you easily to discover the Jina’s
intention
The third greatness of the Lamrim: The greatness of enabling one easily to
find the Conqueror intent.
You may have noticed that I have spent quite a lot of time talking about
the first two greatnesses. I thought it is important and beneficial. We
have to understand that all the misconceptions that we have been talking
about do exist here. Many people think that the Hinayana teaching and
Mahayana teaching are contradictory. Likewise, they also think that
Mahayana and Vajrayana are contradictory. Also in particular, the huge
misconception thinking that one does not need to learn all these great
treatises as they are nothing to do with one’s practice. Lama Tsongkhapa
says about the huge misconception thinking that there is no relationship
between hearing, reflection and meditation. There is this idea that what
you meditate on is not what you have heard of and reflected on. These huge
misconceptions are here in our mind. They are great obstacles for our
development. So I thought it is beneficial to talk about these again. So
you have to pay attention to these areas and to think about these. This is
also Lama Tsongkhapa’s explanation. Lama Tsongkhapa is not an ordinary
person. He is talking based on his own experience of having learned,
reflected and meditated on the entire Buddhadharma. So he explains it from
his own realization experience.
A For beginners the Jina’s intention is not easy to find without a guru’s
oral instructions
Although the great texts, teachings along with their commentaries, form the
supreme instructions, completely uneducated beginners cannot find the
intention - even though delving into it - without relying on excellent
direct instructions, and even if they find it, they spend a lot of time and
enormous effort.
B It is found through a guru’s oral instructions
If they rely on a guru’s direct instructions and the like, it becomes easy
to understand.
[Alternative translation LRCM Vol I page 53: The classic texts –the
scriptures along with their commentaries- are the supreme instructions.
Yet, even if beginners –persons without extensive training –delve into
them, they will not discover their intended meaning without depending on
the personal instructions of an excellent being. Even if they find the
intended meaning, their search will require a very long time and a great
deal of effort. However, if they depend on the personal instructions of a
Lamrim, they will easily come to know the intended meaning.]
If we depend on excellent personal instructions -the Lamrim- we will be
able to discover easily the intent of the Buddha. The Lamrim is essentially
can be condensed into the path of the three types of person i.e. persons of
the three different capacities. The point is to understand that all these
instructions in the Lamrim -all the Buddhadharma- are actually the
instructions for any one person to put into practice to achieve
enlightenment. Therefore, if we understand the Lamrim well, we will be able
to easily discover the Buddha intent. Therefore it becomes very important
for us to learn and reflect the Lamrim.
2B2C-4 The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself
Fourth: the greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself:
The fourth greatness of the Lamrim: The greatness of enabling one easily to
refrain automatically from great wrongdoing; the wrongdoing of abandoning
the dharma. As I have explained earlier, if we understand the practice of
Lamrim well, we will understand that all the teachings of the Buddha, all
the scriptures, all the treatises and all the commentaries are instructions
that are to be put into practiced. These are instructions that everyone
should put into practice to achieve enlightenment. If we are able to see
all the scriptures and all the great treatises as instructions for practice
then we will not create the grave misdeed of abandoning the dharma. If we
are able to understand the Lamrim well, we will be able to appreciate all
the words of the Buddha and all the commentaries. We will be able to see
them as something to be put into practice. If we have that type of
appreciation, then we will definitely not create the heavy negative karma
of abandoning the dharma.
Next, the text goes on to explain how serious it is to abandon the dharma.
Lama Tsongkhapa quotes the White Lotus Sutra, the Chapter of the Truthful
One and the King of Concentration Sutra to show how serious the negative
karma of abandoning the dharma is.
A Showing that abandoning the Dharma as the biggest misdeed
As explained in the White Lotus [Sutra] and the Chapter of the Truthful
One, it amounts to abandoning the Dharma, if you hold that some utterances
of the Buddha are means of attaining Buddhahood while others are obstacles
to Buddhahood, dividing them into good and bad, appropriate and
inappropriate or Mahayana and Hinayana, and thereupon holding that a
bodhisattva needs to train in some and not in others because you fail to
understand that all the words of the Buddha directly or indirectly teach
means of attaining Buddhahood.
In the Sutra Gathering All the Threads it says that the karmic obscuration
due to abandoning the Dharma is so subtle that it is hard to recognize.
Concerning the grave disadvantages that ensue if you abandon the Dharma, it
says in the King of Concentration Sutra:
      Someone here in Jambudvipa
      tears down all the stupas found,
      someone abandons a class of sutras
      the latter’s misdeed is far more grave.
      Someone even murders arhats as
      many as sand grains in the Ganges
      someone abandons a class of sutras
      the latter’s misdeed is far more grave.
Although there generally appear to be many ways in which the Dharma might
be abandoned, the one described previously seems to be the greatest, which
is why we should try hard to give it up.
B When there is a realization along the lines of the first two greatnesses,
the misdeed stops by itself
That is to say since this is reversed simply by gaining certainty regarding
what was shown above, the misdeed stops by itself.
C You should come to realize such certainty from the White Lotus Sutra and
other texts
This certainty should be sought by studying the Chapter of the Truthful One
as well as the [Sutra of the] Excellent Dharma’s White Lotus. The other
ways of abandoning the Dharma should be learnt from the Sutra Gathering all
the Threads.
[Alternative translation LRCM Vol I page 54: In general, there are many
ways that abandoning the teaching can occur. However, the way indicated
above is the worst, so take pains to eliminate it. Moreover, since you
overcome abandonment by merely gaining certain knowledge of the first two
greatnesses as indicated above, you automatically are kept from wrongdoing.
Seek such knowledge through extensive reading of the Chapters of the Truth
Speaker and the Lotus Sutra, In the Sutra Gathering All the Threads you
will find other ways of abandoning the teaching.]
Here it says that the negative karma of abandoning the dharma is very
subtle; which means it is very difficult for us to see how serious it is.
It is very difficult for us to realize the negative consequences.
Abandoning the Buddhadharma is extremely grave misdeed. Just to give an
illustration. Let’s say there is a particular teaching of the Buddha. If,
from our heart, we really believe that this particular teaching is of no
benefit and it cannot help us to achieve enlightenment, then we would have
created this negative karma of abandoning the dharma.
Or if you think that you are the follower of Mahayana and then you come
across the teaching of Hinayana. You think that this is a Hinayana text and
it has nothing to do with you because you are following the Mahayana path.
If you really believe that this text is not necessary, is useless and is of
no benefit to you, then you would have created this negative karma of
abandoning the dharma.
Or if one is a follower of Hinayana path but one does not accept the
Mahayana teaching and thinking: “That is Mahayana teaching and it is not a
Hinayana teaching therefore it is of no use to me”. If one really believes
of what one is thinking then one would have created this negative karma of
abandoning the dharma.
If we do think about this, what are we actually implying when we criticize
the dharma such as thinking that this is not the teaching of the Buddha and
it is useless? Essentially, we are denigrating, putting down or criticizing
the Dharma Jewel. When we criticize the Dharma Jewel, it also means that we
are actually criticizing the Buddha Jewel. Why? This is because the Buddha
is the one who taught the dharma. In fact, we are criticizing the Buddha.
Likewise, it also means that we are saying that those people who practice
them are wrong. Then we are also criticizing and putting down the Sangha
Jewel, particularly, the arya beings who practice it. From here, we can see
that by abandoning the Buddhadharma, we end up criticizing and putting down
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Therefore, I guess, the negative karma has
to be very heavy.
This is also related to the unity of all Buddhist as the whole. There are
many Buddhist traditions such as Mahayana, Hinayana and so forth. When one
abandon the dharma and can’t respect the other Buddhist traditions, then
how can there be harmony? However, if everyone would to know the essential
points of the other traditions, whether it is Mahayana or Hinayana, then we
will be able to appreciate others. From that, comes the mutual respect and
also the appreciation; then harmony ensues. If one will to think about the
other religious traditions and if one put down other religious traditions
just because it does not suit one own taste and does not benefit oneself,
then problem will arise as people of different religious traditions fight
and cause disharmony. Just because one particular religious tradition does
not fit an individual, it does not mean that it has no benefit for other
people. If we can recognize that fact, then there can be mutual respect and
there will be harmony. With that as the reason, therefore we also need to
respect other religious traditions. Here we are not talking about faith.
Even though we may not have the faith and belief, we still can appreciate
the other religious traditions and respect them.
Please read the next section: Explanation of how Dharma possessed of the
two greatnesses should be listened to and explained.
Regarding the homework which is due on next Tuesday, the whole point of the
exercise is to get you to sit down and to think about it and then you write
down what you think. Please do not hand in an assignment which paraphrasing
of what is being mentioned in the text. It is not so straight forward. You
have to write what you think and you also have to defend on what you write.
You have to imagine that if someone were to read of what you have written
and then raise some objections, are you able to defend of what you have
written. I am not sure whether you can finish that assignment within one
day; maybe you need more time to think about it. We are not looking for
correct answer. The point is whatever you think is right, you write it with
confidence so you can defend of what you write.  So think about it before
you write so that what you write can stand up with the objection. After you
have written it, then you should read and see whether you need to improve
it further and make the necessary adjustment. That is the reason why I gave
you two weeks to complete this assignment.
Student 1: If I bring my children to take refuge with a guru, but as the
children grown up, they may choose the other religion. Does this considered
as abandoning the dharma?
Geshela: I personally think this is not an issue at all because they just
basically went through the ceremony. Whether they do receive the refuge or
not, it is another question because when they are young, they may not even
know what really the Three Jewels are, and not even sure whether they have
any faith in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha? They may have gone through the
ceremony as part of the tradition. I am not sure. If this person chooses to
follow another religion, I don’t see anything wrong with this. On another
hand, if you went through the refuge with full understanding and have some
faith, have accepted and made the promise, then if you give up your promise
then there is a danger of abandoning the dharma. This may not be applicable
for the kids as they may not know what they are doing. Exception for the
kids and not for the adult.
Student 2: On page 11, “B: When there is a realization along the lines of
the first two greatnesses, the misdeed stops by itself”, what does this
“misdeed” refer to? Does this ‘misdeed’ refer to abandoning the
Buddhadharma?
Geshela: The ‘misdeed’ refers to the negative karma of abandoning the
dharma
Student 2: On “C: You should come to realize such certainty from the White
Lotus Sutra and other texts ” then “This certainty should be sought by
studying the Chapter of the Truthful One as well as the [Sutra of the]
Excellent Dharma’s White Lotus.” Is this saying that in order to have a
better ascertainment of why you should not abandon the Buddhadharma, you
should study the Chapter of the Truthful One? This is because the following
sentence: “The other ways of abandoning the Dharma should be learnt from
the Sutra Gathering all the Threads”. If abandoning the dharma is not
correct, why would I want to learn another ways of abandoning the dharma?
Geshela: By realizing the first two greatnesses of the Lamrim, one will
refrain automatically from the great misdeed of abandoning the dharma.  As
abandoning the dharma can happen in many ways, therefore in order to know
more about what abandoning the dharma really is, then you have to refer to
these texts such as Chapter of the Truthful One as well as the Sutra of the
Excellent Dharma’s White Lotus. I guess in these sutras, abandoning the
dharma is being discussed in more detail than what is here in this text. So
that is the reason why Lama Tsongkhapa is referring to those sutras. I
myself have not the opportunity to read these sutras and neither do I have
the time.
Student 2: So it is more of reading it in order to avoid abandoning the
dharma.
Geshela: Yes.


