Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 29.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.995415
================================================================================


Student 1: (Ven Gyurme rephrased) About the meaning of  purification,  when
you have purified the karma do you actually get rid of the karma or do  you
actually doing something to stop the condition for the karma to ripen?
Khen Rinpoche: When the karma is completely  purified  then  obviously  you
will not have to experience  any  fruitional  effect  of  that  action;  in
particular if you have purified the negative karma with the application  of
the four opponent powers which will be explained in the later section.
Student 2: It was mentioned that the magnification of  the  negative  karma
grow by itself due to the prevalence of the three afflictions in our mental
continuum. It is also taught that it is difficult  for  positive  karma  to
magnify by itself due to the prevalence of our afflictions as well.
Khen Rinpoche: Before you carry on with your question, whatever I had  said
about the magnification of karma in the previous class was just my opinion.
I cannot decisively say that is the intent of the text. I  am  saying  that
whatever I have mentioned in the previous class was just an  expression  of
what I have thought. Having said that, I am  not  saying  that  you  cannot
raise any objection to what I had said. If any of you feel that perhaps  my
opinion is not correct, there is always room for discussion and  this  must
be discussed.
Student 2: For us who have prevalent afflictions and as you have  mentioned
that if one does not do anything to the positive merit  then  it  will  not
grow the way the negative karma grow. In order for us to have small virtues
to grow, can it be done through the seven limbs practice of  rejoicing  and
dedication?
Khen Rinpoche: We have looked at the general characteristics  of  karma  in
the previous lesson. The first characteristic is the  certainty  of  karma.
The second characteristic is the magnification of karma. This  is  what  is
being mentioned in the teaching but we have to think about it.  Yes,  karma
does magnify and we should think about the process of magnification and how
does that happen. This is because when we look  at  the  characteristic  of
karma - the magnification of karma- we might wonder how. Karma/ action is a
composed phenomenon therefore in order for it to  increase  I  think  there
must be conditions for it to happen. In the case of non-virtuous action, if
we link it with our afflictions, our afflictions are like the fuel for  the
growth of non-virtues. In the case of virtues, how does virtue increase? It
is not just limited to couple of things such as the seven limb practice and
so forth. Basically there must be conditions;  perhaps  virtuous  state  of
mind which are the conditions for virtues to increase. When  we  take  vow,
whether it is pratimoksha vow, bodhisattva vows, and tantric vows, the vows
are the conditions for the virtues to increase. This is what I think.
Student 3: Under the general precept, let’s say someone has shaven his head
and put on the robe but in his mental continuum, he does not  has  the  two
causes of going for refuge. Am I correct to say that he is not a Buddhist?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 4: On page 80 of the text, “If you have not accumulated the karma
that will become the cause for experiencing happiness or suffering, you
will never experience the happiness or suffering that is its result. Also,
those who enjoy the effects of the Teacher’s accumulation of an
incalculable collection [of merits], do not need to accumulate all its
causes, however, they need to accumulate part of them”. What is this “part”
that sentient beings from their own side need to accumulate in order to
enjoy all the merits of the Teacher’s accumulation? Another question is on
the third characteristic of karma: Not experiencing the effects of actions
that you did not do, the King of Concentrations Sutra states: “Further,
once you have committed an action, you will experience its effect; And you
will not experience the effects of what others have done”. Is the word
“others” exclude the Buddhas?
Khen Rinpoche: The essential  understanding  that  you  must  get  from  the
discussion on the characteristics of karma is that in  order  to  experience
any result you must have  accumulated  the  karma  to  experience  it.  Just
because there is someone who has created the  cause,  that  alone  does  not
mean that he will experience the result. If you  do  not  create  the  cause
then there is no way for you to experience  any  result.  Having  says  that
there is no internal contradiction.
Student 5: It says that Shakyamuni  Buddha  actually  accumulates  merit  to
attain Buddhahood. He also tried to accumulate  a  lot  of  merits  for  the
followers to benefit. If the followers  do  not  accumulate  part  of  these
causes then they will not enjoy this benefit because they do  not  have  the
causes.
Student 6: I think Shakyamuni Buddha dedicated that those who  live  purely
in their vows will not go hungry. The cause is those who live purely by the
vows.
Khen Rinpoche: There are many causes that we can posit. We cannot just  say
one particular cause.
b" Reflecting on the distinctions among the varieties of karma
1.The principal teaching of the ten paths of action
2. The determination of the effects of actions
Prior to this, there is a discussion on the four general characteristics of
karma. After such discussion, then how should I live my life, what  I  need
to engage in, what I need to avoid, what are the positive actions and  what
are the negative actions? In order  to  answer  these  questions  the  next
section explains the  principal  teaching  of  the  ten  paths  of  action.
Although not all virtues and non-virtues are included within the ten  paths
of action, but the most important actions can be condensed  into  ten.  The
ethics of refraining from these ten non-virtuous actions is said to be very
important. Here there will be going to be a discussion on these ten.
  Chandrakirti, in the Commentary on the "Middle Way," summarized the
  significance of the Buddha's praise in the Sutra on the Ten Levels for
  the ethical discipline in which you eliminate the ten non-virtues:
  For ordinary beings, those born from the Buddha's speech,
  Those whose natures are certain as self-enlightened, or conquerors'
  children,
  There are no causes of certain goodness
  Or high status, apart from ethical discipline.
“Ordinary beings” refers to those beings who has not entered  the  path.  In
order for them to practice, they need a suitable basis for a  good  rebirth.
In order to achieve this suitable basis for the practice of the  path,  they
need to create a cause and there is no higher cause  than  the  practice  of
ethics.
“Those born from the  Buddha’s  speech”  refers  to  the  Hearers  who  have
entered the path.
“Those whose natures are certain as self-enlightened” refers to the
Solitary Realizers
“Conquerors' children” refers to the Bodhisattvas.
This verse is saying that everyone, whether you are ordinary beings,
Hearers, Solitary Realizer or Bodhisattva, the practice of ethics is very
important.
The Sutra of Ksitigarbha states: By means of these ten paths of virtue you
will become a buddha. However, there are those who, for as long as they
live, do not even minimally maintain even a single path of virtuous action,
but who say such things as, "I am a Mahayana practitioner; I seek
unexcelled, perfect enlightenment." Such people are great hypocrites and
liars. They deceive the world in the presence of all the bhagavan buddhas,
and they preach nihilism. When they die, they seem confused and they fall
back
You should understand "falling back" to be a synonym for taking a
completely miserable rebirth.
The point is that protecting the ethics of refraining from the ten non-
virtuous actions is of vital important.
2" The determination of the effects of actions
   1. Non-virtuous actions and their effects
   2. Virtuous actions and their effects
   3. A presentation of other classifications of karma
1. Non-virtuous actions and their effects
   i. The actual paths of non-virtuous actions
  ii. Distinctions of weight
 iii. An exposition of the effects
In the discussion of the non-virtuous actions and their effects, it
primarily focuses on the ten non-virtuous actions.
   1. Killing
   2. Stealing
   3. Sexual misconduct
   4. Lying
   5. Divisive speech
   6. Offensive speech
   7. Senseless speech (Meaningless speech)
   8. Covetousness
   9. Malice
  10. Wrong view
In the discussion of killing, there are four categories:
   1. Basis,
   2. Attitude,
   3. Performance
   4. Completion of the action (culmination).
These four categories are always there in the discussion of all the ten non-
virtuous action.
For the action of killing:
The basis of killing is another living being and the qualification "other”
as in another living being. This is the consideration of cases of suicide.
For someone who commits suicide, it is a negative action but is not a
complete action of killing. Here we are discussing of how an action of
killing becomes a complete action of killing. For an act of killing to be a
complete action of killing, the basis has to be another living beings.
You must be clear in your mind that the being you are killing is a living
being and you are unmistaken with it.
If you have mistaken with respect to your discrimination/ recognition then
the action of killing does not become a complete action of killing.For
example, you set out to kill someone called Devadatta but you have mistaken
Yajnadatta for Devadatta and you kill Yajnadatta instead. The act of
killing is not a complete action of killing because you have no intention
of killing Yajnadatta.
Another example, if you have the plan to kill someone called Devadatta but
along the way, you have the idea that you are going to kill anyone comes
along. Since you have the attitude that it does not matter who you kill,
the action will become a complete action of killing.
So here you have unmistaken discrimination/ recognition/ perception.
The affliction is any of the three mental poisons.
The motivation is the desire to kill. If you have no motivation to kill,
even after the act of killing is done, it does not become a complete action
of killing.
Performance: The nature of the performance is killing by way  of  a  weapon,
poison, a spell, or the like. Whether you do it yourself or  asking  someone
else to do it, it is the same. On the account of the action  of  killing  is
being carried out by yourself or asking someone else to do it, if the  basis
–the sentient being-  dies  before  you,  then  the  action  of  killing  is
complete. However if you happen to die before the basis –the sentient being-
 die, then the action of killing is not complete. As long as the basis  –the
sentient being- dies, it  does  not  matter  whether  you  learn  about  the
sentient being death or not. The action of  killing  is  complete  when  the
person dies; it does not  matter  whether  you  do  it  yourself  or  asking
someone else to do the killing.
Stealing - In term of stealing, there is a qualm as to whether you  need  to
generate the thought  “I  have  obtained  the  object”  before  the  act  of
stealing is complete. The final analysis is not necessary. For example,  you
ask someone to steal something on your behalf. If that person whom  you  had
sent to steal that particular object has  generated  the  thought  “Now  the
object is in my hand,” it does not matter even though you have not get  hold
of the object and has  not  generated  the  thought  “I  have  obtained  the
object,” the act of stealing is complete.
Sexual misconduct –In term of perception/  recognition,  the  Compendium  of
Determinations stated that the perception must be  unmistaken.  But  in  the
case of the Vinaya which governs those who have the celibacy vows,  it  does
not matter whether they have the correct perception or not i.e.  it  has  no
exception. The Treasury of Knowledge Auto-commentary explains  that  if  you
have approached another's wife with the perception  that  she  is  your  own
wife, then this does not become  an  actual  path  of  non-virtuous  action.
Vasubandhu presents two systems in regard  to  when  intercourse  under  the
perception that another person's wife is the wife of a third  person-one  in
which intercourse becomes a path of non-virtuous action and one in which  it
does not.
These three – killing, stealing and sexual misconduct- are the physical non-
virtuous actions.
Then there are the four non-virtuous actions of the speech- lying, divisive
speech, offensive speech and meaningless speech.
Lying is when someone else –the recipient of the lie- comprehends the
meaning of the lie.
The performance is indicating something through speaking, through choosing
not to speak, or through gesture. A lie is a lie - it does not matter
whether you speak for your own purposes or for the sake of others.
According to Arya Asanga, it is said that even causing others to engage in
the three types of speech –lying, divisive speech or offensive speech, it
is the same doing it yourself. It seems that he is saying meaningless
speech is excluded whereas Vasubandhu in his Treasury of Knowledge and Auto-
commentary says that all four verbal non-virtues, which include the
meaningless speech, constitute paths of action when you cause others to do
them. According to the Vinaya –the text on discipline- you yourself must
speak in order to incur a full infraction. Hence here there are three
systems.
I think for lying, divisive speech and offensive speech, the other person
has to comprehend it. It is said that if you are lying or you are engaging
the divisive speech or the offensive speech and the recipient does not
understand the meaning then it does not become lying, divisive speech or
offensive speech but rather that action of speech become meaningless
speech.
For meaningless speech, as long as one say something meaningless, then it
became meaningless speech. It does not require anyone to understand what
you are saying. Those are the four verbal of non-virtues.
Next are the three mental non-virtues:
   1. Covetousness
   2. Malice
   3. Wrong view
In term of mental non-virtues, for example covetousness, the motivation,
performance and completion have to be of the single flow of continuum of
thought in a same mental continuum.
For example, covetousness with the motivation desiring to make something as
one’s own and when that thought become stronger then that is the
performance of the act of covetousness. If one reach the conclusion “May it
become mine,” that is the culmination of covetousness.
For here, the wrong view primarily is the view of deprecation; denying
something that actually exist such as denying the existence of
reincarnation or denying the existence of action and its effect.
Student 7: Is killing someone to relieve his pain considered as killing?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, it is considered as killing. Sometime we think as if we
don’t accept reincarnation. If you think about reincarnation and are asked
to visualize the karma, the suffering of the next life is much worse than
this. By comparing to the suffering in the next life, the suffering in this
life is nothing as it is very small. If you don’t think about the past and
future lives, by helping a person to end his life, then that is the end of
it but if you think about the past and future lives and karma, actually by
helping the person to die earlier, we are actually sending him quicker to
more suffering. If the motivation is really of great compassion, it is
still killing but it does not become a complete act of killing.
Student: Can you please explain the restrictions on women with whom one is
not allowed to have sexual intercourse with, i.e., women under the
protection of their families or kings? These restrictions seem archaic and
outdated in our 21st century world.
Khen Rinpoche: The essence is that if the object of sexual misconduct – a
person- is protected by someone else or is held as a partner of someone
else, if you have intercourse with that person, then it became a sexual
misconduct.  It does not matter whether the person is protected by the king
or the family because it is harming someone else by having sexual
misconduct in that way.
We will discuss the difference between action and the path of action. This
can be challenging. You should read from page 88 of the course material and
think about it. Read the section on the distinctions of weight such as the
criteria for powerful actions and the specific effect of these ten non-
virtuous actions.
It is very important that you read the text on your own. Please do that. If
you have any questions after reading the text, you should write it down
immediately. In the class, I will just explain briefly. If you have
question, you can bring it out for discussion in class. I thought this is
the way how the class should be conducted. It is not just from my side
reading the text. You read the text and come out with questions. I will
just summarize (the text). If you have any questions, you can bring them
out for discussion. I think this is the best way of learning. For those who
really cannot read the text for whatever reasons such as lack of time, you
can rely on those study aids that are made available by the group leaders.
Just as you have faith in the Buddhadharma, when come to study you should
act like this.
