Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 14.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.978016
================================================================================


The great master Nagabodhi said that:
      Enlightenment is not owned by anyone
      Enlightenment is not given to us by anyone.
      But, rather through recognizing the nature of our own mind.
      That is what we refer to as the Buddha.
Enlightenment is not something that is owned by just one individual. That
is the meaning of the first line.
The second line means that enlightenment is not something that is given to
us.  Enlightenment is not like a gift that can be bestowed upon us by
someone. Enlightenment is not like that. When we have completely realized/
understood our own mind that is what is referred to as enlightenment; that
is Buddha.
We have been circling in cyclic existence/ samsara since time without
beginning. So if we do analyze carefully what is it that cause us  to be in
such a state up to now, at the end of the day, it has got to do with our
non-realization of our own mind. We do not have the complete realization/
understanding of our own mind. That is the reason. Because we have not yet
realized our mind completely therefore we are still circle in the cyclic
existence. We have been doing so since beginningless time. Why we have not
yet realized our mind completely?  Why we have not yet understood our mind
fully? The main reason is that our mind has been obscured. Why our mind is
still obscured since beginningless time? It boils down to our not
understanding the ways to accumulate the collection of merits.  Because we
do not know the ways to perfectly accumulate the collection of merits
therefore our mind has been obscured since beginningless time. Why is it
that we do not know how to perfectly accumulate the collection of merits?
If we think about it, at the end of the day, it boils down to lack of
faith. This is what we have talked about in the previous lessons.
Everything boils down to faith. If one has faith then one will be able to
perfectly accumulate the collection of merits and one will be able to
purify the obscurations. In that process one will definitely achieve
Buddhahood/ enlightenment. Therefore enlightenment boils down to faith.
This is something that we have to think about it constantly. We have to use
the power of logic and reasoning to see why faith is so important and how
to develop it? As I have mentioned, all these boil down to faith.

Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
We have finished with the section on guru devotion – correctly relying on
virtuous friend in thought and in action. Perhaps this may be useful for
the senior students. In order to train our mind in seeing the guru as the
Buddha, it is mentioned in the teaching that one should reflect and
meditate on the four outlines. Basically the thing that we need to prove to
ourselves is that our guru is the Buddha. Vajradhara himself has stated
that our guru is the Buddha. We must prove the guru to be the Buddha using
both scriptural authorities and reasonings to gain unshakable conviction.
The four outlines are:
   1. Vajradhara stated that the guru is a Buddha.
   2. The guru is the agent of all the Buddhas’ enlightenment activities.
   3. Even at this time the Buddhas are still working for the benefit of us
      sentient beings.
   4. You cannot be sure of appearances. Our appearances are not certain or
      definite.
These are the four outlines that one should meditate on in order to prove
to our mind that our guru is the Buddha. This is mainly for the senior
students; not for the new students. I thought this might be useful for you.
We have finished with the section on guru devotion –correctly relying on
virtuous friend in thought and in action.
2B4A-2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain it
      A The actual way to sustain it
      B The reason why it needs to be sustained by means of two modes of
      sustaining
2B4A-2A The actual way to sustain it
      1 What to do during the meditation session itself
      2 What to do during the periods between sessions
2B4A-2A1 What to do during the meditation session itself
      A What to do in preparation
      B What to do during the actual [meditation session]
      C What to do at the end
What do you do after you have correctly relied on the virtuous friend in
thought and in action? What are the stages of training? In term of the
trainings or practices, there are the preliminary, the actual body and the
conclusion.
The first one has three points: what to do in preparation, during the
actual [meditation session] and at the end.
2B4A-2A1A What to do in preparation
1 [Cleaning your dwelling and setting up representations of body, speech
and mind]
2 [Laying out offerings]
3 [Sitting posture and mental attitude]
4 [Visualization of the merit field]
5 [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities]
6 [Mandala offering and request for blessings]
First: the six preparatory practices:
First, we will talk about the preliminary. Here, in this context,
preliminary refers to the six preparatory practices.
2B4A-2A1A-1 [Cleaning your dwelling and setting up representations of body,
speech and mind]
Following the life story of Serlingpa you should clean your dwelling and
set up representations of the exalted body, speech and mind.
Clean well the place where you are staying, and neatly arrange the
representations of the Buddha's body, speech, and mind. It is mentioned in
the teaching that it is very important to do one’s practices in a clean
environment. When cleaning the place where you are going to do your
practice, it is not just about cleaning the dirt on the outside. Although
it is important to do that but at the same time it is important that while
you clean the room or the environment externally, you should also clean the
mind; you have to do both external and internal cleaning. When one is
cleaning the room, with each action of cleaning, at that time you can think
that you are also purifying whatever afflictions that may be in your mind.
You can think the dirt on the outside represent your afflictions. If you
can think in this way then it is said to be very beneficial.
If you were to keep the environment in which you are going to do your
practice clean, it does make a difference to the celestial beings that are
on the white side who support the dharma practitioner. You will receive
their helps and supports. Since it is good to setup the representations of
the Buddha's body, speech, and mind, it is important that you set these
holy objects in a clean place. It would not be good at all to setup the
representations of the Buddha's body, speech, and mind in a dirty and
filthy place. By setting up the representations of the Buddha's body,
speech, and mind in the clean place, it helps in the accumulation of
merits.
You can get your maid to clean your place or you just have to clean it if
you do not have a maid. The point is to keep the environment clean. I guess
it does help the mind a lot.
Singapore is considered to be a very clean country. If you go to certain
home where they have maid, then the place is usually very clean. I have
been to places whereby people do not have any maid and usually the place is
quite messy. So I think it is very important to put aside time to keep your
living environment and the place where you are doing your practice clean.
This is pretty obvious; whether you are talking it from the dharma point of
view as a preparatory practice or from the hygiene point of view. So it is
important to keep the place clean as it is very helpful and beneficial. I
guess when that does not happens it is probably due to laziness.
Next is arranging the representations of the Buddha's body, speech, and
mind. There are many reasons why we arrange the holy objects. One of which,
I guess, it does help in our meditation. If we have something to focus on,
perhaps it makes a difference to your visualization as it may arise easily.
When we have holy objects - the representations of the Buddha's body,
speech, and mind- on the altar, we are more likely to make offerings, make
prostration and so forth. It induces us to engage in such virtuous
activities. The point I am trying to make is that you have to understand
why we do certain things; why we have to do the preparatory practices of
cleaning the room and arranging the representations of the Buddha's body,
speech, and mind? Having an altar and setting up the representations of the
Buddha's body, speech, and mind is not an absolute necessity. However, it
is said that it is very useful to the beginner like us. But you must
understand that it is not an absolute must.

2B4A-2A1A-2 [Laying out offerings]
Beautifully lay out an arrangement of offerings that were honestly
acquired.
Obtain offerings without deceit, and arrange them beautifully. The
offerings that you setup at the altar should not be obtained through
deceit. If you obtain the offerings with deceit, let’s you bought the
offerings with the money that is obtained through non-virtuous means such
as stealing, cheating, fooling others in order to get something in return,
etc. these offerings are not considered good.  The motivation should not be
deceitful as well. When we make offerings, we should do it sincerely with
pure motivation. We do not setup nice offerings as show-off or trying to
please the sponsor.
With respect to making offerings, it is said that it is beneficial to
recite the Offering Cloud dharani because it is said that the numerous
Buddhas will receive the sky of offerings.

2B4A-2A1A-3 [Sitting posture and mental attitude]
On a comfortable seat straighten up your body. Assume a suitable position
in cross-legged or half cross-legged posture making sure that the mind is
fused with going for refuge and bodhicitta.
We should sit up straight upon a comfortable seat in a suitable posture;
your legs either in the full or half-lotus position, and then absorb
yourself in the practices of going for refuge and generating bodhicitta/
the altruistic intention. It is mentioned in the teaching that we should
sit in the seven-featured Vairochana posture. If we are able to do our
practices by sitting in the seven- featured Vairochana posture, there is
benefit.
1. You sit in the full or half-lotus position.
2. Your back is straight.
3. Your hand on the lap in the meditation posture.
4. You leave your mouth and tongue in a natural position.
5. You close your eye but let your eye fall in the direction of the tip of
  your nose.
6. Tilt your head slightly forward
7. Both of your shoulders should at equal level.
By sitting in this seven-featured Vairochana posture one is able to do the
practice session for long time without any difficulties. If you sit at
other kinds of posture, although temporary it may be more comfortable, but
you will not be able to sustain that posture for long time. If one is able
to sit at this posture while doing your practice it make your body
serviceable. It helps with a clear mind. If you are constantly engaging in
practices then sitting in this posture does help. We are not talking about
sitting in this posture for just one session but we are talking about doing
the practice in long run. Of course you have to get use to sitting in such
a posture. It may be difficult at the beginning because you are not use to
it. You just have to get into the habit.
After having sat down in this seven-featured Vairochana posture, you have
to absorb yourself in the practice of refuge and bodhicitta. At this point,
it is important to check the state of your mind. If the mind is in the
negative state with the manifest afflictions, it is important to transform
the mind at least into the neutral state. There is a practice of nine
rounds breathing exercise. If one can do that, it is good. The point is to
make the afflictions go away and making the mind come to a neutral state.
You can place your attention to the breathing. As you exhale, you can think
that whatever manifested afflictions are expelled from the body with the
exhalation. The afflictions are expelled in the form of black smoke. It
leaves the body and dissolves into space. During inhalation, you think you
are inhaling the blessing of all the Buddhas and bodhisattvas in the form
of white light and it go into you and bless your mental continuum and
transforming your mind into virtue. This breathing meditation exercise does
make a difference.
At those time when you have stress, if you breathe deeply and then let out
a long breath, it helps to relieve the tension in your body. When you are
stressed, you breathe in hard and then release your breath which sounds
like air being released from the punctured tire.
If you are able to do this breathing meditation with some attention in
focus it will make a difference as it make easier for you to employ your
mind in virtue. Basically you are trying to move the mind in the direction
of virtue or positive state. Within the virtuous state of mind, visualize
the object of refuge. Then go for refuge and develop the altruistic
intention.
After doing well the practices of going for refuge and developing
bodhicitta, dissolves the object of refuge which you have visualized in
front of you and absorb into you through the point between your eyebrows.

2B4A-2A1A-4 [Visualisation of the merit field]
In the space in front of you should imagine that there abide the lineage
lamas of vast conduct and profound view and countless buddhas,
bodhisattvas, arhats, arya hearers, and pratyekabuddhas along with their
attendants  those who abide in the Buddha's word, [thus] visualising the
merit field.
Visualize the field of merit in the space in front of you primarily the
gurus of the vast and profound lineages, as well as immeasurable buddhas,
noble bodhisattvas, pratyekabuddhas (solitary realizers), sravakas
(hearers), and those who abide in the Buddha's word (which means the dharma
protectors).
When you visualize the merit field, you can visualize Guru Shakyamuni
Buddha.
To the right of Shakyamuni Buddha are the lineage gurus of the extensive
deeds/ vast conduct.
To the left of Shakyamuni Buddha, are the lineage gurus of the profound
view.
Surrounding them are all the meditational deities, Buddhas, bodhisattvas,
solitary realizers, hearers, dakas, dakinis and the dharma protectors.
Visualize as well as you are able this field of merit because it is the
field for us to accumulate the collection of merits.

2B4A-2A1A-5 [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities]
 A The reason why it is necessary to accumulate [merit] and purify
 [negativities]
 B Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail
 C Categorization of the individual [elements]
2B4A-2A1A-5A The reason why it is necessary to accumulate [merit] and
purify [negativities]
It is exceedingly difficult for [wholesome] paths to arise in your
continuum, if the favourable conditions for their arising, the
accumulations, have not been accumulated, and their adverse conditions, the
obscurations, have not been purified. Therefore you need to purify the mind
by means of the seven-limb practice, which brings together the key points
of accumulation and purification.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 94: The cooperative conditions for
the production of the path in your mind are
(1) the accumulation of the collections, which are favorable conditions,
and
(2) the purification of your mind from obscurations, which are unfavorable
conditions.
If you lack these cooperative conditions, it is extremely difficult to
produce the path, even if you take pains to sustain the meditations that
are the substantial causes of the path.
Now you must purify your mind with the seven branches of worship, which
comprise the crucial points for accumulating the collections and purifying
the mind of obscurations. With respect to the seven branches of worship,
the first, the branch of obeisance, includes the combination of physical,
verbal, and mental obeisance.]
This paragraph is telling us what we need to do if we want to develop the
experiences of the dharma and realization of the path in our mind. This
paragraph is saying that we need to accumulate the collection of merits and
purify our mind of obscurations. There are two things that we need to do.
1. Accumulating merits and purifying our mind of obscurations are the
cooperative conditions (or the assisting factors) for developing the
realization.
2. The substantial causes (or the main cause) for developing the
realization in our mind are sustaining the relevant meditations of the
path.
In order to develop realization, we need both the cooperative conditions
and the substantial causes. This paragraph is not saying that it is enough
for us to just accumulate merits and engage in purification and then
realization will arise. This is just one part of the equation. We need to
accumulate merits and purify our mind and these are the cooperative
conditions. The substantial causes (main cause) for developing the
realization is sustaining the relevant meditations of the path.
These two words – substantial cause and cooperative condition – will come
out very often as we progress in our dharma studies. Therefore it is
important to gain an understanding of the meaning of these two words.
An illustration:  The seed transforms into sprout.
The seed is the substantial cause of a sprout.
But having the seed alone will not give rise to sprout. In order for the
seed to become the sprout, we need the assisting factors or cooperative
conditions. The cooperative conditions to produce the sprout would be the
water, fertilizer, correct temperature and so forth. These are conditions
that assist the seed to transform into sprout. Therefore we need both the
cooperative condition and the substantial cause. Similarly, the substantial
cause for all the realizations in our mind is sustaining the relevant
meditations on the path. But if we just sustain the meditation without
making effort in accumulating merits and engage in purifications, the
realizations will not arise. Therefore, while sustaining the relevant
meditations on the path we need to bring together the cooperative
conditions in the form of accumulating the merits and purifying our mind of
obscuration.
In order to generate realizations in our mind, we need to accumulate merits
and purifying our mind of obscurations. How should we go about doing it?
This is by practicing the seven branches of worship (seven-limb practice).

2B4A-2A1A-5B Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail
   1 The actual detailed explanation
   2 The need to take the meaning of the words to heart
2B4A-2A1A-5B1  The actual detailed explanation
   A [The limb of prostration]
   B [Offerings]
   C [Confession of evil deeds]
   D [Rejoicing]
   E [Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned]
   F [Supplication]
   G [Dedication]
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A [The limb of prostration]
   1 [Prostration combining the three doors]
   2 [Prostrations of the three individual doors]
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-1  [Prostration combining the three doors]
With regard to the limb of prostration, the prostration combining the three
doors is [set out] in the single stanza “Whoever...” This is not
[prostration] to the world spheres of one direction and to the buddhas of
one time. Rather, focusing on all the Jinas residing in the 10 directions
and three times, you prostrate body, speech and mind to them with respect
and from the bottom of your heart.
The first of the seven branches of worship (seven-limb practice) is the
branch of obeisance (prostration).
As in the first verse of the King of Prayers:
  You lions among humans,
  Gone to freedom in the present, past and future
  In the worlds of ten directions,
  To all of you, with body, speech, and sincere mind, I bow down.
This paragraph brings together the practice of paying homage with one’s
body, speech and mind.

2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-2 [The prostrations of the three individual doors]
A [Physical prostration]
As regards the prostrations of the three individual doors, there are three
points: “Physical prostration [is set out in] the single stanza “excellent
behaviour...” You focus on all the Jinas belonging to the directions and
times as the objects of your mind, as though you directly perceive them.
Emanating your own body in manifestations as numerous as fine particles you
should prostrate. Furthermore, having generated the power of confidence in
the excellent conduct of the objects, you are motivated by that.
As in the second verse of the King of Prayers:
  With the energy of aspiration for the bodhisattva way
  With the sense of deep respect
  And with as many bodies as atoms of the world,
  To all you Buddhas visualized as real, I bow down.
In regard to physical, verbal, and mental obeisance, physical obeisance is
expressed in the second verse.
The motivation at the beginning of paying homage is extremely important.
Here, you are asked to reflect on the bodhisattva activities of the merit
fields in front of you to enable you to develop faith. With that faith, you
pay homage and make prostration. You should imagine that you are
prostrating to all the buddhas abiding in all directions and times as if
you are actually perceiving them directly.  First bring all the buddhas of
the present, past and the future to your mind. When you prostrate you
should visualize replicas of your own body equaling the number of the atoms
of the world emanating from you. With these many numbers of bodies then you
prostrate to all the buddhas of all directions and all times.
Here you are asked to prostrate to numberless buddhas of the present, past
and future and of all directions. You are asked to prostrate to them while
visualizing emanating countless duplicate of your body in a number equal to
the atoms of the world. What is the reason for you with these numbers of
bodies that you prostrate to all the numberless buddhas? If we were to
compare this way of prostrating to just prostrating to one Buddha with one
body, there is a difference in term of outlook; whom you bring to mind and
the number of buddhas you prostrate to. It makes a difference in term of
the amount of merits being accumulated. It is said that there are
immeasurable benefits.
These are the important points that you need to take note:
At the beginning when you make prostration, your motivation is important.
When you prostrate you should bring to mind all the numberless Buddhas of
all directions and of all times.
You prostrate to them while visualizing emanating countless duplicate of
your body in a number equal to the atoms of the world. If you are able to
this, you will accumulate immeasurable merits compare to just making
prostration, without thinking and to one Buddha with one body. There is no
comparison at all.
Is there any difference by prostrating without thinking and prostrating
with doing all the visualizations? Do you accept that there is benefit?
Then if you do one hundred thousand prostrations with one body versus doing
one prostration by visualizing one hundred thousand bodies, is there any
difference?
Perhaps the wider your perspective, the more merits you will accumulate.
That is the point. If your mind is expansive, then the merits you can
accumulate will be much greater. If your mind is not as expansive, then the
merits that you can accumulate will be lesser.

B [Mental prostration]
Mental prostration [is set out in] the single stanza “on one fine
particle...” - on top of each minute particle buddhas as innumerable as
dust particles reside encircled by bodhisattvas. You generate the resolute
faith of recollecting their positive qualities.
As in the third verse of the King of Prayers:
  On every atom are Buddhas numberless as atoms,
  Each amidst a host of bodhisattvas,
  And I am confident the sphere of all phenomena
  Is entirely filled with Buddhas in this way.
This verse is paying homage with one’s mind.
Here it says: “On every atom are Buddhas numberless as atoms,” can you
imagine that on every atom, you think that there are numberless Buddhas
equal in number to the numberless as atoms, and each of these numberless
Buddhas is surrounded by bodhisattvas. By bringing this to your mind, then
reflect on the qualities of their holy body, speech and mind. Then you
develop faith.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Kyabje Lama Zopa Rinpoche said that if you
do like that, it is mind blowing.
Then emanate countless duplicate of your body prostrate with this faith.
Again this has to do with the mental perspective. Here, if you can think
that there are numberless Buddhas equal in number to the numberless as
atoms and because the mental perspective is so much wider, it makes a
difference in the merits that you accumulate.

C [Verbal prostration]
Verbal prostration [is set out in] the single stanza “praising those...”
From each of the bodies innumerable heads emanate and from each of the
heads again innumerable tongues which sing inexhaustible praises of the
objects’ positive qualities to sweet melodies. Here “melodies” are praises
and their “branches”, that is their causes, are the tongues. The word
“ocean” refers
to a lot.
As in the fourth verse of the King of Prayers:
  With infinite oceans of praise for you,
  And oceans of sound from the aspects of my voice,
  I sing the breathtaking excellence of Buddhas
  And celebrate all of you gone to bliss
This is paying homage to Buddhas and bodhisattvas with one’s speech. As
mentioned before, you bring to mind the qualities of the holy body, speech
and mind of the numberless Buddhas – as in the previous verse the
numberless Buddhas equal in number to the numberless as atoms, and each of
these numberless Buddhas is surrounded by bodhisattvas. Then you develop
faith. At the same time you think that you emanate countless duplicate of
your body verbally expressing these praises.
Therefore it is important to know when you pay homage there is physical,
mental and verbal homage. You should know what they entail, what do they
mean, what is physical homage, what is mental homage and what is verbal
homage. You have to know how to extract the most out of your prostration.
While you are making prostration you have to know what are the factors that
make the prostration very powerful in term of the accumulation of merits-
what do you have to think about, the kind of mindset, what you have to
visualize. These are the important points.
In the teaching it talks about the immeasurable benefits of making
prostration. When we make physical prostration, when our body is on the
floor, the body cover a specific area on the ground with numberless of
atoms.  Each of these numberless atoms from the surface of the ground to
the core of the earth (known as the golden ground in Tibetan) becomes a
cause for you to be reborn as a Wheel Turning king one thousand times. This
is the immeasurables benefit that is stated in the teaching. The benefits
are, literally, hidden for us. It is ‘hidden’ in the sense that it is not
something that we can easily realize or to see for ourselves. Every now and
then, you should do some prostrations with this attitude. As much as
possible when you prostrate, first do it with a virtuous state of mind.
With positive motivation, then you prostrate with all the visualizations
that we have talked about; visualizing emanating countless duplicate of
your body in a number equal to the atoms of the world to all the numberless
Buddhas of all directions and of all times. Even if you are able to do just
one prostration with this visualization and with this attitude then you do
accomplish the goal and purpose. So as much as possible you should do this
all the times.
I think we should be able to finish the rest of the seven branches of
worship in the next lesson. I guess the senior students already aware of
what we have discussed today on prostration. Generally speaking, if you
talk to someone outside or to someone who is new to Buddhism, they may be
aware of the practice of doing prostration, but I guess it is very rare to
find people who actually know what a prostration is, what to think when
making prostration and how to maximize one’s act of making prostration. So
from this example you can see that by learning/studying about making
prostration does make a huge difference to the quality of your prostration,
the merits that you accumulate etc. That is why I always mention that study
is so important because study make a huge difference to our practice. In
term of accumulating merit, the merits that you accumulate after having
done some studies are definitely much more and powerful. So using this one
example here, one can clearly see that studying/learning only benefit the
practice. Studying doesn’t harm/ disrupt one’s practice. So you can that
there is a connection between study and practice by just using this example
on the topic of making prostration. So you see how study improves the
quality of one practice. As we have seen in the earlier section on
listening to the dharma, it is not sufficient to just hear the teaching. We
have to put whatever we have heard into practice then we will enjoy all the
benefits that are mentioned in the teaching. Of course by just hearing the
teaching, there are some benefits. In order to extract the full benefits,
we have to put those teachings into practice.
Student 1: Why do we need to prostrate three times instead of one time?
Why certain verses in the prayer are repeated three times?
Khen Rinpoche: I guess, in the case of making three prostrations, it may
symbolize the three objects of refuge: Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Perhaps
it also represent paying homage with one’s body, speech and mind. But the
point is that there is no fix number and repeating three times is not a
must.  Every time before each class or in any teaching, we recite the
prayer of refuge and bodhicitta three times. The point of reciting the
prayer is to give ourselves time and an opportunity for us to adjust our
motivation. If you are able to bring forth the attitude of refuge and
bodhicitta with just one recitation then you just need to do it once; you
don’t have to do three times. Even if you recite the prayer three times but
are not able to bring forth any attitude, technically speaking, you need to
recite as long as possible, even for one hundred times, until the attitude
arise.
Student 2: (Ven Gyurme summarized) Although Lama Atisha has many teachers,
he considered Lama Serlingpa as one of his main teacher. The qualm is that
on his side, he is biased.
Khen Rinpoche: Lama Atisha considered Lama Serlingpa as one of his main
teachers not because of Lama Serlingpa has more qualities than the other
teachers. From the perspective of qualities, all of them are about the
same. But there is a difference in the kindness that is shown to the
individual. There is a difference in kindness that we see from different
teachers. In the case of Lama Atisha, he regards Lama Serlingpa as very
important because it was from Lama Serlingpa that he received the
instruction on developing the kind heart- bodhicitta. It was through Lama
Serlingpa’s guidance he was able to develop bodhicitta. Based on that, he
regards Lama Serlingpa as very kind.

“Meditation Posture” extract from “Meditations on the Path to Enlightenment
“by Geshe Acharya Thubten Loden
In order to meditate it is helpful to position the body properly. As the
mind and body are interdependent, if the body is placed in a certain pose,
the mind naturally becomes more stable and calm. There are traditionally
seven aspects of the meditation pose called the seven point posture of
Vairocana, Vairocana being the Buddha of form. Here, focusing the mind on
the breath is included as an eighth part.
1. Sitting on a soft cushion slightly raised at the rear, the legs should
  be crossed with the feet resting on the thighs in the full lotus
  position, which, if the joints are supple enough to allow one to hold
  this position comfortably, is the most stable and relaxing posture for
  retaining a clear mind during meditation. If the full lotus position is
  difficult, the half lotus, where one leg is rested on top of the other,
  is a little easier. Otherwise just sit in any comfortable cross-legged
  position that enables you to retain a straight back. If sitting on the
  floor causes trouble with your legs or back, it is acceptable to sit in a
  chair.
2. The hands should rest in front of your body with the right hand on the
  left palm. The thumb tips should meet, as this avoids losing the energy
  of the body. The tips of the thumbs are at the level of the navel.
3. The backbone should be straight so that the subtle energy channels that
  run parallel to the spinal cord are
  also straight, making it easier to concentrate.
4. The mouth, jaw and tongue are to be relaxed in a natural position. The
  mouth should not be open or clamped shut, but just in a normal, relaxed
  position. The tip of the tongue should touch the back of the upper teeth
  to control the build-up of saliva.
5. The head should be tilted slightly forward. If it is slouched too far
  forward you will tend to become sleepy, and if it is too far back you
  will tend to become agitated.
6. The eyes are half closed and gazing in a relaxed manner down the bridge
  of the nose.
7. The shoulders are held level with the arms relaxed and resting out a
  little, not touching the body.
8. Sometimes only seven positions are given, but in the Great Exposition of
  the Stages of the Path Lama Tsong
  Khapa mentions an eighth which is mindfulness of the breath as described
  in the previous chapter. This calms the mind and brings it to a neutral
  state, from which it is then easy to generate a virtuous state of mind.
  When you have calmed your mind you can then establish the proper
  motivation and meditate on the chosen subject.
