Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 19.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.386581
================================================================================


2B4B The stages of how to train the mind once you have relied
1 The basis of leisure - exhortation to take its essence
2 How to take the essence
2B4B-1 The basis of leisure - exhortation to take its essence
A Identification of leisure and endowments
B Considering their great value
C Considering the difficulty in finding them
We have finished with the outline: “How to rely correctly in thought and
action on the virtuous friend”.
Next is the outline: “The stages of how the students train their minds
after they have relied on the teacher”
The stages of how the students train their minds have two parts:
 1. An exhortation to take full advantage of a life of leisure and
    opportunity
 2. How to take full advantage of a life of leisure and opportunity
Leisure in Tibetan is “dal ba” which means having freedom to practice
dharma.
[Note: Leisure is also translated as freedom, endowment is translated as
opportunity]
2B4B-1A Identification of leisure and endowments
1 Leisure
2 Endowments
2B4B-1A1 Leisure
A Identification of leisure
First: In the Summary it says:
  Through rules the essence of the many worlds of animals and eight unfree
  states are renounced – thus constant leisure won.
  Accordingly, leisure consists in the freedom from the eight unfree
  states.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 118:  The Verse Summary of the
Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines says:
    Through ethical discipline you eliminate
    The eight conditions that lack leisure
    And many circumstances in a life as an animal.
    Through it, you always attain leisure.
According to this, leisure means freedom from a rebirth in any of the eight
conditions that lack leisure.]

B The eight unfree states:
[Living in] a border remote country where the four types of followers [of
the Buddha] do not roam, stupidity or being dumb, being of incomplete
faculties - missing a limb, an ear etc., holding wrong views that regard
past and future lives, actions and their effects and the Three Jewels as
non-existent, being without the word of a Jina, with no buddha having
appeared [in the world] are the four unfree states of humans.  The three
bad migrations and being a long-lived god are the non-human unfree states.
As for the long-lived gods, the Commentary on the Letter to a Friend
discusses two types: discriminationless ones and formless ones. The former
live in one region of the fourth concentration, Great Result, as if in a
solitary place far away from a village. The latter are ordinary beings born
in the formless realms. In Discourse on the Eight Unfree States gods of the
desire realm constantly distracted by activities of desire are explained to
be long-lived gods.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 118:  These eight conditions are
stated in the Friendly Letter.
      To be reborn with wrong views or without a conqueror's word,
      Or as an animal, a hungry ghost, a hell-being,
      An uncultured person in a border region,
      A stupid and mute person, or a deity of long life
      Is to be afflicted by one of the eight faults that are conditions
which lack leisure.
      After you have attained leisure, which is freedom from these,
      Strive to end birth.
With three of these eight you are unable to know what to adopt and what to
cast aside:
  -being reborn in a border region in which the four types of followers
  [fully ordained monks and nuns and novice monks and nuns] are not active;


  -being mute, stupid, and having incomplete sensory faculties -which means
  incomplete limbs, ears, and so on; and
  -lacking a conqueror's word, meaning born where a buddha has not arisen.
  -If you have a wrong view which misconceives the three jewels, karma and
  its effects, and former and future lives as nonexistent, you do not
  believe in the sublime teachings.
  -You will have great difficulty in developing a religious attitude if you
  are born in any of the three miserable realms, and, even if you do
  develop a little bit, you will be unable to practice because you will be
  tormented by suffering.
Mahamati's Clear Words: Explanation of the "Friendly Letter" explains  that
a deity of long life is one who  lacks  discrimination  and  lives  in  the
formless realm.
Asvaghosa's A Talk on the Eight Conditions that Lack Leisure explains  that
a deity of long  life  is  one  in  the  desire  realm  who  is  constantly
distracted by activities of desire.
Vasubandhu's Treasury  of  Knowledge  states  that  the  deities  who  lack
discrimination exist in one area of Great  Fruit  -a  land  of  the  fourth
meditative stabilization. This area is set off from the rest of Great Fruit
in the way that a monastery is set off from a lay  settlement.  Even  more,
these deities have inactive minds and mental processes, except for the time
immediately following birth and during death. Finally, they live  for  many
great eons. It is incorrect to say that a noble being  who  exists  in  the
formless realm is in a condition that lacks leisure. Therefore, we say that
ordinary beings who are born in the formless realm are in a condition  that
lacks leisure because they do not have the opportunity to achieve the  path
to liberation. The same can also be said for being reborn as a deity of the
desire realm who is constantly distracted by sensual pleasures.
Thus, with respect to calling these "conditions that lack leisure," the
Clear Words: Explanation of the "Friendly Letter" states:
  In these eight states there is no time for acts of virtue; therefore,
  they are called "conditions that lack leisure."]
Leisure – means freedom from the eight inopportune states.
The eight inopportune states are broken into two sets of four:
    - Four inopportune states in the human realm and
    - Four inopportune states not related to the human realm.
Four inopportune states in the human realm
Even you are born as a human being but if you are in the  world  at  a  time
where  the  Buddha  has  not  descended,  then  that  becomes  one  of   the
inopportune human conditions.
Even if you are born as a human in a world where the Buddha  has  descended,
but if you are born in a place where the teachings of  the  Buddha  has  not
spread, then that is another inopportune state.
The first inopportune human state refers  to  a  combination  of  these  two
factors; you are born in a place where either the Buddha has  not  descended
or even if the Buddha has  descended  but  you  do  not  find  the  Buddha’s
teachings in that particular place.
The second inopportune human state is that being born  in  a  border  region
where there are no teachings of the Buddha.
The third inopportune human state is that even if you are born  in  a  place
where the Buddha has descended and in a place where you have access  to  the
Buddhas teachings but you are born with incomplete sensory faculties or  you
are physically challenged in certain way such as  having  incomplete  limbs,
being deaf and so forth.
The fourth inopportune human state is that even you are born  with  complete
sensory faculties, but if you are born as someone with  wrong  views  or  as
someone who denies the existence of the Three Jewels and karma.
Summary: If you are born as a human being, then the four inopportune human
states refer to:
1. being in a world where the Buddha has not descended or being in a world
   where the Buddha has descended but you have no  access to the Buddha’s
   teachings.
2. being born in a border region where there are no teachings of the
   Buddha.
3. being born with incomplete sensory faculties.
4. being someone who holds wrong views.
This is something to think about. If someone is born as a  human  being  but
with these four inopportune conditions, basically, I think this person  will
neither have any mental space nor time to practice the Buddha’s teachings.
This is something that we all have to think about individually.  Considering
these four inopportune conditions separately, if any of us were  to  possess
any of these conditions, is it possible to practice the teachings?
Next are the four non-human inopportune states such as:
 -being born as a celestial god with long life or
 -being born in any of the three lower realms
I am thinking that an understanding of the three lower  realms  as  being  a
non-human  inopportune  condition  is  pretty  obvious.  While  we  may  not
directly perceive the hell beings nor the pretas (hungry ghosts) but we  can
see the animals. We should analyze that if one is born as an animal,  is  it
really possible to practice the dharma? I guess it is  pretty  obvious  that
one cannot practice the dharma as an animal. Then  it  goes  without  saying
that if one born as a hungry ghost or as a hell being, there  is  really  no
way to practice the teachings.
The fourth non-human inopportune condition is being born as a celestial  god
with long life.
The entire samsara is divided into three realms; the desire,  the  form  and
formless realm.
The form realm itself is divided into four levels.
The gods of long life here refer to the celestial beings  who  are  born  in
the fourth level of the form realm. For these beings, their  discrimination/
consciousness only manifest actively during the time of birth  as  that  god
and when they die. Other than that, in between birth  and  death,  they  are
basically spaced-out. These celestial gods have very long  life  but  if  we
were to take this kind of rebirth then we would  possess  one  of  the  non-
human inopportune states.
Then you have beings of the formless realms  as  well.  There  are  ordinary
beings and superior  beings  in  the  formless  realm.  Beings  born  as  an
ordinary being in the formless realm  is  also  considered  to  possess  the
inopportune state because they lack the fortune to  actualize  the  path  to
liberation.
After thinking about it, one would probably have to say  that  the  ordinary
beings in the form realm do possess the fortune  to  practice  the  path  to
liberation.
When we talk about the celestial beings/ worldly gods,  there  are  gods  of
the desire realm and there are gods  of  the  higher  realms.  Here  we  are
referring to the gods of the form and formless realm. Most of  the  gods  of
the desire realm are said to be in an inopportune state because most of  the
desire realm gods are distracted constantly by sensual pleasures. They  also
have a very long life. This non-human inopportune state of being  a  worldly
god with long life, depending on the commentaries  used,  some  commentaries
explain it to mean the specific god of the fourth level of  the  form  realm
(the one who lacks discrimination) whilst some commentaries  takes  this  to
mean the worldly gods of the desire realm.
In the Lamrim Chenmo, it is clearly stated that the beings in the  form  and
formless realms do not have the fortune to newly attain the path of  seeing.
So, it is stated that the ordinary beings of  the  formless  realms  do  not
possess the fortune to achieve the path to liberation whereas  the  ordinary
beings of the form realm do possess the  fortune  to  achieve  the  path  to
liberation. If you say this, you should have reason to back-it up. I am  not
actually sure. Do you have any suggestion?
(Some student gave suggestions but inaudible)
It is clearly mentioned in the text that the ordinary beings  who  are  born
in the formless realms are in a condition that lacks freedom  i.e.  they  do
not have the opportunity to achieve the  path  to  liberation.  Having  said
that, we have to think about the reason.
The way to think about these eight inopportune states or the lack  of  these
eight inopportune conditions is to  relate  it  to  our  own  existence.  By
recognizing the mere fact that we are now born as a  human  being  and  free
from these eight inopportune conditions and  just  by  having  this  freedom
alone can help us in the practice of the Buddha’s teachings.

2B4B-1A2 Endowments
A The five personal endowments
The second one has two points of which the five personal endowments are
said to be “human nature, birth in a central region, complete faculties, no
extremely perverted deeds [and] faith in the foundation”. Here “birth in a
central region” is to be born in a place where the fourfold followers roam.
“Complete faculties” consist in not being stupid or dumb and having
complete limbs as well as minor body parts such as eyes and ears. “No
extremely perverted deeds” implies not having committed or caused to commit
an action of immediate retribution. “Faith in the foundation” is faith in
the foundation from which all the mundane and supramundane white dharmas
are born, discipline. Here “discipline” should be applied to all three
collections [of scriptures].
As those five are brought together in one’s own mental continuum and
constitute circumstances for the accomplishment of [the] Dharma, they are
called “personal endowments”.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 119:  a) The five aspects of
opportunity that pertain to yourself
According to the Sravaka Levels the five are:
    Being human, being born in a central region, having complete sensory
    faculties,
    Having reversible karma, and having faith in the source.
"Being born in a central region" means that you are born in an area wherein
the four types of followers are active.
"Having complete sensory faculties" means that you are not stupid or mute,
and that you have your main limbs, secondary limbs, eyes, ears, and the
like intact.
"Having reversible karma" means that you have not done or caused others to
commit the five deeds of immediate retribution.
"Faith in the source" means that you have faith in discipline, which is the
root from which all mundane and supramundane virtues arise. Here,
"discipline" refers to all three scriptural collections.
These five are called "aspects of opportunity that pertain to yourself"
because they are included in your mind-stream and are favorable conditions
for practicing the teaching
Next is the “Identification of the endowments”. There are ten endowments:
- five pertaining to oneself and
- five that are pertaining to others.
The five endowments pertaining to oneself:
 1.Being born as a human.
 2.Born in a place where Buddhas teachings exist.
 3.Having complete sensory faculties
 4.Having reversible karma means that one has not engaged in the five deeds
 of immediate retribution and so forth.
 5. Having faith in the source i.e. one has faith in the  three  scriptural
 collections –Buddha’s teachings.
These are the five endowments  -favorable  conditions-  that  we  personally
must possess to engage in the dharma practice.

B The five endowments conditioned by others
The five endowments conditioned by others are said to be:
       A buddha arrived and taught the holy Dharma,
       the teachings are abiding and being followed,
       there are hearts with loving concern for others.
Here the “A buddha arrived or emerged” means that, after accumulating the
collections throughout three countless eons, he has manifestly attained
perfect Buddahood. “taught the holy Dharma” means that the Buddha or his
hearers have taught the Dharma. “The Dharma teachings are abiding” means
that the Dharma that is accomplished by means of actualizing the Dharma of
the ultimate has not degenerated. “The abiding Dharma teachings being
followed” means that through that very realisation of the Dharma, beings
see that they have the power to directly perceive the holy Dharma and
follow the teachings in accordance with that realisation. “Hearts of loving
concern for others” means that there are alms-givers and benefactors who
grant monastic robes and the like. As those five are present in the mental
continuum of others and constitute circumstances for the accomplishment of
the Dharma, they are called “endowments conditioned by others”.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 119: b) The five aspects of
opportunity that pertain to others
The five are:
    That a buddha has visited, that the sublime teaching is being taught,
    That the teaching remains, that there are those who follow it,
    That there is caring for others.
Among these,
"that a buddha has visited," (or is appearing), means that a bodhisattva
has accumulated the collections of merit and sublime wisdom for three
countless eons, and has reached the heart of enlightenment; i.e., become a
perfect buddha.
"That the sublime teaching is being taught" means that a buddha or the
disciples of that buddha are imparting the teaching.
"That the teaching remains" means that it is not degenerating between the
time of someone becoming a buddha and giving the teaching until this buddha
passes into final nirvana. Furthermore, this phrase refers to the teaching
at the time its followers achieve it by knowing the ultimate sublime
teachings.
"That there are those who follow" this teaching means that there are some
who understand that beings have the capacity to perceive the sublime
teaching. They understand this through the very knowledge of the ultimate,
sublime teachings mentioned above. These individuals then follow the
teaching while teaching others according to their knowledge.
"That there is caring for others" refers to benefactors and those who
actually carry out acts of charity by giving religious robes and the like.
Since these five conditions exist in the minds of others and are favorable
conditions for the practice of the teachings, they are called "aspects of
opportunity that pertain to others."
The first four aspects of opportunity that pertain to others (as presented
here from the Sravaka Levels are at present incomplete for us. However, it
is suitable to consider an approximation of three of these four—the sublime
teaching being taught, the teachings given remaining, and there being
followers of the teaching which abides—to be complete for us.]
The five endowments that pertains to others:
1. A Buddha has descended in this world.
2. The teaching is being taught either by Buddha himself  or  his  followers
such as hearers and so forth.
3. The teachings remains refers to the  existence  of  people  who  put  the
Buddha’s teachings into practice and have generated realizations; those  who
are upholding the realizational dharma.
4. There are those who follow means that there are people who are  following
after the teachings.
5. There is a caring  for  others  refers  to  benefactors  and  donors  who
support the dharma.
These are the five endowments  pertained  to  others.  These  are  necessary
conditions for us to practice the dharma but these conditions have  to  come
from someone else; other than ourselves. Therefore they are endowments  that
pertain to other.
If you think about these endowments, they are the favorable  conditions  for
practicing the dharma. The endowments are divided into  personal  endowments
and endowments pertaining to others. What does it mean? It means  that  both
kinds of endowments are necessary. Some people may think  that  as  long  as
the Buddha is around then everything is fine as everything is in  the  hands
of the Buddha and we don’t have to do anything. From here,  we  can  clearly
see that we need to possess the endowments from our own side as well  before
we can practice the dharma. The whole point of  identifying  these  freedoms
and endowments is so that we can reflect on it.
In terms of the freedoms, we have to ask ourselves:
 - do we possess all these eight freedoms?
 - by possessing these eight freedoms, does it really make a  difference  to
my practice?
 - by possessing these eight freedoms, what does  it  do  for  my  spiritual
development?
Similarly, in terms of the ten endowments -the five personal  and  the  five
pertaining to others- we have to ask ourselves:
 - as an individual, do I possess all these endowments?
 - by possessing all these endowments, are they important to me?
 - am I fortunate to have them?
 - does it make any difference to my spiritual practice?
On the basis of having identified these eight freedoms  and  ten  endowments
in  relation  to  ourselves,  then  we  move  on   to   the   next   outline
“Contemplating the great importance of  this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments”. Then on the basis of recognizing that we  do  have  this  human
life of freedoms and endowments, we then move on to the next  outline  where
we will reflect on how important and valuable it is to  have  this  kind  of
rebirth.

2B4B-1B Considering their great value
1 Considering the inappropriateness of someone with this special base
acting like an animal
Second: If no practice of the completely pure Dharma for the sake of
lasting happiness comes about at all, you are like an animal despite your
birth in a higher realm, since animals also have the endeavour merely to
attain happiness and eliminate suffering until they die.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 120: Until death, animals strive
merely to avoid suffering and achieve happiness. Therefore, if you do this
and do not practice the pure teachings for the sake of achieving lasting
happiness, then you are like an animal despite being born in a happy
realm.]
Here it says that after having attained such  a  human  life  with  all  the
freedoms and endowments and if we do  not  use  it  to  achieve  everlasting
happiness to practice pure dharma then it is said that we are  no  different
from animal. We have to ask ourselves whether this is true or not. Is  there
are any differences if we do not use  this  human  life  with  freedoms  and
endowments for something better?  If we just lead a normal life, are we  any
different from the animals?


2 How a body of leisure and endowments is best
For the accomplishment of the Mahayana path a base like the one explained
earlier is necessary. In the Letter to a Disciple it says:
  The base of the path of those gone to bliss, the tool for leading beings,
  that very strength of mind, a strength that human beings have gained that
  path has not been found by gods or nagas - nor by asuras, not by garudas,
  vidyadhara, kinnaras or snakes.
Furthermore, although some gods of the desire realm with strong habitual
tendencies from having previously trained on the path on a human basis, are
suitable as a basis for seeing the truths for the first time, it is
impossible to attain the arya path for the first time on an upper realm
basis. However, as explained before, the desire realm gods are said to be,
for the most part, an unfree state and therefore not the best basis for
attaining the path for the first time.
Again, an inhabitant of the continent of Uttarakuru is unsuitable as a
basis for vows, which is why the bases of [the other] three continents is
praised - and out of those [especially] the inhabitants of Jambudvipa.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 121: Not just any life will suffice
for the practice of such pure teachings in general or for the practice of
the Mahayana path in particular. Consequently, you must attain such a life
as was described earlier. The Letter to a Student:
   With a human life you attain the spirit of enlightenment,
   Which is the basis for the path to the state of a sugata,
   Which brings great mental force, and which equips you to lead all
   beings.
   Neither nagas, demigods, vidyadharas, garudas, kinnaras, nor  snakes
   attain this path.
A life as a certain type of desire realm deity -one who has strong latent
propensities due to previously having trained in the path as a human -can
serve as a basis for initially seeing the truth. However, you cannot
initially attain the path of a noble being during a life in the higher
[deities'] realms. [That is, you cannot attain the Path of Seeing and
become a noble being as a deity of the form of the formless realm.]
Moreover, most desire realm deities are said to be in a condition that
lacks leisure, as explained previously. Therefore, a human life is the
supreme basis for initially achieving the path. Furthermore, since a human
life on the Uttarakuru continent is not a suitable basis for vows, there is
praise for a human life on the other three continents. Moreover, among
these, there is praise for a human on Jambudvipa.]
Someone who has obtained a human life of freedoms and endowments is said  to
have obtained a special human rebirth. For example, on the basis  of  having
this  kind  of  rebirth,  one  can  meditate  and  develop  the   altruistic
intention/ bodhichitta. This kind of human life  is  considered  to  be  the
best basis for practicing and developing bodhichitta/ altruistic  intention.
Even though beings who are born as a  god  or  naga,  they  have  their  own
powers and they are relatively more powerful than human beings in many  ways
but when it comes to developing bodhichitta,  human  rebirth  with  body  is
said to be the best basis. So the text is advising us  that  since  we  have
already attained such a human rebirth, rather than letting it go  to  waste,
we should extract the essence to make this rebirth meaningful.

3 How to train in the wish to take the essence, having brought to mind
those [two] objectives
‘Consequently, why would I act in such a way that an excellent base like
this one I have gained does not have a result? If I did not make it
meaningful, could there be a greater self-betrayal and a bigger stupidity?
Having passed through many perilous places of unfreedom, such as the bad
migrations, again and again, if I were to go back to those places,
forsaking this one-off liberation as meaningless, it would be like turning
mindless as though stupefied by a magic spell’. By way of thoughts like
these you should meditate again and again
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 121: Therefore, repeatedly meditate
with thoughts such as this:
Why would I waste this attainment of such a good life? When I act as though
it were insignificant, I am deceiving myself.  What could be more foolish
than this? Just this once I am free from continuously trekking the many
narrow cliff-paths of leisureless conditions, such as miserable realms. If
I waste this freedom and return to those conditions, it would be similar to
losing my mind, like someone dazed by a magic spell.]
There is a quotation from Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva’s  Deeds.

In Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour [Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds] it
says:
      Having found this kind of leisure,
      not to cultivate what is virtuous -
      no betrayal could be a greater,
      nothing more deluded than that.
And:
      Having found this place so rare,
      hard to find and beneficial,
      if I, well aware of it,
      were taken to that hell again
      as if deluded by magic spellshas
      my mind here wasted away? -
      through what delusion I do not know either -
      what has become of my mind - my feelings?

4 The inappropriateness of returning empty-handed, given that not only
ultimate but also temporary objectives are easily accomplished
Thus you should also consider the method that allows you easily to attain
the causes of a higher realm body, resources, and a retinue which are not
only greatly meaningful from an ultimate but also from a temporary point of
view by means of this basis: [practicing] giving, ethical discipline,
patience and so on. If you do not apply yourself day and night to the
causes of those two by means of that greatly meaningful basis, it would
seem like returning empty handed from an island of precious jewels.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 123: Contemplate the great importance
of leisure and opportunity in this way with respect to your final goals.
Also reflect on how important they are in terms of your temporary goals.
That is, consider how you can easily achieve with this life qualities such
as generosity, ethical discipline, and patience, which are the causes of
resources, perfect attendants, and the body of a being in high status
[rebirth amongst humans or deities]. Think as follows:
  In this way, this life is very important in terms of attaining high
  status and certain goodness [of either liberation or omniscience]. If I
  were to waste it and not strive day and night to create the causes of
  these two goals, it would be as if I were returning empty-handed from a
  land of jewels. Also, I will be bereft of happiness in the future and
  will not obtain a life of leisure. Without leisure, I will undergo
  continual suffering. Thus, what kind of self-deception is worse than
  this?]
On the basis of having obtained this human life of freedoms and  endowments,
we can achieve both the temporary and the ultimate goals.
Temporary goal refers to getting a higher rebirth  such  as  human  or  god.
That is something we can achieve.
Ultimate goal is the achievement of liberation  and  enlightenment.  We  can
also achieve this.
Here we are advised to make full use of this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments day and night in order to achieve the two goals-  both  temporary
and ultimate goals.
This topic of the human life of freedoms  and  endowments  comes  under  the
headline: “Exhortation to take full advantage of  a  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments”.  This section is persuading and convincing us to  do  something
useful with this human life of freedoms and  endowments.  The  only  way  to
persuade ourselves is to think over and over again  on  what  we  have  just
covered. We have to think about  it;  otherwise  there  is  no  way  we  can
persuade ourselves. The way to persuade ourselves is to understand  that  we
have received this human life of freedoms and endowments  and  to  think  of
all the wonderful things that we can achieve -both  temporary  and  ultimate
goals- with this human rebirth. It is difficult to find such an  opportunity
again. Therefore, for these various reasons, we persuade ourselves to  start
doing something now and better not let it go to waste. The essence  of  this
section is essentially an advice  which  exhorting  us  to  be  better  than
animals. To be better than animals is  to  think  beyond  the  preoccupation
with this life affairs and happiness. If we do not go beyond this,  then  we
are no different from the animals. We have the ability to  think  about  why
we should be better than animals and how we can be better than the  animals.
We have the ability to do this. If we tell the  same  thing  to  an  animal;
“You need to be better.” I think there is nothing the animals can do.

2B4B-1C Considering the difficulty in finding it
Is it easy to get this human life of freedoms and endowments? The answer  is
no.

2B4B-1C1 Illustration of the difficulty in finding it
Third: In the Basis of Scriptural Transmission it says that beings who die
and migrate from the bad and happy realms to the bad realms are like the
dust of the great earth and that the beings who are born from there into
the happy realms are like the dust taken up by the tip of a finger nail.
Therefore, [a precious human rebirth] is difficult to find from both the
happy and the bad realms.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 124: Moreover, whether you start from
a happy realm or a miserable realm, it is difficult to obtain such leisure
and opportunity. For, the Buddha states in the Bases of Discipline that
those who die in the miserable realms and are reborn there are similar in
number to the dust particles on the great earth, whereas those who are
reborn from there into happy realms are similar in number to the dust
particles on the tip of a fingernail. Further, those who die in both types
of happy realms [human and divine] and are reborn in the miserable realms
are similar in number to the dust particles on the great earth, while those
who die in the happy realms and are reborn there are similar in number to
the dust particles on the tip of a fingernail.]

2B4B-1C2 Reasons why it is difficult to find
If you ask just why they are it is so difficult to find, it says in the
Four Hundred [Verses]:
    For the most part people fix
    on the side that is unholy.
    Consequently common beings
    mostly surely go to bad realms.
Accordingly, there are many humans and other beings who mostly fix on the
side of the ten non-virtues and that is also why, consequently, they go to
the bad realms. Furthermore, if, for each moment of anger and the like
towards a bodhisattva, you have to spend one eon in the [Avici] hell of
incessant torment, the negativities accumulated over many lifetimes which
have not come to fruition nor been overcome by antidotes, and which are
present in your own continuum, will doubtlessly cause you to spend many
eons in bad realms.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 124: Question: Why is a human life of
leisure and opportunity so difficult to obtain?
Reply: It is because beings of the happy realms -humans and the like- are
frequently involved in such ignoble activities as the ten non-virtues.
Because of this, they are reborn in the miserable realms. As Aryadeva's
Four Hundred Stanzas states:
    Humans for the most part
    Are involved in things ignoble.
    Therefore, most ordinary beings
    Will surely go to the miserable realms.
For instance, for even a single moment of anger toward a bodhisattva you
must stay for an eon in the Unrelenting Hell. As this is so, it goes
without saying that you will have to stay for many eons in the miserable
realms on account of having in your mind-stream the imprints of many sins
that you previously accumulated over many lifetimes. These imprints have
not been erased by an antidote and have not yet issued effects.]
This is the  difficulty  of  obtaining  this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments. Why is so difficult and rare to obtain? Because majority of  the
sentient beings, wherever they are, are constantly engaged in the  ten  non-
virtuous actions. If we look in our own mental continuum, we  can  also  see
how we are so naturally dispose to non-virtue. If one constantly engages  in
non-virtue, then the end result will be  the  lower  realm  as  non-virtuous
actions will only project or throw us into the lower  realm  rebirth;  never
ever in  the  higher  realm  rebirth.  As  most  sentient  beings  including
ourselves are naturally predispose to non-virtuous actions such as  the  ten
non-virtuous actions that mean it is very difficult for us to get the  human
life of freedoms and endowments again in the future.  On  top  of  that,  we
have to deal with all those  non-virtuous  actions  which  we  have  already
accumulated since beginningless time. Of  course,  if  we  do  purifies  all
these negativities  through  practicing  confession  by  applying  the  four
opponent powers, perhaps we can reduces some  of  these  negativities.   But
again that is something we don’t do.  It is very rare that there are  people
who engage in heartfelt confession practices immediately  right  after  they
have committed non-virtue. So, in general, it is very difficult  for  people
to achieve good rebirth. Once we find ourselves  back  again  in  the  lower
realm and to be able to get out from that  rebirth  and  go  to  the  higher
realm, it is very difficult because once you are in the lower realm,  it  is
very difficult to get out. Why it is very difficult to get out once you  are
in the lower realm? Once you are in the lower realms as hell beings,  hungry
ghosts or animals, you will always  accumulating  negative  karma  in  those
rebirths. If one is accumulating negative karma  in  human  body,  then  one
will freshly accumulate more negative karma when one is in the lower  realm.
 So that makes it very difficult to get out from  the  lower  realm.  If  we
think about this, then one realizes how difficult it is for  one  to  obtain
this human life of freedoms and endowments again.
[LRCM V1 page 125: Qualm: When I experience the suffering of the miserable
realms, I will be extinguishing previous bad karma, and then I will be
reborn in a happy realm. Hence, getting out of the miserable realms is not
difficult.
Reply: While you are experiencing the suffering in the miserable realms,
you are constantly accumulating sins. Therefore, although you may die in a
miserable realm, you will continue to be reborn in miserable realms.
Because of this, getting out of the miserable realms is difficult.
After you have reflected on the difficulty of obtaining a human life of
leisure and opportunity in this way, develop the desire to take full
advantage of such a life. Think, "If I use this life for wrongdoing, it is
extremely wasteful. In light of this, I will spend my time practicing the
sublime teaching."]

2B4B-1C3 The rarity of those obtaining the causes of leisure and endowments
Although, if you thus made sure to clear away and purify the causes of bad
migrations accumulated earlier and closed the door to new engagement in
them, happy migrations would not be rare, as it is, they are very rare
indeed. If you fail to do so, you go to bad migrations, and, once you have
gone to bad migrations, you do not create virtue, but always commit
negativites and therefore do not even hear the name of happy realms for
many eons, as it says in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 124: Still, if you completely clear
away previously accumulated causes of miserable rebirths and restrain
yourself from engaging in these causes again, you are assured of a happy
rebirth. However, doing this is extremely rare. If you do not act this way,
you will be reborn in a miserable realm. Once there, you will not cultivate
virtue, but you will continually commit sins. You will not even hear the
phrase "happy realms" for many eons! Therefore, a human life of leisure and
opportunity is very difficult to obtain.]

2B4B-1C4 The result of sustaining those objectives
Potowa said: “In the region of Pan there was a solid fort by the name of
Ma’i Chakar which had been seized by an enemy. For a long time the people
had become poor servants. One old man used to be in anguish about this fort
and when, one day, he heard people saying that it had been won [back], he
grabbed his spear and, not being able to walk, dragged himself along
saying: ‘If only the capture of Ma’i Chakar was not dream’. Likewise,
having won leisure and endowments, one must also derive such joy from it
and practice Dharma.”  In accordance with this statement, you should
meditate in order to gain this kind of attitude.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 126: Bo-do-wa said: In the region of
Pen-bo there was a great fortress named May-cha-kar . It was captured by an
enemy, and could not be recaptured for a long time. Consequently, there was
this old man who was tormented by the loss of this fortress. One time he
heard someone cry, "The fortress has been taken back," whereupon he grabbed
a spear, being unable to walk, and, dragging himself along with the help of
the spear, exclaimed, "How nice it would be if recapture of the May-cha-kar
fortress isn't a dream!" Similarly, you must find such delight in the
attainment of leisure and opportunity, and you must practice the teachings.
Meditate until you attain the attitude indicated in these stories.]

2B4B-1C5 The method of meditation with four special features
Thus four thoughts regarding the Dharma are necessary for the generation of
a fully qualified wish to take the essence of this basis of leisure:
1. The need to accomplish [the Dharma] - because all sentient beings only
want happiness and do not want suffering and attaining happiness and
eliminating suffering only depends on the holy Dharma.
2. The ability to accomplish [the Dharma] - because you have the external
condition, a spiritual teacher, and the internal condition, leisure and
endowments.
3. The need, also, to accomplish [the Dharma] in this life - because if you
do not accomplish it within this life, it will be difficult to find leisure
and endowments in many [future] rebirths.
4. The need to accomplish [the Dharma] right now - because the time of
death is uncertain.
In order to  take  full  advantage  of  this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments that we have already obtained,  you  must  reflect  on  its  four
elements, as follows:
1. the need to practice the teachings, because all living beings only want
  happiness and do not want suffering, and because achieving happiness and
  alleviating suffering depend only on practicing the teachings;
2. the ability to practice, because you are endowed with the external
  condition, a teacher, and the internal conditions,
  freedoms and endowments. We possess all the favorable conditions –both
  external and internal – therefore we definitely are able to practice the
  teaching;
3. the need to practice in this lifetime, because if you do not practice,
  it will be very difficult to obtain freedoms and endowments again for
  many lifetimes; and
4. the need to practice right now, because there is no certainty when you
  will die.
If you really think about these four elements, they  are  really  important.
The first question that we always ask ourselves: “Why should I practice  the
dharma?”  The answer is because we don’t want suffering and what we want  is
happiness. In order to obtain that, then we have to practice. We are in  the
position to practice the dharma because we have all the conditions.

The third one of those counteracts the laziness of abandoning it, thinking
“I should practice the Dharma in later lives” and the fourth one
counteracts the laziness of not engaging in it thinking “it needs to be
accomplished in this life, but although it was not accomplished in earlier
years, months and days, it is enough to accomplish it much later on”. It is
admissible to make them into three subsuming those two under “[the need to]
accomplish it quickly”. Like that, remembering death may also be linked in
here. In any case, as this is a lengthy topic, it should be explained
below.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 127: Among these, the third stops the
laziness of giving up, which thinks, "I will practice the teaching in
future lives." The fourth stops the laziness of disengagement, which
thinks, "Although I should practice in this lifetime, it is enough to
practice later on and not to practice in my early years, months, and days."
Therefore, it is acceptable to create a list of three qualities by
subsuming these two into one, "practicing quickly." In this case,
mindfulness of death is indeed relevant here, but I will explain it later;
otherwise this will become too wordy.]

2B4B-1C6 Differentiated, sustained mode [of practice]
2B4B-1C6A How to contemplate from various points of view
As the mind is more significantly subdued, if you contemplate from various
points of view, you should contemplate as explained above. If you cannot do
that much, you should subsume them under [three headings]: what the essence
of leisure and endowments is, the manner in which they are greatly
meaningful from a temporary and ultimate point of view, and how difficult
they are to find from the point of view of cause and effect. You should
study each of the points explained above as appropriate and meditate.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 127: If you reflect on this human
life of leisure and opportunity from many perspectives, you will greatly
affect your mind. Therefore, contemplate as instructed above. If you cannot
do this, condense this material into three topics:
  -what the nature of leisure and opportunity is,
  -how it is important in terms of temporary and final goals, and
  -how it is difficult to obtain in terms of its causes and effects.
Then take from the above explanations whatever accords with your mind, and
meditate on it.]

2B4B-1C6B How to contemplate in particular
1 The difficulty in finding [leisure and endowments] from the point of view
of their cause
 First: The difficulty in finding [leisure and endowments] from the point
of view of their cause. Generally speaking, even for the attainment of a
mere happy migration, it is necessary to perform one of the pure virtues
such as discipline. In particular, for the attainment of complete leisure
and endowments, you need a lot of roots of virtue such as getting hold of a
base through pure ethical conduct, reinforcing it through giving and the
like and making connections by means of stainless prayers. In that case, it
becomes apparent that those who accomplish such causes are very few, which
is why one should think that, proportionately, the result, the general and
specific base of happy realms is difficult to find.
2 The difficulty of finding [leisure and endowments] from the point of view
of the result.
The difficulty of finding [leisure and endowments] from the point of view
of the result:
You meditate on the fact that, from the point of view of the beings in bad
migrations, different in rank from us, even the mere happy realms seem hard
to attain, and from the point of view of beings in happy migrations, of the
same rank, too, distinguished leisure50 is extremely rare. Geshe Dolpa laid
great emphasis on this. He said that all other teachings come about brought
on by this. As it is like this you should strive accordingly.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 127:  With respect to how it is
difficult to obtain a human life of leisure and opportunity in terms of the
causes, consider the following. In general, even to obtain just a happy
rebirth you must cultivate a single pure virtue, such as ethical
discipline. In particular, to obtain complete leisure and opportunity
requires many roots of virtue, such as having a foundation of pure ethical
discipline, augmenting it with generosity and the like, and when dying
making a connection with your next lifetime through stainless aspirational
prayers. As this is so, it is obvious that very few achieve such causes.
Therefore, once you have understood this, reflect on the difficulty of
obtaining the general effect, a life in a happy realm, and the particular
effect, a human life with leisure and opportunity.
The difficulty of obtaining a human life of leisure and opportunity in
terms of the effects is explained as follows. Compared to the dumber of
beings in the miserable realms -beings unlike us- even a mere rebirth in a
happy realm seems almost nonexistent. Even compared to the number of beings
in the happy realms  -beings like us- a special life of leisure is very
rare. Meditate on this.
Geshe Dol-wa greatly valued this teaching on the difficulty of obtaining
leisure and opportunity. Thus, he said that the practice of all other
teachings follows this one. Since this is so, strive at it.]
This paragraph is saying that, in general, just to get a good rebirth is
really difficult. On top of that, if you want to obtain a human life of
freedoms and endowments, that is even so much difficult. What is the
reason? Because the causes for achieving this rebirth are very difficult to
put them together; they are very rare. If you do not practice the cause and
if you find it difficult to put the causes together then of course you will
have difficulty in finding the result. The essence is to reflect and to
remind ourselves the opportunity that we have should not let it go to
waste. We should strive to use this rebirth that we have in order to
achieve the temporary and the ultimate goals. So we need to do as
individual is to think about these things over and over again such that we
end up encouraging and persuading ourselves to use this opportunity now to
achieve both the temporary and the ultimate goals.

Questions for discussion on Sunday, 28th August 2011
1. What is faith and why is it so important?
2. What is meditation and what is the purpose of meditation?
3. What is the most important thing to do in between the meditation
   sessions?
What is the difference between analytical and stabilization meditation and
is it correct for a single individual to engage in both?
Student 1:  What is the difference between the desire and the form realm?
As an ordinary being, which realm am I living in?
Khen Rinpoche: We are abiding in the desire realm. In order to be born in
the form realm, you must first have achieved calm abiding/ meditative
serenity. Someone who is born in the form realm, that person has no
interest whatsoever in the enjoyment of the desire realm. They regard
enjoyment of the desire realm as unpleasant. They don’t have the attachment
to the enjoyment of the desire realm because they have something better!
Student 2: Is the ordinary being of the form realm considered to be of the
opportune rebirth?
Khen Rinpoche: When we talked about the god of long lives, we specifically
talk about the god of the fourth level of the form realm. We are not
talking about every single god of the fourth level of the form realm but we
are talking about those who lack of discrimination. From what you have
said, it seem that you are implying that the gods of the first, second and
third levels of the form realm do possess the opportune whereas the god of
the fourth level of the form realm do not possess the opportune condition.
The form realm is divided into four levels. There are ordinary beings in
the form realm who have entered the path but it seem that is not the case
for the formless realm. Indeed there is this difference. The point is that
in the formless realm, it seems that there is no ordinary being who has
entered the path while in the formless realm. So there is the difference
between form realm and formless realm. So why is the difference?  There
must be reasons and this is something to think about.
There are ordinary being who has entered the path while in the form realm
but cannot the newly attain the Path of Seeing. In order to newly attain
the Path of Seeing they have to take rebirth in the desire realm. This is
stated in the Abhidharma and it is also stated in the Lamrim Chenmo; “It is
impossible to newly achieve the Path of Seeing in the higher realm.”
It is stated very clearly that it is not possible to newly achieve the Path
of Seeing in the higher realms i.e. form realm and formless realm but you
can newly achieve the Path of Seeing on the basis of desire realm god. This
because of having very strong habitual tendency from the past rebirth as
human being.

Please read on the next section which talked about the three types of
person.
