Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 17.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.021233
================================================================================


Sometime it is important to remember how extremely fortunate we are. So it
is important to constantly reflect how fortunate we are. Just take the
example of you coming to class; despite the full day of work, you still
come to class with a virtuous motivation to seek the dharma. Because of
these aspiration and virtuous motivation, you collect merits just by coming
to class. When you come to the center, there are many representations of
the Buddha’s exalted body, speech and mind and other holy objects. You
create merits just by coming to the center and seeing all these holy
objects. We usually recite the prayer “Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha” during
class. When we recite all these praises, we bring the Buddha to our mind.
These activities and prayers collect merits. We also do the seven branches
of worship. By doing this practice we again collect merits. We should
remember that we collect all these benefits and merits every time when we
come to class. We should rejoice in these merits. So just by coming to
class alone, we are able to collect these much merits and to purify our
mind of obscurations and negativities.
We come to class to hear the teaching of the Buddha which shows the path to
enlightenment. When we hear this teaching, we get the clear ideas as what
we have to abandon and what we have to cultivate.  Through hearing the
teaching we leave very strong imprints in our mental continuum. We should
continue to study and to hear the teaching with virtuous motivation. We
need to remember this constantly. So having a good motivation for hearing
the teaching and for explaining the teaching is extremely important. The
subject matter here is Lamrim – the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. By
studying and actualizing the Lamrim and gaining the realization of the
path, we can share our knowledge and our experience with other sentient
beings. By doing so, we remove the darkness of their ignorance and
enclosing their mind. Through doing so, we will be able to cause the
teaching of the Buddha to be upheld in this world. So we have to remember
all these and to generate the motivation of continuing your studies.

Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
We have look at the meaning of meditation and the purpose of meditation.
Meditation refers to the act of repeatedly focusing our mind upon a
virtuous object of meditation.  By doing so, we transform the entity of our
mind into that of virtue. What meditation seeks to do is to transform our
mind into virtuous state. This is something that we have to try to do all
the times i.e. to make our mind remains in the virtuous state. If we are
able to cause our mind to abide in virtuous state, the mind will not engage
in negative actions.
What we have covered so far is “How to sustain the meditation in general”.
Next is “How to sustain the meditation specifically” and, in this context,
is on the topic of guru devotion.

2B4A-2A1B-2 How to sustain [the meditation] in this context
A By thinking about the benefits of reliance and the faults of non-reliance
Second: You should first think about the benefits of reliance and about the
faults of non-reliance.
When meditating on the topic of guru devotion, first reflect on the
benefits of relying on the teacher, such as quickly achieve enlightenment.
At this point in time, you can bring to mind all the benefits that you have
experienced so far by relying on the teacher and then reflect on them. It
is best if you can relate this meditation to your own experience. So you
should think about all those specific benefits that you have received by
relying on the teacher. You can compare the state of your mind and your
conduct before you have met the teaching and started to rely on the teacher
and after you have relied on the teacher. So remember to bring to mind of
your own experiences in relation to relying on the teacher.
Before meeting the teacher, our thought and conduct are basically non-
virtuous and those actions would lead us to suffering and lower realms.
After having met the teacher, we come to know about virtue and non-virtue.
Then we are able to abandon non-virtue and are able to transform our mind
into virtuous as much as possible. Did this happen to you? So you have to
reflect on this based on your own experience. This is something that you
have to see it for yourself. By relying on the teacher, in each and every
single day, you become closer to enlightenment. If you have not relied on
the teacher, then effectively each and every single day you will be further
away from enlightenment. Is this true for you? Have you experience this?
This is something you have to think it for yourself.
So, by reflecting on the benefits of relying on the teacher and the faults
of not relying on the teacher and then relating it to your own experience,
at the end of the process, you need to have some feeling in your heart. In
this context, we are looking at the meditation on guru devotion.

B How to train in faith by means of thinking about his positive qualities
Then you repeatedly resolve never to allow your mind to get lost in
conceiving faults in the guru and think of qualities like discipline and
meditative stabilisation that you yourself have perceived in him,
cultivating the faith that is a mind having the aspect of faith until it
arises.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 100: First reflect on the benefits of relying
on the teacher, such as quickly attaining buddhahood, and the drawbacks of
not relying on the teacher, such as giving rise to suffering in this and
future lives. Then, think, many times and with an attitude of restraint, "I
will never allow myself to conceive of faults in my guru." After
considering any of your guru's good qualities that you know -such as
ethical discipline, concentration, wisdom, and being learned- meditate on
them until you produce a faith that has the aspect of mental clarity. ]
In this context of training the mind to cultivate faith in the guru, we
have to try as much as possible to stop the conception of faults in the
guru. By relying on the attitude of restraint as much as possible, one
stops all conception of faults in the guru. You need to meditate repeatedly
on the good qualities that the guru possesses such as ethical discipline,
concentration, wisdom, and being learned. You should not restrict only to
these few qualities but you can also think of other qualities such as
having good heart and so forth. It is important for you to bring to mind
whatever good qualities that you have seen in your guru and repeatedly
meditate on them until you develop faith.

C Training in the respect that remembers kindness
Then you should, in accordance with the above quotations from the sutra
collection, consider the [instances of] beneficial kindness that you
received and are still receiving and sincerely cultivate respect until it
arises.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 100: Then, in accordance with the sutras
cited earlier, contemplate how your guru's kindness has been and will be
helpful to you. Meditate on that until you develop respect from the depths
of your heart.]
It is solely through the kindness of the guru that we are able to engage in
virtue and it is only through the kindness of the guru, we are able to
accumulate merits. It is also through the kindness of the guru, we are able
to take the very first step towards the state of liberation. Again, if we
relate this to our own life experience, then we will be able to see this
clearly.
Before relying on the teacher, we are not able to engage in virtue but
after having relying on the teacher and through the kindness of the
teacher, we are able to engage in some virtues, collecting merits, make
some positive changes and make the first step towards liberation on the
path. All these happen due to the kindness of the guru. So if we think
about these, we can understand how extremely kind our teacher is. If you
look at your own life experience, you can see that whatever small positive
changes and good qualities that you have, this is due to having met and
relied on the teacher; not anyone else. Although there are Buddhas and
bodhisattvas out there but who is the person in our life that practically
enable us to even achieve this small change for the better? It is the guru.
It is obviously due to the kindness of the teacher and you can relate this
to your own life experience. As mentioned in the teaching, the teacher is
kinder than all the Buddhas. You have to see it for yourself why such
statement is made. Although there are numberless Buddhas, but the person
who actually are guiding us on the path is the virtuous friend- our guru.
That is why the guru is so much kinder than the numberless of Buddhas.
Remember at the beginning of this section, before we engage in the
meditation session, we have to engage in the six preparatory practices;
which are the preliminary to the meditation session. For the actual
meditation session, we have to sustain the relevant meditation during the
actual meditation session. If you are sustaining the meditation on guru
devotion, then you have to do of what we have just covered; meditating on
the benefits of relying and the faults of not relying, cultivating faith,
generate respect and so forth. That is the specific context.
Next is what to do at the end of the meditation session.

2B4A-2A1C What to do at the end
2B4A-2A1C-1 What should actually be done at the end
Third: By means of the Prayer of Good Behaviour and the Seventy about
Aspiration the accumulated virtue should be dedicated with strong
determination to the temporary and ultimate aspirations.
By means of such prayers as the Prayer of Samantabhadra and Aspiration in
Seventy Verses dedicate the virtue that you have accumulated. Do it with an
aspiration so strong that it will be the cause of fulfilling your
provisional and final aims.

2B4A-2A1C-2 Times and duration of meditation
A Indication of the times of meditation
Thus you should meditate in four sessions - at dawn, in the morning, in the
afternoon and in the evening.
Meditate in this way during four sessions: predawn, morning, afternoon, and
at nightfall.
If one is serious about this, then you should meditate in four sessions.
Predawn – between 3~ 4am
Morning – when there is some brightness in the sky
Afternoon- after mid-day and is between 3~4pm
Nightfall – after sunset and is between 7~8pm
Basically there are two sessions before 12 noon and two sessions after 12
noon.

B How to meditate in the beginning
Moreover, if [your sessions are] long in the beginning it is easy to fall
under the power of laxity and excitement. As it is difficult to correct
this state of mind once you have got used to it, you should have many short
sessions. If you break off the session when there is still a desire to
meditate, you will really want to enter meditation the next time, too. They
say that otherwise, you will be overcome by nausea at the sight of your
practice place.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 100: Furthermore, if  at  first  you  meditate
for a long time, you will be readily susceptible to laxity  and  excitement.
If this becomes your habit, it  will  then  be  difficult  to  correct  your
awareness. Therefore, meditate in many  short  sessions.  If  you  end  your
session while still wanting to meditate, you will be eager to  reenter  each
future session.  Otherwise, it is said that you will feel nauseous when  you
see the cushion.]
At the beginning, we should have short session and not long session. As  for
the short session, we should have many. From the beginning, if we  start  to
meditate for  very  long  time  i.e.  keeping  long  session,  it  makes  us
susceptible to fall under the influence of  laxity  and  excitement.  If  we
keep falling under the control of  laxity  and  excitement  and  becoming  a
habit, then it would be difficult for us to correct that bad  habit  in  the
future. So, therefore, right from  the  beginning,  you  should  have  short
sessions.
I would like to give you some idea of what laxity is. Laxity can be  divided
into coarse laxity and subtle laxity.
Coarse laxity: When you bring the object of meditation to mind, in the  case
of laxity, you have the object in your mind and your mind is able  to  abide
on the chosen object of meditation but the object does not  appear  clearly.
There is a factor of stability but there is no factor of clarity.
Subtle laxity: After sometime in the meditation session, come  a  time  when
you have both factor of clarity and the factor of stability  but  your  mind
does not hold on the object of meditation  strongly  i.e.  the  strength  of
apprehending the object may not  be  strong.  That  happens  when  there  is
subtle laxity in the mind.
An ideal meditation would possess both factor of stability  and  the  factor
of clarity.
What are the two primary hindrances to achieve these two factors?  They  are
laxity and excitement.
Laxity hinders with the development of clarity.
Excitement hinders with the development of stability.
There will be an extensive discussion on laxity and excitement when we  come
to the topic of meditative serenity and calm abiding. Here is  to  give  you
some ideas of what laxity and excitement is. For now, you just have to  keep
these in mind.
When there is laxity in the mind,  the  factor  of  clarity  is  not  really
there, although there is a factor of stability.
Excitement happens mainly due to attachment. Due to attachment, the mind  is
distracted to some other object and that is the clear sign that the mind  is
under the influence of excitement. Excitement hinders with  the  development
of the factor of stability. When there is stability, the mind is abiding  on
the object of meditation.
In short, an ideal meditation should have these two factors: the  factor  of
stability and the factor of clarity.

C How to sustain [the meditation] once it has stabilized a bit and advice
on how to avoid exhaustion
When it has stabilized a bit, you should prolong the sessions, sustaining
them all  free from the faults of being excessively tense or relaxed.
Thereby small obstacles, over-exhaustion and drowsiness will be pacified.
So we should start  with  short  meditation  session  but  with  many  short
sessions. After you have achieved some stability, then you can lengthen  the
session.
When your meditation has become somewhat stable, lengthen  the  session.  In
all the sessions make your practice free from the  faults  of  being  either
too strict or excessively relaxed, and thereby sustain your  meditation.  In
this way you will have few obstacles and  will  overcome  problems  such  as
overtiredness, laxity, and lethargy.

2B4A-2A2 What to do during the periods between sessions
2B4A-2A2A General practices enhancing the object [of meditation]
Generally speaking, there are numerous practices enhancing the object such
as prostration, circumambulation and recitation, however, the main point is
that, having made an effort at the essence of the session, if, during the
intervals where you leave the session, you let go carelessly without
relying on mindfulness and introspection with respect to the observed
object and aspect - which is the cause of sustaining [the meditation] - the
outcome will be very little. Therefore, you should also be concerned with
the Dharma [texts] teaching that [object] in between sessions, and recall
it again and again. By various means you should accumulate the collection
of conditions favourable to the arising of positive qualities, and by
various means purify the adverse conditions, the obscurations. Your
determination with respect to the discipline you have accepted, the basis
of everything, should be reaffirmed a lot.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 100:  In general there are many things to be
done between meditation sessions, such as obeisance, circumambulation, and
recitation of prayers and scripture. However, the principal thing to do in
this context is as follows:
After you have made an effort to meditate in the actual session and are at
the point of ending the session, you might not continue to rely on
mindfulness and vigilance, and might instead completely let go of what
should be sustained- the object of meditation and its subjective aspects.
If you do so, your progress will be extremely small.
Therefore, even in between sessions, look at teachings that reveal the
meaning of your object of meditation, and recollect it again and again.
Accumulate, by many means, the collections, which are favorable conditions
for producing good qualities. Also, clear away, by many means, the
obscurations, which are unfavorable conditions.
By applying what you know, strive at whatever vow you have promised to
observe, as this is the basis of everything. In addition, follow the
instruction called "Consolidation" with regard to (1) training the mind in
the object of meditation and its subjective aspects, (2) observing vows,
and (3) accumulating the collections.]
Here it talks about the kind of activities that we should engage during  the
periods between sessions. Whatever  the  object  of  meditation  during  the
meditation session, in between session, you should read  and  consult  texts
that will help you to sustain the chosen object of meditation  i.e.  reading
texts that talk about what you are meditating on. If you do so, when you re-
enter the session, it will help you in the  meditation  session.  Otherwise,
you may completely forget the object of  meditation  during  the  in-between
session and that will not help you when you  re-enter  the  next  meditation
session. So it is extremely important to consult the text  that  talk  about
the object of meditation that you are sustaining in the  practice  and  this
will benefit you when you re-enter the meditation  session.  Therefore  what
you do in the in-between session does help in  your  main  practice.  During
the periods between sessions, you  can  also  engage  in  the  practices  of
accumulating merits and purifying the mind of obscurations. It is also  very
important to keep whatever vows you have taken properly during  the  periods
between sessions. These are the practices to be done in general  during  the
in between sessions.
Next it talks about the different conditions that are helpful  in  achieving
calm abiding and special insight. If you  are  a  serious  practitioner  who
want to meditate to achieve calm  abiding  and  special  insight,  then  you
should train in the collections of these four conditions.



2B4A-2A2B The causes of calm abiding and special insight
1 Controlling the sense doors (restraining the sensory faculties)
2 Vigilant behaviour
3 Knowing the right measure of food (appropriate diet)
4 Exerting oneself not sleeping and practicing yoga, and what to do when
lying down to sleep (striving to practice without sleeping at the wrong
time, and acting properly at the time of sleep)
Apart from that, train in the collection of four causes for an easy arising
of the paths of calm abiding and special insight, the four accumulations.

2B4A-2A2B-1 Controlling the sense doors (Restraining the sensory faculties)
In this regard: When the six consciousnesses arise in dependence upon
objects and sense powers, after that attachment and aversion arise toward
the six pleasant and the six unpleasant objects of mental consciousness.
Controlling the sense doors guards against their arising.
Before any sensory consciousness is generated, there must be a contact  that
happens between the sense object and the respective  sensory  faculty.  When
the  object  and  the  sensory  faculty   meet,   the   respective   sensory
consciousness is generated.
When the sensory faculty comes in contact with an  attractive  object,  then
attachment arises.
When the sensory faculty comes in contact with an  unpleasant  object,  then
hostility (anger) arises.
For a beginner, in the first place, one should tries to  avoid  the  object;
whether it is an attractive object or unattractive sensory object.  If,  for
whatever reason, there is a meeting of the sensory faculty with the  sensory
object - whether it is an attractive object or unattractive  sensory  object
which leads to the generation of attachment or anger – one has  to  try,  as
much  as  possible,  to  stop  the  afflictions  from  arising.   When   the
affliction –anger or attachment- arises, then by remembering the  faults  of
anger and attachment, we should apply antidote immediately to  overcome  the
affliction. As  much  as  possible,  we  should  stop  the  arising  of  the
afflictions in particular anger and attachment.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 101:  How to restrain  the  sensory  faculties
has two parts, and they are as follows:
1) Guarding the sensory  faculties:  After  the  six  consciousnesses  arise
based upon their sensory objects and  faculties,  the  mental  consciousness
produces attachment for the six  attractive  sensory  objects  or  hostility
toward the six unattractive ones. "Guarding  the  sensory  faculties"  means
protecting your mind against such attachment and  hostility,  and  making  a
great effort not to produce them.
 2)  Practicing  restraint  with  the  six  sensory  faculties  is  actually
stopping the sensory faculties. For instance,  you  don't  let  them  engage
those sensory objects that will  produce  afflictions  when,  for  instance,
looked at.
Furthermore, "guarding the sensory faculties" means neither to take note  of
the six sensory objects nor to imagine them, and  to  achieve  this  through
restraint, even when a sinful attitude such  as  attachment  arises  due  to
forgetfulness and an abundance of afflictions.
"Take note of" refers to perceiving and paying attention to the  intentional
or unintentional appearance of  sensory  objects  such  as  forms  that  you
should not look at.
"Imagining" can refer to the mental consciousness's apprehension of  sensory
objects that produce attachment, hostility, and  ignorance,  after  the  six
consciousnesses have perceived them. It can  also  refer  to  hearing  about
these sensory objects from others and  then  imagining  them  despite  never
having perceived them.
Restraining means  protecting  the  mind  from  being  afflicted,  and  then
setting it on something that is ethically neutral  or  virtuous.  Here,  the
time for setting the mind on something that  is  "unobscured  and  ethically
neutral" is  not  when  the  mind  is  apprehending  a  virtuous  object  of
meditation, but at other times, such as during physical activities.]

2B4A-2A2B-2 Vigilant behaviour
Vigilant behaviour - in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour it says:
     To examine time and time again,
     the situation of one’s mind and body put
     concisely that and only that
     is the sign of protective vigilance.
Following this, whenever the body etc. engages in such and such an action,
you come to understand whether or not it should be done and behave
accordingly.
We also have to be vigilant at all the times to check what our body,  speech
and mind is up to. We have to maintain our vigilance whenever we  carry  out
physical activities such as moving, speaking or thinking.

2B4A-2A2B-3 Knowing the right measure of food (appropriate diet)
Knowing the right measure of food means to give up eating too much or too
little and to eat only the amount that does not do damage to one’s virtuous
activities. Furthermore, having meditated upon the drawbacks of craving for
food, you should also remember what is said in the scriptures about eating
thinking that it should be without mental afflictions, that it should be of
benefit to the giver,  that you now bring together the micro-organisms of
your body by means of material things and that in the future you will bring
them together by means of the Dharma, and that you will bring about the
welfare of all sentient beings. In the Letter to a Friend it also says:
     Reasoning that foodstuffs are like medicine
     depend on them without attachment or hatred
     they are not meant for conceit nor for arrogance
     they are not meant to fatten you - just keep you going.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 105: An appropriate diet has four attributes:
1. Not eating too little: If you eat too little food, you will be hungry
   and will become weak, leaving no strength for virtuous activities.
   Therefore, "not eating too little" means that you must eat just the
   amount that will allow you not to be afflicted
   by hunger until tomorrow's meal.
2. Not eating too much: This is because if you eat too much, your body will
   be heavy, as if you were carrying a burden. It
   will be hard to breathe in and out. Sleepiness and lethargy will
   increase. You will be unfit for any action, so you will have no
   strength for eliminating the afflictions.
3. Eating digestible and wholesome food: With such food you eliminate old
   feelings of suffering related to food and you do
   not create new ones.
4. Eating appropriate food which does not produce afflictions: With such
   food you do not create misdeeds, and you stay happy.
Remember as well that Santideva's Compendium of Trainings says to eat while
reflecting that
1. you are benefiting the giver;
2. whereas now you are assembling micro-organisms in your body through the
  material gift of food, in the future you will gather these beings
  together through the teachings; and
3. you will accomplish the welfare of all living beings.
Also Nagarjuna's Friendly Letter states:
       With an understanding that food is like medicine,
       Eat it without hostility or attachment;
       Not for haughtiness, might,
       Or robustness, but only to maintain your body.]
You have to eat the right amount of food: not eating too little or not
eating too much as this will interfere with the practice of virtue. If you
eat too little, then you will become weak. If you eat too much, your body
and mind become heavy which lethargy will increase. It is important not to
eat out of afflictions. If you eat out of attachment, you have to remember
the faults of food*1. We are advised to think about the followings when we
are eating:
    - the intention to benefit the person who is providing the food.
    - we are making charity by giving the food to the micro-organisms in our
      body. Through making this connection, in the future, you will gather
      these beings together through the teachings.
    - you will accomplish the welfare of all living beings
In essence, when we eat, we should eat with the thought of benefiting all
living beings and benefiting others. When we eat, we should not be
motivated by afflictions like anger and attachment. We can think that we
eat because we need to maintain this body so we can continue with our
practice.

2B4A-2A2B-4 Exerting oneself in yoga without sleeping, and what to do when
lying down to sleep
2B4A-2A2B-4A What to do when lying down to sleep
1 [The time to lie down]
Exerting oneself not sleeping and practicing yoga, and what to do when
lying down to sleep.
In the Letter to a Friend it says:
    Sensible one, great being after all the day’s sessions,
    as well as the first and last ones of the night
    also sleep with mindfulness in between these
    so that during sleep, too, fruit will not be absent.
The essence of the sessions of both the entire day and the first and last
part of the night as well as what should be done in between is being
explained. Therefore, having walked about and sat down, you should
completely purify your mind of the five obscurations and thus make
[whatever you do] meaningful.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 106:  How to practice diligently without
sleeping at the wrong time and how to act properly at the time of sleep
      The Friendly Letter:
           O Reasonable One, after cultivating virtue all day
           And in the first and last periods of the night as well,
           Sleep between these periods with mindfulness,
           Not wasting even the time of sleep.
"All day" and "the first and last periods of the night" both refer to what
should be done during and between meditation sessions. Therefore, while
sitting or standing, act purposefully, as I have explained before, by
completely clearing your mind of the five obscurations.]
One should strive in virtue during the day. This means that one should not
sleep during the day. One should also be striving in virtue in the first
and last periods of the night. This means that one should only sleep in the
intermediate period of the night.
Student 1: “..you should completely purify your mind of the five
obscurations ..” - What are the five obstructions?
Ven Gyurme: As in the LRCM page 388 endnote 171, the five obscurations are:
excitement and regret, malice, lethargy and sleepiness, longing for
desires, and doubt.



2 The behaviour of sleep
As the behaviour of sleep occurs between sessions, it should also not be
wasted meaninglessly.
In this regard, the conduct of the body consists in lying down, during the
middle of three parts of the night, on your right side placing the left leg
on top of the right one and sleeping like a lion.
Your conduct during sleep takes place between sessions, so do not treat
even that as having no purpose. You should make it meaningful. In this
regards, how should you sleep and in what kind of posture? During the
middle portion of the night, you sleep by lying on your right side, place
your left leg upon the right, and sleep like a lion. This is something that
you have to experiment it for yourself. As for sleeping like a lion, your
sleep does not become heavy but the sleep will be light.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 107: How should you sleep? During the day  and
in the first of the three portions of  the  night,  spend  your  time  doing
virtuous activities; then sleep when the middle  portion  arrives.  For,  by
sleeping you will enhance those elements of the body which are benefited  by
sleep. When you develop the body  in  that  way,  your  body  will  be  most
serviceable for employment in both  kinds  of  joyous  perseverance  in  the
group of virtues, and this also will be helpful.
When you go to sleep, first come out from the  meditation  room,  wash  your
feet, and then enter your own room. Then, lying on your  right  side,  place
your left leg upon the right, and sleep like a lion. As for sleeping like  a
lion, among  all  animals  it  is  the  lion  who  uses  superior  capacity,
confidence, and  fortitude  to  subdue  its  opponents.  Likewise,  one  who
joyously perseveres at  practice  instead  of  sleeping  will  use  superior
capacity, etc. to subdue opponents and will, at rest,  sleep  like  a  lion.
This is unlike the sleep  of  hungry  ghosts,  deities,  or  those  who  are
involved in desire, for they  all  have  laziness,  weak  perseverance,  and
little capacity to subdue opponents.
From another point of view sleeping on your right side  like  a  lion  means
that your body naturally does not become limp. Even  when  you  have  fallen
asleep, you do not lose your mindfulness. Your sleep does not become  heavy.
You do not have bad or sinful dreams. But if you should sleep in some  other
way, all the faults that are the opposite of these four will arise.]

3 Mindfulness
As for mindfulness, you should rely on the fact that, until you fall
asleep, it pursues the predominant virtuous action that you have cultivated
during the day. Therefore, you can sustain your spiritual practice such as
meditative stabilisation even while asleep similarly to when you are not
asleep.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 107: Mindfulness: This arises from having
heard, thought, and meditated on meaningful, virtuous teachings. Pursue
this practice until you have fallen asleep. By this means, even when you
are asleep, your mind will continue to engage the teachings, just as though
you were not asleep. In short, you will sustain your virtuous practice even
when you are asleep. ]
Before it is time to sleep, we spend our time cultivating virtue i.e.
training the mind in the entity of virtue. Just we are about to fall
asleep, we should sustain the mindfulness on virtue.
If we fall asleep while the mind is in virtuous state, then the entire
sleep becomes virtuous. If we fall asleep while the mind is in non-virtuous
state, then the entire sleep becomes non-virtuous. Therefore we have to
strive to ensure that we sleep with the virtuous frame of mind.

4 Vigilance
Vigilance: If any mental afflictions arise while you cultivate mindfulness,
you become aware of them and rather than grasping them eagerly abandon
them.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 107: Vigilance: While you cultivate
mindfulness in this way, any of the afflictions could arise. If any of them
does, you notice it and eliminate it rather than acquiesce to it.]

5 The discrimination of getting up
The discrimination of getting up consists in projecting the thought of
getting up at this and that hour.
Before you go to sleep, you should project this strong intention thinking
that when you wake up, you will wake at a certain time.  This kind of
practice does leave an imprint in the mind such that you will wake up at
that particular time. This does makes a difference.
Summary: During the actual meditation session, it is important to sustain
the relevant meditation correctly. With regards to the number of sessions
that we should have at the beginning, in general, we should enter into four
meditation sessions a day. As a beginner, it is better to have short
session but with many short sessions. During the periods between sessions,
we should engage in those activities that will benefit us when we re-enter
the next meditation session. In particular, during the in between sessions,
we should read and consult the texts that will deal specifically with the
chosen object of meditation. When we have to eat in between sessions, we
eat with a proper motivation by thinking: “I am going to eat in order to
sustain this body so I can continue with my practice.” It is important to
eat without any afflictions such as anger and attachment. When it is time
to sleep, sleep that occurs during the periods between meditation sessions,
it is important to fall asleep within the virtuous state of mind. It is
said that if we do fall asleep within the virtuous state of mind, the
entire sleep will become virtuous.
Next lesson is pertaining to the need to engage in both analytical and
stabilizing meditation.
Student 2: How does a lion sleep?
Khen Rinpoche: By lying on your right side, place your  left  leg  upon  the
right, and sleep like a lion. The Buddha shows the aspect  of  the  deed  of
passing away into sorrowless state while lying in that position. We can  see
some statues of the Buddha in that aspect.  When we go to  sleep,  there  is
also a practice of recollecting the Buddha.
Student 3: What is the length of the short meditation session?
Khen Rinpoche: It is up to the individual; which is not more than  an  hour.
If you are someone who wishes to  start  the  practice  during  the  predawn
-which is around 3am- then you have to sleep by 9pm. If you want to wake  up
at 5am, then you probably have to sleep at 10pm. I  guess  you  should  have
sufficient rest. When one is discipline, with sufficient rest at night,  you
will be able to do the practice  in  the  morning.  The  mind  tends  to  be
clearer and the memory work better in the morning.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: Based on my own experience,  you  have  done
so many things during the whole day and you mind  get  tired.  When  you  go
home and try to meditate, your mind is not fresh as  it  is  already  tired.
Whatever practice you do, it may look  like  you  are  doing  something  but
nothing much will be achieved. So it is better that  you  go  to  sleep  and
have some rest. After you  have  waked  up  in  the  morning,  you  do  some
exercise and then you do the meditation practice. Also your memory  is  much
better at this time. If I remember some texts when I go back to my room,  it
is extremely difficult. When I wake in the morning and  I  try  to  remember
the same things, it become easy. So that is the difference. Many people  say
that they are not morning person but a night person. It  is  very  difficult
for me to understand that because your mind it too tired  at  night  because
of no rest. If you want to practice at night, how could it be? If  you  have
proper rest during the night, your mind is the best in the morning  and  you
can focus on the practice. You can check whether there is any difference  if
you try to remember something in the night  time  and  in  the  morning.  It
seems that you can remember better in the  morning.  Therefore  you  can  do
better meditation in the morning.

*1 The faults of food (Extract from LRCM V1 page 105:
Moreover, the remedy for craving food lies within meditating on the faults
of food. There are three faults:
(1) The fault that arises from the causes of enjoyment: Contemplate how any
colorful, aromatic, and good-tasting food whatsoever appears like vomit
once you have chewed it and moistened it with your saliva.
(2) The fault that arises from digesting food: Contemplate how food
produces such elements of the body as flesh and blood after it is digested
in the middle or last period of the night. Contemplate how some food
becomes feces and urine, and then remains in the lower part of the body;
moreover, each day you have to excrete that. Think how many kinds of
illnesses develop in connection with this food.
(3) The five faults that come from looking for food: The five are as
follows:
     1.The fault of procurement: While being tormented by heat and cold,
you must make great effort in order to procure food
and assemble its causes. If you do not procure it, you suffer sorrow and
the like. Even if you do procure the food, you fear
that it will be stolen or wasted, and then suffer because of taking great
pains to guard  it.
   2)The fault of ruining close relationships: Even close relatives, such
as fathers and sons, will dispute and fight with one an
other for the sake of food.
  3) The fault of insatiability: Kings and the like will go to war with
each other and experience much suffering when their
craving for food intensifies.
  4) The fault of the lack of independence: Those who eat others' food
experience much suffering when they fight with opponents on behalf of their
leader.
  5) The fault that arises from wrongdoing: Having amassed sins of body,
speech, and mind for the sake of food and its causes,
you remember your sins when you are dying, and die with regret. Moreover,
after death, you fall into a miserable realm.
Despite all of this, there is some benefit to food—after all, the body
depends upon it. Eat your food after you think, "Since it is not correct to
rely on food just for the sake of my body's maintenance, I will conduct
myself in a pure manner in dependence on my body's maintenance. Benefactors
and those who actually carry out acts of charity work so hard that their
skin, flesh, and blood dry up! Then they make their gifts with a wish for a
special result. I will ensure that their actions have great effects."
