Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson50.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.088588
================================================================================


If one is asked whether it would be alright to achieve liberation as a
result of practicing the three higher trainings on the basis of having
developed the determination to be free from samsara. Then the answer would
have to be: “No, it is not sufficient and it is not alright.”  What is the
reason for this? Even if one achieves liberation from cyclic existence as a
result of practicing the three higher trainings, the elimination of faults
and the attainment of good qualities are incomplete.

Having said that, after one has achieved liberation, what kind of fault is
still left to be eliminated? The fault is the obstruction to omniscience.
As the word implies, obstruction of omniscience prevents one from having
omniscience i.e. it prevents one from seeing every single phenomena as it
is. Because of having this fault, therefore, one is not able to fulfill the
aims of every living being in the perfect way.

This is the reason why it is insufficient just to achieve liberation alone.
The essence is that even if you do achieve liberation, your elimination of
faults and your attainment of good qualities are incomplete. Due to these
two reasons, with regards to your own purpose, you have not completed them.
Because of this, you are not able to fulfill the purpose of others in a
perfect way.

You have to know the reasons why it is not sufficient just to achieve
liberation. With these reasons, therefore one has to enter into the
Mahayana and achieves full enlightenment to become a Buddha.
There are two ways of entering o the Mahayana:
1. Through practicing the three higher trainings, one first achieves
   liberation and then somewhere along the line, one enters the Mahayana.
2. After having generated renunciation/ the determination to be free, one
   enters into the Mahayana right away.
Of these two ways of entering into the Mahayana, it is best if one enter
into the Mahayana after having generated renunciation. Why is it better to
enter into the Mahayana right away after having generated renunciation?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Why? You are okay with that or you do not
agree with that? Anyone like to answer?
Student 1: (Audio 20:25 – 21:07)
Ven Gyurme: No, why is it better to enter the Mahayana right away after
developing the determination to be free? Not go on to achieve liberation
first and then wait for a while and then enter the Mahayana?
Student 1: (Audio 21:21 – 21:53)
There are two types of people who enter into the Mahayana:
   1. Those who enter into the Mahayana as foe destroyers, who have already
      achieved liberation from cyclic existence and
   2. The rest of them who enter the Mahayana as the non-foe destroyers.
Which is the better one? Why?
You must also know that the Hinayana and the Mahayana are differentiated by
bodhichitta and not by the wisdom realizing emptiness. Having said that,
you must also be able to give the reason why the Hinayana and the Mahayana
are not differentiated by wisdom.
Question: Why are the two vehicles not differentiated by wisdom?
I have already given the answer to you in last session. The new students
must answer.
Student 2:  The Hinayana and the Mahayana are differentiated are
differentiated by bodhichitta because the Hinayana only aim for self
–liberation and the Mahayana aim is to liberate all sentient beings. (Audio
25:12 – 25:42)
Khen Rinpoche: The question is: “Why are the two vehicles not
differentiated by wisdom?”
Student 3: The wisdom understanding emptiness is required for both the
Hinayana and Mahayana; so the views are the same, except the seed or method
is different. The method for Mahayana would be bodhichitta whereas for
Hinayana would be renunciation. (Audio 26:14 – 26:57)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It is good. Good answer.
Khen Rinpoche: Why do the Hearers, for example, need the wisdom realizing
emptiness? Actually, I can say they don’t need it.
Student 3: They need wisdom realizing emptiness to really cut off all the
delusions; hence the twelve links, the suffering. (Audio 27:35 – 27:50)
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you need wisdom to destroy the afflictions?
Student 3: To destroy the self - seeing oneself as the self rather than to
see all phenomena are of non- inherently existence. (Audio 27:35 – 28:30)
Ven Gyurme: Why do you need wisdom to destroy the afflictions?
Student 3: Wisdom seeing emptiness would enable one to see everything is
non-inherently existence directly. (Audio 28:48 – 29:07)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Are you comfortable with what you are
saying?
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you need wisdom to destroy the afflictions?
Student 3: Seeing things as they are and not inherently existence and there
is no self. (Audio 29:22 – 29:34)
Khen Rinpoche: What is the link between wisdom and the non-arising of the
afflictions?
Student 3: After seeing wisdom understanding emptiness you realize every
phenomenon is dependent arising and not self-existence. I have exhausted
all my answers already. (Audio 29:54 – 30:20)
From this discussion, you can see how actually we have to go deeper into
things. We can say: “It is not the wisdom that differentiates the two
vehicles”. We can also say: “The Hearers need the wisdom realizing
emptiness.”  But if we were to push the question: “What exactly is the
wisdom?  Why do you need it? What is wrong if you don’t have it?”  So, you
see we have to investigate deeper.
Earlier on we talked about liberation. Here liberation refers to liberation
from cyclic existence. Cyclic existence arises from its cause: karma and
afflictions. That which arises from karma and afflictions is cyclic
existence. In order to achieve liberation, we have to free ourselves from
cyclic existence. In order to liberate ourselves from cyclic existence, we
must free ourselves from the causes of cyclic existence. As discussed in
the earlier lessons, the cause of cyclic existence is karma and
afflictions. Of the two, affliction is the primary cause. If you look at
the different kinds of afflictions, all afflictions have as their root
ignorance - apprehending a self.
Remember the innate view of transitory collection that we have discussed?
If we take the view of the transitory collection is the same as ignorance,
the view of transitory collection is the root of cyclic existence and the
root of all the afflictions; thereby is the source of the entire samsara
and problems.
We have to analyze what the view of transitory collection is. Therefore, it
is important not to forget what was already covered because it is crucial.
In the context here, the view of transitory collection is the mind that
observes the aggregates and then apprehends the ‘I’ as self-sufficient.
This view of transitory collection, ignorance, is a wrong conception; a
mistaken apprehension. It is a perverse mind. It is a wrong consciousness.

There must be a mind that is completely opposite which counter force this
perverse mind or wrong consciousness.
The mind that is the opposite or an antidote to ignorance has to have a
mode of apprehending the object in the completely opposite way of
ignorance. This mind is wisdom and its mode of apprehension is the complete
opposite to that of ignorance.
What does this mind observe?  This mind realizes the self-sufficient person
does not exist; whatsoever. This mind which realizes this is wisdom or
specifically; the wisdom realizes selflessness.
In order to destroy the view of the transitory collection which is a wrong
conception, the fundamental of misapprehension of the self, we must
generate another mind whose way of apprehending the ‘I’ is contradictory to
ignorance. This mind, the wisdom realizing selflessness, realizes that the
self-sufficient person does not exist.
Therefore, in order to overcome ignorance, we need this wisdom. In order
for the Hearers (the sravakas) to achieve liberation from samsara, they
need this wisdom.
It is very important to put effort into completing the whole thought
process and bring it to conclusion. Using this question as an example; “Why
are the two vehicles not differentiated by wisdom?” You may just give a
very simple answer: “It is not differentiated by wisdom because both need
the same wisdom to achieve liberation and enlightenment. Therefore it has
to be differentiated by bodhichitta.”  If the question is pushed a bit
further then you start to be a bit unsure. This is something you must all
work at, engage in the whole thought process and bring it to completion
until you have developed some certainty and conviction.
In the last session, we saw how there are general causes and specific
causes for achieving full enlightenment. Bodhichitta (spirit of
enlightenment) is said to be the specific cause or the uncommon cause of
full enlightenment. But we must able to explain the reason why. It is not
sufficient to just say; “Bodhichitta is the specific cause of
enlightenment”.
Question: Why is bodhichitta the uncommon cause or the specific cause of
full enlightenment?
Student 4: It is the specific cause of full enlightenment because it is not
shared by the Hearers and Solitary Realizers. (Audio 44:46 – 45:00)
Khen Rinpoche: There are two embodiments of Buddha:
             1. Embodiment of form (form body)
             2. Embodiment of truth (truth body)
Is bodhichitta the uncommon cause of the Buddha’s truth body?
Student 4: No
Ven Gyurme: Truth body is not Buddha.
Student 4: It is not an uncommon cause of the Buddha’s truth body.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the uncommon cause of the Buddha’s truth body?
Student 4: The wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
Ven Gyurme: It is safer to say: “complemented with bodhichitta”.
Student 4: Can also say complemented by renunciation.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the wisdom realizing emptiness in the continuum of the
bodhisattva an uncommon cause of Buddha?
Student 4: If I say yes, then it is not shared among the Hearers and
Solitary Realizers. I would say no because the Hearers and Solitary
Realizers, Foe Destroyers, will also use the same wisdom realizing
emptiness to enter the Mahayana and eventually to achieve the truth body.
Khen Rinpoche: Then it follows that the wisdom realizing emptiness is not
the uncommon cause of the truth body. Just now, you said that wisdom
realizing emptiness is the uncommon cause of the body truth body.
Student 4: Did I say that?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You did. Anyway not so much issue there.
Don’t worry about that.
Khen Rinpoche: My point here is that you need to think and not just
accepting what you hear. You have to push and think deeper.
We are about to look at the importance of great compassion in the
beginning, middle and end.
a" Showing that the root of the Mahayana path is compassion
Showing that the root of the Mahayana path is compassion has three parts:
   1. The importance of compassion in the beginning
   2. The importance of compassion in the middle
   3. The importance of compassion at the end
[LRCM V2 page 28] 1" The importance of great compassion in the beginning
Once your mind is moved by great compassion, you will definitely make the
commitment to free all living beings from cyclic existence. If your
compassion is weak, you will not. Therefore, compassion is important in the
beginning because feeling responsible to free all beings requires great
compassion and because, if you do not take on this responsibility, you are
not ranked as a Mahayana practitioner.
The great compassion is very important in the beginning because if one
doesn’t have great compassion in the beginning, one will not have a
wholehearted resolve to free sentient beings from suffering. Without this
wholehearted resolve, one will not enter into the rank of the Mahayana no
matter what. In order to enter into the rank of the Mahayana, one must take
on a personal responsibility such as “I would do this myself”. In order to
have this wholehearted resolve which comes with the sense of personal
responsibility, it must be preceded by great compassion. Without which such
a wholehearted resolve will never arise.
This is the reason why great compassion is important in the beginning. You
have to think of the reason for yourself in order to arrive at this feeling
and understanding: “Yes, indeed great compassion is very important in the
beginning”.
Not only is great compassion important in the beginning, it is also very
important in the middle.
[LRCM V2 page 29] 2" The importance of great compassion in the middle
You may develop bodhichitta at one time. But when you see that living
beings are innumerable and act improperly, that the training is very
difficult and limitless, and that you need an immeasurable length of time,
you may lose heart and fall into the Hinayana. However, by accustoming
yourself to increasingly greater compassion that is not just a one-time
development, you become less concerned with your own happiness or suffering
and are not discouraged at providing others' welfare. Therefore you easily
accomplish all the collections.
This paragraph is saying that even after having generated the real
bodhichitta, still it is very important to continue to familiarize oneself
with great compassion, mediate on it to increase great compassion. Why is
this important? Because even though one may have generated bodhichitta,
there is always a danger of losing it. Therefore, one has to accustom
oneself to great compassion over and over again. This is why great
compassion is important in the middle.
After having generated bodhichitta, if one continues to accustom oneself to
great compassion and increase it, then the stronger one’s great compassion
becomes, the stronger one’s bodhichitta will be. With the stronger
bodhichitta, one will find it easier to work for the welfare for others;
one gets less discouraged and one will work more for the benefits of
others. In doing so, one will accumulates the collections and purifies the
obscurations. It is very often mentioned in the teachings, with the
realization of bodhichitta, one is able to easily amass the collections and
purifies great amount of obscurations.
Next is the discussion on why great compassion is important in the end.
[LRCM V2 page 29] 3" The importance of compassion at the end
Based on the power of great compassion, buddhas, even when they reach their
goal, do not abide in peace like Hinayana practitioners, but continue to
work for the welfare of beings as long as space remains. For, without
compassion buddhas would be like sravakas.
After having achieved full enlightenment, it is very important to have
great compassion in the mind. Why? This is because if great compassion is
not there then one will abide in peace and one will not be able to work for
the happiness of sentient beings uninterruptedly. The reason why the
Buddhas are able to work uninterruptedly for the welfare of every living
being is specifically due to their great compassion. So even after having
achieved enlightenment, great compassion is still very important.
This section is an introduction to the vital importance of great
compassion: how it is so important in the beginning, in the middle and at
the end. Next is employing an analogy to highlight this vital importance of
great compassion.
[LRCM V2 page 30] The glorious Candrakirti taught that just as seeds,
water, and ripening are important in the beginning, middle, and end of a
harvest, similarly compassion is important in the beginning, middle, and
end of the harvest of buddhahood.
Here it is using the analogy to show how great compassion is important in
the beginning of getting to full enlightenment, in the middle on the way
there and even after having reached there.
Next is the explanation of why bodhichitta should be the most important
practice.
[LRCM V2 page 30] The teacher Shang-na-chung said, "Even though I asked for
instructions from the Great Elder [Atisha], he said nothing except:
'Renounce the world; cultivate bodhichitta.'" Upon hearing this, Geshe Drom-
don-ba was embarrassed for him and said, "You received the Great Elder's
ultimate instruction!" Geshe Drom-don-ba understood the core of the
teaching.
When we talk about dharma or a particular teaching, usually when that
particular instruction or teaching fits our mind or is something that we
like, we would say this is a good teaching. This happens to a particular
individual by the name of Shang-na-chung. He went to Lama Atisha asking for
teachings and Lama Atisha said; “Renounce the world, abandon the eight
worldly dharma and practice bodhichitta.” Actually what Lama Atisha had
said was that is the most important thing of the entire dharma practice but
Shang-na-chung did not realize it and kind of look down on the instruction.

For those people who really know what the dharma is and also know the
essential points of dharma and also a practitioner, whenever they get an
instruction such as: “Renounce the world, cultivate bodhichitta,” they will
be able to see that as an instruction and then put into practice. However
for people who do not know the essential of the dharma and who are not
really practitioners then no matter what they hear, it would be of no
benefit and it doesn’t have any impact on their mind.
[LRCM V2 page 31] This conviction is very difficult to achieve, so you must
seek a stable and certain knowledge by repeatedly clearing away
negativities, accumulating merit, and reading scriptures such as the Array
of Stalks Sutra and the commentaries. The glorious Matrceta's Praise in One
Hundred and Fifty Verses says:
    Only you, O hero [Buddha], know your precious spirit,
    The seed of perfect enlightenment,
    To be the quintessence;
    No one else can reach this certainty.
In the text, ‘this conviction is very difficult to achieve’ means that it
is very difficult to achieve the wholehearted conviction that one is so
sure in the mind that bodhichitta is so wonderful, is so important and it
has all these benefits and so forth.
This conviction is very difficult to achieve. In order to achieve a very
stable and certain knowledge of the benefits of bodhichitta and be
convinced of how precious, how amazing and wonderful this bodhichitta is,
then we have to repeatedly engage in purification of our negativities,
accumulate merit and read the scriptures such as the Array of Stalks Sutra
and commentaries that include: The Great Shantideva’s Engaging of the
Bodhisattvas’ Deeds, The Compendium of Trainings and also The Ornaments of
the Mahayana Sutra.
The quotation from Matrceta says that it is very difficult to really know
how the bodhichitta is the seed of perfect enlightenment. It is only the
Buddha who perfectly knows how bodhichitta is the very seed and it is not
easy for ordinary beings to realize that.
This is the vital importance of the great compassion at the beginning, the
middle and at the end. Here we are discussing great compassion in the
context of the sevenfold cause and effect instruction.
b" How the six other personal instructions are either causes or effects of
compassion
The explanation of how the  six  other  personal  instructions  are  either
causes or effects of compassion has two parts:
  1. How the first four personal instructions—recognition of all living
     beings as your mothers through the development
     of love—act as causes of compassion
  2. How wholehearted resolve and the spirit of enlightenment are the
     effects of compassion
In order to be able to develop strong compassion for others, we first must
be able to see everyone as very precious and pleasant. Before that can
happen, there must be equanimity.
[LRCM V2 page 31] In general, if you repeatedly consider the sufferings of
living beings, you of course develop a simple desire to free them from
suffering. However, to develop this attitude easily, strongly, and firmly,
you must first cherish these beings and have affection for them. For, at
present you cannot bear for your friends to suffer; you are pleased with
your enemies' suffering; and you are indifferent to the suffering of
persons toward whom you have neutral feelings, who are neither enemies nor
friends.
In order to be able to develop lasting, strong and firm compassion, we
first must be able to see everyone is very pleasant, precious and are
matter to us. Without which we will not be able to develop compassion that
is long lasting and firm. It is just like how we feel for our loved one and
our friends. Why are we so excited and so concerned about them when they
suffer?  This is because we have affection for them.
The next section talks about the reasons why we have affection for some and
not for others: You have the first attitude which is not able to bear the
loved one’s suffering.
[LRCM V2 page 31] You have the first attitude because you are fond of your
friends. Commensurate with your cherishing of them, you cannot bear for
them to suffer. When you cherish friends to a small or medium degree, you
are only able to bear their suffering slightly. When you cherish your loved
one a great deal, you clearly cannot bear for them to suffer at all, even
if they suffer just a little.
When you see enemies suffer, not only do you not develop a desire to free
them from it, but you also think, "May they not be free from suffering and
suffer even more." This is due to your lack of affection for them. Your
lack of affection for enemies is commensurate with your pleasure at their
suffering.
Being neither unable to bear nor pleased with the sufferings of persons
toward whom you have neutral feelings results from your having neither
affection nor lack of affection for them.
Next is how do we actually do arrive at having great love and great
compassion for everyone by seeing everyone as attractive; which come from
recognizing how all sentient beings have been our mothers, remembering
their kindness and having a wish to repay their kindness.
[LRCM V2 page 32] Consequently, in order to have affection for living
beings, cultivate the view that they are close to you, like friends or
relatives. Since your mother is the closest person to you, cultivate a
recognition of all beings as your mothers. Also, recollect their kindness
as your mothers and develop the wish to repay their kindness. These three
steps are how you learn to cherish and have affection for living beings.
The result of these three steps is a love that considers living beings to
be beloved, just as a mother considers her only child. This love gives rise
to compassion.
In order to develop love and compassion, we first must regard every living
being as attractive, very precious and are matter to us; that means having
affection. With this affection for them, one will be able to develop love,
and from which comes compassion.
The way to develop this affection for others is to be able to see how
others matter to us and to see them as close to us is through the following
steps:
   1. Recognizing everyone as having been our mothers
   2. Recollecting their kindness when they are our mothers
   3. Developing a wish to repay their kindness.
The instructions are saying that if we are able to reflect well of:
 -how every sentient being has been our mothers,
 -how they were very kind to us when they are our mothers and
 -you will be able to develop a wish to repay their kindness
then we will be able to develop great love and have affection for sentient
beings; seeing them as very pleasant, very precious and they are actually
matter to us. Based on that, the text is saying that great love give arise
to great compassion.
By cultivating those first three steps, one is  able  to  develop  affection
for sentient beings:
• focusing and based on this affection for someone, the thought  arises  of
  wishing that person to be happy. That is love.
• focusing on that person’s suffering, you develop the wish for the  person
  to be free from suffering. That wish is compassion.
In general, the causal relationship between love and compassion is not
definite; that means it is not definite that one come after the other. But
in this context here, we are talking about the love which arises through
the force of affection i.e. the love that arises because of having
affection for others. The relationship between love and compassion has a
definite order.
The causal relationship between compassion and the love (that is the wish
for beings’ happiness) is not definite.
In the context of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions for
generating bodhichitta, there is a definite order between the love (which
arises through the force of affection for others) and the compassion comes
after it.
Having said that, there can be a qualm: In general, I thought, between
compassion and love, there is no definite order. In general, it is true
that that there is no definite order between love and compassion. Sometimes
love can arise first and sometimes compassion can arise first. But in the
context of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions, when we are talking
about the love which arises through the force of affection for others and
the compassion that come after, there that is a definite order between
these two.
You need to differentiate between:
   1. love and compassion in general and
   2. love and compassion that comes in the sevenfold cause and effect
      instructions
Why the love in one place is not different from the love in another place?
The love, that is one of the elements of the sevenfold cause and effect
instructions, is not just mere love.
Mere love is a wish for others to be happy. The love that is the part of
the sevenfold cause and effect instructions is the love that arises through
the force of affection for others; through seeing others are important, how
they are matter, and how they are precious. Through that, you have the wish
for others to be free and to have happiness. So it is different.
The text goes on to state whose instructions are these.
[LRCM V2 page 32] The masters Candrakirti, Candragomin, and Kamalasila
explained that cultivating the view that living beings are your friends or
relatives is the cause of developing bodhichitta.
Back to love again, in general there is no definite order in the arising of
love and compassion. But the love and compassion that is in the sevenfold
cause and effect instructions, there is a definite order between these two:

-Love that arises through the force of affection for others must come
before great compassion.
Why? This is something to think about.
Student 5: Is there any difference between compassion and great compassion?
(Audio 103:54 – 104:45)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  I will explain in the next class.


