Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson31.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.919944
================================================================================


Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Welcome back to class.
The great Nagarjuna said in one of his compositions; “Through amassing the
two collections, may we achieve the two bodies of the Buddha.”  He is
saying that in order for us to actualize the two bodies of the Buddha -the
Truth Body and the Form Body- we need to amass the collection of merits and
the collection of wisdom.  These two collections -collection of merits and
collection of wisdom- are the fundamental causes for actualizing the Form
Body and the Truth Body of the Buddha respectively. There is such a prayer
but it is not sufficient just to make that aspiration prayer. You have to
know what the causes are and we have to train in the causes before we can
actualize the two bodies.
In order to complete the collection of merits and the collection of wisdom
to actualize the two bodies of the Buddha, we need joyous perseverance.
Without it, you will not be possible to accumulate and to complete the
collections of both merit and wisdom (also translated as accumulation of
both merits and wisdom).
In order to have a candle, there must be wax. You need the wax or the
butter to light up the candle. Without the wax or butter, you will not get
the light. Likewise, you need both the accumulation of merit and wisdom as
the causes for achieving the two bodies of the Buddha. We need joyous
perseverance in order to accumulate and to empower one’s accumulation of
merits and wisdom to ultimately achieve the two bodies of Buddha.
In our case, we are here to find out and to learn about the Buddha’s’
teachings and  joyous perseverance is absolutely required. It is very
important. Without which, one will not be able to learn the Buddha’s
teachings. So we need joyous perseverance. The main obstacle to joyous
perseverance is laziness.
There are three kinds of laziness:
   1) The laziness of procrastination.
   2) The laziness of attraction to meaningless activity
   3) The laziness of defeatism
Let’s talk about the first kind of laziness – the laziness of
procrastination- which is basically just hanging around, space out and
doing nothing. We enjoy doing it. We derive some kind of happiness from it
by being attached to the bliss that coming from just hanging around doing
nothing.
I guess we all are in that situation especially after such a long break of
three months. We may have been hanging around doing nothing. I guess
basically that is our mind set for the past couple of months during the
break. We were being attached to the bliss and happiness of not having
class. It is basically time spent not doing anything beneficial or
virtuous.
Joyous perseverance is a mind that is enthusiastic about virtuous. It is a
mind that wants to engage in something beneficial and virtuous. That is the
complete opposite of laziness -just wanting to hang around and be satisfied
with not doing anything (virtuous).  So this is the first kind of the
laziness and the usual kind of laziness that we are aware of.
The practices of the person of small capacity are also method to overcome
this particular kind of laziness. In the practices of the person of small
capacity, there are reflections on the difficulties of obtaining a perfect
human rebirth such as the one that we have, and also reflecting on death
and impermanence particularly about how the time of death is uncertain.
Through such reflections, we should be able to overcome this particular
kind of laziness.
It is important that we do something to counteract this particular form of
laziness. One of the best methods is to think of the fragility of life; on
how death is certain and the time of death is uncertain. Through such
reflection then we will be able to counteract this particular kind of
laziness.
The second kind of laziness is the attraction to meaningless activity i.e.
the laziness of engaging in non-virtuous actions. Engaging in actions that
are not in accord with dharma is considered to be this kind of laziness.
This is how most people usually spend their life, i.e., basically spending
their lives engaging in all sorts of activities that are not really in
accord with the dharma; which are not in accord with virtue. Therefore it
is considered to be a kind of laziness. In order to counteract this kind of
laziness -the laziness of engaging in actions that are not beneficial and
not in accord with the dharma- we have to reflect on how anything that is
contaminated is in the nature of suffering.
When engaging in action that is not dharma or non-virtues, even though in
ordinary term, we usually talk about people who work very hard in order to
earn money. If you think about it, it does falls into this kind of laziness
because if the person is engaging in action that is not beneficial and is
not in accord with the dharma, it is against virtue. Therefore it becomes a
kind of laziness.
By realizing that if we do come under the influence of this kind of
laziness -the laziness of engaging in action that is not beneficial and not
in accord with virtue/ dharma, such action will ultimately only lead to
dissatisfaction, sufferings and problems. With these realizations, we will
be able to counteract the attraction to this kind of activities.
The third kind of laziness -laziness of defeatism - believing that you are
not capable and with low self-esteem thinking “I cannot, I am not made for
this, this is too beyond me”. These things also happened in our context
when we are here studying the Buddhadharma. There are people who maybe
think that this study really beyond them, “I cannot read, I don’t
understand, I am too old”. All these are considered to be the laziness of
defeatism.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So, don’t be like that.
I think this kind of laziness of defeatism with regards to learning the
dharma or the teaching of the Buddha comes when you don’t really have a
strong interest or intention to learn in the first place. If you do really
have the intention to learn and really want to know the Buddha’s teachings,
I don’t think this kind of laziness would arise in your mind.  If the
interest is not really strong in the first place, we convince ourselves
with various reasons -this reason, that reason etc. Basically, at the end
of the day we are the one who make ourselves unable to study by thinking;
“I cannot read, I cannot see, I don’t understand, I am too old”.  So it
becomes extremely important to uplift our mind. We must tell ourselves, “If
I work hard, I can do it. If others can do it, I can also do it”. So it is
important to uplift our mind and our confidence.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I saw in the TV, there is a Chinese
cooking program “If Yan can cook, I can cook.” Also I saw one guy who ran
in the marathon. He has only one leg but still he wants to go to the
marathon. This is because of his own interest. Here is same thing. When you
have interest to study, you can make it somewhere. You don’t get the first
one but you can get somewhere. I think the same idea is not to discourage
yourself. So this is important. Also it is difficult when you have long
break between the class about three months. When you come back, to
start,(it is) like to start an old car which take time to start. I think
similar.
For everyone, it is the same. Even myself is not easy. Once class starts,
maybe much better. In the beginning, always there is also some difficulty
there.
As I always say, you must always develop this confidence, perseverance and
determination to study. You must strive and tell yourself that you can do
it and then put in the effort. Age doesn’t really matter. We just have to
work hard. As I have often say, even just hearing the teaching and
understanding the teaching have many benefits, even just to gain a simple
understanding of how a particular action, for example, is non-virtue. Even
that understanding has some beneficial effects as it enable us to engage in
a certain form of virtue; which is the opposite of that negative action.
When we listen to the teachings, we also place virtuous imprints in our
mind. The more we learn about the dharma, the better we become because we
leave more imprints in our mental continuum. These imprints stay with us as
we move from life to life and it get better and better. It makes our
learning and practice in our future become easier as well. So, you can
become better and better. The main thing is to work hard, to put in effort
and to persevere joyously. Whether it is accumulating the collection of
merits and wisdom or whether it is learning about the Buddha’s teachings,
we need this joyous perseverance. Without joyous perseverance, we would not
be able to accomplish anything.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  I remember when I was in Sera, next to
my door there was one monk who has to memorize the text every morning.
Maybe for one hour, he has to memorize six or seven lines or maybe half a
page. Maybe one or two hours can memorize that. There is one monk next to
my door who can only memorize two lines in one and a half hour. How long he
takes, he put in effort from morning to night. He keeps repeating same
words; same kind of sentence. Repeating and repeating on the two lines.
Only then he can memorize the words. For me, when compared to him, much
better. I can memorize maybe half a page. But compared to my other
classmate, he memorizes two pages within an hour. But when I see the
person, he put in effort not one day, morning he memorize, night time he
forgets. Night time he has to again repeat. First day he knows but the next
day, he forgot everything. He needs this kind of effort. The same thing
(happens) when he memorizes the text; first day he memorizes, next day he
forgot. After one week, he forgot. He has to repeat again. He takes months
and years to put in the memory chip there. It is not easy to put inside.
Sometimes it disappears and again you need to put it back. It is not easy.
I see the monk how he puts in effort morning to night; so much effort he
put. He doesn’t have much intelligence or wisdom but he has his effort to
do that. I think at the end he did complete his studies, he graduated and
became the Lharampa Geshe also. Now he went to Mongolia to teach. There is
one of my classmates, he is exactly the same; he memorizes one line, he
forgets. He also so difficult; every times he has to give the exam to his
teacher every morning; one line two lines. He doesn’t have much
intelligence but somehow at the end of the day he is the one who has
thousands of pages to give in the exam by accumulation. But he doesn’t have
the intelligence but he put in effort. Whether it is joyous effort I am not
sure. His teacher keeps pushing him. He must do otherwise teacher can beat
him. I can hear he is crying behind my bedroom. Sometimes his teacher beats
him if he missed one line. If tomorrow he forgets, he will get another one.
But unfortunately, he doesn’t have the intelligent to debate. By this kind
effort he can memorize thousands of pages of all the philosophy texts. He
can tell but he doesn’t have this kind wisdom to debate and analyze. So
some are like that; he can memorize but he doesn’t have the wisdom to
analyze what is the meaning. Like mathematics, he doesn’t have this kind of
wisdom. Compare to him, I have a little bit intelligence to debate. He can
memorize so many quotations, sometimes we debate, and we need the
quotation. We don’t know how to repeat but he knows. We have to tell him to
repeat the words. One of my classmates who is much more intelligent than
me, good in debate, good in memorization sometimes I think I wish to have
his wisdom for me but this is also not possible.
Here, what I am trying to say, mainly the effort. We all here has different
wisdom, different karma, different body, and different thinking but at the
end of the day, it boils down to your effort.  How much effort you put in,
that much you learn on the topics. Last time I also mentioned that when I
went to America I met one of the teacher who teach us English. He said he
memorizes the text in Tibetan words, he is English man but he memorize some
of the definitions in philosophy. He memorizes definition in Tibetan by
reciting like mantra. You put one definition then one bead down. You do one
hundred times to memorize one definition. So by then, he said he remembers.
I hope that help you.
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B Incidentally : Summary indication of the gates of
strong karma
1 Great strength by way of the field
2 Great strength by way of the support
3 Great strength by way of the thing
4 Great strength by way of the attitude

Just before the break, we looked briefly at the criteria for making an
action powerful. Depending on various factors, an action can be very
powerful. The strength of the action can be influenced by:
   1) The type of recipients of the action
   2) In term of the support
   3) In term of the object that is involved in the action
   4) In term of attitude or motivation behind the action

   [Alt translation LRCM V1 page 231:
   (b') A brief discussion of the criteria for powerful actions
The strength of actions is explained in terms of four aspects: recipient,
support, objects, and attitude.
(1') Strength in terms of recipient
There is strength in actions directed toward the three jewels, gurus, those
who are like gurus, parents, and the like, for, though you direct no
intense thoughts toward them and do them only small harm or help, the
ensuing misdeed and merit is great. Further, the Mindfulness of the
Excellent Teaching states:
Even if you take something small from the Buddha, the teaching, or the
community, the fault will be large. However, if you offer some similar
substance that is greater than what you stole from them, you will clear
away the karma of stealing from the Buddha and the teaching. However, there
is no clearing away the karma of stealing from the community without
experiencing the result, because of the weightiness of the recipient.]
1. Strength in term of recipient:  There is strength in action directed
towards very powerful objects such as the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, the
gurus, one’s parents and so forth. Any action that is directed in relation
to these powerful recipients, even if your motivation is weak, but because
of their status being the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha or one’s parents or one’s
teachers, the action becomes extremely powerful.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 232:  Within the community, persons who are
bodhisattvas are extremely powerful recipients in terms of activities that
are either virtuous or non-virtuous. The Seal of Engaging in Developing the
Power of Faith Sutra says that it is an immeasurably greater sin for
someone to become angry and turn his or her back on a bodhisattva, saying,
"I will not look upon this evil person," than for someone to become angry
and put all the living beings in the ten directions into a gloomy prison.
Further, it states that if someone were to despise any bodhisattva, it
would be a sin immeasurably greater than that of someone stealing all the
belongings of all the living beings in Jambudvipa. Again, it says that if
someone were to have malice or anger for a bodhisattva, who delights in the
Mahayana, and speak disagreeably to such a bodhisattva, it would be a sin
immeasurably greater than that of someone who demolishes or burns as many
stupas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River.
Further, the Seal of Engaging in Certain and Uncertain Destinies Sutra
speaks of someone who looks with faith upon a bodhisattva (who delights in
the Mahayana) and who, wanting to look with clear faith upon such a
bodhisattva, speaks praises of him or her. This person would accumulate
merit that is immeasurably greater than that of someone who lovingly gives
eyes to all the living beings of the ten directions after they all have
lost their eyes, and frees such living beings from incarceration,
establishing them in the bliss of a universal monarch or Brahma.]

It is mentioned in the text that any action that are done in relation to a
bodhisattva, that action is extremely powerful. Whether you are committing
a positive action or a negative action in relation to a bodhisattva, it
becomes very powerful. The example it says here that if someone were to
have malice or anger, let’s say, criticize a bodhisattva. Just an act of
criticizing the bodhisattva that action is more powerful than someone who
destroys as many stupas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River.
Imagine that if all the people in this world were blind and let’s say you
are able to restore their sights. This is an extremely meritorious action.
But compared that action to just looking a bodhisattva with faith, that
action accumulate more merit.
If you think about it, you may find it difficult to accept and not being
able to understand the reason. How is it so? Naturally, we have the
question; “How can it be? What is the reason?” I think the main lesson that
one should draw from this particular example is about respecting others. In
the case of our parents who are the most kind for us in this life, we
should respect and cherish our parents. Likewise, the object to whom we
have faith in such as the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, we should also respect
and have faith in them.
Those beings who are helping others in an extensive way such as the
bodhisattvas, we should respect and cultivate faith towards these beings.
We should praise them and not to speak harshly in relation to them. Here
the example is that of a bodhisattva only but what we should draw or
extrapolate from the point here is that on the basis of being able to
respect the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, the bodhisattvas and so forth, we can
gradually extend the level of treatment to others i.e. to those sentient
beings who are of equal status as us and to those who are lower than us.
The point is to extend this treatment of treating others with respect, not
insulting them or speaking badly of them.
Here it is speaking about practice of extending the treatment of respect to
others; the objects of refuge, bodhisattvas and of course then extending to
sentient beings: one’s parents and also in relation to one’s virtuous
friends (spiritual masters, gurus). But the point is able to relate to
others with respect and speaking pleasantly instead of speaking
unpleasantly. Sometimes when we see statement such as if we do something to
a bodhisattva we will get this and that. Sometimes you may wonder why or
how. The point is to be able to extrapolate and to relate back also to
other beings kindly.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 233:
(2') Strength in terms of support
Although even a small lump of iron sinks to the bottom of a body of water,
the same substance made into a vessel, even a large one, floats on top.
Likewise, the Buddha said, sins committed by those who are not
knowledgeable and those who are knowledgeable are heavy and light as well.
The Great Final Nirvana states the reason for this:
Just as a fly that is stuck to nasal mucus cannot extricate itself, so the
ignorant cannot extricate themselves from even small shortcomings. Further,
they cannot do virtuous actions, because they are without regret. Even
though they have previous virtuous actions, they defile them with sins,
because they hide their faults. The causes of experiencing a fruition of a
non-virtue in the present lifetime are therefore transformed into causes of
great suffering and become causes for experiencing a very severe hell.
Therefore, the Buddha said that non-virtues are light for the knowledgeable
who regret their former non-virtuous actions, restrain themselves from
future non-virtuous actions, do not conceal their sins, and do virtuous
actions as remedies for those non-virtuous actions. However, non-virtues
are weighty for those who make a pretense of being knowledgeable and do not
do these actions but belittle them and engage consciously in non-virtuous
action.]

What does the support here means? For example, there is a difference
between those who are knowledgeable and those who are not knowledgeable.

In this context, knowledgeable refers to those who have regret for having
committed non-virtues in the past and those who have the intention to
restrain themselves from committing such an action again in the future.
It is said that the negativities of such a person -the knowledgeable one -
is said to be lighter.
In this context, not knowledgeable refers to those who do not have any
regret for the non-virtuous committed in the past and also do not have any
kind of intention for wanting to stop creating such an action again in the
future.
Their negativities are said to be heavier.
There is no exception because there may be some who pride themselves as
being well-learned thinking; “I know what I am doing. I am a Buddhist” but
they disregard their actions at the same time. They don’t really have any
regret for their past non-virtues and they don’t really care about
refraining from the action and yet at the same time they think; “I know
what I am doing. I am a Buddhist.” It is said that their negativities which
were committed out of disregard for their actions are said to be heavy.
It is said that those people who have regret for their non-virtuous
accumulated in the past and who have intention to refrain from doing these
actions again in the future, their negativities are lighter as compared to
someone who doesn’t has any regret and restraint. Therefore it is important
to have these two:
   1. to have regret for the past non-virtues and
   2. to have restraint for future negative action.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 234: The Heap of Jewels Sutra speaks of a
bodhisattva who has renounced the householder's life holding a lamp wick
coated with a trifling amount of butter in front of a stupa. The merit
accumulated from this is then compared to all the living beings in the
universe of three billion world systems having entered the Mahayana,
possessing the kingdom of a universal monarch, and then each making
offerings to a stupa of the Buddha with butter lamps whose vessels were the
size of an ocean and whose wicks were the size of Mount Meru. It states
that even this would not match even a hundredth of the former's merit. This
is a case in which the attitude -the spirit of enlightenment- and the
recipient -the stupa- are not different, but there is a pronounced
difference in the object offered. However, this is clearly a case
exemplifying strength in terms of the support [vow]. ]
Here there is another example that illustrates the strength in terms of the
support. Imagine that all living beings in the universe, not just this one
universe, but the universe of the three billion world systems, having
entered the Mahayana and have great possession, each of them making
offerings to the stupa with butter lamps whose vessels are the size of an
ocean and the wicks are the size of Mount Meru.  That is a lot of merit,
right? But these merits when compared to a bodhisattva who is ordained (who
give up the householder’s life) making just a small butter lamp offering
with just a little bit of butter to the stupa. It is said that his merit is
greater than the merit accumulated by all those living beings as mentioned
earlier.
In this example here comparing the ordained bodhisattva merit and all the
living beings in the three billions world making offerings yet the ordained
bodhisattva merit is greater. What is the reason for that?
The difference doesn’t come from the motivation because all of them have
the same motivation; they have entered the Mahayana and they have
bodhichitta motivation.
It doesn’t come from the object to which they are making the offering;
which is the stupa.
Obviously the difference cannot come from the offering substance itself.
The ordained person just has one butter lamp but the others have numberless
butter lamp.
The difference comes in terms of the support of the vows because the
ordained person has the ordained pratimoksha vows. He holds more numbers of
vows; therefore his action of making the butter lamp offering is much more
powerful.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 234: Following the line of reasoning in this
passage, it is evident that, regarding cultivation of the path by someone
without the support of a vow, someone having a vow, and, within having a
vow, the support of possessing one, two, or three vows, the latter will
have quicker progress than the former. It is clear as well that when people
such as householders practice such things as generosity, there can be a
great difference in the strength of the roots of virtue produced. This
difference comes from whether they act within having a vow such as a one-
day vow or whether they act without a vow.]
This is what happens when we engage in virtue having the support of the
vows; whether it is the pratimoksha vows, the bodhisattva vows or the
tantric vows. The more vows that we live in makes our actions very powerful
even it is a very small virtue. Because of having the support of the vows,
even a small virtue can become very powerful. Lama Tsongkhapa says very
clearly that even in the case of lay people, the more numbers of vows one
hold, the better it is because it makes a difference in the merit that one
accumulate. Lama Tsongkhapa says that whether it is one, two or three
pratimoksha vows and even there is also discussion of the eight vows.
You have to keep this in mind.  From your side, according to your own
ability/ capacity; you should take as many vows as you can. Take it, then
protect the vows and live your life with the vows. It is like everything is
life, when there is pro, then there is also con. It is same thing here.
With taking vows, there are all these benefits. But if one takes a lot of
vows and not able to keep it well, one transgresses them. Of course the non-
virtues that follow are very heavy as well. The negativities accumulated by
a person who is living in the vows probably are heavier than the
negativities accumulated by a person who does not live in the vows.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 234:
(3') Strength in terms of objects
Among the giving of gifts to living beings, the gift of the teaching is
vastly superior to the gift of material things. Among offerings to the
buddhas, the offering of practice is vastly superior to the offering of
material things. Following these examples, understand the others.

When we practice giving with sentient beings, you can give material things.
One can also give the gift of dharma. It is said that the gift of dharma is
vastly superior to the gift of material things. The gift of material things
are benefit but only temporary and it is only for a short while whereas the
gift of dharma benefit the recipients from life to life. Because of that,
therefore the gift of the dharma is said to be vastly superior to the gift
of material things.

Even in the case of making offerings to the Buddha, one can make the usual
offerings of material things. There is also the offering of practice. If
you were to compare these two, the offering of practice is more important
and more powerful. The merit that you make by offering of practice is much
more powerful than offering material things. The offering of practice
usually mean learning and putting into practice the Buddha’s teachings.

These are the important things that we should be able to keep in the mind
and then use the information here. The discussion is telling you that if
you want to engage in virtue, it especially telling you what kind of
virtues are the most powerful, the most effective and the most beneficial.
When we know them, then we should engage in them. By knowing what negative
actions are more powerful then you should try to avoid those extremely
powerful negative actions. We have to understand how, for example, the
recipient of the action does determine the weight of the action. The
difference also comes in terms of the support of whether you have vow,
whether you are knowledgeable or not and so forth. There is also difference
in the objects of an action.

So, from here you can see that if you are someone who is really interested
in virtue and want to do something beneficial and good, if you don’t study,
you will not understand something like this and actually you are making a
loss. You are working hard but you don’t really get anything. Just using
this as an example, it shows that how important learning and studying is.
As I have always says, please work hard and try. You have to read the text
and think about it. If you have questions then you should ask. We have the
monthly discussion. It is important that you should attend. This is just my
wish and my request. Please try to do.
