Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 26.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.351633
================================================================================


As I have mentioned in the last lesson, we really need to think about
refuge. In order for there to be genuine refuge in our heart, we first must
possess the two causes for such a refuge to arise in our mind. What are the
two causes? In summary, they are the fear and faith. [Lesson 25: The two
causes of going for refuge are the fear of the sufferings of the lower
realms combine with the faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ abilities
to protect you from that fear]
There are two conditions of us being protected by taking the refuge:
external condition and internal condition.
-The external condition is the Buddha because he possesses all the
necessary qualifications to protect us.
-The internal cause is from our side. We have to entrust ourselves
completely to the Buddha by taking the wholehearted refuge. If we do that,
we will definitely be protected.
Having said that, with the present of these two conditions we will be
protected by the Buddha but how are we being protected? To understand this,
there is one very important point for us to realize. Our fear and
sufferings arise primarily from our undisciplined/ unsubdued mind. All our
problems and sufferings are the result of the non-virtuous karma which is
inside of us –it is internal and not external. In order to be freed from
our suffering we have to overcome this internal condition -the unsubdued
mind which gives rise to our non-virtuous karma. If we can overcome them,
we will be liberated from our suffering. Since the main cause of suffering
is the unsubdued mind and the non-virtuous karma which are inside of us, so
the solution to this problem has to come from our own side as well i.e. the
solution has to be inside us as well. We have to practice the solution
which is the ethic of refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions. With
the faith of conviction in the Buddha and from our own side, we guard our
practice of the ethic of refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions then
definitely we will be protected from the sufferings of the lower realms. In
this context of the path that is shared with person of the small capacity,
the very thing that rescues us from sufferings of the lower realms is the
practice of the ethic of refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions. In
this context, this practice becomes the actual protection. If our faith and
trust in the Buddha is strong then we will be able to practice the ethic of
refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions. The stronger our faith and
trust in the Buddha the better will be our practice of ethics. There is a
relationship on this. Therefore, the faith and trust in the Buddha becomes
important.
If you have notice in the section of the teaching: “Identifying the objects
to which you go for refuge”, it does not only talks about the Buddha, it
talk about the three refuges –the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha. The
objects that we regard as our savior/ refuge are the Buddhas together with
their spiritual sons –all the Bodhisattvas abiding on the different
bodhisattva grounds arise from the Dharma Jewel. All the Buddhas whom we
hold so dear and precious in our heart, what is that produce the Buddhas?
It is non-other then the Dharma Jewel. All the Superior beings whom we hold
in high regard and we cherish them, they also come from the Dharma Jewel.
Therefore there are these three objects of refuge –the Buddha, Dharma and
Sangha. If we think of the Three Jewels in term of the cause and effect
relationship, especially in relation to our own mind of how we can be like
them, the Dharma Jewel has to arise first. The person who achieves the
Dharma Jewel becomes the Sangha Jewel. This Sangha Jewel progressively on
the path will one day become the Buddha Jewel. So in-term of cause and
effect, first in dependent on the Dharma, the person becomes a Sangha and
then become a Buddha.
In term of the evolution, first is the Dharma Jewel, then the Sangha Jewel
and finally the Buddha Jewel. Usually when we talk about the Buddha, Dharma
and Sangha, we talk about the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha in that order. This
order of describing the Three Jewels is from the perspective of the Buddha
coming to this world. In term of the historical evolution of this world,
the Buddha descended to this world, and then he taught the Dharma and from
actualizing the Dharma, then came the Sangha.
If we talk about the evolution, first there is a Dharma Jewel. What is a
Dharma Jewel?
Dharma Jewel refers to the particular mind that can act as a direct
antidote to any of our afflictions. Come the time when this mind is
generated that is when the Dharma Jewel is produced. The person who has
this Dharma Jewel in his mind becomes the Sangha Jewel. Is Dharma Jewel a
dharma text?

The way you go for refuge
  1. Going for refuge by knowing the good qualities
  2. Going for refuge by knowing the distinctions
  3. Going for refuge through commitment
  4. Going for refuge by refusing to acknowledge other refuges
Going for refuge by knowing the good qualities
A. The good qualities of the Buddha
B. The good qualities of the Dharma
C. The good qualities of the Sangha
A. The good qualities of the Buddha
In the last lesson we did looked briefly at the good qualities of the
Buddha’s exalted body,  Buddha’s exalted speech, Buddha’s exalted mind and
his enlightened activities. The text then continues with the good qualities
of the Dharma and the good qualities of the Sangha.
B. The good qualities of the Dharma
When we look at the Buddha’s exalted body, exalted speech, exalted mind and
his enlightened activities, they are really inconceivable. Where this
inconceivable Buddha came from? He arose from the Dharma. The Dharma here
refers specifically to True Path and True Cessation. If you understand how
inconceivable the Buddha’s qualities are then you will get some ideas of
the potential of the Dharma.
Now back to the Dharma Jewel. Specifically the Dharma Jewel refers to the
True Path and True Cessation.
True Path refers to the mind which is the direct antidote to the
afflictions in our mental continuum. Come the time when this special mind
is developed then we achieve the True Path. Therefore True Path is the
special mind which is the antidote to afflictions. Based on that, you
achieve permanent freedom from any of the afflictions. That factor of the
permanent freedom from any of the afflictions is known as True Cessation.
For now, you just have to stick to this level of understanding of what a
Dharma Jewel is so you have some ideas of what True Path and True Cessation
are. This will become clearer in the future when we look at the topic of
Paths and Grounds where True Path and True Cessation will be explained in
more details.
[LRCM Vol 1 page 187: Once you have made respect for the Buddha your
primary cause, you should then recollect the teaching jewel as follows:
"The Buddha possesses limitless good qualities, all of which arose from
meditating on and realizing both the verbal teachings and the teachings as
they are put into practice. That is, he actualized the true cessations,
thereby eliminating faults, and meditated on the true paths, thereby giving
rise to good qualities."]
C. The good qualities of the Sangha
The Sangha Jewel here refers primarily to Arya beings/ Superior beings.  We
reflect on the qualities of the Superior beings and how they  are  the  one
who possess the Dharma Jewel and how they practice the Dharma.
Here we have finished with “Going for refuge by knowing the good qualities”
2. Going for refuge by knowing the distinctions
You go for refuge after understanding the distinctions among the Three
Jewels i.e. the differences between the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. The
distinctions are based on their defining characteristics:
The Buddha Jewel has the defining characteristic of full, perfect
enlightenment.
The teaching jewel/ Dharma Jewel have the defining characteristic of
arising from the Buddha Jewel.
The Sangha Jewel has the defining characteristic of correct practice by
means of personal instruction i.e. they correctly practice the Dharma
Jewel.
3. Going for Refuge Through Commitments
   As is apparent from the Extensive Commentary on the Vinaya, you  go  for
   refuge in terms of considering the Buddha to be the one who teaches  the
   refuge; the Dharma to be nirvana, which is the actual  refuge;  and  the
   Sangha, to be the companions accomplishing refuge.
Going for refuge through commitments means upholding the Buddha as the
teacher of refuge, the Dharma –nirvana- as the actual refuge and the Sangha
as those who assist us to attain refuge.
4. Going for refuge by refusing to acknowledge other refuges
Going for refuge by refusing to acknowledge other refuges comes from the
basis of knowing that the Buddha is someone who has perfected good
qualities and has eradicated all faults. He is the only one who can protect
any individual from the sufferings of the lower realms and the whole of
samsara. If you do understand that no one else can do that, based on this
you hold the Buddha as the only refuge and you don’t turn to anyone else
for protection.
After having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, what are the
trainings that we have to follow?

The Precepts of Refuge
Once you have gone for refuge, the stages of the precepts
   How they appear in the oral tradition
    1. The special precepts
    2. The general precepts
1. The special precepts
    A. The proscriptive precepts
    B. The prescriptive precepts
A. The proscriptive precepts
After having gone for refuge to the Buddha Jewel, what we should not do?
  If one does not even regard powerful worldly gods, Rudra, Vishnu and the
  like as long-term refuge, no need to speak of nagas and local spirits
  belonging to the hungry ghosts. In this regard, while it is not
  appropriate to rely on them from a lack of conviction in the three
  objects of refuge, it is not inappropriate to seek their assistance for
  some action of temporary character. By way of example, it is like seeking
  assistance from a donor for one’s livelihood or like relying on a doctor
  in hope for a cure.
When you take the refuge, first you have to identify who you are seeking
protection from? We have identified that they are the Buddha, Dharma and
Sangha. To the Buddha in particular, you are supposed to go for refuge
after you have decisively concluded in your own mind that it is only the
Buddha who can protect you from the sufferings of the lower realms and the
whole of samsara. Once you have decisively concluded that in your own mind
then you entrust yourself to the Buddha. After having done that, if you
then decide to seek refuge from the worldly gods, nagas, or spirits (who
are hungry ghosts) then it is like going against what you have committed
earlier.  You are supposed to avoid that after having gone for refuge to
the Buddha.
What is refuge? It is a state of mind which has decisively entrusted the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and then going for refuge to them. If this is the
meaning of refuge but after having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma
and Sangha, you then consider some other entities as your ultimate refuge
then the previous mind of refuge, which is the heartfelt condition, will
cease to exist. Both cannot exist together. After having gone for refuge to
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, we entrust ourselves to some other entities
as our ultimate refuge, then the earlier mind of refuge will cease.
We have to relate to what we have discussed earlier which are very
important. We need to understand that our sufferings, problems and
unhappiness ultimately arise from our negative mind -our unsubdued mind.
All these sufferings, problems and unhappiness are the result of our
negative karma. It is inside us; not outside us. All these sufferings and
problems arise from non-virtues and the non-virtues arises from the
unsubdued mind. If we look at our unsubdued mind, the root of the unsubdued
mind is our ego; technically speaking is apprehending a self to be real and
truly existent. This is what we call ignorance and it is the root of our
problem.  The only entity or person who has taught the antidote to this
ignorance is only the Buddha; no other entities. From this we can
understand how ultimately the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are the highest
objects of refuge.
If we want to be free of all our problems then we have to liberate from the
causes of these problems. The root of all the problems is ignorance -
apprehending a self to be real and truly existent. We have to produce an
antidote to overcome that ignorance and only the Buddha has taught the
antidote to this ignorance. What did the Buddha said about this? The Buddha
taught the meaning of dependent arising as the antidote to overcome this
ignorance. Nobody else in this world has taught dependent arising. Based on
the understanding of this discussion, then you can really start to see how
the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha are the unsurpassed objects of refuge
i.e. there is no one higher is than the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha; who are
our savior.
One question that is being asked all the times: “Is it alright to take
refuge to the worldly god or the naga?” The answer in the text is very
clear: if you regard these entities as your ultimate/ highest refuge, then
it is not right because they cannot do protect you. However at times it is
alright to seek their temporary assistance especially if the problem is
related to them and is within their means such as spirit harms or sickness;
just like consulting a doctor for the cure of an illness.  It is not right
at all to regard these worldly entities as the ultimate objects of refuge.
We have to understand that all these worldly gods, nagas and spirits are
just the external condition. It is true that at times they do play a part
in some of our experiences such as spirit harms but, nevertheless, they are
still an external condition. Perhaps at time the problem can be solved by
working on this external condition but we have to understand the main cause
of being possessed or experiencing sickness is still inside us; which is
due to our own unsubdued mind and our non-virtuous karma. If we do seek
assistance from these entities we still have to remember that the main
cause still lies within us; which is our own non-virtues.
So that is the proscriptive precept that we should cultivate after having
going for refuge to the Buddha.
The proscriptive precept that we should cultivate after having going for
refuge to the Dharma is:
  in giving up causing harm or difficulty to humans or animals, and so
  forth through thought or actions like beating, binding, ensnaring them,
  piercing their noses and loading them unbearably .
In essence, after having gone for refuge to the Dharma, we should avoid
causing harm to other sentient beings. This is very important.
The third proscriptive precept entails not agreeing with those who do not
believe in the three jewels as a refuge and who repudiate them.
I think why this proscriptive precept of not agreeing with people who do
not believe in the Three Jewels as the refuge and those who repudiate the
Three Jewels is avoid to be close to them; especially as a beginner. As a
beginner, when our refuge is not yet stable and by mixing closely to those
who are actively against the Three Jewels, there may be a danger that we
may give up our refuge. It is important to understand the rational for this
particular precept or else it may seem that we may have lost our freedom
such as “you cannot do this and that.” I guess when it said “do not
associate with these people”, I think primarily it is on the physical and
verbal levels. On the physical level, we do not maintain a close
relationship but in our heart we should still feel close to everyone. We
only need to keep a distance on the physical and verbal levels due the
danger as explained earlier. Only when our refuge has become stable and
having achieved irreversible faith, then there is dispensation for some
situations; if there is a need for it i.e. one is permitted to do some of
these things which are not allowed. For those who have very stable and
irreversible faith, there is a special dispensation for them to benefit
others. Therefore, we need to have the complete understanding of the
rationale behind this proscriptive precept because if without the complete
understanding and just looking at the proscriptive precept at the face
value, we might start to wonder why Buddhism is so narrow and restrictive.
[LRCM Vol 1 page 194: Thus, there are three proscriptive precepts: not
going to other deities for refuge, abandoning harm and malice toward living
beings, and not befriending non-Buddhist philosophers.
Not going to other deities for refuge is explained as follows: since you
should not even hold worldly deities such as Rudra and Visnu as your
ultimate refuge, what need be said about nagas and the local divinities who
are hungry ghosts? While it is improper to entrust yourself to these beings
without full belief in the three refuges, it is proper to merely seek these
beings' help for some temporary religious purpose, just as, for example,
you would seek the help of a benefactor in acquiring the means of
livelihood, or consult a doctor for the cure of an illness.
The second proscriptive precept entails refraining from doing harm or
injury to living beings through thought or deed. This includes actions such
as beating, binding, imprisoning, nose-piercing, and overburdening humans,
animals, and so forth.
The third proscriptive precept entails not agreeing with those who do not
believe in the three jewels as a refuge and who repudiate them.]


B. The prescriptive precepts
There are three prescriptive precepts i.e. things that you should do.
We should regard all representations of the Buddha -statue, painting and  so
forth- as the actual Buddha. We should treat  these  representations  as  an
object of reverence. Our level of  reverence  and  respect  for  these  holy
objects should not be based on material that is made from and  regard  those
representations that are made  from  precious  material  as  something  more
holy. If the painting of the Buddha is not done well,  we  still  accord  it
with proper respect and reverence with the recognition  that  is  an  actual
Buddha.  By doing that, we are the one who stand to gain.
After having gone for refuge to the Dharma, we should regard any  scriptures
and dharma texts as  an  actual  Dharma  and  accord  it  with  respect  and
reverence. So it is very important  to  accord  with  proper  reverence  and
respects for the dharma  scriptures  especially  those  texts  that  we  are
learning and reflecting on. We should regard it as something  very  precious
and pay homage to it, make offerings and so forth. If we do that,  it  makes
a difference in term of our understanding and realizing the  subject  matter
that is contained in those texts. We should accord proper  respect  for  the
scriptures because the scriptures contain all the things  that  we  need  to
learn and the scriptures are the medium through which these information  are
make known to us. We have to accord it with proper  respect  and  reverence.
We should not put it at the low place but put the texts in the  high  place.
As the great Kadampa master Sharawa said: "We are playing  around  with  the
teaching in so many ways.  Showing  disrespect  for  the  teaching  and  its
teachers ruins our wisdom. We are stupid enough now—let's  not  create  more
stupidity! If we become even more stupid, what  will  we  be  able  to  do?"
Basically we need to develop a  very  high  regard  and  respect  for  those
scriptures that show us what to practice and  what  to  learn.  We  need  to
respect by making offerings. By respecting  these  scriptures  we  stand  to
gain with success in our learning, reflection and meditation. Then  it  will
be cause to develop wisdom.
After having gone for refuge to the  Sangha,  we  should  not  criticize  or
despise the Sangha, renunciates, or those who merely possess the symbols  of
an ordained person. Even the person is wearing mere  symbols  or  robes,  we
should regard as if they are the  actual  Sangha  Jewel  itself.  We  should
respect the Sangha Jewel and not to put them down. We should regard them  as
the actual Sangha Jewel  itself.  You  can  see  varieties  members  of  the
Sangha.
It is not sufficient for people to regard the Sangha as in  the  way  it  is
being  taught  but  from  the  Sangha  side,  they  also  have  to  practice
contentment and so forth. It would not be right  if  the  Sangha  arrogantly
pride himself as a Sangha; this is not right. In short, the householder  and
lay person should not despise or revile the Sangha. From  the  Sangha  side,
they have to do their part by practicing as much as they can  especially  on
the practice of contentment.
The precepts here are telling  us  that  we  have  to  respect  the  Buddha,
respect the teaching and respect the Sangha  even  to  those  who  are  just
wearing the robes. The point is if we regard the Buddha, Dharma  and  Sangha
with respect, we create the cause to be respected i.e.  we  respect  others,
in return, people will do the same to us.
It is taught here that from our own side, as much as possible,  we  have  to
respect the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha with our body, speech and mind. If  we
do that, we will gain from it. We should also regard those who  are  bearing
the signs of ordination i.e. from our own side, to respect and reverence  to
those who even just wear a robe. I guess that if we start to revile or  look
down on any ordained person, then slowly we may think; “This  people  is  of
one kind,” then we may start to think; “The Dharma is also of one kind.”  If
the Dharma is like that, we may end up concluding; “The Buddha  is  also  of
one kind.” So we end up  revile  the  Dharma  and  the  Buddha.  This  is  a
possibility and is a danger. So we are advised not to criticize  even  those
are who are just bearing the sign of ordination.
[LRCM Vol I page 194-196: There are three prescriptive precepts. The first
is to treat images of the Buddha as objects of reverence -as though they
were the Teacher himself- not pointing out their faults regardless of their
quality, and not disrespecting them or treating them with contempt by
putting them in dishonorable places, pawning them, etc. The Friendly
Letter:
      Just as the learned worship an image of the Sugata,
      Whatever it is made of, even wood...
The second prescriptive precept is never to show disrespect for writings on
the teachings, even those composed of as little as four words. Further, you
should not pawn volumes of scriptures, treat them as merchandise, place
them on the bare ground or in dishonorable places, carry them together with
shoes, walk over them, etc. Treat them with respect, as though they were
the teaching jewel itself.
The third prescriptive precept is never to revile or despise members of the
community, renunciates, or those who merely possess the symbols of a
practitioner of virtue [someone who is dressed as a monk or nun but has no
vow]. Nor should you do this to the mere symbols [part of the robes] of
these practitioners. Never in any way divide yourself and others into
opposing factions and view the others as enemies.]

2. The general precepts
There are six general precepts:
1. By recalling the distinctions and good qualities of the three jewels, go
   for refuge again and again
2. By recalling the great kindness of the three jewels, strive  to  worship
   them constantly and offer the first portion of your food and drink
3. Establish other living beings in this practice by considering them  with
   compassion
4. Whatever activity  you  engage  in,  and  whatever  your  purpose,  make
   offerings and supplications to the three  jewels,  forsaking  any  other
   worldly methods
5. After you have understood the benefits, go for refuge three times in the
   day and three times at night
6. Maintain your refuge and do not forsake the three jewels, even  in  jest
   or if it costs you your life

By recalling the distinctions and good qualities of  the  Three  Jewels,  go
for refuge again and again. We should bring to mind what the Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha are and the distinctions between them. If we remember all  these,
then we should entrust ourselves and go for refuge again and again.
By recalling the great kindness of the Three Jewels, strive to worship  them
constantly and offer the first portion of your food and drink. On the  basis
of understanding that  all  our  every  single  happiness  are  due  to  the
kindness of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, we should repay the  kindness  by
constantly making offerings to the Three Jewels. Since we have  to  eat  and
drink all the times and before we do so every time  we  should  first  offer
that to the Buddha by remembering  his  kindness.  We  should  remember  the
kindness of the Three Jewels and constantly  make  offerings  to  the  Three
Jewels. With regards to the kind of things  that  we  should  offer  to  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, it is said that we should offer the best  of  our
abilities. We should not offer those things that are already bad  or  lousy.
This is related to what we have discussed earlier. From our own side, if  we
really decisively conclude in our heart that the  Buddha  is  the  only  one
ultimate refuge,  I  guess  when  it  come  to  show  reverence  and  making
offering, it should not a problem for us to offer  the  best.  If  we  don’t
have that kind of recognition and attitude, I guess, you will not offer  the
best.  The stages of training here  advise  us  to  make  offerings  to  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, because by doing so,  we  will  quickly  complete
the collection of  merits.  So  we  should  honor  the  Three  Jewels,  make
offerings and constantly paying  homage  with  reverence.  By  honoring  the
Three Jewels, paying homage and make offerings, we will be able  to  quickly
produce the paths and grounds – realization- in our own mind.  As  mentioned
in the text:
   When you listen, you cannot remember the words.
   Even you can remember the words, you cannot understand the meaning.
   Even you can understand the meaning, when you meditate,  nothing  happen
   to the mind.
The solution is to honor the Three Jewels, pay homage, make offering and  so
forth. If you do that, then you will be able to retain the words,  you  will
be able to understand the meaning and  you  will  be  able  to  produce  the
experience and  realization  in  your  mind.  As  for  how  extensive  one’s
offerings are, it has got to do with how expansive one’s mind is. Those  who
has relatively less to offer or do not have anything to offer,  they  should
not feel; “Since I have nothing to offer, I cannot  do  anything.”  This  is
not the case because one can make mentally  creates  the  offerings.  Having
say this, the teaching also say that when you have things to offer  and  you
do not offer them but just mentally creates it, then this is wrong  as  this
is done out of miserliness. It is like someone who can see taking the  blind
for a ride. Even if we do not have much to offer, we should still offer  and
we slowly strive to increase the quality and quantity of the offering.

Refutation of the manners of speaking [to the effect] that the way
Bodhisattvas make offerings, having gained control over material things, is
impure
  If great bodhisattvas, having gained control over material things,
  emanate many hundreds of thousands of bodies and for each body, again,
  emanate hundreds of thousands of hands etc. and [if they] appear in all
  the fields making offerings to the Jinas for many eons, the statement by
  those who know only the superficial appearance of positive qualities that
   “As for me, I do not hope [to reach] enlightenment that way,” – is the
  idle talk of [people] who have very little familiarity with the Dharma
[LRCM Vol I page 201: Great beings who have gained control over material
things emanate many hundreds of thousands of bodies, each of which in turn
emanates hundreds of thousands of hands. 'Visiting all the buddha-realms,
they make offerings to the Conquerors for many eons. They can do all this,
while others settle for small achievements that look good, and say, "I do
not expect enlightenment through making offerings." This is the nonsense of
those who have little exposure to the teaching. ]
Those great bodhisattvas, especially those abiding on the first
bodhisattva’s ground onwards, have gained control over material things and
they still manifest numerous replicas of themselves and go to the various
Buddhas fields to constantly honor the Buddhas.
There are people who tell others that in order to achieve enlightenment
there is no need to do all these things such as making all these countless
offerings but rather one just need to meditate. Whoever says something like
this, it is a very clear sign that the person has no idea what he is
talking about. This is a sign that the person does not have an overview of
a good complete understanding of the entire Buddhadharma.
What is the advice we can extract from this paragraph here? If these great
beings have to do these things then it goes without saying that we mere
mortal have to do even more. This shows that in order to achieve
enlightenment we need to amass an unbelievable amount of merits. With that
understanding, therefore we should strive to accumulate the collection of
merits by honoring the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, by paying homage and
making offerings and so forth. In order to achieve full enlightenment we
have to amass immeasurable complete collection of merits and a collection
of wisdoms. Therefore it is important for us to amass these collections. In
relation to whom we can accumulate these collections of merit and wisdoms
there is no higher object than the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. So we strive
to honor the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.




