Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson51.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.046774
================================================================================


Let’s recap of what we have covered. We were looking at the two
instructions for developing the spirit of enlightenment or bodhicitta:
  -the sevenfold cause and effect instructions
  -the instruction of exchanging self and others
We have started with the first one: the sevenfold cause-and-effect
instructions. In this instruction, there is an instruction to recognize all
sentient beings as having been our mothers. On that basis, recollecting
their kindness and then developing a wish to repay their kindness.
The purpose of reflecting on these three instructions is to enable us to
see every living being as attractive so that you are able to have the
feeling that they do matter to you and they are precious. If you are able
to see everyone as precious, very attractive and very pleasant then you
will be able to develop love which arises through the force of such
attraction. On the basis of which, then you will be able to develop great
compassion.
We were discussing this in the context of how great compassion is important
in the beginning, in the middle and at the end.
The reflection on:
1. How all sentient beings have been our mothers
2. Remembering their kindness
3. Developing a wish to repay their kindness.
4. Developing love which sees all sentient beings as very pleasant and
   precious.
These four (1, 2, 3, 4) are the causes for developing great compassion.
5. Generate great compassion in our mind
6. The wholehearted resolve
7. Actual spirit of enlightenment/ bodhicitta
These two (6, 7) are the effects of great compassion.

How wholehearted resolve and the spirit of enlightenment are the effects of
compassion
Qualm: Once you have developed the great compassion, a mind that is unable
to bear the suffering of sentient beings, wouldn’t you then develop a
desire to achieve Buddhahood or full enlightenment for sentient beings? Why
do you need wholehearted resolve? Why does wholehearted resolve come in
between the development of great compassion and developing bodhichitta (the
desire for enlightenment)?
[LRCM V2 page 32] Reply: Although the Hearers and Solitary Realizers have
the immeasurable love and compassion whereby they think, "If only beings
could have happiness and be free from suffering," these non-Mahayana
followers do not think, "I will take on the responsibility to remove the
suffering and to provide the happiness of all living beings." Therefore,
you must develop wholehearted resolve that surpasses all other courageous
thoughts. It is not enough to think, "If only all living beings could have
happiness and could be free from suffering." You must also wholeheartedly
assume the responsibility of producing this yourself.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): So, you got the answer? You got the
question, do you understand the answer or not? First is the question, you
understand the qualm. Next, the text is giving the answer for the qualm. My
point is do you understand that answer or not? Did anybody read and think
about this?
Student 1: I have question to ask.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): What question? You think the qualm not
correct or what?
Student 1: Yes. I thought during the developing of great compassion, you
develop this wish to do it yourself; to lead all sentient beings from
suffering Why must you have this wholehearted resolve? (Audio 20:13 –
20:59)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That is the qualm.
Student 1: What is the difference between compassion and great compassion?
(Audio 21:28 – 21:39)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That one comes later. You got the qualm?
Lama Tsongkhapa is explaining that answer. My point is do you understand
how he answers to the qualm?
First you must get the qualm. The qualm is: once great compassion arises in
anybody’s mind, how would that person feel? When that person sees suffering
sentient being, he would want to free that sentient being from the
suffering. Following from that wish, logically he would then seek to
achieve enlightenment in order to be able to act on his wish. So,
wholehearted resolve is not necessary. So you can have the six-fold cause-
and-effect instructions rather than the seven-fold.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Faster as one less.
In general, you can take the thought wishing others to be happy and to be
free from suffering to be immeasurable love and compassion and to be the
same as great compassion. Then even the Hearers and the Solitary Realizers
would have such a thought.
For a Mahayana practitioner, having just great compassion is not
sufficient. On top of having the wish for others to be free from suffering,
you must have the determination to act on it by yourself alone i.e. you
need this wholehearted resolve.
The answer: In order to enter into the rank of the Mahayana, you need
wholehearted resolve; from which you are able to develop bodhichitta. Just
having great compassion alone does not enable you to become a Mahayanist
because even the people of the Hinayana disposition -the Hearers and the
Solitary Realizers- have that great compassion.
I don’t think there is a problem by explaining it in such a way. There
shouldn’t be any problem in saying that great compassion is also present in
the minds of the Hearers and the Solitary Realizers. Why?  Because,
assuming the responsibility of freeing others from suffering, does not
occur in the Hearers’ and the Solitary Realizers’ minds.
The essence of the answer is: just having great compassion alone would not
enable the person to develop the spirit of enlightenment/ bodhichitta. The
wholehearted resolve, which is assuming a personal responsibility to free
others from suffering, must be generated before bodhichitta can arise.
If you look at the actual answer provided in the text, the text is saying
that just having compassion alone is not enough; even the Hearers and the
Solitary Realizers have it. There must be something in addition. That
additional thing that comes before bodhichitta is wholehearted resolve
(also translated as universal responsibility).
The wholehearted resolve is a very strong kind of compassion because it is
not just a wish but it is a wish that comes with the feeling of personal
responsibility for freeing others from suffering i.e. you actually take on
the personal responsibility “I will do it myself alone”.
As to whether immeasurable compassion is the same as great compassion or
not, this is something that you can discuss.
Is there a difference between compassion and great compassion? You can make
a difference between compassion and great compassion.
If you just talk about compassion, it can be a biased compassion, partisan
compassion or compassion with partiality.
When you talk about great compassion, you can say that great compassion is
generated on the basis of impartiality towards all sentient beings.
Impartiality towards everyone is the basis for great compassion. In
general, such a basis is not required for compassion.
In the major philosophical treatises, it is explained that you need to
actualize one of the actual concentrations before you can have immeasurable
compassion. Only on that basis then one can talk about developing
immeasurable compassion. Such is not said with great compassion. In that
sense, we could make a distinction between immeasurable compassion and
great compassion.

|Compassion (In       |Can be compassion with partiality                    |
|general)             |                                                     |
|Great Compassion     |Generated based on impartiality towards all sentient |
|                     |beings                                               |
|Immeasurable         |Can only be generated after actualizing one of the   |
|Compassion           |actual concentrations                                |


As to whether the Hearers and Solitary Realizers do possess great
compassion in their minds or not, this is something we can think about it.
Some scholars assert that they do have great compassion while other
scholars assert that the Hearers (Sravakas) and Solitary Realizers
(Pratyekabuddhas) do not have great compassion in their minds.
Back to the answer, having great compassion alone is not sufficient. Great
compassion must become stronger to the point whereby you actually assume a
personal responsibility to free others from suffering; and that is the
wholehearted resolve. That must be present before there is any chance of
developing bodhichitta.
As to how wholehearted resolve will lead to bodhichitta, it is explained in
the text.
[LRCM V2 page 33] Once you intend to liberate all beings, you realize that
in your present condition you cannot fulfill the aims of even a single
being. Moreover, even if you attain the high state of the two arhats
[sravaka and pratyekabuddha], you will still only be able to fulfill the
aim of liberation for merely a few living beings and will be unable to
establish them in omniscience. Therefore, if you think, "Who can fulfill
all the temporary and final aims of limitless living beings?" you will
realize that only a buddha has this ability. Then you will develop the
desire to attain buddhahood for the sake of these beings.
You first generate great compassion - the wish for all sentient beings to
be free from suffering. Once that great compassion become stronger till the
point that you assume a personal responsibility to do so by thinking; ‘I
will free all sentient beings from suffering by myself.” Once you develop
this wholehearted resolve then you actually sit down and wonder whether you
can actually do it or not. You may have the wish but with the present
conditions, there is no way you can do it. If you analyze who can do the
job, you will then discover that it is only the Buddha who has the ability
to do this. Then you will have the desire to become a Buddha – the fully
enlightenment one.

2'  The gradual training
The gradual training has three sections:
   1. Training the mind to be intent on others' welfare
   2. Training the mind to be intent on enlightenment
   3. Identifying bodhichitta/ the spirit of enlightenment, the fruit of the
      training
a" Training the mind to be intent on others' welfare
Training the mind to be intent on others' welfare has two parts:
   1. Establishing the basis for developing this attitude
   2. The development of the attitude of being intent on others' welfare
1" Establishing the basis for developing this attitude
Establishing the basis for developing this attitude has two parts:
   1. Achieving impartiality toward living beings
   2. Having affection for all beings
On the “achieving impartiality towards living beings”, there is a
preliminary practice that has to be come before even doing this practice of
achieving impartiality. After having engaged in this preliminary practice,
then the text goes into the actual training in impartiality. Then Lama
Tsongkhapa says;
[LRCM V2 page 36] (a) Achieving impartiality toward living beings
I have previously explained the stages of the preliminary practices and so
forth in the context of the persons of small and medium capacities.
Practice these preliminary practices here as well and then sustain your
meditation.
We have to engage in the preliminary practices before we can even try to
develop impartiality. The preliminary practices are taught in the context
of the person of small and medium capacity; as in the earlier Lamrim, for
example, reflection on karma, reflection on the faults of cyclic existence
and so forth. These have to be cultivated first. Here we are cultivating
impartiality at the basis for developing bodhichitta. In achieving
impartiality, what has to be stopped is the mind that relates to others
with either attachment or anger (hostility).
[LRCM V2 page 36] From the outset establish an even-minded attitude,
eliminating the bias which comes from attachment to some living beings and
hostility to others. Otherwise, any love or compassion you feel will be
biased; you will never feel unbiased love or compassion. So, cultivate
impartiality.
We are looking at the instructions for developing unbiased love and
unbiased compassion. The obstacles for developing unbiased love and
unbiased compassion are attachment and anger. If you are someone who can
relate to your own mind, then I think whatever is said here is quite
obvious and there is nothing much to say. The text is saying that we don’t
have that unbiased love and unbiased compassion for everyone; in the sense
that our love and compassion is not even-minded. What is the reason?  As in
the text, it is due to attachment and hostility (anger). Is this true or
not? This is something we have to figure out for ourselves.
What is the kind of impartiality that we are trying to achieve here?
[LRCM V2 page 36] Immeasurable impartiality is said to have two types:
(1) wishing that living beings were free from such afflictions as
attachment and hostility, and
(2) being even-minded yourself after you have become free of attachment or
hostility toward living beings.
In this section, impartiality refers to the latter.
Of the two types of impartiality that is mentioned, in this context, do you
know which impartiality that we are talking? When you read, do you know
what the two types of impartiality are?  It is time to lift up your head
and give an answer. When the question was asked, if you didn’t understand
then you say no. If you understood what I was saying, you have to say yes.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I don’t know as there is no reaction. I
don’t know whether you understand or you don’t understand. Take Fong you
understand? You have to explain what is the two differences.
Student 2: The first one is you want others to be free from biased due to
attachment and hostility. The other one is you wants yourself to be free
from biased due to attachment and hostility. I think it is of different
objects. (Audio 55:52-56:56)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Good.
It is just like what Student 2 has said: the two types of impartiality that
mentioned here are:
-The first is more to do with others. When you focus on others then you
wish that they abide in impartiality and they be free of attachment and
hostility. So, that is one kind of impartiality. But the kind of
impartiality that we are talking about here in the context of a
practitioner who is trying to develop bodhichitta i.e. the impartiality
that is the basis of bodhichitta, the impartiality is oneself - we
ourselves become even minded after having removed the feeling of attachment
or hostility towards everyone.
Of these two types of impartiality, in this context here, the impartiality
that we are supposed to cultivate is the second one. If this is the kind of
impartiality that we need to cultivate, then how are we supposed to develop
it?
[LRCM V2 page 36] The steps for cultivating immeasurable impartiality are
as follows. Since you can easily be impartial to a person toward whom you
have neutral feelings, first take as the object of your meditation such a
person, someone who has neither helped nor harmed you. Achieve an even-
mindedness toward this person, removing your attachment and hostility.
As the object of meditation, you take a person toward whom you have neutral
feeling i.e. someone who has neither helped nor harmed you. Taking that
person as the object of meditation, you eliminate any feeling of attachment
or hostility towards that person. So you try to have the sense of even-
mindedness with regards to that person. If you are able to develop that and
having some good experiences, then you are asked to switch object by
focusing on the loved one, friend or relative. Then focusing on that
person, you try to generate even-mindedness by removing any feeling of
hostility (anger) and attachment towards that person. Once we are able to
achieve even-mindedness towards your loved one, then you are supposed to
move on to your enemy. Bring the enemy to mind and as before, again develop
an even-mindedness by removing any feeling of hostility or attachment. So
this is the order of meditation.
[LRCM V2 page 36]  Once you have attained this, then cultivate even-
mindedness toward a friend. Your lack of even-mindedness toward this friend
is either because of the degree of your attachment for him or her or
because of the bias from your attachment and hostility.
After you achieve an even-mindedness toward this friend, cultivate it
toward an enemy. Your lack of even-mindedness toward this person is due to
your hostility, viewing him or her as totally disagreeable. After you are
even-minded toward this person, finally cultivate it toward all living
beings
Usually when we think about our loved one, there is an attachment because
this person is of matter to us: “This person is on my side and is
supporting me, and so forth”.  When we think about our enemy, we are not
happy with this person: “This person is not on my side”. Then we have
hatred. This is what usually happens. From this, it is quite apparent that
it is our attachment and hostility that prevent us from having even-
mindedness towards everyone. Without getting rid of this attachment for the
loved one and hostility towards the enemy then there is no way to develop
even-mindedness whatsoever.
If attachment and hostility interferes or obstructs the achievement of even-
mindedness towards every living being then how are we supposed to stop this
hostility and attachment? How do we have to think in order to eliminate
attachment and hostility in order to develop even-mindedness?
[LRCM V2 page 37] Question: Well then, what meditation eliminates
attachment and hostility toward these three persons?
Reply: Kamalasila's second Stages of Meditation or the Middling stages of
Meditation offers  two approaches:
(1) Contemplate as follows, "From living beings' viewpoint, all equally
want happiness and do not want suffering. Therefore, it is inappropriate to
hold some close and to help them, while keeping others at a distance and
harming or not helping them."
(2) Contemplate as follows, "From my viewpoint, if I have continuously been
reborn since beginningless time, all beings have been my friends hundreds
of times. To whom should I be attached? To whom should I be hostile?"
Stopping this feeling of attachment and hostility towards friends and
enemies respectively is no mean feat. Seriously it is not easy and is
really tough. But if we reflect on these two approaches as given in the
text, I think definitely we can do something with our attachment and
hostility. At least we can reduce them.
The first approach is: consider from the view point of all living beings,
everyone is equal in that sense. If you look from the perspectives of all
sentient beings, whether friends or enemies, all of them are equal – both
don’t want problems and both only want happiness. This is something that we
can think about.  From that perspective, they are the same. If that is the
case and with that thought in mind, we can ask ourselves; “Is there a need
to be attached to one and to be hostile towards the other?” If we think
about in such a way, I guess perhaps we can see that there is no real
reason to be attached to one and to be hostile towards the other. There is
no reason for that bias. That is from all living beings’ view point.
Then what about switching to the perspective of our view point; that is
one’s personal view point? From our own personal perspective, considering
our own personal situation, we have been taking rebirth since beginningless
time. Everyone has been our loved one numberless of time. Our enemies of
this life have been our loved one for numberless of time and have benefited
us many times. Similarly, our loved ones of this life have also harmed us
numberless of times in the past. In that sense, they are all equal.
The text is saying that if we limit the scope of thought to this life
alone, this person is my enemy or that person is my friend, then it becomes
very narrow. If we extend the scope of thought beyond this life and
thinking our whole existence since beginningless lifetimes, then from that
perspective, the concept of enemy and friend with the feeling of hostility
and attachment would be inappropriate.
Whenever we have the feeling of attachment for people who are from our side
such as our loved ones or relatives then we can just remind ourselves that
they have harmed us numberless of times in the past so as not to get too
emotionally involved. When we develop hostility for someone who has harmed
us in this life or has caused us problem in this life, we usually get
upset. However, if we think in a bigger perspective, that person has also
been loved one and has been helpful to me numberless of times. I guess this
helps to reduce the hostility towards that person.
Even just to think of these two approaches is not easy. Why? Because it
presupposes that you already have an understanding and conviction in
reincarnation in the beginningless nature of cyclic existence. Secondly,
you need to have conviction in karma. On top of that, you also need to have
thorough conviction in what was taught in the person of medium capacity.
Remember the discussion on how in cyclic existence, friends and enemies are
never certainties because they do change. So, you need to have the
conviction in all these things in order for the mind to accept these
contemplations.
Anyway, these are the instructions that are stated here. We have to study
them, think about it and see whether it works or not. When somebody
disturbs us or does something that we don’t like, we usually get disturb.
If we don’t do anything about it, we will get very disturb when the
hostility becomes stronger. At such time we should think about this
instruction and see whether it helps or not. Similarly, when people help
us, we automatically feel attach. It is fine but if we get too emotionally
involve, then it becomes a problem. At such time we should think about the
instruction as stated here and see whether it helps or not. We have to try
it out and experience it.
At this juncture, the text raises a qualm: Are you telling me that there is
no such thing as friend and enemy?
The answer is no. We are not eliminating the notion or the concept of
friend and enemy. They do exist and will continue to exist. What we have to
stop is the attachment that arises when we think of our loved ones. What we
have to stop is the hostility that arises when we focus on our enemies. So,
we are not here to stop the concept or notion of friend and enemy.
[LRCM V2 page 37] In this context your contemplation requires  you  to  make
the distinction between friend and enemy. It is not the notion of friend  or
enemy that you need to stop but the bias  that  comes  from  attachment  and
hostility, which are based on the reason that some people are  your  friends
and others your enemies.
The actual instructions of the sevenfold cause-and-effect tradition start
with the meditation on how all sentient beings have been our mothers. I
guess this is something that we can start in the next lesson. I did ask you
to read this whole section on developing bodhichitta on your own. It is
quite straight forward and if you did read, then it is very clear. From my
own side, I don’t think I can make it any clearer as it is just there and
is so straight forward. Those of you who have not read beforehand, perhaps
there is some benefit for me to say all these things in class; otherwise it
is all there.
Questions for discussion on Sunday, 22nd April 2012
   1. How do the attachment and hostility that were discussed under the path
      of the person of medium capacity harm us?
   2. What is the difference between action (or karma) that is intention and
      action (or karma) that is intended action?
   3. What is the difference between projecting karma for a human rebirth
      and projecting karma for rebirth as a desire realm god?
   4. (a) What is the lifespan of an intermediate state being?
      (b) Once one reaches the intermediate state for a certain rebirth, can
      one change to the intermediate form of another rebirth?*
   5. In order to take rebirth in cyclic existence, does one need to have
      the ignorance that is part of the twelve links of dependent-arising?
*According to the Lower Abhidharma, Abhidharmakosa, the intermediate state
cannot be changed. According to Compendium of Knowledge, the intermediate
state can be changed. Here I am not asking whether the intermediate state
is changing from moment to moment. I am not asking whether it is
impermanent or not. For example, if you enter into the intermediate state
of a hell being and before you enter into the real hell, can the
intermediate state of a hell being be changed into the intermediate state
of a human being.


