Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson59.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.301766
================================================================================


We have been talking about generating the mind of enlightenment. We did
talk about adopting the aspirational spirit of enlightenment that comes
with commitment. On top of that, one has to train in the deeds of the
bodhisattva in order to achieve full enlightenment. In order to achieve the
full enlightenment you must practice the path that is both unmistaken and
complete.
In the text, we have brought up a wrong concept for discussion. The wrong
concept is that there are people who believe that enlightenment has to be
achieved by setting the mind in the state that lack of any kind of thought.
They believe that as long as you start to think, it doesn’t matter whatever
kind of thought, they are obstacles to achieving full enlightenment. In
order to achieve full enlightenment, what you have to do is to set your
mind in the state that lack of any kind of thought and it is through that
practice that one achieves enlightenment. This is a wrong concept which we
must refute.
Many pages in the text are devoted in refuting this wrong concept. After
reading and analyzing these many pages of discussion, the end result is
that you should be able to realize and convince yourself of how setting the
mind in the state whereby you do not think will never be a cause for full
enlightenment. This is the position of the opponents which says that one
does not need to train in the deeds of the bodhisattva in order to achieve
full enlightenment. All you need to do is to settle your mind in the state
that lack of any kind of thought.
Our own system in refuting this position is that in order to achieve full
enlightenment you need to practice the combination of method and wisdom. In
order to achieve full enlightenment, which is non-abiding nirvana,
-compassion eliminates the extreme of nirvana
-wisdom eliminates the extreme of samsara
You need to understand how compassion and wisdom eliminate these two
extremes. You should not leave it as it is. You have to ascertain it to
yourself. This has to come from investigating and thinking about this topic
again and again until it comes to an ascertainment. You should be able to
explain how:
-compassion eliminates the extreme of nirvana
-wisdom eliminates the extreme of samsara
In the text, the opponents then bring out another wrong idea. They claimed
that as long your understanding or realization of emptiness is not stable,
you need to practice the deeds of the bodhisattva. Once you have stabilized
your realization of emptiness you do not need the practice of the deeds of
the bodhisattva anymore.
Our reply: That is that is wrong. Even bodhisattvas at the eighth ground
still have to practice the deeds of the bodhisattva.
[LRCM V2 Page 94] Do not misconstrue  the  following  statements:  From  the
sutras:
  Adhering to  the  six  perfections—generosity  and  so  forth—is  demonic
  activity.
From the Three Heaps Sutra:
  Confess each of these: descending to the level of objective existence and
  giving gifts, observing ethical discipline because of  a  belief  in  the
  supremacy of ethics, etc.
And from the Sutra Requested by Brahma:
  All analysis is conceptual thought; the non-conceptual is enlightenment.
The opponents then cited certain scriptural quotation asserting that one
needs not practice the deed such as generosity. They quote: “From the
sutras: Adhering to the six perfections -generosity and so forth- is
demonic activity”.
They also quote from the Three Heaps Sutra: “Confess each of these:
descending to the level of objective existence and giving gifts, observing
ethical discipline because of a belief in the supremacy of ethics, etc.”
They also cite from the Sutra Requested by Brahma: “All analysis is
conceptual thought; the non-conceptual is enlightenment.”
This section actually gives an overview of the entire Buddhadharma. It also
shows the important of knowing many texts and what is being said in
general. It is not sufficient just to focus and study on one text alone. It
is possible that one may misunderstand the teaching.
Our position on the first quotation that is cited by the opponents: “From
the sutras: Adhering to the six perfections -generosity and so forth- is
demonic activity” is that this statement has to be understood correctly.
This statement does not mean that all forms of generosity are demonic
activities, but rather instances of generosity that are motivated by the
apprehension self of person or apprehension self of phenomena are demonic
activities.  The main point is that if generosity is motivated by an
adherence to the self of person or to the self of phenomena then that
instance of generosity become impure generosity. Because it is an impure
generosity, therefore it is called demonic activity.
[LRCM V2 Page 95] The second scriptural passage means that  the  perfections
are impure because of being motivated by a mistaken adherence  and  explains
that you must confess them. It  does  not  teach  that  you  should  not  be
involved in generosity, etc.; otherwise, the mention of  a  descent  to  the
level of objective existence in the phrase,  "descending  to  the  level  of
objective existence and giving gifts" would be  unnecessary,  and  it  would
instead have stated, "confess the giving of  gifts  in  general,"  which  it
does not in fact say.

For the second quotation, Lama Tsongkhapa is saying  that  demonic  activity
refers to the practice  of  generosity  and  ethics  that  is  motivated  by
adherence to the self of person or self of phenomena. That has to  be  case;
otherwise, the mention of a descent to the level of objective  existence  in
the phrase, "descending to the  level  of  objective  existence  and  giving
gifts" would be unnecessary, and it would instead have stated, "confess  the
giving of gifts in general," which it does not in fact say.
[LRCM V2 Page 95] This method of response, formulated in the third Stages
of Meditation, emphasizes an extremely important point, because Ha-shang's
view misunderstands this passage and asserts that the whole range of deeds
is qualified by signs, wherein the deeds are taken to be the apprehension
of signs of a self of persons and objects.
If every sort of virtuous conceptual thought—such as the generous attitude
when thinking, "I shall give this thing," and the attitude of restraint
when thinking, "I shall restrain from this wrongdoing"—were an apprehension
of a self of objects that misconceives the three spheres [agent, object,
and recipient], then it would be right and proper that everyone finding the
view of the selflessness of objects should completely reject virtuous
conceptual thought just as they reject hostility, pride, etc., and it would
be quite wrong for them to purposefully cultivate those virtues.
The point is that opponents seem to be saying that all kinds of thought  are
almost like an apprehension of signs of a self. This is not  the  case  i.e.
not all thoughts are apprehension of signs.
So it is incorrect to says the virtuous thought “I shall give  this  thing,”
and the attitude of restraint when thinking, "I  shall  restrain  from  this
wrongdoing" were an apprehension of signs. It is incorrect to says that  all
these thoughts are necessary the apprehension of a self.
[LRCM V2 Page 95]  If all conceptual thoughts, which think, "This is this,"
were conceptions of the self of objects that misconceive the three spheres,
then what about contemplating the good qualities of a teacher;
contemplating leisure and opportunity, death, and the suffering of the
miserable realms; training in the practice of going for refuge; thinking
how a certain action gives rise to a certain result; training in love,
compassion, and the spirit of enlightenment; and practicing the precepts of
the engaged spirit of enlightenment? Since all of these paths require only
that you induce certain knowledge by thinking, "This is this," "This comes
from that," "This has this good quality or that fault," you would increase
your conception of a self of objects commensurate to your certainty about
these paths. Conversely, you would become less certain about these paths
commensurate to the certain knowledge of the selflessness of objects you
could sustain in meditation. The deeds component and view component would
thus become mutually exclusive, like hot and cold, and you would then never
develop a long-lasting and very forceful certainty about both the view and
deeds.
So it is incorrect to  say  that  all  thoughts  are  apprehension  of  true
existence. If all thoughts are apprehension of  true  existence,  then  when
virtuous  thought  become  stronger  that  will  also   imply   that   one’s
apprehension of true existence will become stronger.  Conversely,  if  one’s
realization of selflessness of person or phenomena  becomes  stronger,  then
the certainty of one virtuous  thought  such  as  reflection  of  death  and
impermanence will become weaker. In that case, that  would  make  deeds  and
wisdom become mutually exclusive, like hot and cold, that will make one  not
beneficial to the other.
The deed and wisdom do not contradict with one another. If you look  at  the
final object of attainment, the final fruit of  the  path  is  the  Buddha’s
embodiment of form (form body) and embodiment of truth (truth  body).   Just
as there is no contraction between  the  two  bodies  at  the  time  of  the
result, therefore during the time of the path,  method  and  wisdom  do  not
contradict with one another. The fact that at the time of the result,  these
two  embodiments - embodiment of  form  and  embodiment  of  truth-  do  not
contradict with another  or  harm  one  another.  Therefore  the  cause  for
achieving these two bodies at the time of the path must  be  posited  to  be
non-contradictory. The mind at the time of the path, which is the cause  for
achieving the two  bodies,  are  the  minds  that  realizing  emptiness  and
dependent arising.
The mind realizing emptiness is the cause for the Buddha’s embodiment of
truth (truth body, dharmakaya).
The mind realizing dependent arising is the cause for the Buddha’s
embodiment of form (form body).
If you understand that the dependent arising is the meaning of emptiness
and emptiness is the meaning of dependent arising, then you can see how
these two are not contradictory. Then you would have found the intent of
the Buddha. You have to gain certain knowledge on how these two are not
contradictory and how by bringing these two together, one achieves
enlightenment.
In order to understand how dependent arising is the meaning of emptiness,
you must have the good understanding of the four Buddhists tenets or the
four Buddhists philosophical school especially on the presentation of the
view.  Therefore it is important to learn the view of the four Buddhists
tenets.
Basically there two positions with regards to the meaning of emptiness.
1. According to the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), the highest
school with the final view, they assert that all phenomena do not exist
inherently; how all phenomena are empty inherently. Precisely for them,
because things and events do not exist inherently therefore you can talks
about the Four Noble Truths. The presentation of the Four Noble Truths does
work because things and events do not exist inherently. This is the view
point of the highest school.  For the highest school, because things and
events do not exist inherently therefore they exist as dependent
originated. Because things and events are dependent originated therefore
you can posit the Four Noble Truths. Once you can posit the Four Noble
Truths, then you can talk about the presentation of the Three Jewels-
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
2. Whereas the rest of the Buddhist tenets believed that if things and
events are indeed empty of existing inherently, then the Four Noble Truths
will not be able to work. If that is the case, then the Three Jewels
–Buddha, Dharma and Sangha- become non-existence. This is the view of the
rest of the Buddhist tenets.
These are the two complete different positions:
 - The CMWS assert that because things and events do not exist inherently,
   therefore things can function. Therefore you can talk about the Four
   Noble Truths and then the Three Jewels.
 - The rest of the Buddhist tenets assert that if things and events are
   empty of existing inherently then things cannot function.
At the end of the day, the final view is with the CMWS because things and
events do not exist inherently therefore they exist as dependently
originated.
One need think well the meaning of emptiness of inherently existence. It
does not mean non-existence, but it means not existing inherently. If
things do not exist inherently they have to exist as dependently
originated. So if one has a good understanding of dependent origination,
this will induce an understanding of how everything is empty of existing
inherently. So it is said that is possible to understand how the meaning of
emptiness is dependent arising and how the meaning of dependent arising is
emptiness.
As for the quotation from the Sutra Requested by Brahma:  “All  analysis  is
conceptual thought; the non-conceptual is enlightenment”, what the sutra  is
saying is that ultimately there is no generosity.
Next the text refutes the  assertion  that  enlightenment  can  be  achieved
without focusing on anything. In fact, in  order  to  achieve  enlightenment
you need to focus on different observed objects.
[LRCM V2 Page 97]  And the Sutra of Showing the Tathagata's Inconceivable
Secret says:
  Children of good lineage, it is like this. Fire, for example, burns from
  a cause and goes out when this cause ceases to exist. Similarly, mind is
  activated by an observed object; without this it is inactive.
The Sutra is using an analogy. The sutra is saying that in order for the
mind to improve you must observe certain object. If you just sit there and
thinking of nothing, your mind will not improve.
[MLR Root text page 173]   The way in which Master Kamalashila refuted
mental inattention does not refute meditation
where [the mind] is placed into the view that has settled the meaning of
the manner of being and placed single-pointedly on that without mentally
attending to anything else. However, it does refute that the mere placement
that places the mind in not conceiving anything without placing it on the
meaning settled by the view, the manner of being, constitutes meditation on
emptiness.
He is saying that Kamalashila is not objecting the meditation on  emptiness.
Let’s say that you have settled the meaning of emptiness  and  you  meditate
on the meaning of the view that you have settled and then  place  your  mind
in meditative equipoise.  That  kind  of  meditation  on  emptiness  is  not
refuted by Kamalashila.
What Kamalashila is refuting is that meditating  in  the  way  as  described
“settling the mind in the state without any thought” i.e. by  thinking  that
is meditating on the mode  of  abidance  of  all  phenomena.  That  is  what
Kamalashila is refuting.
We don’t have time to look at everything.  The  things  you  need  to  think
about and understand are:
-Why thought in general is not an obstacle to enlightenment?
-Why is that thoughts are not necessarily apprehension of true existence?
-How settling the mind in the state that one  does  not  think  of  anything
will never become the cause for enlightenment?
-Why, in our position, need both method  and  wisdom  in  order  to  achieve
enlightenment?
-How method and wisdom are complementary?
Please read these on your own and think about them.
End of Module 1: The Stages of the Path
We don’t have time to cover the six perfections. If we do find time  in  the
future, we will do it. If not, you have to read them on your own.
Khen Rinpoche (speak in English): Be your own teacher.

Coming Exam
I would like to talk a little bit about the exam. In the section  where  the
qualifications of the student are mentioned, the three  qualities  that  the
student should possess are:
   1. Diligence
   2. Non-partisan
   3. Intelligence
Of the three defining characteristics that the student should have, I  think
diligence is the most important because within diligence is a  condition  to
develop intelligence. If one is  diligent  there  is  hope  for  one  to  be
intelligent. If one is intelligent then one is able to be non-partisan  i.e.
to be able to discriminate.
Khen Rinpoche (speak in English): If that happen then you are going to  take
the exam.
As I have mentioned before, we are all the same. When it comes  to  exam  if
we do not push to study or if there is no pressure on us to study,  we  will
just do nothing. You need to understand that the exam is the  condition  for
you to learn. You should not mistakenly think that the exam is the cause  of
suffering.
In the previous Basic Program,  the  students  were  enthusiastic  and  took
their exam quite seriously.  They studied  and  then  took  the  exam.  They
tried their best and it turned out well. So I would like to thanks those  of
you from the previous BP who did your best and  turned  out  well.  When  it
comes to studies the Buddha’s teaching it is an individual  choice  i.e.  it
is something that we take it on ourselves and it is not  force  on  us.  But
having the feeling to do something does not necessary mean you will  do  it.
So there is no point just making promises when you don’t do it. So you  have
to act on your own interest.
Yes, learning Buddha’s teaching is challenging and is not easy.  In  my  own
case, I studied for 20 years and I worked hard for  it.   Even  now  when  I
read certain philosophical text or Lamrim, there are always  things  that  I
still don’t understand. Whatever I don’t understand does not become a  cause
for me to get discourage but instead it make me want to learn  more  and  to
find out.  I don’t keep thing as it is if I don’t  understand.  I  have  the
interest to try to find the answer either I read more or  asking  around.  I
do try to resolve whatever doubt I have but sometime when I could  not  find
anyone to ask, even I do get my  question  across  but  the  answer  is  not
clear. In the case of my own teacher who is old and it is not as  if  I  can
easily ask the question frequently.
It is actually the rule of the BP that anyone enrolls for the BP  must  take
the exam. I do hope you do take the exam. Again you need to understand  that
the exam is just a way to help  you  to  study.  Sometime  you  do  get  the
feeling of not understanding anything despite having studied or listened  to
the teaching for months. If you think about it, this is not the case. It  is
incorrect that you have not  learned  anything  despite  having  studied  or
listened to the teaching for months. Definitely you have learned  something.
I guess you don’t really know what you have learned.
Khen Rinpoche (speak in English): That is the  problem.  Actually  you  know
what but you don’t know what. That is the main problem for  us.  I  remember
my own story when I was young in Kopan. I studied for 6 years from  the  age
of 12 to 18 in Kopan. I  studied  Tibetan,  English  and  Philosophy  for  6
years. At the end of the 6  years,  I  always  think  that  I  didn’t  learn
anything. My brother also thinks that I have not learned anything because  I
cannot speak and read Tibetan well. I also think like that. At  the  age  of
18, I moved to Sera. After that I realized how much I have learned in  Kopan
because when I was there, I can write and talk little English.  I  can  also
do painting and even little bit of philosophy. At the  time  there  were  so
many classmates but none of them is good in English  and  I  was  the  best.
When I was in  Kopan for 6 years I have to go for debate. When  the  teacher
teach philosophy in the class,he read  the  text  but  we  don’t  understand
anything. Zero. We then fall asleep. At the beginning  the  class,  Rinpoche
teach us the basic philosophy but we don’t understand anything what he  say.
We fall asleep and sometime he hit our head with the mala to wake us up.  He
don’t hit hard.  Within  6  years,  I  don’t  have  any  interest  to  study
philosophy because we have zero knowledge. We just repeat  every  word  what
the teacher teach. We do not know the  meaning  and  Tibetan  is  my  second
language. It is very hard and quite discouraging. When I move to Sera,  they
do teach philosophy. On the first 6 months when I went  to  the  debate,  my
classmates did very well but I was just sitting there. I do  not  what  they
are debating about. I  just  go  there  and  sit  down.  When  I  listen  to
philosophy from my teacher, I don’t know what he is  talking  about.  It  is
very difficult. But after one year I can understand a bit  here  and  there.
Once I can understand a little bit I have some kind of interest to do  more.
After that I put in effort.  As  I  have  mentioned  before  I  am  not  the
intelligent person compare to you all but I am hardworking. I have  to  wake
up at 4.30am and sleep at 1.00am. We have study from morning till night.  It
is also not easy  with  the  room,  water  and  food  and  living  there  is
difficult. I have a good classmate like Yangsi Rinpoche  who  is  brilliant.
He is very quick. But at the end of day, we become same. Whether  wisdom  or
not, at the end of the day is your own effort can increase the wisdom. I  am
not saying that I am good but what I am saying by  putting  effort  you  can
achieve something and you can learn something. Everybody can  be  the  same.
So when you learn, you study and when you  think,  you  are  able  to  learn
something and able to leave some imprints.  Later  you  can  teach  to  some
other people. When you complete the BP, you to someplace and talk  to  those
people of how much you know. Once you are here, you  think  that  you  don’t
know anything but I think you are learning a lot. That is not  easy.  Really
not easy. For my case, I did it full time but you are doing part  time.  One
week two days and for the two days, it is one hour. So it  is  not  easy  to
study one hour Buddhist philosophy. I  know  you  have  busy  life  and  are
working. You come to class whenever  you  have  time.  I  really  appreciate
that. In the monastery we do it full  time  and  not  everybody  study  well
also. You must encourage yourself to study and see the point. Read and  take
the exam.
I made the previous exam difficult because I did mention  to  them  at  that
time why I did made it difficult. It is because the questions not  only  can
be seen by you; other people can also see the question. They may think:  “If
it is so simple, then why is there a need to study. I also know  the  answer
without having going to the BP.” If I  give  you  simple  question  such  as
“What is the Three Jewels?” People may think “What  ABC  is  teaching  here?
Even they do not know the Three Jewels.” This is not correct. That is why  I
made it difficult last time; some writing, something need  to  memorize  and
some quotations to remember.  Last BP students were different from these  BP
students as many of you are beginner to Buddhism. Last batch of BP  students
were long time Buddhists and they think they knew  a  lot.  They  have  some
kind of ego to be challenge. So they completed the BP with  ego  mind.  Just
joking. Here I see that most of you are new  to  Buddhism.  Sometime  it  is
difficult and feel discourage. This does  happen.  If  you  really  want  to
study and to learn then there is no other way. You must put  in  effort  and
not be discourage. If you don’t understand within these 6 years then we  can
go on another 6 years. So  don’t  worry.  The  exam  this  time  is  not  so
difficult. Last time I use to give tips for the exam.  This  times  no  tip.
The exam for this time is that you don’t have to write  anything.  You  just
sit, read and tick what you think is good. So simple. It is  pretty  simple.
Last time I saw some people throwing coin and unfortunately  the  coin  fall
onto the fall and know about it. The whole point here is you do not need  to
throw the coin. Don’t throw as there is no point. Just read  and  you  think
it is “True” then tick “True” and if you  think  it  is  “False”  then  tick
“False.” Take your time. It is easy. I give 1 ½  hours  for  the  exam.  The
exam is on Sunday from 1.30pm to 3pm. I think you should finish around  half
an hour or 1 hour. It is not so difficult so you don’t have to  worry.  Your
mark is confidential so you don’t have to worry about your  mark.  You  just
think then tick. This is to learn. When you get back your  paper  check  why
you are wrong and why you are right. Then you can more discussion  and  then
learn from there. This is to check your own understanding.
Exam:
Date & time: 3 June (Sunday) from 1.30pm to 3.30pm ( 1 ½ hrs)
Question format: True and False
Those who cannot take the exam on this Sun, please  contact  Benny  for  the
arrangement for another day.


