Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 2.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.131584
================================================================================


Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha
We will start with the recitation of “Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha.” When we
recite this Praise, visualize Shakyamuni Buddha in the space in front of
us. Try to remember the kindness of the Buddha. It is because of Buddha had
descended into this world of ours, now we have this opportunity to practice
the dharma. We can also reflect on the qualities of his exalted body,
speech, and mind. Through that, you try to develop some faith towards the
Buddha. It is said that just by turning our attention to the Buddha, that
itself purifies a lot of obscurations and accumulate a lot of merits. So
please try to put in some effort into such reflection when reciting this
Praise.
Praise to Manjushri
Whenever we study the Buddha’s teaching, it is very useful and, in fact, it
is important for us to have wisdom or intelligence. If we have made request
to Manjushri, who is a special deities of wisdom, that make a difference.
When we recite the “Praise to Manjushri,” it will be good if we can
visualize Manjushri in the space in front of us.
Before we recite this prayer, it would be very good if we can go through
the practice of the Seven Limb mentally.  The seven limbs are:
      -prostration
      -making offerings
      -confessing our negativities and obscurations
      -rejoicing the virtues
      -requesting the Buddha to turn the wheel of Dharma
      -beseeching them to not to pass away into nirvana
      -dedication of merits
If you can do this mentally before reciting this Praise, then it would be
good. We will spend a minute in silence to go through the seven limbs
quickly in our mind. Those of you who are not yet familiar with the Seven
Limb practice, then at this point in time, you can make a heartfelt single-
pointed request to Manjushri and pray to him “May all of us quickly be like
him.”
Visualize Manjushri in the space of us. He wields a sword in his right hand
and he holds a volume of text on his left hand at his heart. The sword that
Manjushri is holding symbolizes the eradication of the afflictions, in
particular ignorance that is in our mind. The text that he is holding in
his left hand symbolizes that things that we trying to learn, in particular
the reality of life and things around us.
Visualize at the heart of Manjushri, there is a moon disc which is a flat
disc of light.
Visualize the syllables of Manjushri’s mantra on the moon disc. (Mantra of
Manjushri: Om Ah Ra Pa Tsa Na Dhi)
Next visualize mass of light rays and nectar flow from the moon disc and
the mantra garland in the heart of the Manjushri flows into us purifies us
of all our ignorance and ego grasping. Also think that all the obscurations
that hinder our Dharma study and practice are all purified.
After that, again visualize all the light rays and nectar flowing from the
heart of Manjushri to us. Think that with that you have achieved a very
special wisdom and you have acquired this wisdom that is equivalent to
Manjushri’s wisdom.
So we will recite the “Praise to Manjushri” and we will recite the mantra
of Manjushri for one or two minutes. At that time, you can visualize in the
way that I have explained.
Mandala offering
We offer the mandala to Manjushri inseparable from our root guru. We
visualize our roots of virtue or merits transform into the aspect of the
mandala and presenting it to guru Manjushri. If we do this visualization,
it will accumulate immeasurable amount of merits.
Before every class, basically we will recite the same prayers. In future,
whenever we recite these prayers, please remember those points that I have
brought up today. This is because I cannot be repeating them in every
session. We have to familiarize ourselves with what we have to visualize.
Please keep that in mind. When we recite those prayers, please do it
without distracted mind.
Whenever we recite prayers, the prayers that we are reciting should move
the heart and the mind; at least a little bit. From our side, we should
make that happen. This is what we have to do. Of course, it is not
something that can just happen overnight. It is a matter of getting used to
it and being familiar with the prayers and the recitations. From our side,
we have to try. Beside familiarity, it is possible that whenever we recite
such prayer, special kind of feeling, emotion or faith may arise. This is
what we have to work towards.
As I have mentioned in the last class, it is very difficult in general for
people to have an interest to want to study the Buddha’s teaching. So in
general, it is very difficult and is rare. The very fact that all of you
have expressed your interest in wanting to learn and the fact that you have
made your way here, that itself is amazing! It is as if that something that
is near to impossibility has happened. If you think about it, it is amazing
because all of you have a very busy life with all sorts of commitments. You
have come from work. The very fact that you are here is something really
amazing.  So what you have done is not something that others can do in
general. It is rare for people to have this interest and to actually act on
their interest. Now, how do we sustain such interest and moving on? How do
we sustain our interest from day to day, from week to week, from month to
month and then from year to year? We hope to complete this in five to six
years. If you are able to sustain your interest, that is even more amazing
than amazing! If we do manage to sustain our interest and if we do complete
the course, then that would be the greatest of all amazement!
It is one thing of having the interest to learn but we have to ensure or at
least try to sustain this interest moving forward. This is important
because, in the course of our study, we will meet with all sorts of
difficulties, problems and obstacles. Usually when we meet with big problem
or obstacle, somehow our interest in study degenerate and become weaker.
Then we will find it more difficult to come to class and find it difficult
to continue with our studies. When problems and difficulties arise,
naturally we find it difficult to come to class and continue with our
studies. But the point is not to lose the courage and the determination
because once we lose the courage and the determination, then it is very
difficult to get back that interest to continue with the studies. All of us
obviously must have the interest to study but this is only the second
session. The thing to do is to try your best to sustain this interest and
moving forward. In the course of our studies, you will definitely learn
about the teaching of the Buddha but there is always be things that you
would not be able to understand immediately. So, there will always be thing
that you would not be able to understand along the way. If you use that as
the reason to give up or to be discouraged, then that is a mistake.  As I
had mentioned, we will meet with all sorts of difficulties and problems and
all sorts of obstacles –both outer and inner obstacles. So that is why it
become very important to continuously make prayers and request to special
deity;, be it Manjushri or another special deity. So by bringing that deity
to mind, we should accumulate merits and purify the obscurations by doing
the Seven Limb practice and make heartfelt single-pointed request. We need
to do this constantly. If we do this, it will make a huge difference to be
able to successfully complete our study.
There is another reason why people get discourage along the way. There will
always be people who are bright and intelligent. They seem to understand
everything. If we happen to be someone who doesn’t understand everything,
then naturally we will get discourage and start to think: “People are so
bright and intelligent. I am kind of dumb.” Then you will start to get
discourage. When discouragement set-in, then you will stop studying and
stop coming to class. If that happen and we start to think like that, we
must know how to deal with it. There is no point of getting discourage. I
guess everyone is a Buddhist and we all accept karma. Due to karma, there
is no way that all of us will be the same. In fact, all of us are
different; some people are more intelligent and some people are not so
intelligent. This is the result of karma, isn’t it? So those who are more
intelligent, they are experiencing the result of their own good karma from
the past.  The point is that we have to take rebirth. So if we just sit
there and be discouraged and beat up ourselves, it is not going to help our
future lives. In fact, we should put in more efforts because what we do now
in this life will affect our future lives. If we feel that we are not so
intelligent in this life and we want to be more intelligent in our future
lives, we should put in more effort to learn and to study. So this is what
you have to think.
Geshela spoke in English: When I was studying in Sera, I have many
classmates. Comparing to me, I had a friend who is more intelligent. I can
only memorize one page but he can memorize ten pages within one to two
hours. When I saw this, sometime I felt discouraged: “How come he has this
intelligence and I don’t have such intelligence.” Sometime I felt
discouraged when I did the comparison. That happened to me. That is why I
am sharing this experience with you.  Probably some of you are also like
that. I had one classmate who is very intelligent. During debate, when
someone taught him, he can get it very quickly but for me, it takes time to
get it. I am not that intelligent comparing to my classmate. Although he is
more intelligent, he is not hard-working. Although I am not that
intelligent comparing to him, I am more hard-working. In our study, in the
long run and in the final, not the intelligent one but the hardworking one
will wins. Here I am not saying I am good. Sometime the intelligent one
thinks that their mind is so quick, they stop their study and doing other
things and then continue to study. Sometime they study very hard in one
month like becoming a scholar and then relax in the following month. So one
month is good and another month is not good. At the end, he could not
achieve his goal. Here, what I am saying is that hardworking is more
important; not the intelligence. If you work hard, you will achieve
something. So it is very important that how much hard work you put it, that
much you will achieve. Of course, it is entirely different with wisdom; if
you don’t have wisdom, even you work hard, you will not be able to achieve
so much but you will still achieve something in according to your wisdom.
My message is work hard. If you work hard, at the end of the day, you will
achieve something; just like if you work hard, at the end of the day you
make some money. Studying will be the same thing; if you study and work
hard, come to class, put in effort, trying to listen, read your book and at
the end of the five years, you will get something. You should be happy to
get whatever you can. We should not compare; “Oh, you get more and I get
less” and then get discourage, and then give up your study. That is not
correct. You must work hard and be strong, you will achieve something.
Therefore, it is very important to sustain that interest in learning. As
much as possible, try not to miss any class because once you start missing
classes, from one, then two classes, somehow you will end up not coming to
class anymore. You lose your study and get discourage. I always tell my
class that it is very important to read the text; even on a couple of pages
before coming to class. That is very important. It doesn’t matter whether
you understand on what you have read but it is very important to read the
text before coming to class.

Stages of the Path
Chapter 1: Introduction
Respectfully I prostrate at the feet of the venerable saints who are full
of compassion.
1 The introductory elements of the explanations
1A Expression of veneration
Bhagavan, Lord of this world system of forbearance,
Jina’s1 regent, Jamgon, Lord of the Dharma,
Manjughosha, single father of all the sugatas,
Nagarjuna and Asanga, foretold by the Jina,
bowing to you with respect
Note 1: conqueror, victorious one
This is an expression of worship or veneration. Usually when one composes a
treatise or an important text such as this, at the beginning of the text,
it is important to pay homage to express one’s veneration. Here, in this
text, Lama Tsongkhapa pays homage to the holy beings particularly to his
root guru. He pays homage to Shakyamuni Buddha, Maitreya Buddha, Manjushri,
Nagarjuna and Asanga.
What is the reason for paying homage to these different beings at the
beginning of the text?  Usually, whenever important text such as this is
being composed, there are many kinds of obstacles. In order to pacify those
obstacles that may arise in the course of composing the text, the author
usually pays homage at the beginning.
After paying homage to these different beings, what does Lama Tsongkhapa is
going to do?  He says:
1B Vow of composition
I shall once more
give explanations here in a summary fashion
of the gradual path of the most profound view
and of vast conduct - making it easy to access.
Lama Tsongkhapa says: “I shall once more give explanations…”  Prior to
composing this Middle Length Lamrim, Lama Tsongkhapa has already finished
writing the great treatise on the “Graduated Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment.”  Here, in this text, Lama Tsongkhapa is trying once more to
give the same explanation but in the condensed way.
1C Identification of the Dharma to be explained in the context of what the
title means
The Dharma to be explained here consists in how the fortunate are lead to
the level of buddhahood through the stages of the path to enlightenment. It
summarises all the points of the Jina’s excellent speech, [following] the
tradition of the two great trail-blazers Nagarjuna and Asanga, constitutes
the Dharma system of supreme beings progressing to the state of
omniscience, and contains all the stages without omission that the three
[types of] beings need to practice.
Shakyamuni Buddha taught the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. The Perfection of
Wisdom Sutra:
      -explicitly teaches the stages of the path of profound view
      -implicitly (in hidden manner) teaches the stages of the vast conduct.

The stages of the vast conduct (sometime translated as the path of the
extensive deeds) were clarified by the Savior of Love, Maitreya. From
Maitreya, those teaching pertaining to the stages of the vast conduct are
passed down to Asanga.
The stages of the path of profound view were passed to Manjushri by Buddha.
In turn, Manjushri passed those teachings to the protector Nagarjuna.
The teaching that we are looking at here is the Lamrim –The Graduated
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment- is the system for supreme beings
progressing to the state of omniscience. So that’s what Lamrim is. Lamrim
is also a teaching that fully comprises all the stages practiced by the
three types of person– the person of small, middling and great capacities.
As to whom they are, we will cover that as we go along.
2 Composition of the explanations themselves
2A Correspondence with the manner of explanation proposed by the scholars
The scholars of glorious Vikramashila [monastery] considered it vital to
start off with three preliminaries, i.e. the greatness of the author of the
teachings, the greatness of the teachings and the way to explain and listen
to them.
As we move on with the text:
   -we have to know who the author of this teaching is
   -we have to know what qualities that are possessed by the author
   -we have to know the special distinguishing features of this dharma
system
   -we will look at how this particular teaching should be listened and how
it should be taught.
2B The actual explanations in accordance with that
In accordance with that, the guide to the stages of the path to
enlightenment has four parts:
   1 Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the
   teachings are of noble origin
   2 Showing the greatness of the teachings in order to generate respect
   towards the instructions
   3 How the teachings which are great in two ways should be listened to
   and explained
   4 The stages by which a disciple should be guided through the actual
   instructions
Who actually is the author of this teaching? As I have mentioned earlier,
the implicit meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra is the stages of the
vast conduct (or the path of the extensive deeds) was handled down to
Maitreya Buddha. Maitreya Buddha then handled down to Asanga and was
successively passed down to various spiritual masters. Those teachings were
received by Lama Atisha. He then composed the text called the Lamp on the
Path to Enlightenment. In that text, Lama Atisha arranged this teaching on
the path of the extensive deeds in an easy manner to practice.


2B1 Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the teachings
are venerable (are of noble origin)
2B1A The root and actual author
First: the author: Generally speaking, the present instructions are the
ones that the venerable protector Maitreya gives in his Ornament of Clear
Realization. In particular, they are based on Lamp on the Path to
Enlightenment, so that its author is also the author of the present text.
Other than under the name of Great Master Dipamkara Shri-jñana he is also
widely known as the glorious Atisha.
2B1B Atisha’s greatness
2B1B-1 How Atisha took birth in an excellent family
Lama Atisha was born as a prince in India into a royal family which was
extremely wealthy and powerful. The king and queen had three children. Lama
Atisha was the second son.
2B1B-2 How Atisha achieved his good qualities on that basis
Next, the text talks about how Lama Atisha gained knowledge, how he studied
and how he practiced in order to gain different realizations.
2B1B-2A How Atisha attained the positive qualities of comprehensive
scriptural knowledge
1 How Atisha learnt the areas of general knowledge
First: By the age of 21, having studied the four areas of knowledge common
to Buddhists and non-Buddhist - language, logic, crafts and medicine - he
had become an excellent scholar. In particular, the great Drolungpa relates
how, at the age of 15, having heard the Lines of Reasoning2 just once, he
debated with a non-Buddhist intellectual renowned for his erudition and
beat him - which spread his fame far and wide.
Note 2: Lines of Reasoning is a valid cognition text on logics and
reasonings.
2 How Atisha learnt Mantra
Then he requested complete empowerment from the master yogi of the main
temple on Black Mountain, the glorious Rahulagupta who had received direct
visions of Hevajra and a prophecy from Vajradakini, receiving the secret
name Jñana-guhya-vajra. Up to the age of 29 he studied the Vajrayana under
numerous highly realized gurus and thereby became knowledgeable in all
texts and instructions. When the thought “only I am knowledgeable in the
secret mantra” occurred to him, dakinis pointed out, in his dream, several
volumes of mantra he had not seen before. That lowered his pride.
Lama Atisha learned many teachings on the Secret Mantra. Probably there was
a time in which he thought he had learned everything about Tantra and
developed some pride. However in his dream, dakinis pointed out that there
several volumes of mantra he had not seen before.
It is not impossible for us to actually develop pride during the course of
our studies. Once we start learning some stuff and then gain understanding
of the stuff, it is possible to develop pride. Therefore, it is important
to ensure that whatever we learn along the way does not become the cause to
be proud of.  It will become an obstacle if we develop pride due to our
study. If pride arises because of knowing some of the Buddha’s teaching, it
will cause us to look down on others. If that happen, it does not serve any
purposes. Therefore, it is important to ensure that whatever we learn does
not become the cause to be proud of. That lowered his pride.
3 How Atisha was ordained and learnt the collections of inner knowledge
Next the text talks about how Lama Atisha was ordained and how he continues
his learning.
Both in his dreams and directly the gurus and protectors then made known to
him that vast benefit would accrue for the teachings and many beings, if he
took monastic vows as appropriate. Upon their encouragement he had himself
ordained. The great upholder of monastic discipline, Shilarakshita, an
elder of the Mahasamghika tradition who had attained the concentration in
which you single-pointedly enter [ultimate] reality on the path of
preparation, officiated as abbot. Candragarbha received the name Shri
Dipamkara-jñana.
Afterwards, up to the age of 31, he studied the lower and upper divisions
of inner philosophical knowledge, in particular, for 12 years, the Great
Detailed Explanation under Guru Dharmarakshita in Odantapuri. As he was
very well versed in the scriptures of the four original traditions, he had
an infallible grasp of the tiniest details in modes of behaviour that
should be cultivated and rejected according to the various philosophical
schools, like [for instance the monastic rules concerning] accepting gifts.
Here it says that Lama Atisha heard the teaching of the Great Detailed
Explanation, which is a text on Knowledge of Abidharma, for 12 years from
his Guru Dharmarakshita. Sometime it is helpful to read accounts of the
life of these great masters. From these accounts, we can see very clearly
that no one is born a scholar; there is no exception, not even these holy
beings. It is not as if they were born as a scholar. We don’t see this
happening in any of their account; no matter how wealthy, how powerful or
how intelligent they were. All of them had studied at the feet of their
gurus. They also studied extensively for long time before they became
learner.
2B1B-2B How Atisha attained the realizational qualities of its correct
accomplishment
The text goes on to explain how by engaging in a proper practice, Lama
Atisha gained good qualities of experiential knowledge or realizations.
2B1B-2B1 How all realizational qualities are contained in the three
trainings
Second: As, generally speaking, all the scriptural teachings by the Jina
are contained in the three precious collections, the realizational
teachings are also contained in the three precious trainings (three higher
training).
All Buddha’s teachings can be condensed into the three precious scriptural
collections (also translated as 3 baskets):
   1. Vinaya
   2. Sutra
   3. Abidharma
The three higher trainings are:
   1. Higher training in ethics
   2. Higher training in concentration
   3. Higher training in wisdom
These three higher trainings form the subject matter of the three
scriptural collections.
How these three scriptural collections are differentiated? They are
differentiated by the subject matter.
The vinaya (code of ethical conduct for the ordained) collection deals
mainly with higher training in ethics.
The sutra collection deals mainly with higher training in concentration.
The Abidharma collection deals mainly with higher training in wisdom.
So when we pick-up a teaching of the Buddha (or a sutra), how do we know
which scriptural collection does that particular text belong to? In order
to make it easy for the reader, the dharma king in Tibet made it a rule.
They ordered the translators to come up with a system. So when you open up
a text and if in the beginning you see:
-I prostrate to the buddhas and bodhisattvas – that would indicate the text
belong to the sutra collection.
-I prostrate to the youthful Manjughosha – that would indicate the text
belong to the Abidharma collection.
-I prostrate to the Omniscient One– that would indicate the text belong to
the vinaya collection.
So by coming to class today, you must know:
- What are the three scriptural collections?
- How are they differentiated? They are differentiated by the subject
  matter.
- What constitute the subject matters of these three scriptural
  collections?  The subject matters are the three higher trainings.
- How do you identify a text to which scriptural collection they fall into?
In the next, you should be able to tell me:
      -what are the three scriptural collections?
      -what are the three higher training?
      -how do you determine whether a particular sutra belong to the
vinaya, sutra, or Abidharma collection?
Geshela spoke in English: In year 2005, I went to America for two months to
learn English. There is one teacher who doesn’t speak Tibetan but he knows
how to read Tibetan. He knows what the Tibetan text is talking about. He
said that in order to know the topic, he must memorize them such as the
definitions of certain topics. He said for each sentence, he has to repeat
it for 100 times and by then he will remember the definition. This is how
he did it.
We have to adopt a very different approach in our study here. I don’t think
there is of any benefit by me just talking from my side and you just sit
there and listen. Nothing much is going to happen from that. On the basis
of listening to the teaching, you have to read the text and you also have
to do the thinking and analyzing; in particular engaging in the discussion
with one another. This is very important. We have to adopt this approach in
our study. The point is that by thinking about things on the basis of
listening to the teaching, reading the text and by critically analyzing the
subject matters that is how we can reach the decisive ascertainment or
understanding of any topics. You really have to do this. Without this
particular approach, it makes a huge difference on how much we can learn.
If you adopt this approach, then whatever you learn will definitely stay in
your mind for a long time and you won’t forget it. If you do this, it makes
a huge different as well in developing your own intelligence and wisdom. So
the more we think and the more we analyze in order to reach a decisive
ascertainment of the subject matters, your brain will become more alert,
become more intelligent and become quicker. As what the scientists is
saying; we are just using a very small portion of our brain and most of it
are not being used.
Geshela spoke in English: The only problem is that each time you think, a
white hair will appear. Joking.
Student: If it is a Mahayana sutra, does it necessary belong to the sutra
collection?
Geshela: Not necessarily so.  The word ‘sutra’ means the words of the
Buddha. The words of the Buddha, in general, are referred as sutra. As
mentioned, in the teaching of the Buddha, there are different divisions.
(Benny Law shared his BP experience.)
Geshela spoke in English: Rinpoche knew that we have started with our BP.
Rinpoche also heard that we have 230 students attending this BP and he is
extremely happy. He said this is the best record of all the fpmt centers.
This really pleased his mind. I think this is the best offering we can make
to him. If you do many prayers or what, I am not sure (whether it is the
best offering). The best offering is to please your guru and he is
extremely happy with it. I think that is the best way and we are doing
that. He also said that by having a center is to help to study. He said
this is the main purpose of having centers. He also sent message to
everyone. He wishes to come here to wish everybody but he could not come.
He said “Tashi Delek” to everyone.” I think in English is “Hi, to
everyone.” As Rinpoche has always mentioned that by having center is to
study. So remember that. So the guru’s wish is wanting you to study. If you
study, then you are following guru’s advice; then there will be success in
your life. That really makes the guru to live long. The guru wish is to
have center. So remember that and put in effort to study.
