Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Lesson57.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.166918
================================================================================


We have talked about adopting the aspirational spirit of enlightenment
through a ritual.
There are two systems for adopting the aspirational spirit of enlightenment
through a ritual, either:
    - in the presence of a master or
    - in the presence of a representation of a Buddha such as a Buddha
      statue
Whichever option we go for:
-At the beginning one has to go for refuge in a special way i.e. the
Mahayana way.
-Then one needs to accumulate merit and purify the obscurations by doing
the seven branch worship.
-Then one has to sustain the meditation either through the sevenfold cause-
and-effect instruction or exchanging self and other.
By sustaining the meditation well, you should be able to develop the
heartfelt feeling of love and compassion.
On the basis of having developed these feelings well, you generate the
spirit of enlightenment through the ritual. At that time you think; “For
the benefit of all sentient beings who do not have happiness and who are
suffering, I will achieve enlightenment for them”.  You generate this
thought through the means of the ritual. So this is generating the
aspiration for enlightenment that does not come with commitment and can be
done by anyone. If this is done through a ritual, it is said that there are
immeasurable benefits.
If the generating the aspiration for enlightenment through a ritual is done
well at the beginning of the day as the motivation for the entire day and
night, it is said to be many benefits.
If we develop this well in the beginning of the day, then whatever we do in
that day will becomes a cause for us to achieve full enlightenment. It does
make a difference to that day if you are able to this well at the beginning
of the day. It also does make a difference to your mind by becoming more
virtuous, good hearted overtime, accumulate merits and leave strong
imprints in your mind. If you are able to do this well, then you will be
able to adopt the aspirational spirit of enlightenment that comes with the
commitment. If you are able to do that, then you also will be able to adopt
the engaged bodhisattva vows.
So if you are able to generate the aspirational spirit of enlightenment
well right from the beginning, you generate the aspirational spirit of
enlightenment that comes with commitment. Then come the day you are able to
take the actual bodhisattva vows. By seeing all the benefits and the
purposes, you will then be able to train in the bodhisattva practices and,
sooner or later, you will be able to achieve full enlightenment without
much difficulty.
What is the aspirational spirit of enlightenment that comes with
commitment? On the basis of generating the thought “I want to achieve full
enlightenment for the benefits of all sentient beings”, and on top of that,
you make a commitment or promise to never ever give up this thought until
you have achieved enlightenment, then that would be generating the
aspirational spirit of enlightenment with commitment. Since you have made
that commitment, it is important for you to ensure that this promise never
degenerates. So you have to train in the causes that will ensure this
aspirational spirit of enlightenment which was generated does not
degenerate in this life and also train in the causes that ensure you will
not be separated from it in the future lives.
You have to train in the causes that will enable whatever aspirational
spirit of enlightenment that you have generated to not degenerate in this
life.  As mentioned in the text, there are four trainings to do after you
have generated the aspirational spirit of enlightenment with commitment:
   1. To recall the benefits of the spirit of enlightenment
   2. To generate the spirit of enlightenment six times each day
   3. Not to mentally abandon the living beings
   4. To accumulate the collections of merit and sublime wisdom
Of these trainings, the training in generating the spirit of enlightenment
six times each day is an uncommon precept of generating this aspirational
spirit of enlightenment with commitment.

2'  The training in the precepts that cause you to not separate from your
spirit of enlightenment in future lifetimes as well
The training in the precepts that cause you to not separate from your
spirit of enlightenment in future lifetimes as well has two sections:
   a. The training in the precept to eliminate the four dark practices which
      weaken the spirit of enlightenment
   b. The training in the precept to adopt the four light practices which
      keep the spirit of enlightenment from weakening
a The training in the precept to eliminate the four dark practices which
weaken the spirit of enlightenment
   1. Deceiving abbots, masters, gurus, and those worthy of offerings.
   2. Making others feel regret about something that is not regrettable.
   3. Speaking disparagingly, etc., to beings who have correctly entered the
      Mahayana.
   4. In an absence of sincerity, using deceit and misrepresentation to get
      the service of others.
b. The training in the precept to adopt the four light practices which keep
the spirit of enlightenment from weakening
   1. Forsaking consciously lying to any living being whatsoever even in
      jest or even for the sake of your life
   2. Not deceiving but remaining sincere to all living beings.
   3. Developing the idea that all bodhisattvas are the Teacher.
   4. Causing the living beings that you are helping to mature to not want
      the modest vehicle but to adhere to perfect enlightenment
We have to eliminate the four dark dharmas.

|Four Black dharmas                   |Four White dharmas (as antidote to   |
|                                     |black dharma)                        |
|1. Deceiving abbots, masters, gurus, |1. Forsaking consciously lying to any|
|and those worthy of offerings        |living being whatsoever even in jest |
|                                     |or even for the sake of your life.   |
|2. Making others feel regret about   |4. Causing the living beings that you|
|something that is not regrettable    |are helping to mature to not want the|
|                                     |modest vehicle but to adhere to      |
|                                     |perfect enlightenment.               |
|3. Speaking disparagingly, etc., to  |3. Developing the idea that all      |
|beings who have correctly entered the|bodhisattvas are the Teacher.        |
|Mahayana.                            |                                     |
|4. In an absence of sincerity, using |2. Not deceiving but remaining       |
|deceit and misrepresentation to get  |sincere to all living beings.        |
|the service of others.               |                                     |


Note: The four dark practices and four light practices can be translated as
four dark dharmas and four white dharmas respectively.
First black dharma: Consciously deceiving abbots, masters, gurus, and those
worthy of offerings with a lie
Objects of your action: Abbots, masters, gurus, and those worthy of
offerings
Antidote: The first white dharma which is forsaking consciously lying to
any living being whatsoever even in jest or even for the sake of your life.
If you are able to train well in the first white dharma, which is to
forsake consciously lying to any living beings, then you will be able to
stop doing the first black dharma, which is consciously misleading or
deceiving one’s abbots, masters, gurus and those worthy of offerings.
So if you are able to train well in the first white dharma, which is
forsaking consciously lying to any living beings, then you will not be
deceiving or lying to anyone.
Second black dharma: Causing someone who is cultivating virtue without
regret to regret of what he/she has done.
Objects of your action: Persons cultivating virtues without regret
Antidote: The fourth white dharma which is causing someone who you want to
mature, instead of letting them enter into the Hinayana you are able to
cause them to connect to the Mahayana path of full enlightenment.
If you are able to mature or ripen someone by helping that person to
connect to the Mahayana, at the same time you will not have the thought of
wanting him / her to regret in doing something virtuous.
For the first black dharma, by deceiving one’s abbots, masters, gurus and
those worthy of offerings,  it doesn’t matter whether they are actually
deceived or not. By the fact that you have tried is already enough to make
it a black dharma. Similarly, for the second black dharma, which is causing
someone who is cultivating virtue without regret to regret, it is said that
it makes no difference whether that person actually regret or not. As long
you have done something to that effect to cause that person to regret, it
becomes a black dharma. As in the text:
LRCM V2 page 77: For these two dark practices, it is said to make no
difference whether or not you are able to deceive or whether or not you are
able to cause regret.
Third black dharma: Saying something unpleasant motivated by anger to
beings who has generated the spirit of enlightenment
Objects of your action: All bodhisattvas; any person who has generated
bodhicitta/ spirit of enlightenment
Antidote: The third white dharma: developing the idea that all bodhisattvas
are the Buddha.
You are supposed to think all bodhisattvas similar to Buddha and to give
voice to whatever good qualities that they have. It is difficult to say who
is and who is not a bodhisattva and where they reside. So if you are able
to train in pure appearance by regarding everyone as a Buddha, then that
becomes the antidote to the third black dharma.
With respect to the bodhisattva, you are supposed to give voice to the
qualities that they do actually possess.
As said in the text, you are supposed to voice in the four directions
praise of their characters. If there are listeners around, you have to give
voice the qualities of the bodhisattva; otherwise it becomes a fault.
However, if there is no listener around, you do not incur a fault if you do
not voice a quality they do actually possess in reality.
The essence of training in this third white dharma is to give voice to the
good qualities of any sentient beings that they do actually possess. If you
do actually see the quality they do possess, you are supposed to give voice
to them.
It is said that there is a great danger of speak disparagingly to a
bodhisattva motivated by anger because it is a cause for going to the lower
realm. If you are happened to be someone who is about to develop
realization, it is said that your realization will be postponed if you
speak disparagingly out of hatred to a bodhisattva. As I mentioned before,
it is difficult to say who is and who is not a bodhisattva. If you speak
disparagingly to a bodhisattva then there are all these faults.
If you are able to adopt the practice of not criticizing others and not
pointing out the faults motivated by anger; and at the same time able to
give praise at the qualities that they do possess, since you are supposed
to give voice to the qualities of the Bodhisattva, then that would be very
good. This third white dharma is very important for developing pure
appearance of seeing everyone as Buddha.
Fourth black dharma: Without any sincerity, doing things through deceit and
misrepresentation.
Objects of your action: Any living beings other than yourself
Antidote: The second white dharma which is not deceiving sentient beings
but remaining honest to them.
Again this is deceiving and misleading others. You deceive or mislead
others either through deceit or misrepresentation (or guile).
What is deceit? Deceit is pretending to have good qualities that you do not
have.
Deceit is the mind that wishes to exhibit good qualities that one doesn’t
have.
Misrepresentation (or guile) is done to mislead and deceive others. This is
done through hiding the faults.
Misrepresentation is a mind that wishes to hide and not to exhibit one’s
faults.
Those who have generated the aspirational spirit of enlightenment with
commitment have to abandon the four black dharmas. The way to do so is to
apply the four white dharmas. This is the way to ensure that you will not
be separated from the spirit of enlightenment in your future lives. The way
to do this is to abandon the four black dharmas and to cultivate the four
white dharmas.
It is also said in order to ensure that the spirit of enlightenment do not
degenerate in the future lives, you have to give up pride, jealousy,
stinginess and should cultivate joy when you see others are doing well. By
training in such a way, it will help you to ensure that whatever
aspirational spirit of enlightenment that has been generated will not
degenerate and you will not be separated from it in the future lives. So
you just have to try to conjoin all your activities with this motivation of
bodhicitta, and should always dedicate your merits to increase this spirit
of enlightenment.

c' The method of repairing the spirit of enlightenment if you do weaken it 
Remember the outlines for how to adopt the spirit of enlightenment through
ritual which has three parts:
a' Attaining that which you have not attained
b' Maintaining and not weakening what you have attained
c’ The method of repairing the spirit of enlightenment if you do weaken it
[LRCM V2 page 84] : With the exception of the precepts not to relinquish
the aspirational spirit of enlightenment and not to mentally abandon living
beings, breaking the precepts does not constitute a transgression relative
to the spirit of enlightenment until you receive the bodhisattva vows.
Nevertheless, if you break the precepts, you break the precept that comes
with your commitment to virtue in the interim before you take the
bodhisattva vows; you therefore commit a misdeed, and you should make a
confession with the four powers.
Question: What is the meaning for the paragraph that was just read out? Why
do we need to exclude the precept of giving up bodhicitta and also
excluding the precept of do not mentally abandoning sentient beings?
Student 1: Because this one constitutes the definition of the spirit of
enlightenment that comes with the two aspirations of achieving Buddhahood
for others welfare. If we give up these two aspirations, which is the
definition of aspirational spirit of enlightenment, we actually give up the
aspirational bodhicitta. Therefore we have already given up. So if we do
not give up these two aspirations, whatever other things we have
transgressed becomes a misdeed but not a totally giving up or loosing this
vow from the roots. That means it is only a misdeed that we can repair by
using the four opponent powers. But if we give up the two aspirations, we
have to retake the vows from the beginning because we do not have the
Bodhisattva vows anymore.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): OK. I think I got something there.
Anybody got something what he is saying. Come and talk.
We are talking about someone who has adopted the aspirational spirit of
enlightenment with a commitment. If this person gives up the aspirational
spirit of enlightenment or mentally abandons any living beings, then there
is no aspirational spirit of enlightenment anymore. It has already gone.
This person who has adopted the aspirational spirit of enlightenment with a
commitment, if he breaks the precepts with the exception of these two
-mentally abandoning sentient beings or giving up the thought of wanting to
achieve enlightenment for sentient beings- it is only a fault and it does
not become a transgression of the bodhisattva vows i.e. it is not a
bodhisattva downfall. This is because this person has yet to take the
bodhisattva vows. He has only adopted the aspirational spirit of
enlightenment with a commitment. In order to incur bodhisattva downfalls,
the person has to have taken the bodhisattva vows. What does this person
need to do since he has incurred a fault by breaking the precepts? The
person has to confess by applying the four opponent powers.
Ven Gyurme: In common English we usually talk about aspirational
bodhisattva vows but technically it only refers to as the bodhisattva vows.
We do not have to say engaged bodhisattva vows; just the bodhisattva vows.
Here we have finished with the aspirational spirit of enlightenment.

An Introduction to the Six Perfections
c) How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of
enlightenment
How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of
enlightenment has three parts:
   1. The reason why you must learn the trainings after developing the
      spirit of enlightenment
   2. Demonstrating that you will not become a Buddha by learning either
      method or wisdom separately
   3. Explanation of the process of learning the precepts
1) The reason why you must learn the trainings after developing the spirit
of enlightenment
[LRCM V2 page 85] It is indeed the case that great benefit comes from mere
development of the aspirational spirit of enlightenment without learning
the trainings of generosity and so forth. Consider in this regard the
passage from the Life of Maitreya cited earlier. However, you still have to
practice the bodhisattva trainings. If you do not emphasize this practice,
you will never become a buddha. So learn the bodhisattva deeds.
And the King of Concentrations Sutra also says:
  Therefore take practice to heart. Why? O Prince, because when you take
  practice to heart, perfect enlightenment is not hard to attain.
We are now looking at the reasons why we must learn the training after
having developed the spirit of enlightenment. After having developed
bodhicitta, one has to learn the training of the bodhisattva; without which
one will not be able to achieve enlightenment. For someone who has
developed bodhicitta, his/ her main goal is enlightenment. Since
enlightenment cannot be achieved without learning the training of the
bodhisattva, so this person must learn the training. That is one reason why
the person who has developed bodhicitta must learn the training of the
bodhisattva. Another reason is the need to discipline one’s own mind.
[LRCM V2 page 86] The first Stages of Meditation also says:
 The bodhisattvas, who have thus developed the spirit of enlightenment,
 understand that without disciplining themselves they cannot discipline
 others and so involve themselves in the practice of generosity and so
 forth; without practice they will not attain enlightenment.
The bodhisattva main job is to benefit others, and that is done through
disciplining others. In order to do that, they have to first discipline
their own mind. Therefore they themselves need to train in the bodhisattva
training in the perfections; without which they would not be able to
discipline others.
2) Demonstrating that you will not become a Buddha by learning either
method or wisdom separately
This outline talks about the need to train in unmistaken and complete path
in order to achieve enlightenment.
[LRCM V2 page 86] It is not enough just to want to attain buddhahood.; you
must engage in the method of achieving it. This method has to be unmistaken
because no matter how much you strive on a mistaken path, you will not
obtain the result—like milking a horn in the hope of getting milk. Even if
the method is unmistaken, if it is not complete in all particulars,
striving will not bring the result, just as the absence of a seed, water,
earth, or the like will preclude the production of a sprout; as it is said
in the second Stages of Meditation.
If we enter into a mistaken path, or even if the path is unmistaken but is
incomplete, then no matter how hard we try, it will be very difficult for
us to achieve full enlightenment. Therefore, we must engage in the practice
of a path that is not only unmistaken but must be complete. So, that is why
it is very important to engage in the threefold activity of hearing,
reflection and meditating on the Buddha’s teachings in order to gain a
complete understanding of the entire path that is unmistaken and complete.
[LRCM V2 page 87] What, then, is the unmistaken and complete set of causes
and conditions? Vairocana's Great Enlightenment Discourse says:
  Lord of Secrets, the sublime wisdom of omniscience comes from compassion
  as its root. It comes from the spirit of enlightenment as its cause. It
  is brought to completion by method.
In regard to this, I have already explained compassion. The great
trailblazer Kamalasila explains that the "spirit of enlightenment" is both
the conventional and ultimate spirits of enlightenment, and that "method"
is all virtues such as generosity and so forth.
Enlightenment has compassion as its root; its cause is the spirit of
enlightenment/ bodhicitta. Bodhicitta here refers to either conventional
and ultimate bodhicitta (or conventional and ultimate spirit of
enlightenment).
For the conventional spirit of enlightenment we have already looked at the
Mahayana mind generation.
The ultimate mind generation refers to the direct perception of emptiness
in the continuum of the arya Mahayanist. In order to train in enlightenment
we must train in both method and wisdom. It is not sufficient to train in
method or wisdom individually. We must train in the path that brings
together both method and wisdom.  Then the text brings up a misconception.
[LRCM V2 page 87]
Opponents' position: Some persons like the Chinese Ha-shang, who have a
mistaken idea about the path of the two types of spirit of enlightenment,
say that any thought—nonvirtuous thoughts, of course, but even virtuous
ones—binds us to cyclic existence, so its results do not transcend cyclic
existence. It is like being tied up with a golden rope or with an ordinary
rope, like white or dark clouds covering the sky, or like the pain from
being bitten by a white or a black dog. Therefore, just setting your mind
in a state that lacks any thought is the path to future buddhahood. Such
virtues as generosity and ethical discipline are taught for foolish people
incapable of such meditation on the definitive [emptiness]. To engage in
those deeds after you have found the definitive would be like a king
descending to a common status or like finding an elephant and then
searching for its footprints.
The misconception is basically that you don’t think and all thoughts are
bad, whether virtuous or non-virtuous. , Because once you start to think,
your mind gets disturb. When your mind is disturbed you cannot achieve
enlightenment. You need to achieve enlightenment without your mind being
disturbed. The way to do that is to focus on nothing and to set your mind
in a state that lacks any thoughts. In doing this, you will achieve
enlightenment. Therefore it is not necessary to train extensively in ethics
or in giving.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Sound good. This is the same like
ignorance is bliss. Sometime good, don’t think all these problems and you
have inner peace. Is this true? Is this conception true? Fit your mind?
The reply to this misconception is in the text:
[LRCM V2 page 87 ]Reply:  Ha-shang's saying, "Everything to do with method
is not an actual path to buddhahood," is a tremendous denial of the
conventional. And, since he refutes analyzing with discerning wisdom the
selfless reality that is at the heart of the Conqueror's teaching, he
banishes the system of the ultimate to the far distance. The great
bodhisattva Kamalasila excellently refuted with a mass of scriptural
citation and stainless reasoning this epitome of wrong views in which it is
maintained that the sublime path consists of stabilizing the mind in a
state that lacks any thought.
Ha-shang’s view actually deprecates the method and wisdom aspects of the
path. The wisdom aspect of the path, which is the wisdom realizing
selflessness, is the very heart essence of the entire Buddha’s teachings.
In order to develop this wisdom, one must first engage in analysis. Without
analysis there is no way to develop this wisdom realizing selflessness. If
we adopt Ha-shang’s view to stop all thoughts, then how are we going to
analyze? Without analysis, how is it possible to develop this wisdom
realizing selflessness? Ha-shang’s assertion basically destroys both method
and wisdom aspects of the path. By doing so, how is it possible to achieve
full enlightenment? His wrong views were eliminated by the Great
Kamalasila.
Ha-shang’s ideas is this: When we talk about the mode of abidance or the
ultimate reality of all things and events, it is true that ultimate reality
of all things and events is something very difficult to describe and is
likened to nothing; itself is indescribable, and you cannot describe it or
compare it to anything. That is the mode of abidance of all phenomena; that
is the ultimate nature of reality. Since that is the case, so Ha-shang’s
view is that since the ultimate reality is like that then from the very
beginning when you meditate, you should meditate on nothing. So Ha-shang’s
view is that there is no need to think or analyze. You just only meditate
on nothingness; which is similar to what you are trying to achieve the
indescribable state of reality.
There is another view which believes that prior to realizing emptiness you
need to engage in analysis. You need discerning wisdom to analyze. Once you
have gotten it, you just have to remain in meditative equipoise on
emptiness, and you don’t have to employ the discerning wisdom anymore.
These assertions are wrong. We will see how these assertions are refuted in
the next lessons.
Student 2: For someone to take on the aspirational spirit of enlightenment
with commitment that is observing the four white and four black dharmas,
that person necessarily would have to take refuge before. Is there an
assumption that that person who has taken refuge before at that time have
taken on all the five refuge precepts. The reason I am asking this is
because the very first white dharma is avoiding lying and deceiving your
abbots, your gurus etc. I thought if we take the refuge vow of not lying,
in that sense it already included in the white dharma -not lying to anyone.
The second question is that is there a particular significant to the
sequence to which the black and white dharmas are presented?
Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure if there is a reason behind for this
particular arrangement of the four black and white dharmas. As for the
refuge vow, when one takes the refuge vow, this doesn’t mean that person is
taking on any or all the lay precepts. Even if one takes the precept of not
lying at the time of taking refuge, that precept of not lying does not
refer to just any form of lying. That precept of not lying is referring to
not lying about the abilities that normal human beings does not have. That
is very specific. The lay precept of not lying refers to not lying about
abilities or realization that normal human begins does not have; whereas
here not lying in one of the four white dharmas, it is not lying even in
jest. It is more difficult as it covers more extensively.
I have been telling you that you have to read the text. You really have to
push a bit and have to try. If you don’t read the text and then come to
class, we have to read everything and this will take forever. We will not
be able to finish. If you don’t read before coming to class, I don’t think
there will be much benefit. So as much as possible, please read the text.
So read the text. If you have any qualm or question please notes it down.
So when I give you an opportunity in class, you should be ready. So I will
to give chance to ask question in class, and if there are like ten people
waiting to ask question, then there is the sign that people are reading the
text. So far there is no sign. Of course when we read the text there will
always be stuff that we don’t understand. That is why we ask and that is
how questions come about.

