Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson37.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.012027
================================================================================


Question:  A person of small capacity is supposed to stop his/ her
overemphasis on the happiness of this life. Literally in Tibetan, the
person is supposed to reverse his/her attractions to this life’s happiness.
What is the best method to overcome an overemphasis on the happiness of
this life?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Very short answer. Anybody can say, “This
is the method”. We have covered all the topics so now give me short answer.
When you reverse the attraction to this life’s happiness, at the same time
you are supposed to develop a sincere interest in your future life’s
happiness. A person of small capacity is supposed to reverse his/ her
attraction to the happiness of this life and is supposed to develop a real
sincere interest in his/ her own future life.
What is the method for developing that sincere interest? Is the method the
same as the one use to overcome one’s overemphasis on the happiness of this
life?
Student 1: To reflect the sufferings of this life and future life.
Khen Rinpoche: Your answer is meditating on the suffering of this life. Can
you explain a little bit why?
How does that reverse one’s attraction to the happiness of this life?
Student 1: (Details refers to audio 16:30 – 16:55)
Khen Rinpoche: If you meditate on the suffering of this life, how does that
meditation causes the person to develop a sincere interest in the happiness
of the future life? Because whatever experience in the future life is the
same as this life, as it is all in the nature of suffering.
Student 1: (Details refers to audio 17:40 – 17:50)
Khen Rinpoche: If you meditate on the suffering of this life and that
causes you to give up your any interest in this life, then this method will
not help you to develop a sincere interest in your future life, isn’t it?
Because the experience in the future life is the same as this life, it is
all in the nature of the suffering.
Student 1: (Details refers to audio 18:24 – 18:36)
Khen Rinpoche: You say that in order to reverse the attraction to this life
to overcome the overemphasis on the happiness of this life, you have to
meditate on the suffering of this life, right?
Student 1: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: The meditation on the suffering of this life comes mainly in
the practices of the person of medium capacity. It doesn’t come in the
person of small capacity.
Student 1: (Details refers to audio 19:39 – 19:46)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Now it is the question of the small
scope.  Your answer is for the great scope so it is not correct.
Student 2: By reflecting on the death and impermanence, we can reverse our
attachment to the present life’s happiness because you would know that
nothing is permanent in this life. Therefore why be attached to whatever
happiness in this life? Am I correct to say so?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Yes, I think so.
The main cause of us getting so attach to the happiness of this life to the
extent of overemphasizing it and putting all the priority on it is mainly
due to our apprehension of permanence. We grasp and believe strongly that
things and events are permanent in particular our own lifespan and our own
enjoyments; basically all the good things in our life. We feel that they
will never change; they will remain as it is and they will last for very
long time. It is kind of very strong innate feeling and belief. Due to
that, we overemphasis on the happiness of this life and we are so attached
to it.
Basically the main cause is the apprehension of permanence; grasping and
believing very strongly that things and events will not change and it is
permanent. If that is the case, then the best method to counteract this
grasping at permanence is to do the nine-point meditation or reflection on
death.
At the very least, what we need to do is to reduce that current
overemphasis on the happiness of this life as we have this very strong
attachment to this life. In order to do that, we have to weaken its cause,
which is this apprehension of true existence, by reflecting on death and
impermanence. We all know that this will happen sooner or later and we all
accepted it. But while we live our life with that belief and an
understanding, yet in each and every day of our life we never ever think
that death may happen today. We live our life passing each and every day
thinking that will not happen today but it will happen sometime in the
future; maybe tomorrow. Look at how we view ourselves in the world. We
don’t find there is any difference between our life in the morning and our
life in the evening on the same day. We don’t even really feel that there
is any difference between today and yesterday. We think things are kind of
permanent, solid, fixed and pretty much the same and then we basically
carry on our life in such a way day after day thinking “I will not die”.
Because of that, this is source from which we have very strong attachment.
If you want to mediate, then the way to reduce the overemphasis on this
life is to reflect and to meditate on death and impermanence. If you want
to change then this is what you have to do: to reflect and meditate on how
you definitely going to die and yet the time of death is really uncertain.
Until we are able to reduce our current overemphasis on this life
happiness, our attachment to the happiness of this life will be very
strong. So when our attachment to the happiness of this life is very
strong, obviously our whole focuses is on whatever we do in this life and
our energy is directed at achieving the goals of this life alone. In that
situation, the happiness of future life will become incidental i.e. it
become of secondary importance.  At the back of our mind, we may still
think that the happiness of our future life is important but it is not
really that strong. Due to the overemphasis on the happiness of this life,
we naturally are attracted to this life’s happiness.  Then obviously all
the attention and effort will be put solely on achieving the happiness of
this life.
The main reason why we feel that this life’s happiness is more important
and we put emphasis on it is because of our strong attachment to happiness
of this life. So until we reduce the attachment of this life, there is
nothing much we can do about to overcome our overemphasis of this life’s
happiness. It is mentioned in the teaching that the best method for us to
work with our gross attachment for the happiness of this life is to reflect
and to meditate on our own death and our own impermanence. This is
something we have to do all the time. This is what is being mentioned in
the teaching but we all have to experiment it for ourselves. This is
something we have to see it on the individual level. Are things including
ourselves, our life and friends change or not? Are they in the nature of
impermanence or not? When we do remember impermanence and when we do
remember our own death, does it help us to reduce our attachment? This is
something we have to see for ourselves.
As said in the text, to develop a sincere interest in our future life’s
happiness is to have a good rebirth i.e. to reborn as a human being or
world god.  The way to do that is to reflect on the suffering of the lower
realms. When we realize the chances of us going to the lower realms is very
high where there are a lot of sufferings, only then we really have the
sincere wish of wanting to be reborn as a human being or in the higher
realm.
The most effective method for overcoming the attraction to this life’s
happiness is the reflection and meditation on death and impermanence. The
most effective method for developing a real sincere wish to have a good
rebirth in next life is to reflect on the sufferings that we have to
experience in the lower realms. These are the two methods.
On that basis that once you have this real interest of wanting to have a
good rebirth then you will look for the cause that will enable you to have
a good rebirth. Then upon investigation, the cause is that you have to
engage in virtuous action in particular to live your life in ethical way by
intentionally refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions and to cultivate
the ten virtuous actions. You will also have to engage in the practice of
purifying the non-virtuous actions that you have already accumulated in the
past. You do the purification practice with the applications of the four
powers.
The practice of a person of small capacity is therefore to reverse the
attraction to this life:
-through reflecting and meditating on death and impermanence and
-to develop a real sincere interest in his/ her future life
By changing the mind set of overcoming the current preoccupation of this
life to the one that focus on the future life with the sincere interest to
get a good rebirth and on that basis, if the person were to live an ethical
way of life by intentionally abandoning the ten non-virtuous actions and
purifying his/ her own negativities, this person will achieve a good
rebirth of either as a human being or a worldly god.
If you were to ask: “Is that all? Is it sufficient just to be satisfied or
to be happy with good rebirth?”  Then the answer is no. We shouldn’t just
stop there as that is not enough. At this point in time then the practice
that is shared with a person of medium capacity will now be taught and
shown to that person.
As discussed in the last lesson, we saw how having an excellent body,
excellent resources and excellent helpers are included within the cyclic
existence. These are something we should still aimed for but keeping in
mind that these are the temporary goals and not the ultimate goals.
At this point in time you have the practices of person of medium capacity.
To such a person, there will be an explanation of how even you obtain a
good rebirth as a human being or a god, nevertheless all the experiences of
being a human being and a god ultimately are still in the nature of
sufferings and do not go beyond sufferings. Although these are pleasurable
experiences as a god or a human being but in reality they are in the nature
of sufferings. However, most people look at them to be the real happiness
and real pleasure. In reality that is not the case. So this is a wrong
conception. This conception is called apprehending something which is by
nature unpleasant as pleasant and this need to be overcome and to be
removed.
Through not realizing that which is in the nature of suffering to be in the
nature of suffering, again we develop attachment to these experiences.
Through the apprehension of permanence, we regard these experiences as
permanent and we get attach to them. In the process of running after these
experiences due to attachment, we will engage in all kinds of different non-
virtuous actions and accumulate negative karma. Therefore it is said that
even if you do get a good rebirth, it is no big deal because it is always
possible for you to fall back into the three lower realms especially, due
to attachment, you create the cause through engaging in nonvirtuous
actions. Therefore it is said that getting a good rebirth is no big deal.
If you were to ask: “Is it sufficient to get a good rebirth as a human
being or a god? Is it okay just to aim for that alone?” The answer is NO;
primarily for the two reasons.
   1. It is no big deal even if you get a good rebirth because all your
      experiences in those rebirths are in the nature of sufferings.
   2. It is no big deal even if you get a good rebirth because it is always
      possible for you to fall back to the lower realms.
Training the mind in the stages of the path shared with persons of medium
capacity
The actual training:
   1.  The actual training in that attitude
   2.  The measure of its development
   3.  Elimination of misconceptions about it
   4.  Determining  the nature of the path leading to liberation
 The actual training in that attitude
      A Identification of the mind striving for liberation
      B The methods for generating [the mind striving for liberation]
As for the actual training, training in the mind in the path shared with
person of medium capacity, we first have to identify what is this mind that
is intent on liberation and the method for developing this mind. Before we
can identify what is the mind that is intent on liberation, we first have
to identify correctly what is liberation.
Identifying the mind intent on liberation
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 267: Liberation means freedom from bondage,
and what binds you to cyclic existence is karma and the afflictions. Under
their power, the aggregates are reborn in a threefold manner: in terms of
the three realms they are reborn in the desire realm, and so forth; in
terms of kinds of beings, they are reborn as the five [deities, humans,
animals, hungry ghosts and hell-beings] or six kinds of beings [the five
plus demi-gods]; and in terms of the type of birth, they are reborn in four
ways—by birth from a womb, birth from eggs, birth from heat and moisture,
and spontaneous birth. Since this is the nature of bondage, freedom from
rebirth impelled by karma and the afflictions is liberation.]
Liberation means freedom from bondage. What is it that binds us in cyclic
existence? The thing that binds us in cyclic existence is karma and the
afflictions.  So liberation means freedom from being bound to cyclic
existence due to karma and afflictions. Due to karma and afflictions, we
circle in cyclic existence in the three realms. In these three realms we
are reborn as the six types of beings. In terms of the type of births, we
are either born from a womb, born from eggs, birth from heat and moisture
and spontaneous birth (literal translation is magical birth). When we are
no longer bound by karma and afflictions then we are liberated.
If we are not bound by our own karma and afflictions i.e. if we are freed
from that, that is liberation. However, if we were to think deeper about
liberation, it boils down to the nature of our mind.  When we said we are
bound by karma and afflictions, what is the main thing that is bound by
karma and afflictions? It is the mind. Come a day when the mind is freed or
completely separated from the afflictions, then the clear light nature of
the mind will be fully revealed. The mind which is the nature of clear
light is the very nature of our mind. That is the suchness of the mind.
That is when we achieve liberation.
On the basis of having identified the goal of liberation, then we are
supposed to develop an interest in achieving that and that is developing
the mind intent on liberation. What is the method for developing it? Next
the text talks about the four noble truths.
The essence is this: if you really want to develop a real wish to achieve
liberation then you really have to understand the four noble truths.
The method for developing the mind intent on liberation
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 268: The desire to relieve  the  suffering  of
thirst is based on seeing that you do not want to be tormented by thirst.
Likewise, the desire to attain liberation -which relieves the suffering of
the aggregates appropriated by karma and the afflictions- is based upon
seeing that the appropriated aggregates are flawed insofar as they have
suffering as their nature. Unless you develop a determination to reject
cyclic existence through meditating on its faults, you will not seek relief
from the suffering of the appropriated aggregates. The Four Hundred
Stanzas:
 How can one who is not disenchanted
 With this world appreciate peace?
 Cyclic existence, like home,
 Is difficult to leave behind. ]
The text is saying that it is extremely important to be able to see for
ourselves how the appropriated aggregates are in the nature of suffering.
The way to do that is:
   1. To reflect on the faults of cyclic existence and
   2. To reflect on the process of cyclic existence in terms of its origin.
Showing the significance of the Buddha's asserting the truth of suffering
as the first of the four truths
When the Buddha taught the four noble truths, the Buddha taught in the
following sequence:
   1. The truth of suffering
   2. The truth of the origin of suffering
   3. The truth of cessation
   4. The truth of the path
At this point in the text, there is a qualm: Why did the Buddha talk about
the four noble truths in that order? If you talk about the four noble
truths in terms of the evolution, in terms of the cause and the effect, the
Buddha should have first mentioned the truth of the origin of suffering
which is the cause of the truth of suffering.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 269: Qualm: The true origins are  the  causes
and true sufferings are their effects. Why, then, did the Bhagavan  reverse
that order, if the origins precede sufferings, and say: "Monks, this is the
noble truth of suffering; this is the noble truth of the origin"?]
Why did the Buddha not talk about the truth of the path first before
talking about the truth of cessation? If the four noble truths are in the
perspective of cause and effect, the sequence will be:
   1. The truth of the origin of suffering
   2. The truth of suffering
   3. The truth of the path
   4. The truth of cessation
Why didn’t the Buddha do this?
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 269: Reply: In this case, the Teacher
reversed the sequence of cause and effect, not out of error, but because
this reversal is vital for practice. Why?  If his disciples failed to
develop a proper determination to liberate themselves from cyclic existence
first, they would sever the very root of liberation. How then could he lead
them to liberation? Thus, in the beginning, the darkness of ignorance
enshrouded his students; they mistook the wonders of cyclic existence—which
are in fact suffering—for happiness. As the Four Hundred Stanzas says:
   Fool! If there is no end whatsoever
   To this ocean of suffering,
   Why are you,
   Who are caught up in it, not afraid?
By saying "In fact this [cyclic existence] is not happiness but suffering,"
the Buddha explained many forms of suffering, and led his disciples to
become disenchanted with cyclic existence and recognize it as suffering. As
this is a necessary precondition, the Buddha spoke first about the truth of
suffering.
Once you recognize suffering, you see yourself as submerged in an ocean of
suffering, and realize that, if you want to be liberated from suffering,
you must counteract it. Moreover, you recognize that you cannot stop
suffering unless you counteract its cause. By investigating the cause of
suffering, you come to understand its true origin. Consequently, the Buddha
spoke next about the truth of the origin.
Next you develop an understanding of the truth of the origin, an
understanding that contaminated karma produces the suffering of cyclic
existence, that afflictions produce karma and that the conception of self
is the root of the afflictions. When you see that you can eliminate the
conception of self*, you will vow to realize its cessation, which is also
the cessation of suffering. Thus, the Buddha spoke next about the truth of
cessation.]
*The conception of self is also known as the apprehension of self or self-
grasping
Right from the beginning, it is stated very clearly that everyone has to
develop a mind that is intent on liberation from his/ her own side. As an
individual, we first must have that real interest to want to achieve this
liberation which was explained earlier. Until we have that interest, nobody
would be able to lead us to that liberation. So, from our own side, unless
we have the real desire and real intention to achieve this liberation,
nobody can help us to do it. That is the very essential thing to develop
this mind right from the beginning. The way to develop this mind that is
intent on liberation is to see for ourselves the faults of cyclic existence
and the sufferings that are found in the cyclic existence. When we see the
faults of cyclic existence and the sufferings we will become disenchanted
with it and we don’t want to have anything to do with it. Then we will
develop a real wish and desire to achieve liberation from cyclic existence.
Once we have that wish, we will investigate and try to find out what is
that bind us in cyclic existence. This is when we have to understand the
truth of the origin of suffering. The truth of the origin of suffering
basically means that the very things that bind us to cyclic existence are
karma and our afflictions.
We have to understand the truth of origin of suffering; how it is karma and
our afflictions that bind us to cyclic existence and causing us to
experience all those sufferings. When we think of our afflictions, we have
to realize that all our afflictions arise from their root. What is the very
root of all our afflictions? The root of our afflictions is none other than
the self-grasping or apprehension of the self or ego in simple English.
Then the question arises: “Can this apprehension of the self be removed?”
This is something we have to check for ourselves whether it is possible to
overcome the apprehension of the self?  If you analyze and see for yourself
that this apprehension of the self can be removed then liberation become a
reality. So something that is possible becomes something that really
exists. So if you see the root of all the problems can be removed, then you
will see that cessation, which is liberation, is possible. So if you see
that is possible then you will have a strong wish to achieve that
cessation, isn’t it?
When you have proven to yourself that the apprehension of the self can be
removed then, then for you, liberation becomes a real possibility. It is
something that can be achieved and you are very sure that it can be
achieved. With that stable thought you will then think about the way by
which you can achieve this cessation. Upon investigation, that will lead
you to the fourth noble truth –the truth of the path- that leads to this
cessation.
In the Lam Rim Chen Mo, the example of a sick person is used an analogy.
First the patient has to recognize he/ she is sick and has the wish to be
freed from that sickness. It is only when the patient wish to be freed from
the sickness, he/she will then investigate the cause of the sickness. When
the patient understands the cause and understands that there is a cure,
he/she will then become a bit more relieve as the problem can be solved.
The patient will then take the medicine.
[Alt translation  LRCM  V1  page  270:  Qualm:  If  teaching  the  truth  of
suffering promotes the desire for liberation, should  not  the  Buddha  have
taught the truth of  cessation  immediately  after  teaching  the  truth  of
suffering?
Reply: There is no mistake. Why? At this point, after you recognize the
truth of suffering, you have a desire for liberation, and think, "If only I
could attain a cessation that relieves this suffering!" But if you have not
identified the cause of suffering, and have not seen that you can eliminate
that cause, you do not yet regard liberation as something attainable and
thus do not think, "I will realize a cessation."]
If I say that after having realized what is true suffering and all the
faults in the cyclic existence, you would develop a desire to be freed from
cyclic existence. Wouldn’t you?
If you say yes, then after teaching the truth of suffering then the Buddha
should teach the truth of cessation of suffering i.e. after you have
realized true suffering then the Buddha should tell you what true cessation
is. Then after introducing you true cessation you can take your time to
find out what is the cause of suffering and thereafter the true path. So
the Buddha could have taught in this order: true suffering, true cessation,
true origin, true path.
Actually teaching in this order: true suffering, true origin, true
cessation and true path, is wrong. What are you going to say? Please give
short and sweet answer.
Student 3: (Details refers to audio 86:36 – 86:42)
When you realize true suffering and you see the faults of cyclic existence,
would you develop a wish to be freed from cyclic existence?
When you see the cyclic existence in the nature of sufferings, would you
develop a wish to be freed from cyclic existence? Yes or no?
Student 3: (Details refers to audio 88:08 – 88:41)
My point of asking this question is not so much for the answer because the
answer is already there in the text. Are you able to summarize it?
Student 5: (Details refers to audio 90:00 – 90:40)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): What she is trying to say, I didn’t get
the point.
Student 6: (Details refers to audio 92:38 – 94:07)
The qualm: If you realize that cyclic existence is in the nature of
suffering, you would develop a wish to achieve liberation. So after talking
about true suffering, can the next truth be the truth of cessation? Is
there anything wrong with it?
The answer is:  There is no mistake. In fact you have to explain the four
noble truths in this order: first there is true suffering, then true origin
of suffering, true cessation and true path. After you have realized true
suffering i.e., after you have seen how cyclic existence is in the nature
of suffering, although you do develop a mere wish to achieve liberation but
it is not strong and stable.
According to the earlier author, after you present true suffering then you
have to talk about the true origin of suffering. Once you realize that the
causes of cyclic existence can be removed then from your own mind your wish
to achieve liberation is not just mere wish. It becomes a very strong wish
because you now realize that actually it is possible for you to achieve
liberation. Now you have the conviction and understand that is possible.
Earlier on it is just a mere wish as there wasn’t any conviction or real
belief that liberation is attainable.
Another question: Do you need to realize emptiness before you can really
develop the mind that is intent on liberation?
Student 7: (Not audible)
In order to develop a strong stable mind that is intent on liberation, you
first have to see for yourself that liberation is something that is
attainable. So before you can develop this, you first must realize for
yourself that true suffering is the object to be abandoned; in particular
the root of all the sufferings, the apprehensions of a self.
In order to see that the apprehension of a self can be removed, you first
have to see that its conceived object can be removed – yes or no?  This is
something that we can think about.
The next section is the presentation of the different kinds of suffering:
the eight types of suffering, the six types of suffering and the three
types of suffering. You should read on your own. If you have any question
you can bring it up on Sunday class (1.30pm to 3.30pm). Tuesday will be the
discussion class.
Question for discussion (compiled by Cecilia)
1. For persons of small capacity, the sufferings of  the  hell  beings,  the
   hungry ghosts and so forth are  explained.  Do  these  beings  experience
   those sufferings literally or in a metaphorical manner?
(Clarification by Khen Rinpoche: Aim of question is  for  us  to  understand
that what the Buddha described is possible. The mind should move  closer  to
an understanding that the lower realms are really like that).
2. What is the meaning of going for refuge? Why  is  the  Dharma  Jewel  the
   actual refuge? How are we freed from the lower  realms  when  we  go  for
   refuge?
3. There are four permutations to karma that  is  done  and  karma  that  is
   accumulated. Explain their differences.

                             ******************
If time allows, you can also answer the following  questions:  (from  Lesson
34)

4. With respect to  the  three  nonvirtuous  mental  actions  (covetousness,
   malice and wrong views), there are no actions that  are  accumulated  but
   not done. Why?
5. Why are the three non-virtuous  mental  actions  not  karma?  The  answer
   given in the text is that it is because they are  afflictions.  You  then
   have to explain why an affliction cannot be karma.
The desired outcome of this discussion is to see for yourself how the
suffering of lower realms as explained by Buddha is entirely possible. You
have to move your mind in that direction. It is not just story. The next
question is to arrive to an understanding on what it is mean to go for
refuge and how does going for refuge do actually protect us from lower
realms. On the question about karma done and the karma accumulated, the
point is to come to an understanding of what are these two. When we talk
about we accumulate this karma and that karma, what exactly means by
accumulating karma?
The point of giving you the discussion questions before the discussion
session is so that you can think about it and read the text. If you prepare
for the session it will benefit you when you come on Tuesday. The
discussion session is actually very important, in fact is the best way to
learn the subject. When you come for the discussion you have a chance to
air your views and to ask questions as well. It is important you attend.































