Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 25.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.395799
================================================================================


Although we have obtained the perfect basis for the practice now but this
opportunity will not last forever. It will come a day that this life will
finish. When death arrives, it is not as if we become nothing. It is
definite that we will have to take rebirth; we either take a good rebirth
or a bad rebirth. If we die without having accumulated any virtues or we
have not done anything positive, beneficial and virtuous in this life, then
we will be born in the lower realms; either in the hell realms, hungry
ghost realm or the animal realm. Once we are reborn in those realms, we
have to experience inconceivable sufferings and also have to experience
those sufferings for very long period of time; as long as eons. When we
talk about these sufferings in the lower realms, we must not think that all
these are of make-believe or are created by someone. No, it is not like
that. The sufferings of the lower realms were taught by the Buddha himself
in many scriptures. So, from our side, what we have to do is to seek an
understanding how such states of existences are possible. How is it
possible that all the things that the Buddha describes in texts do exist?
We have to think about it from the various angles and with various reasons.
The point is to move our mind at least in the direction thinking that all
these sufferings are really possible and do exist.
I think the way to think about this is to understand the relationship
between the state of one’s mind and such state of existences. The more
negative one’s mind is, perhaps then it is really possible to have the
correspondingly worse state of existences being mentioned in the text. We
can understand this by looking at how one’s mental perspective does make a
difference to the kind of experience that we have gone through in our life.
We can see for ourselves of how our perspective does influence as to
whether we do really suffer or we are able to remain calm and happy. So you
can see that due to different perspectives, people experience the situation
differently. In this world, you can also see that there are many places
where human beings look like hungry ghosts and suffering like hungry
ghosts; although we all are the same human beings. A lot of them cannot
even find sustenance such as food and water as if they are in the hungry
ghost realm which is directly perceivable in this world. If we use what we
can see as the basis, then we can link such state of existence with the
state of our mind. The sufferings that we see in this world are all created
by karma. This negative karma arises from an unsubdued mind. So we should
try to see the connection between the state of the mind and how it can
affect one’s state of existence. We should physically move our mind closer
towards this understanding such that the more unsubdued the mind, the more
non-virtues one’s mind is and correspondingly the state of existence that
one’s has to take would be correspondingly with more sufferings.
We can use some of our common human experience to understand this. Perhaps
you can look at those people who are suffering and take anyone of them as
an example. Then imagine; “If I were to be reborn as that person and
experiencing his problems and all his difficulties, will I able to continue
my practice right now? Will I be able to do any virtues?” If we were to be
reborn as that person with his problems and difficulties, perhaps we will
not be able to do any practice. On top of that, while suffering in that
state, it is likely that one will continue to accumulate even more negative
karma.  We cannot say for sure that we will never be reborn in such a
situation. We do not have the confidence and we cannot guarantee that we
will not be reborn in that situation. This is because we have already
accumulated all the causes for such a rebirth. As I have mentioned before,
even in this life, we have accumulated so much non-virtues, then what about
all those non-virtues that we had been accumulated in our past lives?
As mentioned in the Lamrim teaching, we have to reflect and meditate until
we get some experiences and understanding of what it would be like if we
were to reborn in the lower realms. Imagine that if we were to put our hand
in the fire now, will we be able to tolerate? If not, then how will it be
like if we are reborn in the hot hells? Also, sometime we cannot even bear
with the cold for about ten to fifteen minutes. If it is difficult to put
up with the cold that we know in this world, what will it be like if we are
reborn in the cold hells and experiencing those sufferings for very long
time? We also know how it is like when we go without food and drink for few
days. If it is quite difficult for us, then how will it be like if we are
reborn as hungry ghosts? If we are now reborn in the lower realms, we have
to ask ourselves whether we will be able to bear those unbelievable
sufferings as described in the text. The sufferings that we have to
experience are not for a short period of time but for very long time. Will
we be able to tolerate all these sufferings? The teaching mentioned that we
have to think about it. When we think about this, then probably we will get
some fear. So we need to meditate until we develop that kind of fear. We
have to reflect and meditate on these sufferings and how it will be like to
be reborn in the lower realms. Will we be able to tolerate all these
sufferings for the length of time that it involves? By reflecting on that
well then we should be able to develop the fear. We have to think about
this until such fear arises in our heart.
You may ask; “What is the point of developing this fear? What do I stand to
gain from this?” We stand to gain a lot if we are able to develop this
genuine fear because with this genuine fear we will be able to purify all
the non-virtues that we have already accumulated in the past and we will be
able to stop ourselves from engaging in non-virtues in the future. With
this genuine fear, it also helps in such a way that we will not find any
difficulty in engaging virtues. In fact, in each and every single moment of
our life, we can actually engage in virtues if we have this kind of genuine
fear. So there are a lot of benefits.
We have quite an extensive discussion on the sufferings of the lower realms
and at the end of the discussion, through reflection and meditation, we
ourselves should develop the belief in our mind that the lower realms do
really exist. So it is important that we put in effort to develop this
conviction. The other understanding that you must attempt to get is that
all the sufferings of the lower realms are ultimately arise from the
unsubdued mind. This is another very important understanding. There is this
misconception among many people that if we are a human being in this life
and when we die, from sure we will be reborn as a human being again
thinking that it is impossible to be reborn into other realms. Such belief
is completely wrong. It does not work like that. As I have mentioned
earlier, we have no control over where we will be reborn. We are under the
control of our karma; depending on the strength of our karma, the stronger
of the virtuous karma and the non-virtuous karma will be the deciding
factor.
Relying on the means for achieving happiness in the next life
  A: Training in going for refuge, the excellent door for entering the
  teaching
  B: Developing the faith of conviction that is the root of all temporary
  happiness and certain goodness

A: Training in going for refuge, the excellent door for entering the
teaching
   1. The causes of going for refuge
   2. Based on that, the objects to which you go for refuge
   3. The way you go for refuge
   4. Once  you have gone for refuge, the stages of the precepts
1. The causes of going for refuge
 There are two causes of going for refuge:
     i) The fear of the sufferings of the lower realms
    ii) A faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ ability to protect you
        from that fear
The genuine fear of the sufferings of the lower realms arises from having
thought about it. In this context, how does one bring about this fear?
Thus, as you think about how you fall to bad migrations because the power
of wholesome karma is small and that of unwholesome karma is excessively
extremely strong, the two arise: fear of bad migrations and the conviction
that that which is rare and precious [the Jewels], can protect you from
them.
If you do think about it, all of us already have accumulated all the causes
that will throw us into the lower realms and what decides our next rebirth
is our karma. For us, our virtuous karma is very weak. Our positive
thoughts are also very rare, just as the flash of lightning in the dark sky
whereas our unwholesome thoughts are very frequent. Our non-virtuous karma
is very strong. From our side, we definitely will go to the lower realms
because we already have the causes sitting there in our mind. Combine with
our reflection on the sufferings that we will have to experience in our
next life then the real fear of sufferings will arise in our heart. This is
one of the causes of going for refuge.
The teaching is saying that it is of vital important that we ourselves have
to develop these two causes of going for refuge in our mind. If we have
these two causes of going for refuge in our mind then our act of going for
refuge will be genuine that will move our mind. Otherwise, without the
generation of these two causes in our mind, our refuge will only be mere
words.
[LRCM Vol 1 page 178: In general there are many causes. However, for our
purposes, the following apply. As previously explained, you cannot remain
in this life -you soon die- and, after death, you have no control over
where you will be reborn, for you are under the control of your karma.
Since virtuous karma is weak and non-virtuous karma is exceedingly
powerful, if you contemplate how readily you fall into the miserable
realms, you will be filled with fear and dread, and will resolve to seek a
refuge. In brief, the causes of your going for refuge are twofold:
1. your fear of the miserable realms and the like, and
2. your conviction that the Three Jewels can protect you from them.
Thus, you must strive to realize these two causes, because if they remain
mere words, so will your refuge, but if they are strong and stable, your
refuge will transform your mind.]

Based on that, the objects to which you go for refuge
     1. Identifying the objects to which you go for refuge
     2. The reasons why they are worthy to be a refuge

1.  Identifying the objects to which you go for refuge
The Buddha, the Dharma (the teaching) and the Sangha (the community) are
the objects of refuge for those who desire liberation.
In this context, we are talking about the path that is shared with the
person of small capacity. For the person of small capacity, the actual
refuge is the ethic of refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions.
It is the practice of the ethic of refraining from the ten non-virtuous
actions actually protects this individual from going to the lower realms.
In order for this person to be able to cultivate this actual refuge –the
ethic of refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions- this person must
first have the faith of conviction in karma.
In particular, this person must also have the faith of conviction in all
the explanations on the subtleties of karma as given by the Buddha.
In order to do that, the person must first trust the Buddha.
Therefore the Buddha is one of the objects of refuge. This person must also
look at what the Buddha has taught with regards to the Four Noble Truths
and the Law of Causality. You can see that how his presentations do not
contradict with reality. The Buddha himself has proven that these things
are valid and we can also validate it. However with regards to the subtle
details of karma which we cannot validate them at this moment, we can
believe these subtle details of karma based on the trust that we have on
the Buddha with the understanding that the Buddha has to be right because
the Buddha has no reason to lie to us. By thinking along this line, once we
have develop some trust and faith in the Buddha, we will not have much
difficulties in following the Buddha’s advice to do the practice of the
ethic of refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions. Anyone who does that
will protect himself from the lower realms. In that sense, we can say that
the Buddha is the actual refuge. Otherwise, we have to remember how the
Buddha protects us from suffering. As we have seen in the previous lesson:
  The Subduers  do not wash away our negativities with water,
  they do not remove our  suffering by hand,
  they do not transfer their realizations to us
  they liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature.
If we are able to understand this, we can understand how the Buddha can be
an actual of refuge and how he can protects us.
For the person of small capacity, in order for this person to produce
genuine refuge in the heart, this person must cultivates two causes:
1. The genuine fear of the sufferings of the lower realms combine with
2. The faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ abilities to protect from
   that fear.
If these two causes are present, then this person will have the genuine
refuge of the person of small capacity. With the genuine refuge in the
heart, then this person will not have problem in training in the precepts
that come with the refuge.
If he is able to train well in the precepts that come with the refuge, then
this person will be liberated from the lower realms. If this person is
liberated from the lower realms, he will be going to the good place. This
is how he achieves happiness in the next life.
In one of the sutra, the Buddha says: “I have already shown you the path to
liberation. Now it is completely up to you whether you can achieve
liberation or not.” In this context, I guess we can imagine the Buddha will
be saying: “I have already shown you the path out of the lower realms. Now
it is completely up to you whether you can take good rebirth or not.”
It is very important for us to develop a correct understanding to how the
Buddha can protect us. But sometime our understanding is almost like those
of other religious tradition which is based on divinity and has the feeling
that the Buddha, like a creator god, is supposed to do everything for us
but is not doing for us now. The Buddha teaching is not like that and it is
never meant to be like that. Therefore, it is very important for us to
understand how the Buddha can protect from us from suffering.
When we talk about refuge in general - we seek refuge- obviously there must
be something that motivates someone to seek refuge. Usually there is some
fear as the person is afraid of something and he seeks refuge and
protection. Isn’t it the case that we will only look for protection or
refuge when we have some fear, problems or worries? It is the same as when
we go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha because of the fear of
the sufferings of the lower realms, we look for protection. Without that
fear, we will not going to seek for protection.
Many factors bring about the experience of sufferings and problems. There
are external conditions and there are also internal conditions; but the
main one is the internal conditions. Generally, most people, also for us,
attribute the external conditions to be the main cause of the problem and
hardly ever consider the possibility of our mind is responsible for these
experiences. In reality, the main cause of the sufferings is the internal
conditions. Basically, it is due to the force of the non-virtuous karma, we
experience suffering. If we do not have the internal conditions of the non-
virtuous karma, it is impossible for us to meet with suffering. We do not
even meet with the external conditions. Even if we do meet with the
external conditions but we do not have the cause of the internal
conditions, we will not experience any suffering. Therefore, the most
important thing to do is to overcome the internal conditions which are the
negative karma that brings about suffering. The practice of going for
refuge is very much related to overcoming the main cause of the suffering
which is the internal conditions. The main practice that is to be adopted
after having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is living our
life in accordance with the law of cause and effect –karma. In this
context, primarily, it refers to living our life while intentionally
avoiding the ten non-virtuous actions. If we do avoid the ten non-virtuous
actions by giving them up, then we do not create the causes for suffering
and as such, we are liberated from the lower realms. This is how refuge
protects us from the internal causes of suffering -the main cause of
suffering. That being the case, the main cause of suffering is inside us
which is our own negative mind and our own non-virtuous karma. Since it is
inside us, nobody else can take that away from us. Only we ourselves can do
that. That is the reason why we say we have to work hard for ourselves.
There is no other solution for this and nobody else can do it for us. Once
we have this genuine refuge in our heart, we have laid a very strong
foundation for further practice as indicated in the outline: Training in
going for refuge, the excellent door for entering the teaching.
What we have been discussing so far is the refuge of the person of the
small capacity. For a person of small capacity, the two causes of going for
refuge are:
1. The genuine fear of the sufferings of the lower realms, combine with
2. The faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ abilities to protect from
   that fear.
Then what about the refuge of the person of medium capacity? For the person
of the medium capacity, the person is not motivated just by the fear of
sufferings of the lower realms. The person is also motivated by the fear of
the suffering of samsara as a whole. The person has the conviction that the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha have the ability to protect him from the fear of
these sufferings.
Then what about the refuge of the person of great capacity?
For the refuge of the Mahayana Paramitayana, this person is not motivated
by his own suffering but is motivated by the unbearable compassion that
unable to tolerate the suffering of all the sentient beings and wishes to
achieve enlightenment.
For the refuge of the Mahayana Vajrayana, this person is not motivated just
by the compassion that unable to tolerate the sufferings of all sentient
beings and wishes to achieve enlightenment but has the wish to achieve
enlightenment as quickly as possible because he is unable to tolerate that
sentient beings have to suffer for longer time.
We have identified the objects to which you go for refuge. Next is: The
reasons why they are worthy of refuge

The reasons why they are worthy of refuge
The actual reasons
Someone who is free from all fear, skilled in means of liberating others
from fear, steeped in great compassion toward everyone without closeness
and distance and who works for the benefit for the welfare of all
regardless of whether they help him or not – such a one is worthy of
refuge. As only Buddha has those [qualifications], while Ishvara and the
like do not, he is a refuge. For that reason the Dharma taught by him as
well as the Sangha of hearers are also  worthy to be refuges.
There are four reasons of why the Buddha is the worthy object of refuge:
   1. The Buddha has mastered fearlessness i.e. he has freed himself from
      all fears. Is that sufficient? No, because even if he is freed from
      all fear, it does not necessarily mean that he can help us.
   2. The Buddha is skilled in the means of freeing others from fear.
   3. The Buddha possesses great impartial compassion. He wants to free us
      from our fear but does this mean that the Buddha will help everyone
      and not just some?
   4. The Buddha will help everyone because he acts for everyone’s welfare
      of all sentient beings regardless of whether the recipients have
      benefited him or not.
With these four reasons, this show that the Buddha is worthy object of
refuge.
[LRCM Vol 1 page 179: There are four reasons why the Buddha is worthy to be
a refuge.
First, he has mastered himself and attained the sublime state of
fearlessness. If he had not attained this, he would not be able to protect
others from all fears, just as a person who has already fallen down cannot
help up someone else who has fallen down. Second, he is in all ways skilled
in the means of training disciples. If he were not so, he would not be able
to fulfill your needs, even if you went to him for refuge.
Third, he has great compassion. If he did not have it, he would not protect
you even if you went to him for refuge.
Fourth, he is pleased, not by material offerings, but by offerings of
practice. If he were not, he would not act as a refuge for everyone, but
would help only those who had previously helped him.]

Advice to be persistent about conviction, the principal cause
There are two causes for us to be protected by taking refuge:
-The external cause –the Buddha because he possesses all the necessary
qualifications to protect us.
-The internal cause – which is from our side, we have to entrust completely
to the Buddha by taking the wholehearted refuge. If we do that, we will
definitely be protected by the Buddha because having trust in the Buddha
then there is no problem for us to follow his advices -entering the paths
and doing the practices. If we are doing that, then definitely we will be
protected.
[LRCM Vol 1 page 179: Thus, after you have ascertained these things, which
are taught in the Compendium of  Determinations, entrust yourself to the
Three Jewels with a single-pointed focus. Develop this certainty from the
depths of your heart, for, once you are able to do this, they cannot fail
to protect you. This is so because there are two causes of your being
protected: an external and an internal. The Teacher has already fully
realized the external factor or cause, but you suffer because you have not
yet developed the internal factor, entrusting yourself to the refuge.
Therefore, know that the Buddha, moved by his great compassion, assists you
even if you do not request his help; that he is not lazy at this; and that
he, the unrivaled and auspicious refuge, abides as your personal protector.
 Recognizing this, go to him for refuge.]
The great Kadampa master, Geshe Potowa, says that most people including us
have a lot of faith in the fortune-tellers, soothsayers, astrologers or
people who do divination. We will follow whatever advices given to us but
when we look at the Buddha and his teaching, we do not react in the same
manner. We do not have the same level of trust as we have for the
fortunetellers or the astrologers. We believe in them more than the Buddha.
So when we look at the teaching of the Buddha, we do not have much
conviction in it. Whenever someone pointed the advice that is in relation
to the Buddha’s teaching, we will give our own interpretation and whatever
reasons just for not following the teaching of the Buddha. This does happen
and it show very clearly that we do not have much conviction in the Buddha.
Our belief in the Buddha is wavering and therefore our conviction in the
Buddha’s instructions and teaching is not there. In order to have the faith
of conviction and entrust ourselves to the Buddha, we need to know the
qualities of the Buddha.

The way you go for refuge
There are four aspects to going for refuge
   1. By knowing the good qualities
   2. By knowing the distinctions
   3. Through commitment
   4. By refusing to acknowledge other refuges


Going for refuge by knowing the good qualities
Since going for refuge by knowing the good qualities requires recalling the
good qualities of the refuge:
   1. The good qualities of the Buddha
   2. The good qualities of the teaching, Dharma
   3. The good qualities of the community, Sangha
The good qualities of the Buddha
The good qualities of the Buddha have four parts:
   1. The good qualities of the Buddha’s exalted body
   2. The good qualities of the Buddha’s exalted speech
   3. The good qualities of the Buddha’s exalted mind
   4. The good qualities of enlightened activities
The good qualities of the Buddha’s exalted body
Please read on your own on the paragraphs that describe the good qualities
of the Buddha’s exalted body.
In short, the Buddha’s exalted body possesses the 32 signs and 80
exemplifications.
[Liberate In Your Palm of Your Hand page 402: The ‘signs’ signify that he
has the mind-stream of a great personage. The ‘marks’ /exemplifications
indicates the sort of qualities he has inside.]

The good qualities of the Buddha’s exalted speech
The Buddha possesses the qualities of being able to response to various
questions simultaneously with just one voice i.e. by saying only one thing,
everyone will get the answer.
[LRCM Vol 1 page 182: Reflect on the marvelous manner of the Buddha's
speech. Even if every living being in the universe asks him a different
question at the same time, he comprehends them all with one instant of his
wisdom. Then he answers all the questions with a single word, which all
beings understand in their own languages.]

The good qualities of the Buddha’s exalted mind
These are explained in terms of the good qualities of knowledge and the
good qualities of caring. The Buddha perceives all the phenomena directly;
both the real nature and diversity of all phenomena itself.
The Buddha has great concern for us sentient beings who are under the
control of our own karma circling uncontrollably in the cyclic existence.
The Buddha is bound by great compassion for us sentient beings and is
always working for our welfare and benefit.
[LRCM Vol 1 page 183: The good qualities of knowledge: Without obstruction
the Buddha's knowledge contacts the real nature and diversity of all
phenomena, as if they were a dhatri fruit placed in the palm of his hand.
Thus, the Sage's knowledge comprehends all phenomena, whereas others'
limited knowledge cannot comprehend the vast objects that are to be known.
The good qualities of caring: In the same way that living beings are bound
inescapably by the afflictions, so is the Sage bound by great compassion,
which arises continuously as he beholds the suffering of living beings]

The good qualities of the Buddha’s enlightened activities
The enlightened activities of the Buddha’s body, speech and mind, being
both spontaneous and everlasting, help all living beings. If disciples are
open to his guidance, the Buddha will give them that which is excellent,
and lead them out of trouble. Thus, the Buddha’s activities are certain to
do everything that needs to be done.
On the basis of having gained ascertainment with regards to the Buddha’s
exalted body, speech and mind and the enlightened activities, we develop a
strong faith and belief in the Buddha.
On the basis of having faith of conviction in the Buddha which come from
the understanding of his various qualities, then one will also come to
regards the teaching –the Dharma- which give rise to the Buddha- as be
excellent and wonderful. One will also come to regards the practitioners of
the Dharma –the Superior beings- to be excellent and wonderful as well.
Student 1:  In other text, there is a discussion about the rebirth in the
higher realms. Here, Lama Tsongkhapa does not seem to go into details about
taking rebirth in the god and demi-god realms but mainly focusing on the
rebirth of the lower realms. Is there any reason for this?
Khen Rinpoche: The suffering of the higher realms which includes god and
demi-god will be discussed in the section which talks about the path that
is shared with the person of the medium capacity. Here, in this context, it
is about the person of small capacity, therefore it focuses on the
suffering of the lower realms.
Student 2: In relation to the topics of death and impermanence, can you
please comment on the weightage of influence on the relationship between
karma, environment and one's effort for any given result of one’s present
life?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you asking specifically achieving a good rebirth or just
anything in life?
Student 2: For any given result of one’s present life and also one’s future
life.
Ven Gyurme: Let’s say whether you will be a millionaire in this life or
not?
Student 2: Yes, you can take that as an example.
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s use study as an example. First, you must have the
karma to have the intelligent brain to study. Without that, then it would
be difficult. It is the karma that determines the kind of intelligence we
have in this life and it is due to other factors. This shows that karma is
so important.  On top of that, you need to work hard as the harder you work
and the more effort you put in, the greater would be the result. On the
condition, it is in-term of one’s support such as companion and friend who
help you. I don’t exactly know the weightage but I guess, maybe, karma is
of 50% because this determines your starting point. Perhaps effort would be
of 40% and then the remaining 10% would be the favorable conditions. If you
understand this fact, especially on karma, then you should then know how to
prepare for your future lives. Therefore it is important to study in this
life and putting in as much effort as possible so as to plant imprints. If
in this life we study and learn as much as we can so as to plant imprint,
this will make a different in our future lives because in our future lives,
we will be intelligent. Because of having planted imprints in this life,
then when we hear this teaching again in the future, it will become much
easier to learn and also will become easier to develop experience and
realization. Regarding imprints, it is definitely true. It does make a
difference as to whether you do have the imprints or not. We can even see
the difference in this life. We may have heard a particular teaching many
years ago and when we hear the same teaching again, and because of having
heard the teaching before, it become easier and clearer. If that is the
case, from this we can infer that whatever imprints we place on our mind
now will make a difference in our future lives. Therefore there is no need
to be disheartened if you think you are not so intelligent. It does not
matter.  The point is that if you know about imprints and karma, then it
becomes important for you to try your best and trying to leave as much
imprints as you can in this life by working hard. It does not matter
whether you understand them or not but you need to try as it does make a
difference in your future lives. We do not study and learn the teaching for
the purpose of this life alone. It is for all our future lives. Therefore,
you should work as hard as possible and pray that you will continue to meet
with the Buddha’s teaching in your future lives. Therefore, I always say
you just need to try and work hard for it. You have to listen to the
teaching and reflect on it as much as possible. You read the text and keep
on reading even if you do not understand them; for the purpose of placing
as much strong imprints as possible in your mind. This will make a
difference in the future. If you stop reading the text and feel discourage
just because you do not understand them, then you are stopping the
placement of imprint in your mind. That will not make your life easier. By
stopping does not mean it will become easier for you in the future. Please
don’t do that but just try your best.
Student 3: Since karma expands, is it better for negative karma to ripen as
quickly as possible as we do not have to pay a higher price later?
Khen Rinpoche: It will be good if we can experience the result of our
action immediately but that is not how karma works. It does not mean that
the accumulated karma will be ripened immediately. If we can experience
everything at one time then the presentation of virtuous karma and non-
virtuous karma can be complicated.
Student 4: In the Lamrim Chemo, why the presentation of refuge only comes
after the presentation of precious human rebirth and death and
impermanence? For a strong refuge, must it based on the ascertainment of
the precious human rebirth and the ascertainment of death and impermanence?
Khen Rinpoche: We are first introduced to the fact that we have a human
life of freedom and endowment which is something very wonderful but yet
that is something that will not last. If we end up in the lower realms
after we died, then it would not be good for us. It is only then we can
talk about looking for help. Although we have a good situation now but this
will not last forever and we may go to the lower realms if we die; then it
would be terrible. Only with this insight, we will look for help. The
minimum entry level to refuge has to be developed based on the two causes:
1. The genuine fear of the sufferings of the lower realms, combine with
2. The faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ abilities to protect from
   that fear.
Perhaps the student question is: Does it mean that the refuge that people
had taken does not count? Does that constitute as refuge?
The next section will be “The Precepts of Refuge” and thereafter will be
the presentation on karma. Please read as much as you can.
