Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 13.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.903083
================================================================================


2B4A-1B6 Summary of the meaning of these [points]
A The importance of proper reliance on the root of perpetual striving
Sixth: That being so, the instructions widely known as Guru Yoga should
also be understood according to what has been explained before. It will not
be enough to do the visualisation in just one meditation session, though.
When you do one Dharma practice from the bottom of your heart, you should
long rely on a spiritual teacher who guides you unmistakenly. As
Chekawa also said about that time span: “when you rely on a guru, there
will be doubtful questions whether to give up”. Accordingly, since there
will only be loss without profit if you do not know how to rely, it becomes
evident that the cycles of teachings about relying on a spiritual teacher
are more important than any other ones and the root of perpetual striving.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 91:  A summary of the meaning of the
previous five parts-
Thus, you must also understand as explained above the instruction that is
renowned as "guru yoga." Yet, you will get nowhere by training in an object
of meditation for just a single session. When you practice a teaching from
the heart, you must rely for a long time on an excellent teacher who guides
you accurately. Moreover, it is as Chay-ga-wa said, "When relying on the
guru, there is the chance that you might give up your guru." So, if you
rely without knowing how, you will not profit, but lose.
Therefore, these topics concerning reliance on the teacher are  clearly  the
foundation of our deepest aspiration, which is more important than  anything
else.]
Guru yoga, in general the word ‘yoga’ refers to training. It is just liked
in the physical yoga in which we trained our body such that it becomes
flexible. Here, ‘yoga’ in the context of guru yoga means training in the
mind focusing on the guru with the purpose of transforming the mind into
something positive. Mainly, it is training your mind so that you are able
to develop faith in your teacher/guru.
As we have discussed before, first you must look for a qualified teacher.
After you have found a qualified teacher and have taken that person as your
guru, you must rely on that guru correctly in thought and in action. So if
you are able to rely on that guru correctly in thought and in action, then
that is the meaning of guru yoga.
Sometimes we may think that practicing guru yoga means meditating on the
guru just for one or two sessions. That is not the meaning of guru yoga. As
I mentioned before, guru yoga means developing the idea, from your side,
looking at your own guru as the Buddha. You look at the guru as the Buddha
in order to stop the conception of faults. Then you reflect on the
qualities of the guru in order to develop faith and reflect on his kindness
to generate respect. In that process you develop a single pointed faith.
This is known as guru yoga.
To be able to see the guru as the Buddha is really a difficult practice
because that requires the stopping of the conception of faults. That also
requires constantly remembering or focusing on the qualities. But, as much
as possible, you should stop the conception of faults in the guru and as
much as possible to think about the qualities. That is achievable, but it
is really challenging to be able to see the guru as the Buddha.
It becomes extremely important to constantly think about the benefits that
we will achieve if we rely correctly in thought and action on the guru. It
also becomes extremely important to constantly analyze/ think about the
drawbacks and the faults of not relying correctly in thought and action on
the guru.
If you are someone who has the strong interest in the dharma, then you have
to rely on an unmistaken qualified teacher; and you have to rely on that
person for a long time. During that long period of time, when you become
closer to your teacher and because of you seeing the faults in that person
somehow that can make you give up that person as your guru. If you are not
looking for that kind of relationship but only for just a short time, maybe
one or two days, from your side the guru looks magnificent. Then there is
no real danger for this to happen as there is no opportunity for you to see
the faults. In that sense, you will not give up the teacher, but you will
not have any real faith in that person. In order to develop faith and trust
in the teacher, first you need to see the qualities of that person. In
order to see the qualities of the person you must have access to that
person and observe him for a while. Only then you will see more qualities.
If you don’t have that kind of that association, you will not see the
qualities. If you don’t see the qualities, how would you be able to develop
any kind of real faith in that person?  That is why it says here; “If you
rely on the teacher for a short time, you would not really have any kind of
faith in him”.
Khen Rinpoche shared his story: In my own case, I have different teachers:
teachers who have given me empowerments, teachers who have guided me
through my studies and teachers who taught me on the daily basis, and so
forth. In my case, when I think about it, there are teachers who have
guided and trained me from the day one when I did not know anything until
this day. I have close contacts with those teachers on the daily basis when
I attended the classes. When I think about my own situation and what I have
gone through, whatever small little qualities I have is mainly due to the
kindness of those teachers who I have close contact with on the daily basis
and who have guided me through the different classes. I see the teachers
whom have helped me and guided me on the daily basis over a long period of
time as the most kind. In my case, I think the reason why I am being able
to have some understandings on the dharma and being able to share it with
others is solely due to the kindness of these personal teachers of mine
whom I had have close contact with on the daily basis for a very long time.

Of course, I also have other gurus who have given oral transmissions,
commentaries, empowerments and so forth. I am not saying that they are not
kind to me. They are. Because of the various reasons, they do benefits my
mind. But when I think about the whole situation in details, personally I
feel that the teachers whom I had close contact with on daily basis for
over a period of long time and who have guided me through the different
philosophical classes as being the most kind. Because of their kindness,
naturally my faith in them is also stronger and I feel closer to them.
I think I had told this story before. One day I went to see my teacher as I
wanted to offer him something. It just happened that at that time, he was
seeing some people. So I waited outside my teacher’s room for the guests to
leave. I think I had waited for half to one hour. I didn’t really want to
go in because as I thought I might disturb others. Somehow my teacher found
out that I was there and he asked me to go into the room. The moment I went
into the room, I got scolded. My teacher said; “Why are you doing out
there? Why don’t you just come in? Are you trying to listen to my secret
conversation?”
My teacher is a no nonsense person. When he gets upset, he will tell you
straight to your face. I explained to him that I did not go into the room
because there is someone in the room and I wasn’t listening to his secret
conversation. Then I gave whatever offerings I had intended to pass to him
and left, but at the same time I was feeling upset.
It was basically a difference in perceiving what had happened. From my
side, I didn’t feel I did anything wrong. My reason was I just wanted to
make offering to my teacher and I have no intention to listen to his
conversation. But my teacher perceived it differently. He was probably
thinking why I did not just go straight in but rather just hang up outside
his room.
This is the case for all of us, isn’t it? We all think that our truth is
the truth and we hold on to that and thinking; “I am not wrong”. We all
just hold on to our truth very very strongly, isn’t it? Of course, when I
think about the situation, there is truth in that. I have no intention or
any interest to listen to what my teacher was saying. All I wanted to do
was to wait for his guest to leave. When I think about it, that is the
truth and that is the reality. But the fact is that even if it is the
truth, the truth or the reality does make us upset at time.
When I went back to my room, I was pretty upset and was wondering what to
do next. I thought about it; if at that time I have decided to just stop
the relationship that would mean a permanent end to that relationship. That
mean I have to look for another teacher. Anyway, I don’t know what had
happened. I decided to take out whatever money I had and offer it to my
teacher. I have bought quite a lot of stuffs such as fruits and so on.
Then I went to see my teacher in the evening and offered it to him but I
did not talk about the whole incident. I talked about something else.
Sometime we think the truth is on our side but nevertheless the truth makes
us upset or angry, isn’t it? So, it happened in my case. It only happened
once. Somehow that situation was pacified. That was just one incident.
Subsequently everything was fine. I was able to finish my studies and now I
have some understandings of the dharma. So when I think about it I can see
it is really due to the kindness of my teacher. It is just an example of
how even by holding on to the truth, somehow or sometime we may get upset.
If we get upset then we start to conceive the faults in the teachers and at
those times there is a danger of severing the relationship with the
teacher. We may give up. So at those times, we must really know how to
think and how to analyze. If we do give up on our teacher, we are the one
to lose. We will suffer a great loss especially if we give up a qualified
teacher. In fact we will suffer the loss from life to life.
At that time, I did think about who was going to be the one who will lose
out. So with that understanding, I went back to see my teacher again. Yes,
it is very difficult and is extremely challenging to be able to see the
guru as the Buddha. But the point is, as much as possible we just have to
put in effort to this practice. To be able to have guru devotion i.e.
seeing your guru as the Buddha is extremely difficult and is extremely
challenging. But if you happen to have the realization, then of course,
everything becomes easy. If you are really able to conceive your guru as
the Buddha, nothing will affect you even if your guru accuses you or your
guru scolds you. You would have no problem with this. It would be like
looking at the wrathful deity. Wrathful deity is supposed to be terrifying
and scary but if you know that he is a Buddha, you will not get scare and
have no fear at all. In fact, you may think the wrathful deity is better
than the peaceful looking Buddha. We may even have faith that this wrathful
deity is powerful. If you are really able to see your guru as Buddha then
one would not have any difficulty.
Lama Tsongkhapa has all these wonderful advices on the topic of guru
devotion. The first thing is to find for a qualified teacher and after you
have relied on him as your teacher then you have to generate faith and
respect. You have to rely on that person for a long time. When conception
of faults in that guru arises, you have to put a stop to it. As I have
mentioned before, if the Buddhas were to come to us in the aspect of the
sambhogakaya (the complete enjoyment body), we will not be able to see them
because only the bodhisattvas have the fortune to directly perceive the
Buddhas in their complete enjoyment body aspect. The dharmakaya (the truth
body) is only something that can only be directly perceived by another
Buddha and we don’t have the fortune. Even if the Buddha is to come to us
in the form of the nirmanakaya (supreme emanation body), I guess we would
not able to perceive them in that aspect because we need to have pure karma
to be able to see the supreme emanation body.
As mentioned by the Buddha in the different sutras, the Buddha has
indicated that he will come in the form of teacher and so forth in order to
benefit sentient beings. If the Buddha is really working for us right now
and if what the Buddha had said is true then if we look into our own life,
who is the Buddha? Probably he has to be our teachers/ gurus. By thinking
along this line of reasoning then we will try to move our mind closer to
the idea that the guru is the Buddha. As I mentioned before, even if all
the Buddhas and bodhisattvas were to come right in front of us right now,
they would not be able to do anything more than or anything higher than
what our teachers are already doing or have already done for us. Do you
agree? If you understand this, then you will see how kind the guru/teacher
is; the one who shows us unmistakably what to adopt and what to abandon.
Most of us claim to have faith in the guru. We may have some faith but when
is it that we get upset or angry with the guru? For most people, most of
the times the anger or the displeasure or the unhappiness towards the guru
arises especially when our most precious ‘I’ or self is hurt. For most
people, when the guru does not act according to our expectation or does not
do what we want, we get upset and lose faith in our guru. On one hand, we
say we have faith but in reality we want to control the teacher; basically
the guru has to do what we want, isn’t it? In reality, what we actually
want is become the guru’s guru.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You want to be higher than the guru.
If you analyze and really think about it, everyone has the same problem.
When the precious ‘I’ or self get upset or hurt because the guru doesn’t do
what we want or doesn’t fit our expectation, that is when we suddenly lose
faith. Let’s say in the context of the teaching, sometime you might think;
“Perhaps my teacher should not be saying this now! Perhaps he should be
talking on something else or he should be talking about this from the
different angle. Perhaps he should present it in a slightly different way.”
Basically, we want the guru to teach what we want to hear. This is our
situation, isn’t it? Like what Guntang Rinpoche says: “Although we rely on
our teacher as our refuge for this and all future lives, however we hold on
to our own truth as the highest truth. This is the saddest thing”.
In fact the practice of guru devotion is really difficult and developing
real faith in the guru is challenging and difficult. Therefore practicing
guru yoga is not simple and is a no easy thing. Nevertheless, it is very
important because if we were to get this right, it will make a huge
difference in the way we will progress on the path and how our mind will
turn to the dharma. If we get this guru devotion right, we will establish a
very firm foundation for our entire practice. As Lama Tsongkhapa says;
“Therefore, these topics concerning reliance on the teacher are clearly the
foundation of our deepest aspiration, which is more important than anything
else.”
It is difficult but you really have to understand the topic of guru
devotion correctly. Why do we need to do this practice? There are many
people out there having the misconception thinking that this guru devotion
practice is not what the Buddha had taught but it is made up by the Tibetan
in order to make themselves important in the eye of the disciples and so
forth. As I mentioned earlier, this is not the case. Although there are
many things to think about, but the things that you need to sort it out for
yourself is; “If I do rely correctly in my guru in thought and in action,
what are the benefits to me? What profit do I get?” When the practice of
guru devotion is done well, all the things that you want -all the
qualities, realizations, experiences- will come your way. So that is the
point. Anyway that is what the teachings are saying. This is what Lama
Tsongkhapa says here. It is not so much to make a conclusion here but you
have to make a conclusion for yourself. You have to think whether that is
true or not? What is the bottom line? Why do you need to do this practice?
How does it benefit you? You have to gain an ascertainment for yourself.
Once you have gained the ascertainment, you will just have to put in effort
into this practice.
If for whatever reason your reliance is not correct then you have to engage
in confession and restrain.

B The need for confession and vows restrain, if that proper reliance does
not come about - because it is a great fault
With our coarse mental afflictions we have often allowed many faults of
reliance on a spiritual teacher to occur in regard to listening to the
Dharma - not knowing how to rely or knowing how to but not doing so. It is
difficult for an awareness of that to develop through confession and vows.
Having understood the advantages and disadvantages as explained previously
you should therefore sincerely confess any occurrences that are not in
accordance with proper reliance, developing many strong resolves.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 92:  Our afflictions are extremely
coarse. Some listen to the teachings given by many teachers. They do not
know how to rely on the guru, and, even if they know how, they do not do
it. Therefore, they will incur immeasurable misdeeds that are related to
their improper reliance on the guru. Moreover, they will find it difficult
to develop an awareness of practices such as confession of former
wrongdoing and restraint from future wrongdoing. Thus, after you have
understood the benefits and faults as previously explained, reflect on them
repeatedly.]

C How the realization of reliance is not far away, if you act in that
manner
If you act in that manner, you will before too long become like the
bodhisattva Sadaprarudita and the young Sudhana who was insatiable in his
quest of a spiritual teacher.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 92:  Once you have done this, you
will quickly become like the conquerors' child Sadaprarudita, who had
perfect courage, and the youthful Sudhana, who knew no limit in his search
for teachers.]
Student 1: Why is it that the realization of bodhichitta not in one  of  the
ten qualities of the qualified Mahayana guru?
Khen Rinpoche: One of the ten qualities of the qualified  Mahayana  guru  is
loving concern. He should possess loving concern.  Loving  concern  here,  I
guess, you can take it to mean great compassion; which is the  root  of  the
Mahayana. Therefore possess loving concern can  include  bodhichitta,  isn’t
it?
Student 2: (Summarized by Ven Gyurme) My guru is a Buddha but  how  come  he
cannot see my pure intention? In the case  of  Khen  Rinpoche’s  story,  how
come he didn’t know that I was here to see him and  not  to  listen  to  his
conversation if he is a Buddha? He should know, isn’t it? Then what  is  the
solution? There are two options: the first option is to train  my  mind  and
pretend that he is Buddha or the other option, it is my own  negative  karma
that causes me to get scolding. How to handle them?
Ven Gyurme: I guess a lot of people have this issue. If you see a fault,  do
you pretend that you didn’t see it? What do you do  when  you  see  a  fault
especially it is really a fault?
Khen Rinpoche:  As I mentioned, as for seeing the faults in the guru,  there
are two possibilities:
   1. There is really a fault. You see a fault as a fault.
   2. Seeing a fault which is actually not there.
In relation to your loved  one  and  everyone  else,  not  just  your  guru,
whether you see it as a fault or quality, it is not so much  from  the  side
of the object but it is more have to do with your own  perspective;  because
when you are in a happier mode, you don’t  see  many  faults.  For  example,
when there is an attachment for a person, you don’t see many faults  or  you
don’t see any fault at all in that person. But on the same object,  when  in
those times that you are unhappy, you see a lot of faults in it. It  has  to
do with how you look at things, isn’t it? When the mind  is  upset  or  when
you are angry or your mind is disturbed, everything appears  differently  as
in the Tibetan saying; “Everything  appears  as  unpleasant.”  This  is  our
experiences, isn’t it? You can verify it for yourself. When you  are  upset,
when the mind is disturbed, you see everything as unpleasant.  While  things
appear as unpleasant when you are unhappy, not  only  do  things  appear  as
unpleasant, we  believe  that  they  are  completely  unpleasant.  They  are
completely bad. You never ever think that actually this is just one  way  of
looking at things.  After  a  while  when  your  anger  has  subsided,  then
gradually you may realize that in fact it is after all your mistakes.   This
realization does not happen when the mind still disturbed and angry.
But there are certain faults that everyone will acknowledge them as  faults.
For example, everyone will see that the teacher is exhibiting  a  fault.  In
that case, it is a fault. If it is a fault then you just have  to  recognize
it as a fault; but what and how do  you  think  at  that  time?  You  should
analyze that is this really a fault of the guru or is it just an  appearance
or is it something that the guru is exhibiting? Isn’t it alright for you  to
think; “Perhaps my guru is making this mistake in order to subdue my  mind?”
 Is it okay to think in such a way? I mean it is possible that  the  teacher
maybe displaying that particular fault  specifically  for  your  purpose  to
subdue your mind. In life there are some people  who  generally  don’t  make
any problems but if they want to make a problem for whatever  purpose,  they
will make that problem. There is a benefit in thinking in  such  a  way.  If
you think: “Maybe the teacher is doing this for my  purpose,  for  my  sake,
specifically to tame my mind”. If you are really able to feel it, it  helps,
isn’t it? Whatever discomfort or unhappiness that is  in  the  mind  towards
the teacher will at least be reduced isn’t it?  Like in the case of  my  own
example which I mentioned just  now,  just  seeing  one  specific  fault  or
mistake in the guru should not be a reason for you to give  up  that  person
as your teacher. There is no reason for that. Even if you see it as a  fault
or mistake that should not make you give up your teacher. You have to  think
who will suffer the loss if just by  seeing  one  fault  then  you  give  up
everything. You suffer the loss and you lose everything. This is the way  to
think.
As I have explained this in previous session, we don’t have the  fortune  to
see the Buddhas in their pure aspect. Even if they were  to  come  right  in
front of us right now, we don’t have the fortune to see them. Therefore,  if
we can’t see them, they are unable to do anything for us. They  can’t  guide
us in that aspect. But if the Buddhas were to come in the  ordinary  aspect,
then they can help us. It is through the ordinary aspect that they can  help
us.
What is the definition of ordinary aspect? The  definition  of  an  ordinary
aspect means having faults. Otherwise there is no  basis  and  there  is  no
reason to call it an ordinary aspect. Ordinary aspect means making  mistake.
As I have mentioned earlier, to really believe that the guru is  the  Buddha
is really difficult. Unless you are a single-pointed  practitioner  and  you
really put in effort, perhaps that is some chance for you. But I  guess,  it
would be quite unlikely and very difficult. It is  normal  that  every  time
when we see a fault, we immediately wonder why this and why  that?  That  is
the sign that we do not see the guru as the Buddha yet.
What are you really looking for when you take someone as your guru? It  boil
down to what you are looking for or what should the  reason  when  you  look
for a guru? In this context, when we look for  the  guru,  we  rely  on  the
person as the teacher because we want certain teachings. If that  person  is
able to give you those teachings that you  are  looking  for,  then  he  has
accomplished your goal. Therefore in that case,  it  really  doesn’t  matter
whether  your  guru  knows  your  life,  he  can  read  your  mind,  he  has
clairvoyance, he can prophesize the future. All these do not matter  because
all you are looking for is the teaching. If he can give you want  you  want,
that  is.   Dharmakirti,   the   great   Indian   logician   said   in   his
Pramanavarttika: “If you want to have the ability to be  able  to  see  very
far away then you should rely on the vulture as your guru.”   This  line  in
Pramanavarttika by Dharmakirti is always in my mind. If  what  you  want  is
able to see far away then invite a vulture and rely on it as your  guru.  If
all you want is your past lives, where you are going in  your  future  lives
and what is happening to you in the future, then you just look  for  someone
who can make those predictions; whether it is an  astrologer  or  a  fortune
teller. As I mentioned earlier, it all boils down to what  you  are  looking
for and what do you want. The qualm that was just brought  up  is  not  just
her own qualm. It is something that is in everybody’s mind. With regards  to
the conception of faults in the guru,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  when  the
faults appear, there are only two possibilities:
      -there is a conception of faults because there is really a fault or
      -it is just an appearance of fault even in reality there is no fault.
Whatever the case, that is not the point. The point here  is  how  you  deal
with it. How do you think?
Student 3: (Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: It is very important to check up on the prospective  teacher.
That is why Lama Tsongkhapa takes great pain to  explain  clearly  what  are
the qualities that a qualified Mahayana teacher should possess. He  explains
these  in  details.  On  the   basis   of   understanding   these   defining
characteristics, he advises you to check whether that person  who  you  want
to take as a teacher possess the  qualities  or  not.  If  the  person  does
possess the qualities then you  can  rely  on  and  if  the  person  doesn’t
possess the qualities then you don’t have to.
Student 4: For teacher who come to Amitabha  Buddhist  Centre  for  a  short
time such as Kyabje Lama Zopa Rinpoche or going  to  His  Holiness  teaching
which we only have a few days with him before we take initiation  from  him,
what is the best way for us to think before we accept them as guru  when  we
don’t have chance to spend so much time with them to check on them?
Khen Rinpoche: With regards to His Holiness, I guess there  shouldn’t  be  a
problem as His Holiness is famous throughout the world. I don’t think  there
is any serious problem arising from  people  devoting  to  His  Holiness  as
their guru. I don’t think there will be problem arises  in  the  future.  If
people do experience problem in viewing His Holiness as their teacher  after
they have taken him as their teacher, it is probably  not  coming  from  His
Holiness’ side. From His Holiness’s side, he has no fault.  It  is  more  of
how the student perceives the guru. As for our centre, we try our very  best
to ensure that the teachers of a certain standard are invited. We  have  our
sources and the ways of checking. From our centre side, we try our  best  to
ensure that whoever is invited is valid. But that does not mean  that  I  am
saying that whoever come to teach at the center  you  should  rely  them  as
your guru. I am not saying that. You should take your time to check and  see
whether that person is someone who you can rely on as  your  guru.  Although
we do invite teachers, I am not saying that you have to  rely  or  you  must
immediately take the person as your guru without checking.  You  still  have
to check.
The next session in the text deals with the six preparatory practices.  They
are very straight forward and easy to read. So please read  it  up  on  your
own.
