Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson39.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.404868
================================================================================


Khen Rinpoche was asking to bring out any complicated questions that cannot
be resolved during the last Thursday discussion class for discussion.
Student 1: There aren’t any examples of actions that are not done but are
accumulated for the three nonvirtuous mental actions: covetousness, malice
and wrong views. Does this mean that if it is the non-virtuous mental
action, it is necessarily both accumulated and done?
Student 1: (Detail refers to audio 2:46 – 3:28)
Khen Rinpoche: In the text, it is stated very clearly that for any of the
three nonvirtuous mental actions (covetousness, malice and wrong views),
there cannot be an action that is accumulated but not done.
What I am asking you is: for the three nonvirtuous actions, why is it
necessary done once it is accumulated?
In order to think about this, ask yourself whether there is a mental
nonvirtuous action that is done but not accumulated?
It is stated very clearly in the LRCM text that there isn’t a mental
nonvirtuous action that is accumulated but not done. Having said that, is
there a mental nonvirtuous action that is done but not accumulated?
Why is it that for a mental nonvirtuous action, once it is accumulated, it
is also done?
Student 2: (Detail refers to audio 7:02 – 7:57)
Khen Rinpoche: If you say this then basically the Lamrim Chenmo is wrong.
For any of the three mental nonvirtuous actions, in order for it to be
accumulated, it doesn’t have to manifest externally in either a physical or
verbal actions. It is not necessary.
Student 3: (Detail refers to audio 9:08 – 9:40) An example of a mental
nonvirtuous action that is done but not accumulated is in my dream I like
Venerable Gyurme’s robe very much  and I wanted to own it (covetousness).
As it happens in my dream, so a mental nonvirtuous action that is done but
not accumulated.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That example could be possible. Done but
not accumulated. Can think about that. Still not sure.
Khen Rinpoche: If it is mental non-virtue, why is it that when it is
accumulated it is also necessary done?
Student 4: (Detail refers to audio 11:00 – 11:40)
Khen Rinpoche: Based on your answer, it follows that a mental virtue, once
done it is necessary accumulated.  Then if it is not done, it is also not
accumulated. Based on your answer, it seemed to be saying that if it is
done it is also necessary get accumulated.
Student 4: No.
Khen Rinpoche: So, it follows that, for you, once it is done, it is
necessary accumulated. Otherwise what extra ingredient do you need for you
to be accumulated?
Student 4: (Detail refers to audio 12:48 – 12:59) The duration of the
thought?
Khen Rinpoche: For the duration, do you mean: long time then it accumulate,
short time not accumulate? You are saying that? How about long dream?  How
about whole night dream?
Student 4: Not sure.
The text identifies different types of suffering. One can identify the
suffering into three types:
   1. Suffering of pain
   2. Suffering of change
   3. Suffering of conditionality
When we talk about a mind that is determined to be free from suffering i.e.
the mind that wishes to renounce suffering and the suffering that is to be
renounced by this mind is mainly the suffering of conditionality.
When we talk about the wish to be free of suffering and, in this context,
it is the wish to be free from suffering of conditionality. Why? The wish
to be free from suffering of pain is something that even ordinary beings
like animal have.
The suffering of change is essentially the contaminated feeling of
pleasure. While in reality it is in the nature of suffering, most people
apprehend it or view it as happiness. Suffering of change refers to all the
contaminated pleasant feelings. The wish to renounce this suffering of
change is found in the mind of non-Buddhist. There are many non-Buddhists
who renounce suffering of change i.e. they renounce this contaminated
feeling of pleasure. They aim to achieve the different concentration,
especially the fourth concentration, whereby they seek to just abide in the
feeling of equanimity. So you don’t have to be Buddhist to be able to
renounce the suffering of change. You also don’t have to be Buddhist to
achieve the stage whereby you just abide in the feeling of equanimity.
Here, for us to wish to be free from sufferings or the wish to free
ourselves from cyclic existence, we first have to wish to free ourselves
from the appropriated contaminated physical and mental aggregates.  So, for
a person who has the renunciation with the wish to be free from the
appropriated contaminated physical and mental aggregates is said to develop
the wish to be free from cyclic existence.
In the section on the eight types of suffering and the main type of
suffering that we have to understand is the suffering of the appropriated
aggregates. That refers to the appropriated physical and mental aggregates
which are contaminated. Because the contaminated aggregates are the product
of karma and afflictions, therefore they are in the nature of suffering.
We have to see for ourselves that our own contaminated body and mind is the
result of our karma and afflictions. We also have to see that our
aggregates are in the nature of suffering because they are the product of
karma and afflictions. On top of being the product of our own karma and
afflictions, they are a vessel for our future suffering. On the basis of
having this contaminated body and mind, we accumulated fresh karma to
suffer in the future.  Because of having this contaminated body and mind,
we have the basis for experiencing all the problems of this life; the
suffering of birth, old age, sickness and death. Also on the basis of this
body and mind, we experience the suffering of change.
It is stated in the teaching that until we develop the renunciation for
this contaminated body and mind, the contaminated appropriate aggregates,
we will not be able to develop an authentic intent or desire for
liberation. If we want to develop an authentic intent or desire for
liberation, we first have to realize for ourselves that our own
contaminated body and mind are in the nature of suffering. Without which,
there is no way to develop a real desire for liberation.  So, that is why,
in order to develop an authentic desire for liberation, we first have to
understand and realize the first noble truth, the truth of suffering.  The
truth of suffering refers primarily to the suffering of the appropriated
aggregates.
In order to develop an understanding of the truth of suffering, we first
have to realize that our contaminated body and mind is impermanent.  As you
can see in the four seals of Buddhism, the first seal is all composed
phenomena are impermanence.  That includes our contaminated appropriated
physical and mental aggregates which are in the nature of impermanence.
When we talk about the impermanence of our body and mind of our life, we
are not just talking about the coarse or gross impermanence like our lives
coming to an end, our aggregates of this life coming to an end, but rather
we also taking about the momentary disintegration of the aggregates i.e.
how our body and mind is changing in each and every moment.
I did talk about the quotation from Dharmakirti. I will just repeat it for
those of you who didn’t really understand it. The great master Dharmakirti
say: “Because the aggregate is impermanent therefore it is miserable.
Because it is miserable, it is selfless.” I think it is important for us to
understand what he meant.
Our aggregates, our body and mind, are impermanent. Why are they
impermanent? Because they are changing in each and every single moment i.e.
they undergo momentary disintegration.
This is something that you have to pay a little more attention. Please to
try concentrate on what is being said.  If you don’t try, then you will not
see the connections. If you try then at least there is some chance for you
to see that.
The aggregates of the contaminated body and mind are impermanent because
they undergo momentary disintegration.  Momentary disintegration means that
they are changing in each and every single moment.
Why the aggregates undergo momentary disintegration? Why the aggregates
change from moment to moment? The change must come from certain causes and
conditions. So what is the cause for the aggregates to undergo momentary
disintegration?
The cause for the aggregates to undergo change in each and single moment is
none other than the cause that has produced the aggregates.
The cause that has produced the aggregates is the very thing that produces
the aggregates to be in the nature of changing in each and every single
moment.
What is the cause that has produced our contaminated body and mind? If you
analyze it, the answer is karma and the afflictions. Our contaminated body
and mind is the product of karma and the afflictions.
When you say it is the product, it means it comes about under the control
or the power of karma and the afflictions. Because of the karma and the
afflictions as the cause, the aggregates are produced.
Because the aggregates are produced from karma and afflictions, it is
miserable; it is in the nature of suffering. From this, you can see that by
depending on the reason of impermanence, the aggregates are established to
be in the nature of sufferings.
The cause of our contaminated body and mind is the karma and the
afflictions. If we were to investigate deeper, the root cause is the
ignorance apprehending a self. The ignorance apprehending a self is an
erroneous mind.
What does the ignorance apprehend? The ignorance conceives a self but in
reality the self that is conceived by ignorance does not exist, therefore
the aggregates are selfless. Based on the reason that the aggregates are
miserable and in the nature of suffering therefore it is selfless.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): OK? This is just an imprint. You can
think.
This is something to think about because this is what you will find in the
treatises. The great master Dharmakirti said “Because it is impermanent, it
is in the nature of suffering. Because it is in the nature of suffering, it
is selfless.” You have to understand what he said and why he said that.
Actually the meaning is the same if you look at the four seals. The four
seals are:
   1. All composed phenomena are impermanent
   2. All contaminated phenomena are miserable (in the nature of suffering)
   3. All phenomena are empty and selfless
   4. Liberation is peace
It is quite easy to establish the fourth point: liberation is peace. This
is because there is an antidote for the root of cyclic existence. The
direct antidote to the root of cyclic existence, the ignorance apprehending
a self, is the wisdom realizing selflessness. Because there is an antidote,
therefore one can put an end to ignorance and then one will be able to
achieve liberation.
In the explanation of the three types of suffering:
   1. Suffering of pain
   2. Suffering of change
   3. Suffering of conditionality
What is the suffering of change? It is essentially none other than our
contaminated pleasant feeling. While we are in the nature of suffering, we
believe that is happiness and due to that belief we grasp at that pleasant
feeling. We need to stop our attachment to this suffering of change.
What is the way to overcome our attachment to these contaminated pleasant
feelings?
When we experience pleasant feeling, we grasp at it and attach to it. How
do we reduce our attachment for this pleasant feeling?
When we experience the suffering of pain i.e. when we meet with painful
sensation and experience unpleasant feeling, we usually develop aversion
towards it. We get upset and angry. We know that we have to reduce the
anger. So, in this situation, what is the best way to deal with the anger?
You have the suffering of conditionality or pervasive compounding
suffering. This induces contaminated neutral feeling. What is the best way
to deal with this contaminated neutral feeling induced by the suffering of
conditionality?
By depending on these three types of suffering we develop the unpleasant
feeling, pleasurable sensation and neutral feeling respectively. In
dependent on those feelings, we develop anger, attachment and ignorance
respectively.
This is something for you to think about and to discuss in relation to the
three types of suffering, the three mental poisons are developed and what
is the best way to deal with them?

|Three types of  |Types of     |Mental     |Question                         |
|suffering       |feeling      |poisons    |                                 |
|Suffering of    |Painful      |Anger      |How to deal with the anger?      |
|pain            |sensation    |           |                                 |
|Suffering of    |Pleasurable  |Attachment |How to reduce the attachment for |
|change          |sensation    |           |this pleasant feeling?           |
|Suffering of    |Neutral      |Ignorance  |How to deal with this            |
|conditionality  |feeling      |           |contaminated neutral feeling?    |


The very important point is that we have to see for ourselves how our own
contaminated body and mind which we have is in the nature of suffering.
This is something that is really important for us to realize and to work at
it by thinking about it.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 289: (c) Meditation on the three types of
suffering
(i) The suffering of change
Pleasant feelings experienced by beings in cyclic existence are like the
pleasure felt when cool water is applied to an inflamed boil or carbuncle:
as the temporary feeling fades, the pain reasserts itself. This is called
the suffering of change and includes not only the feeling itself, but also
the main mind and other mental processes that are similar to it, as well as
the contaminated objects which, when perceived, give rise to that feeling.
(ii) The suffering of pain
When a painfully inflamed boil makes contact with an irritant such as salt
water, it is agonizing. This is how you recognize the feeling of pain.
Painful feelings like this constitute the suffering of pain, because as
soon as they arise the body and the mind are tormented, as in the case of
kidney pain. Also, as explained above, the suffering of pain is not just
the feeling.
(iii) The suffering of conditionality
Contaminated neutral feelings are like an inflamed boil which is in contact
with neither soothing nor irritating substances. Because these feelings
coexist with dysfunctional tendencies, they constitute the suffering of
conditionality, which, as explained above, does not refer to the feelings
alone. Insofar as the suffering of conditionality is affected by previous
karma, as well as the afflictions, and coexists with seeds that will
produce future suffering and affliction, it coexists with persistent
dysfunctional tendencies.
Thus, attachment increases when a pleasant feeling arises, and hostility
increases when pain arises. Ignorance increases when you misapprehend the
body -which is part of a dysfunctional situation that is neither pleasant
nor painful- as permanent, when it is in fact impermanent.
Attachment gives rise to suffering such as future rebirth in the five
realms [the realms of the hell-beings, hungry ghosts, animals, humans, and
deities]; hostility brings about suffering such as sorrow in this life, as
well as the future suffering of miserable realms; while ignorance acts in
such a way as to maintain in existence the sufferings produced by the other
two [attachment and hostility].
Therefore, attachment ceases when you see pleasant feelings as suffering.
In the case of painful feelings/ hostility ceases when you consider that
since these aggregates [of body and mind] are a collection of causes for
suffering, painful feelings arise from them just as physical affliction
does. In the case of neutral feelings, ignorance ceases when you see that
they are impermanent, exhaustible, and perishable in nature. In this way,
you prevent the three feelings from giving rise to the three mental
poisons.]
[LRCM footnote 469: Dysfunctional tendencies refer to the presence of
seeds, or predisposing latencies, for afflicted karma, and the way in which
these predisposing latencies make it hard to use the body and mind for the
practice of the path.]
Next the text discusses:
   1. The suffering of human beings
   2. The suffering of the demigods
   3. The suffering of the gods
I think the suffering of human beings is quite straightforward. While we
may realize that the human’s life is suffering, it is possible for us to
actually aspire to be a god or a demigod and possibly thinking to enjoy a
good and wonderful life. The text explains that they do experience their
own kind of suffering as well because they also possess the contaminated
body and mind. Therefore even their rebirth or existence is in the nature
of suffering.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 292:  a) The suffering of human beings
From what has been explained above, you should understand that the
suffering of human beings consists of the pain of hunger and thirst,
unpleasant sensations of heat and cold, and the suffering of searching for
sustenance and becoming fatigued. It is also birth, old age, illness,
death, and so on—the seven that I have already explained before.]
As in the root text: The suffering of demigods. Third: It is said that the
demigods are mentally tormented by envy that cannot bear the wealth of the
gods. When based on that they fight with the gods, they experience many
sufferings of having their bodies chopped up, split, etc. Although they
possess intelligence, they have fully-ripened obscurations and consequently
cannot see the truth on that basis.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 292:  (b) The suffering of the demigods
They are tortured by their unbearable envy of the deities' wealth. Because
of this, they fight with the deities and endure many sufferings, such as
having their bodies cut and split apart. They are intelligent, but they
have mental obscurations, fruitions of past karma, which make it impossible
for them to see the truth from within their situation. The Mindfulness of
the Excellent Teaching states that they are animals, but the Levels of
Yogic Deeds places them in the realm of the deities.]
Next is the description of the sufferings experience by the gods in the
desire realms. [Alt translation LRCM V1 page 293: The deities of the desire
realms
Deities derive pleasure from indulging their sensual desires, yet greater
than this is the tremendous suffering they experience while dying, when
they become aware of the five signs of death, about which the same text
says:
   Their bodies turn an unattractive color,
   Their cushions become uncomfortable,
   Their flower garlands wilt, and their clothing smells;
   An unaccustomed sweat breaks out over their bodies.]
The text is saying that at the time of death, these desire realm gods
experience tremendous anguish mental suffering.
In the Middle Length Lamrim, the gods in the form and formless is
translated as uppermost realms which means the upper realms.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 295: The deities of the form and formless
realms
The deities of the highest realms—the form and the formless— though they
escape these sufferings, nevertheless die in possession of afflictions and
obscurations. Because they have no control over their future dwelling
place, even they suffer on account of dysfunctional tendencies.]
Even the gods in the form and formless have no control as to where they
will go in their next life. As I have mentioned before, it is very possible
for them to fall back in to the lower realms.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 295: Moreover, as the Discussion of the
Requisite Collections says:
    Those in the form or formless realms
    Are beyond the suffering of pain and the suffering of change.
    By nature they have the bliss of meditative concentration;
    They remain motionless for an eon.
    But even this is most assuredly not liberation;
    After they have counted on it, they will again fall.
    Though it may seem as though they have transcended
    The turbulence of the miserable realms,
    Yet, like birds soaring in the sky,
    They cannot stay forever, though they try—
    Like an arrow shot with the strength of a child,
    They will fall back down in the end.
    Just as butter lamps that burn for a long time
    Are in fact perishing in every moment,
    They are afflicted by the changes of
    The suffering of conditionality.]
Here the text is saying because the gods in the form and formless realms
have contaminated body and mind therefore their existence is also in the
nature of suffering. Even though they do experience pleasure and happiness
when they are in that realm, but that doesn’t last forever. Because the
body is in the nature of suffering, come a time they have to move on to the
next rebirth and it is very likely that they again go back into the lower
realms.
[LRCM footnote 469: Dysfunctional tendencies refer to the presence of
seeds, or predisposing latencies, for afflicted karma, and the way in which
these predisposing latencies make it hard to use the body and mind for the
practice of the path.]
If we look at the word in Tibetan: gnas ngan len, “gnas” means a basis for
experiencing suffering now.  “ngan pa”  is bad. “len” means to take. “ngan
len” literally means is to take on something bad.  It is the source for
future suffering.  What we have just discussed here is etymology. Etymology
and definition is different.
It does not matter where we will be born in the three realms because any
rebirth comes with the contaminated body and mind is in the nature of
suffering. If that is the case then it is something that we need to be free
or separated ourselves from. The contaminated appropriated physical and
mental aggregate is true sufferings. So what is the origin of this true
suffering? We have to understand the origin or cause for our contaminated
body and mind in order for us free from it.
Next is the true origin of suffering and we are looking at the source of
contaminated body and mind.
Reflection on the process of cyclic existence in terms of its origin
The origin of cyclic existence is explained in three parts:
    1. How the afflictions arise
    2. How you thereby accumulate karma
    3. How you die and are reborn

1. How the afflictions arise?
The text stated clearly that the afflictions are the main cause of
suffering.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 298 a" How the afflictions arise
Karma and the afflictions are both necessary as causes for the creation of
cyclic existence, but the afflictions are primary. For, just as a seed
without moisture, soil, etc. will not produce a sprout, so in the absence
of afflictions—even though you have accumulated immeasurable karma in the
past—there will be no sprout of suffering because the karma lacks the
necessary cooperating conditions.]
This is one reason why of the two: karma and afflictions, afflictions are
the primary cause of cyclic existence.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 298: A further reason afflictions are primary
is because—even without previously accumulated karma—if afflictions are
present, you immediately accumulate new karma, and will thereby appropriate
aggregates in the future.]
This is the second why of the two: karma and afflictions, afflictions are
the primary cause of cyclic existence.
You have to remember the two reasons as stated in the text for explaining
why the afflictions are the main cause of cyclic existence. After you have
memorized the two reasons then you have to think about the reasons. The
point is when you think about the reasons you will come to your own
understanding as of why afflictions are the primary cause of cyclic
existence.
If somebody were to ask you: of the two, karma and afflictions, why are
afflictions the main cause of suffering or the main cause of cyclic
existence? You should be able to explain.
Then Lama Tsongkhapa quote from Dharmakirti's text. This is to provide the
scriptural authority.
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 298; Similarly, Dharmakirti's Commentary on
the "Compendium of Valid Cognition" says:
    The karma of one who has transcended craving for existence
    Lacks the potency to project another birth
    Because its cooperating conditions are gone.]
And  also:
    Because the aggregates will arise again, if you have craving.
Consequently, it is very important to rely on a remedy for the afflictions.
Moreover, since this requires understanding the afflictions, you should
become knowledgeable about the afflictions.]
As the afflictions are the primary cause for cyclic existence, therefore it
is very important to be knowledgeable about afflictions. Therefore there
are four points:
   1. Identifying the afflictions
   2. The order in which they arise
   3. The causes of the afflictions
   4. The faults of the afflictions
What is an affliction? This is how it is explained in the teaching:
affliction is a mind when arises it disturbs us.
Here there is the discussion about the ten afflictions:
   1. The five afflictions which are non-view
   2. The five afflictions which are view

[The ten afflictions are:
  • the five non‐views – attachment, anger, pride, ignorance, and afflicted
  doubt
  • the five views – the view of the transitory collection, view of an
  extreme, view holding a bad view as supreme, view holding bad morality
  and conduct as supreme, and wrong view.]
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 298: Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge gives a
general definition of an affliction:
  An affliction is defined  as  a  phenomenon  that,  when  it  arises,  is
  disturbing in character and that, through  arising,  disturbs  the  mind-
  stream ]
You should read this on your own. The reason why I tell you to read the
text is because if you read the text and then think about it and when you
come to class and pay attention while I am explaining, then you will
definitely understand it better. If you don’t read and by just coming to
class and try to understand then it is very challenging. This is why I tell
you to read the text. When I say read the text it is not the way in which
you do your prayer mindlessly. You need to read them mindfully and think
about it. Of course, for those of you who really do not have the time then
I can’t say much. Those of you, who have the time, just try.
Advise on Medicine Buddha Puja
The medicine puja essentially is a practice in relation to the eight
Medicine Buddhas. The structure is the same: to each Buddha, you bring the
individual Buddha to your mind and then with faith and devotion you offer
the seven-branch of worship in relation to them. After offering them the
seven-branch worship then make aspirational prayers to that Buddha. It is
the same for all the eight Buddhas. Of course the prayer change but that is
basically the structure of the puja.
Due to the shortage of time we have to recite it fairly quickly but we
still can do something while we are reciting the words. Be mindful. Let’s
say when you are directly praising the first Buddha, you think of that
first Buddha and in relation to that Buddha, you recite the words of the
prayer and do the appropriate visualization. For example, when it comes to
offering, even if you can just think of one flower, there is some benefits.
So, try to visualize as you recite the prayer.

