Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 11.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.935683
================================================================================


All of us have met with the teachings of the Buddha. On top of that, now we
have some interests and determination to study the Buddha’s teachings. If
you think about it, what is the main cause for having this good situation
now? At the end of the day I think we have to attribute it for having
created the causes in our past lives. Basically, it is the ripening of some
virtuous seeds or imprints. So that is the main thing. The fact that we
have met with the Buddha’s teachings and have the interest studying it, we
are basically experiencing the result of some virtuous karma that we have
accumulated in the past. But we should not leave it as that. We should work
to increase the power of the imprints that were left behind in our mental
continuum in the past. While we still have some interests in the study, we
should try as much as possible to increase the power of those imprints
through the activities of hearing, reflection and meditation.
All of us are doing this study together. We are here together as a group.
Again this is the result of some karmic connections in the past. That is
why we are here together studying this. Therefore it is important to
cultivate this sense of closeness with one another in this class. We should
think that we are going to do this together for the next five years. We
should cultivate the sense of closeness and regards everyone likes a
family.
In the seat of learning, literally in simple English, in the great
monastery in India where the monks are studied, the monks of the same class
are always very united and close with one another. They consider their
friendships and their relationships with the fellow classmates as very
important, perhaps even more important than their own parents because they
understand that they are in this together and they have to help one
another. At time if someone was to meet with some problems, everyone in the
class would come together and help. For example, if someone was to fall
sick, everyone in the class will help that person. Also students of the
same teacher would help their fellow students when they are in trouble.
Perhaps this is what we can emulate here and what we can try to achieve
here as well; to cultivate this bond between everyone in the class.
Generally speaking, on the normal class day, we may not have enough time to
get to know one another because of the limitation of time and so forth.
Therefore we can create such an opportunity by attending the Sunday
discussion session. This is one of the reasons why we have the discussion
session because during those discussion sessions there are opportunities to
get to know one another. So it is important to get to know one another, to
introduce yourself and to know the other people around.
There are suggested guidelines on behaviors and attitudes that are helpful
for the discussion groups. We will send this out to you tomorrow. Please
take some times to look at it. If we adhere to these guidelines when
conducting a discussion session then it would help everyone. During the
discussion, it is important to ask question, and to ask question
respectfully. Of course you don’t ask question, for example, out of anger.
The intention for engaging in discussion is not about winning or defeating
someone. Rather, the whole point of discussion or debate is to eliminate
one’s own misconception and whatever qualms and doubts one may have
pertaining to the subject. If you hear another person’s presentation and
you think that person’s presentation is not correct because there is some
faults in it, with respect one can point out that that line of argument is
wrong with the intention of eliminating the misconception of the wrong line
of reasoning; it is not about winning or it is not about defeating the
person. Let’s say, during the discussion or debate, if the person says
something that you feel is incorrect, from your side by just saying; “That
is wrong and I don’t agree” is not sufficient. It doesn’t help. The point
is that you must be able to explain. You may say; “I don’t agree with this
and this shouldn’t be the case” and you should be able to back up your
objection with a valid reason. You should be able to point out; “This is
not the case because of this and that.” By just saying “no” or just saying
“you are wrong” alone is not helpful. You may raise an objection to
someone’s presentation or view but it is not sufficient just to say; “No, I
object”. You have to be able to point out the reason of why you think that
the person’s line of reasoning is wrong. Of course, when you counter that
person’s presentation, that person may or may not accept your line of
argument. That person also has the right to reject whatever you have just
said by coming out with some other reasons. So this is how the discussion
or debate works; to and fro process. Sometimes at the end you may get the
conclusion and sometimes conclusion may not necessarily be reached about a
particular issue. I guess most people, when they raise an objection during
the discussion, they basically stop at “No, I don’t agree” and have nothing
much to back up their objection. If that happens then the discussion is
over as there is nothing to continue. If you just say “no” and have nothing
else to say and don’t come out with any reason, then perhaps both sides
will just sit there and get upset with one another. If you do object to a
particular line of reasoning or whatever it is said, besides saying “no”,
you have to come out with the reason why. But whatever reason you come out
with may not necessarily be right in the first place; so the opponent or
the person you are debating or discussing with has the right to counter. Of
course that person’s counter argument may not be correct as well. So
basically it is a to and fro process. It is a competition of logic; it is
the comparison of whose logic and whose reasoning is superior.

Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
With respect to the defining characteristics of the Mahayana teacher, so
ideally a Mahayana teacher/ guru should possess those ten qualities as
mentioned in the text. If that is not possible, if one cannot find such a
teacher, at least one should look for a teacher who possesses the five
qualities as mentioned in the middling characteristics. But at the very
minimum, you should rely on the Mahayana teacher whose qualities exceed
his/her own faults. You should not rely on a Mahayana teacher whose
qualities and faults are equal.
Next are the defining characteristics of the student or the disciple who
relies on the teacher.

2B4A-1B2 Characteristics of the one who relies, the disciple
A  Faults of someone who does not have and benefits of someone who does
have the five characteristics
Second: From the Four Hundred:
   Impartial, intelligent, full of endeavour -
   thus is explained a vessel for teachings.
   Otherwise qualities of the teacher,
   have no effect – there’s no change in the listener.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 75: Aryadeva states in his Four
Hundred Stanzas
    It is said that one who is nonpartisan, intelligent, and diligent
    Is a vessel for listening to the teachings.
    The good qualities of the instructor do not appear otherwise
    Nor do those of fellow listeners. ]

As it says in the commentaries: someone endowed with the three
characteristics is a suitable vessel for listening. If all three are
complete, the positive qualities of the one expounding the Dharma appear as
positive qualities and do not appear as faults. Not only that: the positive
qualities of the listeners also appear as such to that person and do not
appear as faults. If the characteristics of a vessel are not complete, the
listener, under the power of his faults, will classify even an extremely,
perfectly pure spiritual teacher who expounds the Dharma, among those who
have faults, and perceive an exponent’s faults as qualities.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 75: Aryadeva says that one who is
endowed with the three qualities is suitable to listen to the teachings. He
also says that if you have all these qualities, the good qualities of one
who instructs you in the teachings will appear as good qualities, not as
faults. In addition, he says that to such a fully qualified person the good
qualities of fellow listeners will also appear as good qualities and not as
faults. It is stated in Chandrakirti’s commentary that if you, the
listener, do not have all these defining characteristics of a suitable
recipient of the teachings, then the influence of your own faults will
cause even an extremely pure teacher who instructs you in the teachings to
appear to have faults. Furthermore, you will consider the faults of the one
who explains the teachings to be good qualities.  Therefore, although you
might find a teacher who has all the defining characteristics, it may be
difficult to recognize their presence. Thus, it is necessary for the
disciple to have these three characteristics in their entirety in order to
recognize that the teacher has all the defining characteristics and in
order then to rely on that teacher.]
If the Mahayana teacher whom you rely upon must possess those qualities as
stated above then what about the disciple/ student who rely upon such a
teacher? What are the defining characteristics that such a student should
have?
The three characteristics of a student are:
   1. Nonpartisan (nonbiased)
   2. Intelligent
   3. Diligent (hardworking)
If the student who relies on the teacher possesses these three defining
characteristics of being nonpartisan, intelligent and diligent, this
student will be able to see the qualities of the teacher as qualities. The
student will not see the qualities of the teacher as faults. The other
thing is that if the student/ disciple possess these three defining
characteristics then the good qualities of the fellow listeners will also
appear as good qualities and not as faults.
If the disciple does not possess these three characteristics, under the
influence of his/ her own faults will cause him/her to see even an
extremely pure teacher to have faults.
Next is the explaining the three characteristics themselves.
The first is the characteristics of nonpartisan or nonbiased. Nonpartisan
means not to take sides i.e. not to like those who you considered to be on
your side and to have aversion for those who are on the other side.
What happen if one is not nonpartisan? If one is not nonpartisan, one would
take sides. If you are biased or partisan, you will be obstructed/ hindered
by your bias, therefore you will not able to see the good qualities.
Because of you taking sides, it obstruct you from seeing good qualities.
Because of this, one will not discover the good meaning of the excellent
teachings.
For example, in relation to our teacher, if we are students then we have a
teacher. There is this idea that you are you and the teacher is somebody
else. This is the concept: others and oneself. If one holds on strongly to
that concept, then under the influence of one’s own attachment, one holds
on to one’s own truth- so one think that whatever one think is correct.
Based on that, you may not be able realize the good intention or the good
explanation that are given by the teacher. This is because you are holding
on to your own truth/ your own view; you think that what you believe is
right although that may not be in accord with reality. But if you think in
such a way then you may not be able to benefit from the excellent
explanation or the intent of the teacher.

B Explaining the specifics of the [various] characteristics in detail
In this regard “impartiality” (“unbiased”) means being without bias. If you
have a bias, it will make you obscured and you will not perceive positive
qualities, due to which the meaning of excellent explanations is not found.
It is just as it says in Essence of the Middle Way:
   With a biased - thus anguished - mind
   peace can never be realised.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 76: With respect to these three
characteristics, "nonpartisan" means not to take sides. If you are
partisan, you will be obstructed by your bias and will not recognize good
qualities. Because of this, you will not discover the meaning of good
teachings. As Bhavaviveka states in his Heart of the Middle Way:
   Through taking sides the mind is distressed,
   Whereby you will never know peace. ]

To be biased means to be attached to one’s own approach and to hate other
people’s approach religious system. Having examined something like this in
your own continuum, you should give it up.
[Alternative translation LRCM  V1  page  76:  "Taking  sides"  is  to  have
attachment for your own religious system and hostility toward others'. Look
for it in your own mind and then discard it.]
We should see if we are partisan. If we discover that we are taking sides
then we should discard it; that is if we want to be a student who possesses
the defining characteristics.

If you wonder whether that by itself is sufficient: even though impartial,
someone to whom good ways of explaining appear as faulty ones, due to not
having the intelligence to distinguish them, is not a suitable vessel.
Therefore one needs to have the intelligence that understands those two.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1  page  76:  Question:  Is  just  that  one
characteristic enough?
Reply: Though  nonpartisan,  if  you  do  not  have  the  mental  force  to
distinguish between correct paths of good explanation and counterfeit paths
of false  explanation,  you  are  not  fit  to  listen  to  the  teachings.
Therefore, you must have the intelligence that understands both  of  these.
By this account you will give up what is unproductive, and then adopt  what
is productive.]
On top of being nonpartisan, we need to be intelligent. Intelligent means
we need to be able to distinguish between good explanation and faulty
explanation. If you don’t have this intelligent, you are not able to
distinguish. Then you will not take up or adopt those good explanations and
there is a danger that you might hold on to faulty explanation as being
correct or being good. There is a danger that one might discard good
explanation and adopt bad or faulty explanation. There is danger that this
may happen. Therefore we need also to be intelligent.

Are those two sufficient? Even if one has the two, [impartiality and
intelligence], someone who is just like the listener to the Dharma in a
[lifeless] picture is not a suitable vessel. Therefore one [also] needs to
have great endeavor.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page  76:  Question:  Are  just  these  two
enough?
Reply: Though having both of these, if, like a drawing of a  person  who  is
listening to the teachings, you are inactive, you are not fit to  listen  to
the teachings. Therefore, you must have great diligence.]
The third defining characteristics, being diligent is very important; that
means one should be able to work hard, basically to have joyous
perseverance. Otherwise one may end up like a drawing of a person because a
drawing of a person is lifeless; it doesn’t do anything.

The commentary states that adding the two, respect for the Dharma and the
expounder of Dharma  as well as an attentive mind, five [characteristics]
are set forth.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 76:  Candrakirti's  commentary  says,
"After adding the three qualities of the student to the  two  qualities  of
being focused and having respect for the teaching and its instructor, there
are a total of five qualities."]
If you add these two -being respect and being focused for the teaching and
the instructor- you have five qualities.

C Specifics of achieving the conducive conditions and eliminating the
adverse conditions for having the four characteristics
That being so there are four:
   1) great endeavour  with regard to the Dharma,
   2) an excellently attentive mind while listening,
   3) great respect in the Dharma and the expounder of Dharma and
   4) holding to good explanations having rejected faulty ones.
Intelligence is a conducive circumstance for those four and the
impartiality is what eliminates adverse circumstances.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 77: Then, these five qualities can  be
reduced to four:
   1. striving very diligently at the teaching,
   2. focusing the mind well when listening to the teaching,
   3. having great respect for the teaching and its instructor, and
   4. discarding bad explanations and retaining good explanations.
Having intelligence is the favorable condition that  gives  rise  to  these
four. Being nonpartisan gets rid of the  unfavorable  condition  of  taking
sides.]
We have five qualities. However, there are four here. These four that we
have just looked at are the favorable condition. The quality of being
nonpartisan eliminates the unfavorable condition. Here it says intelligence
is the favorable condition that gives rise to these four. ‘Those four’
means those four characteristics but in some commentaries, instead of
saying those four, it says intelligence is the favorable condition for the
fourth characteristic; which is you are able to discard bad explanations
and you retain the good explanations.

D The need to strive for those characteristics
You should examine whether or not all the attributes that would make you
suitable for being guided by a spiritual teacher are complete and cultivate
joy, if they are. If they are not complete, you should strive henceforth
including future lives at the causes for making them complete to make them
complete before your next life.
[Alternative  translation  LRCM  V1  page  77:  Investigate  whether  these
attributes that make you suitable to be led by a guru are complete; if they
are complete, cultivate delight. If they are incomplete, you must  make  an
effort to obtain the causes that will complete them before your next  life.
Therefore, know the qualities of a listener.  If  you  do  not  know  their
defining characteristics, you will not engage in an  investigation  to  see
whether they are complete, and will thereby ruin your great purpose.]
Earlier in the section, we were talking about the defining characteristics
of the guru. If the guru who wishes to have students/ disciples, it says:
‘those who wishes to have students should understand the characteristics
and strive to possess them’ i.e. those who aspiring to be teacher should
strive to possess those defining characteristics. Likewise, from the
perspective of the student, if you want to rely on the teacher, then you as
a student ‘should investigate whether you possess these qualities that make
you a suitable vessel that allow you to be guided or taken care of by a
teacher’. So both sides must strive.
This is a very good piece of advice. If you want to have a student then you
must strive to possess the defining characteristics that would allow you to
have a student. If you want to be a fully qualified student/disciple then
you should also strive to possess those qualities that make you a suitable
student/ disciple.
After having explained the defining characteristics of the guru and the
defining characteristics of the student, how should a student who possesses
these defining characteristics rely on a teacher who possesses the
necessary defining characteristics as well?  Next we are going to look at
how that particular kind of student should rely. In this text, it is stated
very clearly and without any ambiguity what kind of teacher you should look
for and what are the defining characteristics; and you as a student, what
kind of student you should be and what are the qualities you should
possess. Only then comes the explanation on how you should rely on the
teacher.

2B4A-1B3  The way he relies on him
A Explanation of the need to rely on someone with the characteristics
B The actual manner of relying on someone who has the characteristics

2B4A-1B3A Explanation of the need to rely on someone with the
characteristics
Third: Thus someone possessed of [the characteristics of] a vessel should
examine – the way explained above - whether or not a teacher has the
characteristics and if so, obtain the kindness of the Dharma from him.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 77: One who has these  qualifications
of a suitable recipient of the teachings should investigate well whether  a
guru has the  requisite  characteristics  as  explained  above.  Then  this
student should receive the teaching's kind words from a qualified teacher.]
With regards to the issue on the topic of relying on the teacher, everyone
is different. There are some people who will just take everyone as their
teachers whereas there are some people who prefer to just stick to a small
numbers of teachers; one or two. Everyone is different because of different
views. You often hear people asking; “Is it better for me to have many
teachers or is it better for me to have a few teachers?” Perhaps as
illustration for this particular question of whether one should have many
teachers or whether one should just stick to a few teachers, two examples
were given in the great treatise of the Stages of Path to Enlightenment
–Lamrim Chen Mo.
[LRCM V1 page 77]: Even so, the biographies of Geshe Drom-don-ba and Sung-
pu-wa are not in accord with each other. Sung-pu-wa had many gurus and
listened to any correct explanation. Thus, when coming from Kham, he even
listened to a lay practitioner explaining the teachings alongside the road.
His disciples said that this was an inappropriate way to receive the
teachings, to which he replied, "Do not say that. I have received two
benefits." Geshe Drom-don-ba had few gurus -not more than five.
Bo-do-wa and Gom-ba-rin-chen, themselves gurus, discussed which of these
two ways was better. They agreed that Geshe Drom-don-ba's way was better in
these times when those with untrained minds still see faults in the teacher
and lose faith. What they have said seems to be very true. Therefore, you
should have few teachers.
The essence is that Sung-pu-wa’s reply to the objection by saying: “Do not
say whatever I have done was inappropriate because I have received two
benefits.”  I guess you have to ask him what the two benefits were as they
are not mentioned in the text. This was Sung-pu-wa’s as an example of
someone who relied on many teachers and Geshe Drom-don-ba who only had five
gurus in his life: three from Tibet and two from India.
So, there are two different approaches. Bo-do-wa and Gom-ba-rin-chen, these
two great masters, were discussing which approach was better.  Both of them
agreed that Geshe Drom-don-ba’s approach is better for those whose minds
are still untrained and therefore would see faults in the teachers. That is
the very essence of their conclusion. If your mind is still untrained, you
tend to see faults in the teachers. So, the more teachers you take on, the
more faults you will see. Then there is a danger that you would lose faith.
Since that is the case, if your mind is still untrained then it is better
to stick to a small numbers of gurus. If you mind is pure and you see
everything as perfect and pure, i.e. you don’t see faults, then the number
of teachers you can have should not be a concern i.e. you can rely on
anyone as your teacher. But if that is not the case, if your mind is still
untrained and you still see faults, then it is better to stick to just a
few gurus.
What we have just discussed here is not in the Middle Length Lamrim but it
is in the Lamrim Chen Mo -the extensive Lamrim. I thought perhaps bringing
this up will be beneficial to you because this question comes up quite
often: “Should I have many teachers or should I just stick to a few
teachers?” You see it all boils down on to the individual’s ability. There
is no one definite answer. There is no one correct answer; you should have
many teachers or you can only have few teachers. It is up to the
individual.

2B4A-1B3B The actual manner of relying on someone who has the
characteristics
1 The manner of relying in thought
2 The manner of relying through actions
With regard to the manner of relying on a spiritual teacher from whom you
generally obtain the kindness of the Dharma and who, especially, guides
your mind well by means of perfectly complete instructions, there are two
points: the manner of relying in thought and the manner of relying through
actions.
The way of relying is basically two folds:
   1) Relying correctly in thought
   2) Relying correctly in action

2B4A-1B3B-1 The manner of relying in thought
A The root, training in confidence   faith
B Through remembering his kindness, developing respect
The first one has two points: the root, training in confidence   faith and
through remembering his kindness, developing respect.
What is the way to rely on the teacher? How many ways are there? Two.
What are the two? Relying in thought and relying in action.
What is relying in thought or what is relying on the teacher in general? To
rely on a teacher or to devote to a teacher does not mean that you
necessarily have to be with him/her; i.e. it only occurs in his/ her
presence. That is not the meaning of devoting/ relying to the guru.
Does it mean that then you have to act as a servant to the teacher or
perhaps attendant or whatever? Does that necessarily mean that you are
devoting or relying on the teacher? No.
When we say “to rely on the teacher” or “to devote to the teacher”, there
are two ways:
      -to devote in thought and
      -to devote in action.
With regards to the first one, devoting in thought or relying in thought,
what does that mean?
The root is training in faith and then by remembering his kindness, you
develop respect.

2B4A-1B3B-1A  The root, training in confidence faith
1 Explanation of confidence faith as the basis of all qualities
First: In the Jewel Tala Dharani it says:
The preparatory practice of confidence bears- like a mother all positive
qualities, guards them and makes them increase.
This says that confidence gives birth to positive qualities that have not
yet arisen and, once they have come into existence, it sustains and
increases them.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1  page  80:   The  Formulae  of  the  Three
Jewels' Blaze  states:
    Faith is the prerequisite of all good qualities -
    A procreator of them, like a mother
    Who then protects and increases them.]
Here it says that faith gives birth to positive qualities that have not yet
arisen and once they come into existent, faith sustains and increases them.

In the Ten Dharmas it also says:
      That which guides  to liberation,
      the foremost yana  is confidence faith.
      Therefore, the intelligent,
      rely on pursuing confidence faith.
      In those who are without confidence faith.
      wholesome qualities do not arise,
      Likewise, in seeds that were burnt by fire,
      no green sprout can germinate.
In these terms confidence faith is said to be the foundation of all
positive qualities through forward and reverse pervasion.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 80:  Also the Ten Teaching Sutra
states:
   Faith is the best of vehicles,
   Definitely delivering you  into buddhahood.
   Therefore, persons of intelligence
   Rely on the guidance of faith.
   Virtues will not arise
   In people who have no faith,
   Just as green sprouts do not grow
   From seeds scorched by fire.
Thus, in light of what you gain when it is present and what you lose when
it is not present, faith is the basis of all good qualities.]

2 Identification of confidence faith
Generally speaking, there are many types of confidence faith: in the
Jewels, in actions and effects, and in the Four Noble Truths, however, here
it is confidence faith in the spiritual master.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 80:  In  general,  faith  is  of  many
types - faith in the three jewels, faith in karma and its effects, faith  in
the four noble truths. However, here we are speaking of faith in the guru.]
The faith in this context is the faith in the guru. The faith is cultivated
through seeing the good qualities of the teacher. Through seeing the good
qualities of the teacher, your mind becomes clear and your mind is filled
with joy.
Usually the example of a body of dirty water, you have a body of water that
is contaminated by pollutants. Like what we do with the Newater, some
chemicals were put into it and the pollutants will dissolve. When the
pollutants are dissolved or removed from the water, the water becomes very
clean and clear. Likewise, your mind maybe contaminated with the pollutants
of seeing faults in the teacher. So through remembering the qualities of
the teacher, then the aspects of seeing faults in the teacher in your mind
-those pollutants- are removed. Through this, your mind become clean and
clear. When your minds become clean and clear through such a process, it
becomes like the foundation for all the other qualities to develop.
In almost everything that we do in life including our study here, in order
to meet with success, basically it boils down to effort/ joyous
perseverance i.e. working at whatever we are trying to achieve. In order to
want to study, basically we need to put in effort. By putting in effort
then we will study. In order for the effort to arise, we first must want to
study. The interest of wanting to study must precede the effort.
Effort must be preceded by the desire for that goal. Let’s say your goal is
to study, therefore effort must be preceded by the interest. Interest can
only arise if you have faith of conviction that it is good for you. In
order to have the faith of conviction you must see the qualities; the
benefits for you. If you are convinced of the qualities/ benefits then you
will have an interest. That interest will lead to effort.
Therefore we need that faith of conviction that this is correct and good.
That arises from seeing the qualities i.e. what is in there for you. If you
see that, then you are convinced and you have the faith of conviction. That
will inspire you to want to actualize whatever it is. That will give rise
to the interest. Then the interest will give rise to effort. From this you
can see how faith is the root of all good qualities.
In this context, the faith that we are talking about is the faith in the
guru/ teacher and the faith that we are supposed to develop in relation to
the teacher is clear faith.
In general, there are three kinds of faith:
     1. Clear faith
     2. Faith of conviction
     3. Aspiring faith
Clear faith – In the context of correctly relying on the teacher in
thought, the faith here is clear faith; which means that through seeing the
qualities of the teacher, the mind becomes clean, clear and filled with
joy.
Faith of conviction – For example, when you think about dependent
origination or cause and effect, you come to be convinced of them. Then you
will develop faith. That is what we called faith of conviction
Aspiring faith – Let’s take the four noble truths. By analyzing the four
noble truths correctly, you come to understand that the first two truths
-True Suffering and True Origin- are the objects to be abandoned.  Then you
realized that True Cessation and True Path are what we must achieve. One
then develops this aspiring faith. You are aspired to want to actualize the
True Path and True Cessation.
One essential point to understand/ to realize is that faith is the very
foundation/ the basis for all good qualities.
Whatever the object in question, if you were to reflect on the qualities of
that particular object or person then you come to be convinced of the worth
of the object or of the person. That conviction will give rise to an
interest from your own sides to want to obtain that object or to achieve
that goal. This interest/ aspiration then give rise to effort. By putting
in effort we will achieve the qualities. This is why we say faith is the
basis of all good qualities.
Here we are talking about cultivating faith in the teacher/ guru. In order
to cultivate/ generate faith in the teacher, you must stop its opponent
force -the conditions that hinder or obstruct the development of such
faith; basically the mind of non-faith. In order to generate faith in the
teacher, you first must stop the lack of faith or no faith in the teacher.
How does one stop the lack of faith in the teacher?
Why do we not have faith in the teacher?
Why do we lose faith?
Primarily this is due to the conception of faults: the mind that believes
and looking for faults in the teacher. That is what causes us to lose faith
and to not have faith. Logically speaking, if you want to develop faith,
you have to do something to this conception of faults. So this is what you
have to think about. If you don’t see any faults then there is nothing to
discuss about because you have faith all the time. The reason why there is
lack of faith is basically through seeing faults. The whole issue rest on
what we can do with this mind of seeing faults. There are many quotations
and also lines of reasoning that are employed in the text to help us
overcome the conception of faults in the guru but nevertheless we still see
faults. The whole point of bringing up all these quotations and even the
lines of reasoning is to overcome the conception of faults. But when we
look at those quotations and the lines of reasoning we found faults with
them. We find faults with the methods that are supposed to help us to
overcome the conception of faults. We will talk about this in the next
lesson. Anyway I guess this is the situation with us. That is where we get
stuck.
Student 1: On page 24 of the text: “In these terms confidence faith is said
to be the foundation of all positive qualities through forward and reverse
pervasion.” Can you please explain the term forward and reverse pervasion?
Ven Gyurme: As an alternate translation for that [LRCM page 80]: Thus, in
light of what you gain when it is present and what you lose when it is not
present, faith is the basis of all good qualities. Basically, it means what
will happen if you have faith, what will happen if you do not have faith.
Khen Rinpoche: If there is faith, all those qualities that have been
mentioned in the quotation, for example, will arise. If the faith is not
there then one will not experience all those benefits.
Student 2: For the term conception of faults, you said untrained mind will
see faults. Does it mean that a train mind will not see faults because of
the way faults are conceptualized?
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that if the minds are trained, there will never
be any faults?
Student 2: Is that the implication?
Khen Rinpoche: Perhaps it is not like that. If you have faith, the stronger
the faith the less likely that you will see the faults. For example, when
we think so highly of ourselves, we think that we are damn good, then we
don’t see any of our faults. The point is this: if you have faith, let’s
say, even if there is a fault, it does not affect your faith. It is even
possible to use one’s seeing of fault to develop one’s faith.
It is not about not seeing faults. It is about the fault not affecting your
faith. If you train your mind to have faith, even if you see fault, it
doesn’t affect your faith and perhaps with training, you can even increase
your faith.
To summarize: If you have faith, you will not see many faults. Even if you
see faults, it doesn’t affect your faith and may even increase your faith.


