Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson55.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.265993
================================================================================


You should always remember how fortunate you are to have an opportunity to
come to class. At the beginning of the class, we do prayers by bringing
Buddha to our mind and then generate faith in him. On that basis, we recite
the Praises to Shakyamuni Buddha. Just to be able to do this show how
fortunate we are. By having some confidence and faith in the Buddha, even
just a little faith itself, is not an easy thing. The fact of having some
faith in the Buddha does indeed make our human life precious. On top of
just having some faith and belief in the Buddha, now we have the
opportunity and interest to learn the Buddha’s teaching, and also has the
opportunity to listen and reflect on the Buddha’s teaching is really
amazing.
It is possible that from time to time people may think that it is of no big
deal to be able to listen to the Buddha’s teaching. Some people might just
listen and study the Buddha’s teaching but they do not practice it as they
may think there is no point of doing that. It is not like that. Just to
have opportunity to listen to the Buddha’s teaching is really amazing.
Great transformation has already taken place just by studying the Buddha’s
teaching. For example, we have heard the teaching on the effects of
committing the ten non-virtuous actions. From this, we have some ideas of
the fruitional effects and the kind of sufferings from committing the ten
non-virtuous actions. By having heard this teaching, itself can remind us
when we are about to engage in these ten non-virtuous actions. Just because
of having heard the teaching, at least there is chance for us to think
twice and stop ourselves from committing these ten non-virtuous actions. If
we are able to stop ourselves from committing these ten non-virtuous
actions, don’t you think this is the result of having heard the teaching on
the ten non-virtuous actions?
We also have heard the instructions on cultivating love and compassion. We
also have heard about the disadvantages of anger and the benefits of
cultivating love and compassion. Just merely hearing these instructions or
topics they do have an impact on us. They do help us to deal with our anger
when anger arises. When we think of what we have heard, at least there are
some reliefs in our mind such as we can do something to our anger. Because
of having heard the teaching on love and compassion it helps us to
reinforce some kind of love and good heart. We do definitely experience
some transformations and changes just by hearing the teachings. Ideally, on
top of hearing the teaching, we should reflect and familiarize ourselves
with the teaching through meditation. Then definitely there will be some
transformations and changes. Without leaving it to just at the level of
mere belief or faith, we should seize the opportunity to learn, analyze and
reflect on the Buddha’s teaching. We should constantly remind ourselves of
how fortunate we are to be able to do so, the opportunity to learn, to have
some interest and also the ability to learn. While our life is still stable
and are not tormented by some serious illnesses, it is really fortunate to
be able to do all these and having the opportunities. We have to remind
ourselves on these.
As I have mentioned in the refuge section, we go refuge to the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha. We go refuge to the Buddha and have faith in him. After
having gone for refuge to the Buddha, I think the best commitment that we
can make to the Buddha is to make a promise or pledge to learn the Buddha’s
teaching as much as we can and then reflect on those teachings. As you know
that the Dharma is the actual refuge, so after having gone refuge to the
Dharma we can make the commitment of trying our best to keep the mind in
positive state as much as we are able to. The whole purpose of going for
refuge to the Dharma is to carry out the promise of keeping the mind in the
virtuous state as much as we can. In order for us to increase our virtuous
state of mind we need help from the surrounding people who are able to
encourage us in virtues and people who are able to act as the condition for
us to further develop the virtuous state of mind. We need to consider and
have respect for those fellow practitioners who are able to perform this
function. In our context here, as everyone coming together as a class, so
the people whom you are going to associate or whom you have been closely
associating with for some time, there should be mutual respect for one
another and as much as possible reduce any feeling of hostility and
unhappiness for one another and increase the sense of consideration and
care for one another.

Exchanging Self and Other
We are now at the section on “Eliminating the two obstacles to training the
mind in this attitude of exchanging self and other.”
[LRCM V2 Page 53]  There are two obstacles to training in this  attitude  of
exchanging self and other:
1. You make a categorical differentiation between people who are  happy  or
suffering—yourself and others—making them as different as blue and  yellow.
Then, you accomplish your happiness and remove your suffering  because  you
think of them as "mine," and you neglect others'  happiness  and  suffering
because you think of them as "belonging to others."
This is one of the obstacles. Basically, it is a mind which feels that one
has no connection with others whatsoever; self and other do not exist in
dependent on one another. Based on this idea, we do not engage in
eliminating the suffering of others and we do not engage in thing that will
achieve the happiness of others.
The remedy for the attitude of this obstacle is below:
[LRCM V2 Page  53]  Therefore,  the  remedy  for  this  is  not  to  make  a
categorical  distinction  between  self  and  other  as  being   essentially
different. Rather, understand that self and  other  are  mutually  dependent
such that when you are aware of self, you are aware of other; and  when  you
are aware of other, you are aware of self. It is like being  aware  of  near
mountains and distant mountains, for example. Relative to your  being  here,
you think of a mountain there in the distance as being a  distant  mountain,
yet when you go to this  distant  mountain,  you  think  of  it  as  a  near
mountain. So the awareness of self and other is not like the awareness of  a
color, for, regardless of what color blue is related to, you  are  aware  of
just blue and are not aware of some other color.
The text is saying that just like near mountain and distant mountains,
oneself and others are also relative.
[LRCM V2 Page 54] Moreover, Santideva's Compendium of Trainings states:
   By becoming accustomed to the equality of self and other,
   The spirit of enlightenment becomes firm.
   Self and other are interdependent.
   Like this side and the other side of a river, they are false.
   The other bank is not in itself "other"; In relation to someone else it
   is "this bank."
   Similarly, "self" does not exist in its own right; In relation to
   someone else it is "other."
Thus Santideva indicates that self and other are merely posited in  relation
to a particular reference point and do not essentially exist.
So we have to think how the self and others do not exist by their own
entities but rather just posited in dependent upon one another.
Another obstacle in training the mind in the attitude of exchanging self
and others is as below:
[LRCM V2 Page 54]  2. You must remove the obstacle of thinking, "I will  not
make an effort to dispel others' suffering because  others'  suffering  does
not harm me." It would be like not accumulating wealth in your youth out  of
fear of suffering in your old age because you think that your  suffering  in
old age does no harm to you in your youth.
The obstacle is this: other people suffering are none of my business. They
can continue to suffer as their suffering does not affect me whatsoever and
it does not harm me. The text is saying by thinking in such a way is just
like saying that there is no need to save for retirement for your old age
because the suffering that you may have when you are old do not harm you
now.
[LRCM V2 Page 54] Or, as stated in Engaging in  the  Bodhisattva  Deeds,  it
would be like not alleviating the pain in your foot with your hand,  because
your foot is "other." Old age and youth (or  similarly,  former  and  future
lives) are just illustrations; this principle applies also  to  morning  and
evening, former and later days, and so forth.
When you have pain in the foot it does not really affect your hand, but in
reality when you have pain in your foot your hand will does something to
your foot.  Based on this, as your foot has nothing to do with your hand,
why your hand has to do something to your foot?
Then there is a qualm:
[LRCM V2 Page 54] Qualm: But old age and youth are one  continuum  and  the
foot and hand are one collection; therefore they are not the same  as  self
and other.
Response: "Continuum" and "collection" are designated to many  moments  and
to many parts; they do not have a self-sufficient essence.  The  "self"  of
yourself and the "self" of others must be posited to  a  collection  and  a
continuum, so self and other are not established by way of an essence  that
can be posited independently.
Question: Can you explain the answer?
The qualm is that you cannot talk about old age and youth in term of
continuum and hand and foot in term of collection being the self and
others.
The response to the qualm is that whether you are talking about continuum
or collection, the continuum does not exist as a continuum by way of its
own entity. Similarly, the collection does not exist as a collection by way
of its own entity.
The thing to be established is how the continuum or the collection does not
exist by way of its own entity.
When you talk about your own collection or continuum, they cannot exist by
way of its own entity. Similarly, when you talk about the continuum of
others or collection of others, you cannot talk about them existing by way
of its own entity as well.
Self is imputed on the basis of the continuum. One’s collection is also
imputed in dependent on one’s collection. It is the same thing on others.
Some other person is designated/ imputed on his/her own continuum. So this
shows that whether it is oneself or others, both do not exist by way of its
own entity.  So, both are similar in the sense that they do not exist by
way of its own entity.
The reason why we are unable to develop love and compassion for others
boils down to the feeling inside us that one and others are inherently
separate; like self and others are established by way of its own entity.
Based on this, we make the distinction between self and others. From this
comes anger and so forth. By having this feeling that oneself and others
are established by way of its own entity, then come the categorically
distinction between oneself and others. Because one makes this kind of
distinction, then anger and attachment arise.
Here it is trying to establish how self and others are established by way
of its own entity on the basis of establishing how one’s continuum or one’s
collection and other’s continuum or others’ collection does not exist by
way of their own entities.
It is really important to think about this answer that respond to the qualm
over and over again. You have to think about this and then discuss because
sometime just by looking at the answer, you may be stuck and not knowing
what it is trying to say. Sometime when we look at the answer it seem that
we understand them but when we look at it again we may end up not knowing
what it is talking about. So it is important to think over and over again
and discuss until it become clearer.

Next the text states that it is possible to exchange self and others if one
is accustomed to this way of thinking. It is a matter of familiarization.
[LRCM V2 Page 54]  However, since beginningless time you have found your
own suffering unbearable because you have been conditioned to self-
cherishing. Therefore, if you become conditioned to cherishing others, you
will give rise to an attitude of finding others' suffering unbearable.
Next is the actual way of exchanging self and others. The actual way of
meditating on exchanging self and other is that at the beginning one has to
think well about the faults of self-cherishing and the advantage of
cherishing others. This is something we have discussed before. This is
something we ourselves have to see or realize of how self-cherishing have
many disadvantages while cherishing others has many benefits. In
particular, we have to realize for ourselves of how self-cherishing is the
door to all the suffering and the root of all the problems and how
cherishing others is the source of all happiness. We should be able to see
how self-cherishing is the real enemy. This is important.
As mentioned in the sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction, remember the
kindness of all sentient beings and how they were our mothers and how they
were kind to us and so forth. So by remembering how sentient beings have
been kind in such a way then we try to develop the sense of closeness
without feeling distant from anyone. From our own side, by realizing how
there isn’t anyone out there who hasn’t been our close friends or loved
ones then one seek to develop an equal love and compassion for all.
Sometime we do think and believe that the numbers of people who help us are
very few and there are many who are harming us, and there are vast majority
who neither help us not harm us. Sometime we do think we are indifferent to
vast majority of people because from our perspective they are neutral. In
that sense, it becomes difficult for us to have love and compassion for
them. But in reality everyone is precious. As mentioned before, we have
seen how every sentient being is the source of our happiness; starting from
the happiness that comes from getting food, reputation and clothing. All
these have to come from others. We have to depend on others. Even achieving
a good rebirth as human being or as celestial being in the future has to
come from sentient beings. If we think of the practices of love and
compassion, I think love and compassion can only be developed because
sentient beings exist. Similarly, the generation of bodhicitta is said to
have sky of benefits and that bodhicitta is generated in dependent on the
sentient beings. There isn’t such a thing such as love, compassion or
bodhicitta being generated without depending on sentient beings. So in this
sense, love, compassion and bodhicitta can only be realized in dependent on
sentient beings. If we just leave out one sentient being, then there is no
way for us to develop the real love and compassion, and of course, there is
no way for us to develop bodhicitta. If we leave out even one sentient
being then there is no love and compassion. There is no way to develop the
actual bodhicitta. Therefore, in order to develop the actual bodhicitta we
need every living being. So, from this we can see everyone is equal and
precious. In order to for one’s realization of one’s love, compassion and
bodhicitta to increase more and more and also to actualize all those
realizations of path and ground up to the achievement of enlightenment, all
these qualities and realizations have to come by depending on sentient
beings. If we analyze and think about this, we can see how all sentient
beings do matter and are precious. When we think about this then it becomes
obvious that there isn’t such sentient being that isn’t matter or is
neither helpful nor harmful. This is not the case as everyone is equally
precious and beneficial. By thinking alone this line, we have to develop
love and compassion and make no distinction between sentient beings.
Another way of equalizing love and compassion for everyone is to remember
impermanence; just as we ourselves are impermanent, all others are also
impermanent. So we are the same as being impermanent. For that reason,
there is no real reason being so attached to one and to be angry at other.
So this equalizes the feeling of love and compassion towards all sentient
beings. If we think about this from others perspective, similar to the
quote from Kamalashila’s Middling Stages of Meditation, others are the same
in wanting happiness and not wanting any suffering i.e. every living being
wants to be happy and not wanting to suffer as they all the same in being
deprived of happiness and being tormented by suffering. So it does not make
any sense to love some and not others. It also does not make any sense of
wanting to work for some and not working for others. When we think about
others, whether the person to be the loved one or an enemy, we also have to
realize that their status of being friend and enemy is not permanent
because their status does change. Like the near mountain and the distant
mountains, friends and foes are only relative as they are not established
by way of their own entities. Due to some slightest change in condition, an
enemy can become a friend. Likewise, due to some small conditions, a friend
can become enemy. So the whole concept of friend and enemy is like the near
mountain and the distant mountain. They are relative and they are not
established from their own sides. In that sense they are all equal. With
such reflection, we try to develop the sense of even-mindedness. Anyway,
the instruction of exchanging self and others is an instruction for
developing this even attitude with regards to love and compassion and
having the wish to benefit sentient beings; i.e. to develop an even
attitude of such mind towards everyone.
[LRCM V2 Page 59]  Atisha said, "Tibet recognizes 'bodhisattvas' who do not
know how to train in love and compassion." Someone then asked, "Well  then,
how should bodhisattvas practice?" He replied, "They must learn  in  stages
from the beginning."
Lang-ri-tang-ba said, "Sha-bo-ba and I have eighteen human  strategies  and
one horse strategy for a total of nineteen. Our human strategy is simply to
develop the spirit of highest enlightenment and then learn to  do  whatever
we do for the sake of living beings. Our horse strategy is this: since self-
cherishing keeps that spirit of enlightenment which  has  not  arisen  from
arising, and destabilizes that which has arisen and prevents its  increase,
train by keeping self-cherishing away and doing what you can to damage  it.
Cherish living beings and do whatever you can to help them."
Kam-lung-ba said, "Through our disinterest in living beings, who  are  what
is most important, they will also do the same [i.e., not bring the  benefit
of virtues] to us."
Who are considered to be the loved ones to those bodhisattvas who have
developed bodhicitta?  The loved ones of the bodhisattvas are the sentient
beings. In order to help the numberless sentient beings numberless
strategies are needed. The text here mentioned the eighteen human
strategies and one horse strategy.
The eighteen human strategies are just a number. What it means here is that
as there are numberless sentient beings then there are numberless
characteristics so numberless strategies are required. In some text, the
eighteen human strategies are listed out.
For the one horse strategy, the bodhisattvas have only one enemy; which is
the self-cherishing.
Next is how it is appropriate to put effort into training many methods in
order to develop this bodhicitta.
[LRCM V2 Page 59] Whether you plant the roots of the Mahayana  or  not,  or
whether you have genuinely entered the Mahayana or not, is all founded upon
this [love, compassion, cherishing others, and the like]. Therefore  always
consider what you should do to develop these. It is  excellent  if  you  do
develop them; if you have not, do not let it remain that way.  Always  rely
on a teacher who gives this kind of teaching. Always associate with friends
who are training their minds in this way. Constantly look at the scriptures
and their commentaries which  describe  these.  Amass  the  collections  as
causes  for  these.  Clear  away  the  obstructions  which  prevent  these.
Moreover, if you train your mind in this way, you will  definitely  acquire
all the seeds for developing these, so this work is not insignificant; take
joy in it. The Great Elder [Atisha] said:
   One who wishes to enter the door of the Mahayana teachings
   Should develop through effort over eons
   The spirit of enlightenment, which is like the sun that clears away
   darkness
   And the moon that quells the torment of heat.
This paragraph talks about the conditions and the things that we need to do
in order to move towards developing bodhicitta.
First, always rely on a teacher who gives this kind of teaching.
If that is not sufficient, always associate with friends who are training
their minds in this way.
If that again is not sufficient, constantly look at the scriptures and
their commentaries which describe these.
If that again is not sufficient, amass the collections as causes for these
and clear away the obstructions which prevent these.
We have to accumulate merits and purify the mind of obscurations. We have
to constantly go back to the teachings and texts that explain this
instruction. We have to rely on liked-minded trainees as companion and rely
on virtuous friends. If we put these conditions and familiarize our mind
with these instructions at least we will be able to leave very strong
imprints on the mind.
Here is the end of the exchanging self and other.
Student 1: Is bodhicitta a mental factor or a main mind?
Khen Rinpoche: Bodhicitta should be a main mind. Don’t worry about the
difference between mind generation and bodhicitta. In essence, they both
are main minds. I guess their differences are made on the basis of the
basis. Bodhicitta exist in the continuum of the bodhisattva.
Student 2: There are two types of bodhicitta: aspirational and engaged.
Both exist up to the continuum of sentient beings. Then there is mind
generation that exists up to the buddha ground. I got the impression that
mind generation and bodhicitta are the same.
Khen Rinpoche: At the beginning of the sevenfold cause-and-effect
instruction, the text translates it as the spirit of enlightenment; which
we generally say it as bodhicitta. We won’t be going into all these
discussions. If we want to be specific we have to bring in the philosophy.
The actual term should be Mahayana mind generation but it is not translated
as this. Mind generation is basically developing very expansive mind and
essentially is the thought that come after wholehearted resolve which
think; “I am going to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient
beings.”  If we want to look at the division of the mind generation with
the thought “I am going to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all
sentient beings,” this mind does exist in the continuum of bodhisattva. It
also exists in the continuum of the Buddha. Because this mind which exist
in the continuum of the bodhisattva, it is called bodhicitta.
Student 2: When one achieves budhahood, what do you call?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You call it mind generation; you don’t
call it bodhicitta
Student 2: In the bodhisattva’s continuum, we can call it as bodhicitta or
mind generation. However, in the Buddhahood, we call it mind generation.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Yes
Student 2: What is Mahayana main mental knower?
Khen Rinpoche: It will come in the next module (Lorig).

Advice on coming exam
It seems that there are some people who are stressed about the exam. Don’t
worry as it is not going to be difficult. Having this kind of worry for the
exam is a worthless or pointless worry. The purpose for this exam is not
for ranking purpose. We are not interested to rank people; who are first
and who are second or who has how many marks. The purpose is to allow
yourself to see how much you have learned from coming to the class, from
reading and so forth. This is to allow yourself to know where you are and
how much you have learned. The exam will be easy. You don’t need to write a
lot. The exam only requires you to think and you don’t have to write as you
just need to answer either “True’ or “False”. This is to check how you are
able to think. Nobody will know how well you have done or your mark. Only
you know it. Most of time people are stressed because they worry people may
know how they have done. You don’t have to worry as nobody will know how
well you have done.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Only you know yourself. I think you don’t
worry about yourself. If you know yourself, are you worried? If other
people know your mark then you worry. If you know your own mark you are not
so worry. That why if you have good mark don’t show it to other people. If
you have bad mark, don’t show to other people. Keep it to yourself so you
have no worry.








