Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson52.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.106094
================================================================================


Meditation practice: Let us spend a few minutes to do some meditation. It
is important that during these few minutes, even for one or two minutes,
you should try to make sure your mind is alert. Sometimes you may use these
few minutes as an opportunity to relax instead of meditating. That is not
what meditation is. Of course this is not an ideal time of the day to do
meditation as everybody has just finished a long day work and is tired. On
top of that, I guess most of you have had your dinner. Naturally this is
the time for space out.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Naturally time for close your eyes and
sleep. Joking!
This is the situation but we will just try to meditate. Generate a little
bit of courage and determination and try to meditate for few minutes. As
usual, as much as possible, bring Buddha to the mind and visualize the flow
of nectar, make prayers and so forth.

The main practice in the Mahayana is developing a wish or intent to achieve
the welfare of others. “Others” here do not refer to any specific
individual or individuals; rather it means every single living being.
Having love and compassion and the desire to work or to achieve the welfare
of a specific individual is something, I guess, that every living being
would have. In our discussion on this topic here, we are not learning how
to develop love, compassion and the wish to accomplish the welfare of any
specific individual.  This is something we all know and everyone is doing
it.

The instruction that we are learning here is the instruction for developing
these unbiased love and unbiased compassion. Of course, we have to ask the
question: “Is it possible to develop unbiased love and unbiased compassion
that extends to every living being?” The teaching tell us that in order to
develop unbiased love and unbiased compassion, we must first develop even-
mindedness or impartiality towards everyone.
“Even-mindedness” means a mind that is not influenced either by attachment
or hostility. Without achieving even-mindedness, there is no way of
developing unbiased love and unbiased compassion.
In our root text, we are told to cultivate even-mindedness by first
focusing on a neutral person. After having some success then we are
supposed to cultivate even-mindedness by focusing on loved one. Only then
we move on to someone that is considered to be enemy. After that we should
gradually extend this attitude of even-mindedness towards all living
beings.
In the last session, we did look at the instructions:
 -for reducing the feeling of attachment that we have for our loved one and


 -for reducing hostility towards our enemies
The main method for reducing hostility and attachment is to reflect on how
nothing is certain in life or in samsara in general. Even if you look in
the context of one lifetime, you can see that enemies do become friends and
friends do become enemies. If you were to think about past lives and future
lives, it will also be the case as nothing is certain. Everyone out there
has equally harmed you and they also have equally benefited you. Therefore
based on this reason, the conclusion is that there is no real meaning in
getting upset and being so emotionally attached. So by reflecting on this
continuously, I guess, it is possible to reduce attachment and hostility
and eventually able to achieve some even-mindedness. For those of us who
are so much influenced by attachment and hostility, at the times when there
is a situation whereby a person becomes an enemy or someone is doing some
harm on us then we can think well; “How things are not certain and things
do change. There is no certainty”. I guess this will help to reduce the
feeling of hostility. If we do meditate according to what is being taught
in the text, I guess even-mindedness can be achieved. It is a matter of
trying it out and then putting it into practice. Of course, it is only
until we get some tastes, some experiences or some practical benefits, or
else it looks difficult.
Having affection for all beings
Having even-mindedness towards all sentient beings is extremely important
because it is the basis for developing unbiased love and unbiased
compassion. In order to develop unbiased love and unbiased compassion, it
is very important to be able to have affection for everyone and able to see
everyone as pleasant. Here it is translated as having affection for
everyone. What should we do to have affection for everyone in order to
develop unbiased love and unbiased compassion, to be able to see everyone
as very pleasant and to feel how everyone is matter to us? Here the text
mentioned the three points:
   1. Cultivating a recognition that all sentient beings are your mothers
   2. Cultivating a remembrance of their kindness.
   3. Cultivating the wish to repay your mothers’ kindness.
The first point to reflect on trying to develop affection for all sentient
beings is cultivating a recognition that all sentient beings are your
mothers. This involves recognizing how everyone has been our mothers before
and they will continue to be our mothers in the future.
How does the text establish that all sentient beings are our mothers?
   1. Cyclic existence has no beginning. Since cyclic existence is
      beginningless, our births in cyclic existence are also without
      beginning. So in between births, we must have died and has taken
      rebirths. In each of those times, we must have a mother. So in that
      sense, everyone has been our mothers.
   2. There is no way to claim that there isn’t a kind of body that we have
      never assumed in samsara. In order to assume all the different kind of
      bodies in samsara, we must have a mother.
It is emotionally difficult for us to understand how samsara has no
beginning as it cannot fit our mind. It is difficult to uphold that samsara
has a beginning and yet beginningless samsara is something we find it
difficult to accept.  If we look at our own existence, we think we have no
beginning.
Question: Is it better to say that we have a beginning or we have no
beginning?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Which one you want to choose? No
beginning? No end?
This is something we need to figure it out. There is no choice. Why isn’t
there a beginning? What is the problem if we say that there is a beginning?
What is wrong if we say that we all have a beginning? What is the reason
for samsara has no beginning? Why our own existence has no beginning?
In essence, the text is saying that all sentient beings have been our
mothers because:
   1. Cyclic existence has no beginning and
   2. Our own rebirths are without beginning.
For these reasons, therefore everyone has been our mothers and will
continue to be our mothers. Based on these reasonings, we would not be able
to find a sentient being who have never been our mothers.
[LRCM V2 Page 38: (i) Cultivating a recognition that all beings are your
mothers
Because cyclic existence is beginningless, your births are also without
beginning. Therefore you have died and been reborn time and time again.
There is absolutely no kind of body which you have not assumed in cyclic
existence. There is absolutely no place where you have not been born, and
there is no person who has not been a relative such as your mother.
Asanga's Levels of Yogic Deeds  cites a sutra as follows:
  I have difficulty seeing a place wherein you have not been born, gone to,
  or died in the distant past. I have difficulty seeing any person in the
  distant past who has not been your father, mother, uncle, aunt, sister,
  master, abbot, guru, or someone like a guru.
Moreover, all beings have not only previously been your mothers but will
also be your mothers in the future a limitless number of times. Reflect
upon this and become convinced that all beings have been your mothers. Once
you develop this conviction, you will then easily remember their kindness
and so forth. If you do not develop it, you will have no basis for
remembering their kindness.]
Once we are able to figure out with our own mind that how all sentient
beings have been our mothers and will also continue to be our mothers,
then we move on to the next step: cultivating the remembrance of their
kindness. In cultivating the remembrance of the kindness of all sentient
beings having been our mothers, the instruction is, first, to remember the
kindness of the mother of this life.
In general for most people, the mother is someone who is very kind. We
cultivate the remembrance of the kindness of our mother of this life. Then
we are also asked to bring to mind the kindness that she has extended to us
in the past when she was also our mother. We are to think about this
continuously. Besides thinking about the kindness of our mother of this
life i.e. how she has been kind to us in this life, if we recollect and
bring to mind how she must have been kind to us in the past when she had
been our mother numberless times. I guess some special feeling will arise
to feel how precious and how kind this person had been.
First, we need to be able to feel the kindness of the mother of this life.
That becomes the basis to recollect, to remember and to think about the
kindness that she must have extended to us in the past when she was our
mother numberless times. In order to be able to do that in the first place,
we must be able to feel the kindness of her in this very lifetime.  The
text mentioned that once we are able to give rise to such a remembrance of
the kindness of our mother of this life -the kindness which she shows to us
in this life and the kindness she had shown to us in our numberless past
lives- then we switch the object to someone else close or loved one such as
our father. We do the same reflection again. Then we extend the reflection
slowly to friends and relatives. Only then we extend the reflection towards
the enemies. Once we are able to have this feeling of how all sentient
beings have been kind to us while they are our mothers, we naturally have
the wish to repay their kindness.
[LRCM V2 Page 38: (ii) Cultivating a remembrance of their kindness
Bo-do-wa said that after you have recognized that all living beings are
your mothers, you will quickly remember their kindness if at first you
cultivate a remembrance of your mother's kindness in this lifetime. Do so
in accordance with his presentation, as follows.
 Imagine your mother clearly in front of you. Think the following a few
 times: "Not only has she been my mother at present but she has been so an
 incalculable number of times throughout beginningless cyclic existence."
 As your mother, she protected you from all harm and provided you all
 benefit and happiness. Particularly in this lifetime she carried you for a
 long time in her womb. Then, when you were a helpless, newborn infant, she
 held you to the warmth of her flesh and bounced you on the tips of her ten
 fingers. She suckled you at her breast, used her mouth to give you soft
 food and to remove mucus from your nose, and used her hand to wipe away
 your excrement. So in various ways she nurtured you tirelessly.
 Moreover, when you were hungry and thirsty, she gave you food and drink;
 when you were cold, clothes; when you were poor, she gave from her wealth
 those things which were very dear to her. Even more, what she gave to you
 were not things that she had obtained easily but that she had secured
 through great hardship while engaging in wrongdoing and receiving ill
 repute and suffering.
 If you suffered from illness, pain, or the threat of death, your mother
 made the choice from the depths of her heart that she would rather be sick
 than you be sick, she would rather be in pain than you be in pain, she
 would rather die than you die. By putting this feeling into action, she
 did what was needed to alleviate these troubles. In short, contemplate one-
 pointedly how your mother provided help and happiness and cleared away
 harm and suffering to the best of her knowledge and ability.
By cultivating a remembrance of your mother's kindness, you will not
remember it just in words. Once you have given rise to such a remembrance,
recognize that other friends and relatives such as your father are your
mothers and cultivate a remembrance of their kindness. Then do the same
with persons toward whom you have neutral feelings. Once you have produced
an attitude toward them which is similar to how you feel toward your
friends, recognize that your enemies are your mothers and cultivate a
remembrance of their kindness. When you have an attitude toward your
enemies that is like the one you have toward your mother, recognize that
all beings in the ten directions are your mothers, and then gradually and
with increasing extensiveness cultivate a remembrance of their kindness.]
Here cultivating the wish to repay our mothers i.e. all sentient beings’
kindness is not just about repaying them in terms of providing them with
some temporary benefits or material comforts. The meditation of cultivating
the wish to repay our mothers’ kindness is this: because they have been so
kind to us so we have to repay their kindness with something that is the
best. What is this? That is to help them to be free from their suffering,
particularly ignorance. Therefore the best way to repay the mothers’
kindness is to free them from suffering and that can be done by helping
them to be liberated from their own ignorance.
If you remember the discussion in the section of persons of medium
capacity, all the undesirable sufferings and all the problems of this life
ultimately comes from ignorance and ignorance is the root cause. Until we
help to free all sentient beings from their ignorance, they will never ever
be truly happy no matter what you do to them. So the best way of repaying
all sentient beings’ kindness is to help them to free from ignorance.
[LRCM V2 Page 39: (iii) Cultivating the wish to repay your mothers'
kindness
These beings, your kind mothers (whom you do not recognize due to the
process of death and rebirth) are suffering and have no refuge. There is
nothing more shameful than to do your best to liberate yourself from cyclic
existence while considering these beings, your mothers, unimportant and
abandoning them.]
We develop affection for all living beings by cultivating these three
points: On the basis of recognizing how everyone has been our mothers and
remembering their kindness when they are our mothers, you will have the
wish to repay their kindness with the understanding that all of them are
suffering because of their ignorance. A very strong wish to do something
for them will arise. You will feel; “I must do something for them”.
If we are able to develop affection for every living being through such
cultivations then we will be able to develop the attitude that is intent on
achieving their welfare. In order to develop this attitude, we have to
cultivate love, compassion and wholehearted resolve. On the basis of having
developed affection for all sentient beings, next is the cultivation of
love.
 2" The development of the attitude of being intent on others' welfare
The development of the attitude of being  intent  on  others'  welfare  has
three parts:
1. The cultivation of love
1. The cultivation of compassion
1. The cultivation of wholehearted resolve
(a) The cultivation of love
What is the object of love that we are supposed to cultivate?
The object of love is living beings who do not have happiness.
The subjective aspects (i.e. what the mind is thinking) are “How nice it
would be if beings were happy," "May they be happy," and "I will cause them
to be happy."
By putting them together, the definition of love is a mind that when focus
on living beings who do not have happiness, it is the mind that think “May
they be happy. How nice it would be if they were all happy.”
What are the benefits of having this mind? Lama Tsongkhapa quotes in the
King of Concentrations Sutra.
[LRCM V2 page: 42] With respect to the benefits of love, the King of
Concentrations Sutra states:
  Always offering to superior beings
  As many countless offerings
  As there are in billions of lands does not equal
  A portion of the benefit of a loving attitude.
It says that the benefit of love has far greater merit than continually
making vast offerings to the highest recipients [buddhas and bodhisattvas].
Also, the Array of Qualities in Manjusri's Buddha-realm states:
  In the northeast is the land of the Conqueror Buddhesvara called
  "Decorated by a Thousand Universes." There living beings have a happiness
  which is like the bliss of a monk who experiences a cessation. If you
  generate a loving attitude here in Jambudvipa toward all living beings
  for merely a snap of the fingers, the merit produced greatly surpasses
  the merit gained by keeping pure conduct there for one trillion years. Is
  there any need to mention the merit of abiding in a loving attitude both
  day and night?
You do see the benefits of love. Even one can develop this love for a very
short period of time -fraction of a moment- the benefits far surpasses the
merit of making offerings. This is telling us that even we cannot do it for
a long period of time, it is important to just thinking about love for a
short period of time. So, we should try.
In terms of the stages of cultivating love:
   1. Cultivate love towards friends
   2. Cultivate love towards people who we have neutral feeling
   3. Cultivate love towards enemies
The way to cultivate love is to remember that as long as anyone, whoever
the person is, is in cyclic existence, there is no real happiness. It
doesn’t matter who. It doesn’t matter where in cyclic existence. As long as
you are in cyclic existence, you are deprived of the real highest
happiness. In fact, you are devoid of it. When you have the realization of
how everyone in cyclic existence is deprived of the real highest happiness,
then the wish for all living beings to be happy will naturally arise.
[LRCM V2 page: 43: The stages of cultivating love are as follows. First,
cultivate love toward friends. Then, cultivate love for persons toward whom
you have neutral feelings. Next, cultivate love toward your enemies. Then,
cultivate it gradually toward all beings.
The way to cultivate love is as follows. Just as you can develop compassion
once you have repeatedly thought about how living beings are made miserable
by suffering, develop love by thinking repeatedly about how living beings
lack all happiness, both contaminated and uncontaminated. When you become
familiar with this, you will naturally wish for beings to be happy. In
addition, bring to mind various forms of happiness and then offer them to
living beings.]
Essentially, in order for us to have love for everyone, we first must
realize how everyone is deprived of real happiness in cyclic existence.
Based on our own experience of whatever happiness that we understand, and
if we can sincerely wish that everyone else can experience it as well
thinking; “How wonderful it would be if they have happiness as well” and we
can feel it, then it is said to bring about immeasurable benefit.

(b) The cultivation of compassion
The objects of compassion are the suffering sentient beings.
When focusing on these suffering sentient beings, the subjective aspects
(i.e. what the mind is thinking) are: “How nice it would be if living
beings were free from suffering.”
The object here is sentient being who is suffering. When you focus on these
suffering sentient beings and develop the wish for them to be free of
suffering thinking; “May they be free from suffering,” this mind is called
compassion.
Similar to love, the order to cultivate compassion is:
   1. Cultivate compassion for our loved one
   2. Cultivate compassion for someone who we have neutral feeling
   3. Cultivate compassion for those who are our enemies
   4. Only then do we extend it to the rest of the sentient beings.
[LRCM V2 page: 44: (b) The cultivation of compassion
In order to understand the cultivation of compassion you must know the
following topics. The object of compassion is living beings who experience
misery through any of the three kinds of suffering. The subjective aspects
are thinking, "How nice it would be if living beings were free from
suffering," "May they be free from suffering," and "I will cause them to be
free from suffering." The steps of cultivating compassion are first to
cultivate it toward friends, then toward those beings for whom you have
neutral feelings, and next toward enemies. When you have equal compassion
for your enemies and friends, cultivate it gradually toward all living
beings in the ten directions.]
In order to develop compassion for all living beings, it is very important
to realize how they are tormented by sufferings in cyclic existence. Once
we are able to see how they are tormented by suffering in cyclic existence,
then the wish for them to be free from suffering will naturally arise. In
order to be able to feel how others are tormented in cyclic existence then
the material that was covered in the section of the persons of medium
capacity become extremely important. We started to understand the general
suffering of cyclic existence, then the specific suffering of cyclic
existence such as the specific suffering of the six realms. That is where
the discussion of the eight types of suffering, six types of suffering and
the three types of suffering. Those materials become very important.
[LRCM V2 page 44:] Kamalasila, following the discourses on knowledge, set
out this way of gradually cultivating impartiality, love, and compassion
while distinguishing specific objects of meditation. It is an extremely
important point. If you train in these attitudes of impartiality, love, and
compassion without distinguishing and taking up specific objects of
meditation, but only using a general object from the outset, you will just
seem to generate these attitudes. Then, when you try to apply them to
specific individuals, you will not be able to actually generate these
attitudes toward anyone. But once you have a transformative experience
toward an individual in your meditation practice as explained previously,
you may then gradually increase the number of individuals you visualize
within your meditation. Finally, take all beings in general as your object
of meditation.  When you sustain this practice in meditation, you will
generate these attitudes correctly, whether you are dealing with
individuals or a group.
This paragraph highlights an extremely important point. When we are
cultivating our own practice of impartiality, love and compassion, we first
have to start with the meditation focusing on a specific person. Once you
have the transformative experience in relation to that specific person then
you gradually extend the number of individuals in your meditation. Only
then you extend the meditation in general way encompassing others, you will
have success.
If right from the beginning you cultivate this without thinking on any
specific individuals but think of all sentient beings, …(???)

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): When one sentient being comes in front of
you then that is. All sentient beings disappear.
This is really a good quality advice. We should try to put it into practice
and if we can put it into practice, it would be amazing. Even to be able to
understand this teaching and to have some faith in it, I think that is
really amazing; needless to say if you are able to practice it.
Next is the measure of having developed compassion.
[LRCM V2 page 45:] Kamalasila's first Stages of Meditation gives the
measure for the development of compassion:
 When you spontaneously feel compassion which has the subjective wish to
 completely eliminate the sufferings of all living beings—just like a
 mother's wish to remove her dear child's unhappiness—then your compassion
 is complete and is therefore called great compassion.
Here Kamalasila says that when you spontaneously feel compassion for all
beings commensurate with a mother's compassion for her very dear and small
suffering child, then you have completely perfect great compassion. Through
this, understand the measure for the development of great love as well.
Just like a mother who is tormented upon seeing her only beloved child
suffering such as sickness, spontaneously and naturally, she will has a
strong desire for only child to be released from that suffering and
thinking day and night when that will happen. That is an example. It is
said that come a day when you are able to spontaneously having this same
kind of feeling of compassion for all sentient beings that is the day when
great compassion has arisen in your mind. It is similar for great love as
well.
Student 1: When Khen Rinpoche was going over the aspect of love, the
subjective aspect of both love and compassion, in the MLR translation, it
says not only the thought of how wonderful it would be if the person is
happy and may they meet with happiness but it says here; “I will make them
meet with happiness”. So it seems to be in this MLR, at least this
translation, that the extraordinary attitude is already here and it appears
in the same way on page 145 when it talks about compassion. Just to clarify
whether this maybe an error in this text. (audio 73:35 – 74:32)
Ven Gyurme: It is there. It is in the LRCM also.
Student 1: If that is the case, how different is this from the
extraordinary attitude?
Khen Rinpoche: It is matter of strength. In developing love and compassion
one will have the thought; “I will cause them to have happiness. I will
cause them to be free of suffer”. When comes to wholehearted resolve, the
strength of conviction is much stronger. I guess in wholehearted resolve
you will not only say “I will do it” but “I myself will do it.”
Student 1: The process of developing the mind of equanimity is said to
starts with someone that is neutral. Can Khen Rinpoche elaborate what the
mind of equanimity is like? I thought if it is someone that is neutral your
mind is even-minded; neither has attachment or hostility. What is the
measure of having achieved the mind of equanimity?
Khen Rinpoche: When we think of a person who is neutral we are complete
indifference to him because that person has neither harms us nor benefit
us. You have clearly expressed of what I have also think. This is what we
conceive of a neutral person. But this is not the case. There is no need to
meditate to develop this. This is a way to work with attachment and
hostility. A neutral person is somebody who, at that point in time, for
whom we don’t have any particular feeling of hostility nor attachment. If
hostility or attachment were to arise in relation to that person generally
it would be easier to stop any such feeling for that person. When you first
think of a neutral person and bring that person to mind, whether we develop
feeling of attachment for that person or feeling hostility towards that
person, it is easier to stop whatever feeling that arise in relation to a
neutral person than a person whom you are so emotionally involved either in
the positive or negative manner. I guess it is a matter of the degree of
difficulty. If it is cultivating impartiality we are first taught to focus
on the neutral person, then the loved-one or friend. It became increasing
difficult.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I don’t know what measure because I
didn’t bring my measurement.
After the good cultivation of love and compassion i.e. after having develop
well the thought wishing all sentient beings to have happiness and to be
free from suffering then one will be able to develop wholehearted resolve
thinking; “I will achieve this by myself alone.” One will be able to take
up this responsibility to do it by oneself. The text seem to be saying that
once you have reach this point of training, the way to bring about this
wholehearted resolve is to remember these few lines and train continuously
in the mind by thinking; “I will do this by myself alone.”
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Repeating the words again and again like
chanting mantras “I will do this by myself alone, “I will do this by myself
alone.”
It is a way of training by keeping this few words in the mind; “I will do
this by myself alone.” It is just being mindful by reminding ourselves. The
training in wholehearted resolve comes only after one’s love and compassion
have been cultivated.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): If you do before that you will become
crazy.
There is clearing some doubt about this wholehearted resolve.
[LRCM V2 page 47:] Even though this thought was described in the context of
the practice of repaying your mothers' kindness, here it indicates that it
is insufficient to have the compassion and love which merely think, "How
nice it would be if they had happiness and were free from suffering." For,
the thought that assumes responsibility shows that you must develop the
compassion and love which have the power to induce the resolve, "I will
provide happiness and benefit to all living beings." It is very effective
if you practice this continuously, being mindful of it in all of your
physical activities during the period of post-meditation and so on, not
just during the meditation session.
Question: What is the qualm being raised here and what is the answer to the
qualm?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): There is a qualm here and you must get
the qualm first, then you answer the qualm. You must get these two things
when you read the text. Did you get that? I will stop here. On Thursday you
bring the qualm and the answer.
We are about to finish the sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction for
developing bodhicitta. In the next session we will finish with this and
then move on the instruction of exchanging self and other.  When we say
“reading the text”, the way to read our text is not how we read the
newspaper and magazine. When we read the text and when we come to the
qualm, we must recognize that there is a qualm and also trying to figure
out the answer to that qualm. So it is important to think as we read and it
is not just glancing through like a newspaper. If you were to read the text
quickly by glancing through that itself will accumulate a lot of
immeasurable virtue but if you can do something better than that such as
analyzing as you read, then of course the benefit will be much greater.
Student 2: Why the cultivation of impartially and follow by affection and
then love are causes to cultivates compassion? Why are they in such a
sequence?
Khen Rinpoche: I have already given you the answer. It is said very clearly
in the text that in general there is no order in the arising of love and
compassion.
Student 2: But in this sevenfold cause-and-effect there is a definite
order?
Khen Rinpoche: It is in the text in LRCM Vol 2 page 32: The causal
relationship between compassion and the love that is the wish for beings to
have happiness is not definite.
In general there is no definite order in the arising of love and compassion
but in the context of sevenfold cause-and-effect instruction, there of
these two elements;  love and compassion. The love and compassion that we
are talking about has definite order because the love in the sevenfold
cause-and-effect instruction is not just love but it is the love that
arises through the force of affection. So this is how it is answer for such
a question but you have to think about the answer.


