Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson58.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.275209
================================================================================


Meditation practice: Try to bring the object of refuge to mind as clearly
as possible and then generates a single-pointed faith towards it. That is
important. Try to recollect the qualities of the Buddha’s exalted body,
exalted speech and exalted mind. You can also recollect the benefits of
generating bodhichitta and rejoice in its virtues. If we can do that, we
will accumulate a lot of merits.  All of you have already done some studies
of the Buddha’s teaching and with whatever understanding you have, perhaps
you may now able to see how the Buddha’s teaching is really different from
others. The Buddha’s teaching is logical and does make sense. By seeing all
these characteristics of the Buddha’s teaching, again develop faith.
Without talking about whether we are able to put the Buddha’s teaching into
practice or not, if we just examine the Buddha’s teachings on its own, we
can see that it is something that really can stands up and different. It is
something that accord with common sense. So you can see how wonderful and
good the Buddha’s teaching is. The teaching is very logical and does make
sense. By seeing all these, we can see how the instructions are the source
of happiness and the pith for others as well. We can then generate the wish
for the Buddha’s teaching to endure for a long time, to be preserved and to
spread in order to achieve happiness for others. With these, from our own
side we can see how important it is to learn the teaching. In order to be
able to learn the Buddha’s teaching, first we must have the aspiration for
it. In order to want to learn the Buddha’s teaching, we first have to
understand how amazing and inconceivable the Buddha’s teaching is. Once we
can see how wonderful the Buddha’s teaching is, we will have the aspiration
to learn it. Therefore, by thinking on these points, try to develop faith
in the Buddha’s teaching and have strong aspiration wanting to learn it. We
have to think about this. The whole point is to develop strong intention
wanting to listen, to learn and to study the teaching.  So, think about
these for the next couples of minutes.

Lamrim teaching
Student 1: (audio 18:34 – 19:22) Regarding generating the aspirational
bodhichitta for six times a day to be an uncommon precept, can you explain
to what respect it is uncommon to: with respect to engaging bodhichitta or
aspirational bodhichitta without commitment?
Khen Rinpoche: Training in the precept to generate the spirit of
enlightenment/ bodhichitta for six times a day is said to be an uncommon
precept to be adopted after one has generated the aspirational spirit of
enlightenment that comes with commitment. Perhaps it is uncommon/ unshared
with the engaged spirit of enlightenment, but I am not sure.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I think so. It must be like that but I am
not sure.
We have been talking about the four black dharmas and the four white
dharmas. The training to abandon the four black dharmas and to cultivate
the four white dharmas is to prevent whatever spirit of enlightenment that
one has generated from degenerating. After one has adopted the spirit of
enlightenment with commitment, one has to train in the four white dharmas.
The fourth white dharmas is maturing or ripening the mind stream of
sentient beings through connecting them to the Mahayana. The essential
point is to do something to cause them to develop the spirit of
enlightenment.
Question: If you have tried but they don’t generate the spirit of
enlightenment, is it black dharma or not?
The question is for everyone. If you say “no”, do you have a reason to say
“no”?
Student 2: (audio 25:41 – 26:18) (The MLR root text page 163 read)
Moreover, while from your side you should cause the disciple to make a
connection with it, if that thought does not arise in the disciple, it does
not become a mistake, because you were unable to accomplish that.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the reason for not incurring a fault if the sentient
beings do not enter into the Mahayana despite your effort?
Student 2: (audio 26:35 – 26:48) The motivation is positive and virtuous.
Khen Rinpoche: If I say no matter what the motivation is, the point is one
has failed to achieve the goal.
Student 2: (audio 27:17 – 27:26) One would try again.
Khen Rinpoche: It is a fault.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I am just arguing, don’t believe what I
said.
Student 2: (audio 27:35– 28:00)
Khen Rinpoche: If you are unable to help the one that you are supposed to
mature, is it a fault or not?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Just say “yes” or “no.” After that
explain why.
Student 2: (audio 28:59– 30:00)
Ven Gyurme: What if they regret meeting the Mahayana?
Student 2: (audio 30:07– 30:23)
Khen Rinpoche: (spoke in English): That means that is not our problem. Not
totally entire to the other person or you fault?
Student 2: (audio 30:45– 31:35)
Khen Rinpoche: In general it is a fault; but in this case, how it is not a
fault? Of course from the perspective of someone who has generated the
aspirational spirit of enlightenment that comes with a commitment to never
give it up, how does it not become a fault if the other party doesn’t
succeed?
Student 2: (audio 32:20– 34:00)
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, the answer is in the text. This is to check whether
the text was read or not.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Anybody read the session for the coming
one? If you don’t read, it is complicated. If I explain now, it will be
complicated. If you read before, maybe you will understand. If you didn’t
read then I think not and it will be more difficult.

c) How to learn the bodhisattva deeds after developing the spirit of
enlightenment
i) The reason why you must learn the trainings after developing the spirit
of enlightenment
ii) Demonstrating that you will not become a buddha by learning either
method or wisdom separately
ii) Demonstrating that you will not become a buddha by learning either
method or wisdom separately
The following section in the text talks about the need to bring both
methods and wisdom together in order to achieve Buddhahood i.e. full
enlightenment. Just by practicing method alone or wisdom alone will not
lead anyone to buddhahood.  This is something we really need to think
about. It is very important. We need to understand why we need both method
and wisdom in order to achieve buddhahood.
We need to know why buddhahood cannot be achieved just by cultivating
wisdom alone. We also need to know why buddhahood cannot be achieved by
practicing method alone.
The protector Nagarjuna’s The Precious Garland says:
  The Buddha’s embodiment of form (form body or rupakaya) arises through
  the collection of merit.
  The Buddha’s embodiment of truth (truth body or dharmakaya) arises from
  the collection of wisdom.
This is what Nagarjuna said in The Precious Garland. We need to think about
this deeply:
   1. How does the accumulation of merit result in achieving the Buddha’s
      form body?
   2. How does the collection of wisdom result in achieving the Buddha’s
      truth body?
In the following section, the essential answer is:  in order to achieve
full enlightenment, you need a path that unifies both method and wisdom.
There is a wrong assertion that claims that any kind of thought -either
virtuous or non-virtuous- is an obstacle in achieving enlightenment and the
path to enlightenment does not involve conceptuality. The people who hold
on to this view also believe that the practice of generosity, ethics and so
forth are also obstacles or hindrances to achieve the path. Basically the
proponent of this view asserts that in order to achieve full enlightenment,
you do not need to practice the six perfections, in fact, they are
hindrances. According to them, in order to achieve full enlightenment, all
you need to do is to settle your mind in a state that lacks of any kind of
thought i.e. space out and not thinking of anything and that itself is to
the path to enlightenment. Nevertheless, there are some who continue to
think in this way.
[For reference] LRCM V2 page 88: Nevertheless, there are still some who
continue to do just what Ha-shang did, because the total decline of the
Buddha's teaching is drawing near, because the excellent persons who
ascertain with total certainty through scriptures of definitive meaning and
stainless reasoning all the key points of the path in their entirety are no
more, because the merit of living beings is so minimal, and because there
are so many who have little faith in the teaching and feeble intelligence.
[LRCM V2 Page 88] Some belittle the deeds that are part of the path—the
vows which are to be kept and the like—rejecting them and so forth when
they cultivate the path; others do not accept Ha-shang's mistaken denial of
the factor of method, but assert that his way of understanding the
philosophical view is excellent; and still others cast aside discerning
wisdom and claim that Ha-shang's meditation of not thinking is best.
The path of these persons is indeed not at all in the direction or vicinity
of a meditation on emptiness. But even if you were to allow that it is a
meditation on emptiness, you would not then go on to say that those with
the knowledge that comes from their cultivation of a faultless method of
meditation, after they have found the unmistaken meaning of emptiness,
should meditate on emptiness alone and "not cultivate conventional states
of mind pertaining to deeds.
Firstly, emptiness is not nothingness. If one meditates on emptiness but
asserts that there is no need to cultivate the method side of the path then
that is wrong; because the text says:
[LRCM V2 Page 88]  Or, alternatively, "do not have to strive at those
conventional states of mind in a variety of ways, upholding them as the
core practice." To say such things contradicts all the scriptures and
completely flies in the face of reason, for the goal for practitioners of
the Mahayana is a non-abiding nirvana. For this you have to achieve non-
abiding in cyclic existence via the wisdom that knows reality, the stages
of the path contingent on the ultimate, the "profound path," the collection
of sublime wisdom, the so-called "factor of wisdom." You also have to
achieve a non-abiding in the peace that is nirvana via the wisdom that
understands the diversity of phenomena, the stages of the path contingent
on conventional truths, the vast (or extensive) path, the collection of
merit, the so-called "factor of method."
If you say: “You can practice wisdom and there is no need to practice
method”, this contradict the scripture authorities and this also defies
logic.
The following have different expressions but they have the same meaning:
   1. The wisdom that know the reality
   2. The stages of the path contingent on the ultimate
   3. The profound path
   4. The collection of sublime wisdom
   5. The so called “factor of wisdom”

[LRCM V2 Page 88]  You also have to achieve a non-abiding in the peace that
is nirvana via the wisdom that understands the diversity of phenomena, the
stages of the path contingent on conventional truths, the vast path, the
collection of merit, the so-called "factor of method."
Likewise the following expressions having the same meaning:
   1. The wisdom that understands the diversity of phenomena
   2. The stages of the path contingent on conventional truths
   3. The vast path
   4. The collection of merit
   5. The so-called "factor of method"
The point is that when you are looking at these different expressions, they
give you the same understanding. Here, we are not analyzing their limit of
their pervasion. We just say that these different expressions mean the same
thing.
The main object of attainment or the goal of the bodhisattvas is the non-
abiding nirvana. The non-abiding nirvana is the great liberation (or the
great nirvana). The non-abiding nirvana here refers to as not abiding in
the two extremes:
        a. Not abiding in the extreme of samsara
        b. Not abiding in the extreme of the peace that is nirvana
What is that enable someone to not abiding in the extreme of samsara?
It is the wisdom that knows the reality. Without the wisdom that knows the
reality, one will not be able to avoid abiding in samsara.
When one achieves enlightenment, one does not abide in the extreme of
nirvana. Nirvana here refers to the lower nirvana; the liberation that is
achieved by the Hearers and the Solitary Realizers.
When one achieves enlightenment, what is that enable one to not abide in
nirvana? It is the factor of method; primarily compassion and bodhichitta.
In order to achieve the non-abiding nirvana, you need to have both the
factor of method and the factor of wisdom. Without the factor of method and
wisdom, one will not achieve the non-abiding nirvana because it the factor
of method and wisdom that allows one to not abide in either samsara or
nirvana.
This is how through reasoning that you can prove the need of both the
factor of method and wisdom in order to achieve buddhahood.
Next is providing the scriptures source.
[LRCM V2 Page 89] The Sutra of Showing the Tathagata's Inconceivable Secret
 thus says: The collection of sublime wisdom eliminates all afflictions.
The collection of merit nurtures all living beings. Bhagavan, since this is
the case, mahasattva bodhisattvas should strive for the collections of
sublime wisdom and merit.
The Teaching of Vimalakirti states at length: What is bondage for the
bodhisattvas and what is their liberation? Wisdom that is not imbued with
method is bondage; wisdom imbued with method is liberation. Method not
imbued with wisdom is bondage; method imbued with wisdom is liberation.
The purpose of quoting these scriptures is to highlight the need for both
method and wisdom in achieving enlightenment.
[LRCM V2 Page 89] Therefore, when you are on the path—right  from  the  time
of wanting the goal  of  buddhahood—you  must  depend  on  both  method  and
wisdom; you will not attain it by either one alone.  The  Foremost  of  Gaya
says:
         If you summarize the paths for bodhisattvas, there are these  two.
 Which two? Method and wisdom.
The quotation from The Foremost of Gaya state that you need both method and
wisdom in order to achieve enlightenment.
[For reference] LRCM V2 Page 90: Therefore, meditate on an emptiness that
has the supremacy of being associated with all aspects, i.e., an emptiness
that is complete in all the facets of method—generosity and so forth. By
meditating on emptiness in isolation you will never reach the Mahayana
path.
The Questions of Crest Jewel Sutra states this at length:
  After you put on the armor of love and station yourself  in  a  state  of
  great compassion, you stabilize your mind  in  meditation  on  an  actual
  emptiness that has the supremacy of being associated  with  all  aspects.
  What is an emptiness that has the supremacy of being associated with  all
  aspects? It is one that is not divorced  from  generosity,  that  is  not
  divorced from ethical discipline, that is  not  divorced  from  patience,
  that is not divorced from joyous perseverance, that is not divorced  from
  meditative stabilization, that is not divorced from wisdom, and  that  is
  not divorced from method.
The Questions of Crest Jewel Sutra says that it is necessarily to meditate
on emptiness that has the supremacy of being associated with all the
aspects, i.e. an emptiness that is complete with all the facets of method -
generosity and so forth.
[LRCM V2 Page 91] In the Sutra Gathering All the Threads:
  Maitreya, fools intending to repudiate the other perfections will speak
  thus about the bodhisattvas' correct practice of the six perfections for
  the sake of perfect enlightenment: "Bodhisattvas should train in perfect
  wisdom alone, the remaining perfections have no use."
  Fools will say that enlightenment is only reached through a single
  way—the way of emptiness. Their deeds will be completely impure.
The quotation here is to reject the view that meditating on the perfection
of wisdom alone is sufficient to achieve enlightenment. The many sutra
quotations show that it is incorrect to say that one can achieve
enlightenment without bringing the method and wisdom together.
The text brings up another qualm.
[LRCM V2 Page 91] Opponents' position: Practicing the  deeds  of  generosity
and so forth in a variety of ways is  for  when  you  do  not  have  a  firm
knowledge of emptiness. When you do have this firm knowledge, then  this  is
enough.
The above  paragraph  means  that  before  you  have  a  firm  knowledge  of
emptiness, you can practice the deeds of generosity and so forth;  but  when
you do have stable understanding of emptiness, then that is enough.
[LRCM V2 Page 91] Reply: This is a very wrong view. If it were correct,
then the children of the conquerors who have ascended to the great levels*
where they have attained the non-conceptual sublime wisdom that perceives
the ultimate truth, and, in particular, the eighth-level bodhisattvas, who
have control over non-conceptual wisdom, would not need the bodhisattva
deeds. This is incorrect because the Sutra on the Ten Levels says that even
though on each of the ten levels there is an emphasis on one of the
deeds—generosity, etc.—it is not the case that they do not perform the
other deeds, so it is said that they practice all six or ten perfections on
each level.
*The level is (usually translated as grounds.
For those who have achieved the non-conceptual wisdom directly perceiving
emptiness, starting from the first bodhisattvas’ ground, and even those on
the eighth bodhisattvas’ ground who have removed the afflictive
obscurations have to practice all the ten perfections. On each of the
grounds, they emphasize on a particular perfection but within that, they
also practice all the ten perfections on each of the ground.
[For reference] LRCM V2 Page 92: In particular, bodhisattvas eliminate all
afflictions on the eighth level. Therefore, when they stabilize on the
ultimate, wherein they have quelled all elaboration, the buddhas exhort
them, explaining that they have to train in the bodhisattva deeds: "With
just this knowledge of emptiness you cannot become enlightened because the
sravakas and pratyekabuddhas have also obtained this non-conceptuality
The eighth ground bodhisattvas who have already eliminated the afflictive
obscuration (usually translated as obstructions to liberation) have already
achieved a very special kind of wisdom. Can they achieve enlightenment with
this special kind of wisdom alone?  No, they cannot achieve enlightenment
with that special wisdom alone.
If we say that they can achieve enlightenment just by having that special
wisdom alone, then that would entail the fallacy of the Hearers and
Solitary Realizers, the foe destroyers, also having achieved enlightenment.
So, it is said that the buddha exhort the eighth ground bodhisattvas to
arise from their meditative equipoise.
Besides wisdom, these high level bodhisattvas still need to train in the
method. In fact, right from the beginning, one has to train in the path
that brings both method and wisdom together. As said in the tantric
teachings, even if one enters into the path of Highest Yoga Tantra, one
still needs to train in the factor of method such as the six perfections.
Of course, on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra, one needs not train in the
six perfections for a long period of time such as over the period of three
great countless eon; nevertheless one still has to train in the six
perfections even on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra.
[LRCM V2 Page 93]: Opponents' position: I do not assert that generosity and
so forth are unnecessary, but rather that they are  fully  present  in  the
state of mind that lacks any thought, because the absence of adherence to a
giver, gift, and recipient makes non-apprehending generosity fully present,
and in the same way the remaining perfections are fully present, too. It is
also because the sutras say that  you  include  the  practice  of  all  six
perfections within the practice of each.
Some people who hold on to this view now says: “I am not saying generosity
is not needed; but when you settle your mind in the state that doesn’t have
any thought, the practice of generosity is complete within that practice.”
They say, for example, the practice of generosity is fully present in the
state of the mind that lacks of any thought because in that state, there is
an absence of apprehending of a giver, a gift and a recipient. That makes
the non-apprehending generosity fully present. They say this apply for the
remaining perfections. They actually said that this is being mentioned in
some of the sutra. Of course, this is incorrect.
The answer given here say that how can the practice of generosity be
present when your mind is in the state of spacing out.
[LRCM V2 Page 93] Reply: If they are fully present in a state of mind  that
lacks  thought,  then  when  non-Buddhist  meditators  are  in   meditative
equipoise even in single-pointed states of serenity (or calm abiding),  all
the perfections would be fully present because they also are  not  adhering
to a giver, gift, and recipient.
In particular, when sravakas and pratyekabuddhas non-conceptually  perceive
the real nature, as in the earlier quotation from  the  Sutra  on  the  Ten
Levels, all  bodhisattva  deeds  would  be  fully  present—so  they  would,
absurdly, be Mahayana practitioners.
This wrong assertion entails the fallacy of asserting the practice of the
perfections is also presents in the mind of the non-Buddhists. They also
entail the fallacy that the perfections are also present in the minds of
the Hearers and the Solitary Realizers who are in the meditative equipoise
directly perceiving emptiness. If that is the case then that entail the
fallacy that they are Mahayanist.

[LRCM V2 Page 93] And if you assert that just  one  practice  is  sufficient
because the sutras say that all six perfections are included in  each,  well
then, since it also says all six are present even when  offering  a  mandate
while  reciting  the  verse  beginning,  "Giving  cow  dung  together   with
water...," it would also be enough to do only this.
Anybody can explain this?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I don’t know what this sentence trying to
say here. I don’t know.
Student 3: (audio 78:21– 79:05):   For the qualm here, if that is the case,
people in the Hinayana path or arya bodhisattvas performing the wisdom in
meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness, those wisdom are not
conjoined with the method of the six perfections. The wisdom in the
meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness, only emptiness appears
to that perspective.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  You are talking who?
Student 3: Arya bodhisattvas
Student 3: (audio 79:13– 80:08) The engaged spirit of enlightenment is not
present at all but only the aspirational spirit of enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes
Student 3: Does that mean that there will be an occasion whereby wisdom and
method are not cultivated together?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Why do you say that? It is conjoined with
that. You have to say must conjoin with bodhichitta. There are two types of
bodhichitta. It is conjoined with the aspirational spirit of enlightenment.
Student 3 (audio 80:33– 80:34): So that is method as well?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Of course.
Student 3: (audio 80:37– 80:44) I thought method here is specifically
refers to the deeds of the six perfections.
Khen Rinpoche:  The factor of method would include the mind generation. One
has to say that the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the continuum
of a bodhisattva is conjoined with the factor of method. During debate, you
have to say the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the continuum of a
bodhisattva is conjoined with the factor of method; but you do not say that
it is directly conjoined with the factor of method.
It is not directly conjoined because in order for it to be directly
conjoined, both that which conjoin and that which is conjoined must
manifest. In the meditative equipoise directly perceiving emptiness, only
wisdom is manifest and bodhichitta is not manifest. This is how you make
the difference between conjoined and directly conjoined.
The text goes on to talk about the meaning of conjoin. The word imbued here
is also translated as conjoin.
[LRCM V2 Page 93] Deeds  imbued  with  the  philosophical  view  and  wisdom
imbued with method may be understood by way of an  analogy.  When  a  mother
stricken  with  grief  at  the  death  of  her  beloved  child  engages   in
conversation and other activities with others, the  feelings  she  expresses
do not eliminate  the  force  of  her  grief.  Yet  not  every  feeling  she
expresses  is  necessarily  grief.  Similarly,  if  the  wisdom  that  knows
emptiness is very strong, even though the states  of  mind  associated  with
giving, making obeisance, circumambulating, or reciting are  not  cognitions
of emptiness, this still does not  preclude  your  being  involved  in  them
while endowed with the potency or force of the cognition of  emptiness.  For
instance, at the start of a meditation session,  if  you  first  generate  a
very strong spirit of enlightenment, this spirit  of  enlightenment  is  not
manifestly  there  when  you  then   enter   meditative   equipoise   in   a
concentration on emptiness. Yet this does not preclude this  concentration's
being imbued with the potency of the spirit of enlightenment.
If one generates a very strong bodhichitta at the beginning of any
meditation session, and whatever one meditates on, the whole meditation
session is influenced by that motivation; it is imbued or conjoined with
the spirit of enlightenment.
Similarly if one generate a very strong thought of bodhichitta before
falling asleep, and when one falls asleep within that motivation even
though the bodhichitta is not manifest during the sleep, the entire sleep
(sleep is a mind) is imbued or conjoined with bodhichitta.
Sleep can either be virtuous or non-virtuous. This depends on the state of
mind before one fall asleep.
If one falls asleep within a very strong virtuous thought then the entire
sleep is imbued or conjoined with that virtuous motivation.
If one fall asleep with a non-virtuous thought then the entire sleep become
imbued or conjoined with that non-virtuous intention.
There is a wrong concept thinking that the collection of merits is only for
the purpose of achieving things such as resources, long lifespan and so
forth and does not become a cause for omniscience. This is a wrong idea.
The collection of merits can be a cause of omniscience if it is imbued with
method and wisdom.
It is important not to misconstrue some statements from the sutra such as
below:
[LRCM V2 Page 94] Do not misconstrue  the  following  statements:  From  the
sutras:
  Adhering to  the  six  perfections—generosity  and  so  forth—is  demonic
  activity.
From the Three Heaps Sutra:
  Confess each of these: descending to the level of objective existence and
  giving gifts, observing ethical discipline because of  a  belief  in  the
  supremacy of ethics, etc.
And from the Sutra Requested by Brahma:
  All analysis is conceptual thought; the non-conceptual is enlightenment.
The first statement: “Adhering to the six perfections -generosities and so
forth- is demonic activity” in general does not shows that all forms of
generosity are demonic activity; but rather generosity that is motivated by
a mistaken apprehension of a self, grasping to ego, grasping to a self is
not pure. Therefore it is stated to be a demonic activity.
[LRCM V2 Page 95] The meaning of the first passage is that generosity,  etc.
motivated by a mistaken adherence to the two types  of  self  [the  self  of
persons and the self of objects] is not pure, and, therefore, is  stated  to
be "demonic activity." This passage does not teach that  generosity  and  so
forth  is  demonic  activity;  otherwise,  since   it   mentions   all   six
perfections,  you  would  also  have  to  assert  that  the  perfections  of
meditative stabilization and wisdom are demonic activity.
The quotation from the Three Heaps Sutra says that the adhering/ grasping/
apprehending a self make the practice of generosity not pure. Therefore,
that has to be confessed. The Three Heaps Sutra is not saying that you
should confess having practice generosity.
[LRCM V2 Page 95] The second scriptural passage means that  the  perfections
are impure because of being motivated by a mistaken adherence  and  explains
that you must confess them. It  does  not  teach  that  you  should  not  be
involved in generosity, etc.; otherwise, the mention of  a  descent  to  the
level of objective existence in the phrase,  "descending  to  the  level  of
objective existence and giving gifts" would be  unnecessary,  and  it  would
instead have stated, "confess the giving of  gifts  in  general,"  which  it
does not in fact say.
[LRCM V2 Page 95] If every sort of virtuous conceptual thought—such  as  the
generous attitude  when  thinking,  "I  shall  give  this  thing,"  and  the
attitude  of  restraint  when  thinking,  "I  shall   restrain   from   this
wrongdoing"—were an apprehension of a self of objects that misconceives  the
three spheres [agent, object, and recipient], then it  would  be  right  and
proper that everyone finding the view of the selflessness of objects  should
completely  reject  virtuous  conceptual  thought  just   as   they   reject
hostility,  pride,  etc.,  and  it  would  be  quite  wrong  for   them   to
purposefully cultivate those virtues.
It is possible for one to think that meditation on emptiness is enough and
the practicing of giving and the practicing ethics is not important. This
is because even if one does give or practice ethics, if it involves a sense
of a self or apprehending of a self when one engages in them, that makes it
like an apprehension of true existence and an apprehension of self. This
interferes with one’s achievement of enlightenment. Then why one does it?
One might as well just meditate on emptiness. It is possible for one to
have such thought.
In the course of giving, there is an apprehension of a truly existent
giver, a truly existent thing that one is giving and a truly existent
person that one is giving it to. If you look at it, all the three are true
and it makes this whole thing truly existence.
What is generosity? It is a mind of giving. If you think about how things
operate in this world, it makes generosity like an apprehension of true
existence. Although people might feel in this way but that is incorrect.
The mind of giving is the mind of giving. Mind of giving is not the
apprehension of true existence. If one thinks that the mind of giving is
the apprehension of true existence then what about the person on the first
bodhisattva ground whose mind is realizing emptiness? Then we should also
regard that is like hostility or pride which is to be discarded.
The bodhisattva on the first bodhisattva ground does not abandon the mind
of giving. In fact, he strives to increase the mind of giving. Does the
bodhisattva on the first bodhisattva ground give up the mind of giving?
For those of you who has done the Special Insight module, remember there
was a discussion on the three ways of apprehending an object:
   1. Apprehending an object as truly existence.
   2. Apprehending an object as not truly existence.
   3. Apprehending an object there is not affected by either an apprehension
      of it being truly existence or apprehending it as not truly existence.
You need to have some understanding of these three modes of apprehension.
Even for someone who has not realized emptiness, it does not mean that
every single mind in that person’s continuum apprehends its respective
object as truly existence.
Student 4: (audio 106:39– 107:48) What is the meaning of the word
“perfection”?
Ven Gyurme: When does giving become a perfection of giving?
Khen Rinpoche: Generosity is not necessarily perfection of generosity.
Generosity that is conjoined or imbued with bodhichitta becomes the
perfection of generosity. Generosity becomes pure on the first bodhisattva
ground.
Student 4: (audio 109:06– 110:10) Why is there a need to request the Buddha
not to pass into parinirvana?
Khen Rinpoche: The Buddha does not die, so, why is there a need to make a
request “Please remain”? I think we have to think about this. We talk about
the Buddha’s embodiment of form (form body) and embodiment of truth (truth
body).
The truth body is divided into:
  -the nature truth body and
  -the wisdom truth body
The form body is divided into:
  -the complete enjoyment body and
  -the emanation body
The complete enjoyment body remains until cyclic existence. Therefore you
do not have to make request to that. The supreme emanation body displays
the deed of passing away into parinirvana. Therefore there is a need to
request to not show the deed of passing into parinirvana.
There are many new concepts and words that you have to work at it. It is
not something you can understand immediately. That is why everybody has to
work at it and just pay attention to them. It is very good for students to
ask questions as that is a sign of thinking and learning. Everybody should
try to do this.
