Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 12.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.894420
================================================================================


As usual we will do the Seven-limb (or Seven-branches worship) practice.
The first limb/ branch is the branch of worship or the branch of making
prostration. There is physical homage, verbal homage and mental homage.
Among these three, the most important is the mental homage or making
obeisance with your mind. Essentially it means having a single-pointed
faith and devotion towards the deity i.e. having a clear faith which arises
from seeing the qualities of the deity. The branch of homage comes right at
the beginning of the practice. Before we start, it is important to bring
forward this faith and devotion towards the deity in question. In the last
lesson, we started on the topic of correctly devoting to a teacher. We saw
how faith is so important for the development of any kind of qualities.
Here at the beginning, the first limb/ branch of worship is the branch of
homage. As I have mentioned earlier, paying mental homage is the most
important; it refers to cultivating the faith and devotion towards the
deity in question.
As I have mentioned before, faith is the foundation of all the qualities.
So if one is able to develop faith right at the beginning of this practice
of Seven-limb then one will do it well on the next practice of making
offerings. One will then have a good practice of confession. Similarly one
will have a good practice of rejoicing, requesting the Buddha to turn the
wheel of dharma, beseeching them not to pass away to nirvana and
dedication. All these practices will become perfect. In order for the
latter practices to be done perfectly, it all depend on the prior practice.
At the right of the beginning of this Seven-limb practice, there is the
branch of homage. Essentially right of beginning it is very important to
generate this faith. It is very important to keep on thinking why faith is
so important to us. This is something that we have to think about it
constantly. If we have faith, what does it do to us? If we do not have
faith, does it make any different? So we have to figure it out for
ourselves why is faith the foundation of all the good qualities. Please
keep this in mind.
As I have mentioned that the first branch is the branch of homage or paying
obeisance. The main thing is developing this faith and devotion. If this is
present at the beginning of the practice, will it make the next practice of
making offerings a better practice? This is something that you have to
think about. When we think of offerings, sometime we have the feeling like
we are asked to think of stuffs that don’t really exist i.e. imaginary
stuffs such as flowers appearing in the sky. I don’t think that is the case
but rather when we make offerings we should remember to focus on whatever
good qualities that we have and whatever roots of virtues/ merits that we
have already accumulated. Then we visualize that these roots of virtues/
merits/ qualities which we already have taken on the form of offerings and
make those as offerings to the merit field. If we do this, I think there is
a greater benefit. At the end when we make dedication, what are we
dedicating? We are dedicating all the good qualities that we have acquired.
We dedicate the virtues and merits for the benefit of others and we
dedicate for the flourishing and preservation of the dharma. There is a
relationship between the quality in our mind and the virtues that we have
accumulated with the limb of dedication. What are we dedicating? We are
dedicating of what we have achieved. Dedication is focusing on the positive
aspects/ qualities/ virtues/ merits that we have and wishing it to be the
cause of something. Basically dedication means we are focusing on the good
aspects of the mind and then increasing it. If we focus on these good
aspects/ qualities/ virtues of the mind, it does help the mind to be more
virtuous in the future because of our attention that we pay to the merits/
virtues/ qualities all the time. As much as possible, please do the Seven-
limb practice; first by visualizing the special deity –Manjushri- in the
space in front of us and on the basis of having devotion for Manjushri then
you do the Seven-limb practice.

Stages of the Path to Enlightenment

We have started with the topic of guru devotion i.e. correctly relying on
the virtuous friend. As for the actual ways of relying on the virtuous
friend, there are:
   1) Relying correctly in thought
   2) Relying correctly in action
Relying correctly on thought consist of two points: the root is training in
faith and then by remembering his kindness, you develop respect.
As for developing faith in the teacher, faith arises in different ways. For
some people, they develop faith in a particular teacher just by hearing his
qualities. Then there are some who do not just leave it at the level of
hearing about the qualities of the particular teacher. They check it out.
When they see the qualities for themselves they develop faith. So in
general, there are these two ways of developing faith. There are some who
develop faith just by hearing and there are some who develop faith after
they have done their checking. This is not just applicable to develop faith
in the virtuous friend/ teacher. It also applies to developing faith in the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Some people who just hear about it, then they
develop faith whereas there are some who develop faith only after they have
check thing out. The second way is the best way of developing faith. Faith
that arises from understanding is the best kind of faith and one can
develop irreversible faith through such a process.
Here we are discussing about faith in the context of the teacher/ guru/
virtuous friend. In order to be able to develop faith in the guru, we must
first overcome the conception of faults in him and as much as possible to
be able to see his qualities. That is the condition for developing faith in
the teacher. Therefore the teaching advises us to look at the guru as the
Buddha. Why we do have to look at the guru as the Buddha? At the end of the
day, we, the students, want only profit and we do not want to suffer any
kind of loss. Whether in reality the guru in question is a Buddha or not,
if we look at the guru as Buddha then we get all the profit. If we need to
look at the guru as Buddha, in reality are we able to look at the guru as
Buddha or not? The answer is that we are able to look at the guru as
Buddha. It is a matter of familiarity. If we continuously just focus on the
guru’s good qualities and not the faults, it is just a matter of
familiarity that one will be able to look at the guru as Buddha.

3 The need to discriminate a Buddha with regard to the spiritual master
Furthermore, as for the way of looking at the spiritual master, it says in
the Vajrapani Empowerment Tantra:
   Oh Lord of secrets, how should a disciple see the master? Just like he
   would see the Buddha Bhagavan.
Similar statements can be found in the collection of Mahayana sutras and in
the vinaya. Their meaning is this: If you understand recognize that someone
is like a buddha, a mind conceiving faults in him will not arise, but
rather a mind thinking about his positive qualities. Likewise, with regard
to a spiritual master, you should purposely abandon any concepts of faults
in every respect while training the mind conceiving positive qualities.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 81:  With  regard  to  how  disciples
should view their gurus, the Tantra Bestowing the Initiation  of  Vajrapani
says:
   If you would ask, O Lord of Secrets, how disciples should view masters,
   then I would answer that they should view them just as they view the
   Bhagavan.
   If the disciples view their masters in this way,
   They will always cultivate virtues.
   They will become buddhas
   And benefit the entire world.
In the Mahayana sutras as well it is taught that you must think of the guru
as being the Teacher. The texts on discipline state this as well,  and  the
meaning of their statements is as follows. When you recognize someone to be
a buddha, you will not discern faults in that  person,  and  you  will  pay
attention to his or her good qualities.  Likewise,  completely  cast  aside
your conception of faults in the guru, and train yourself  to  discern  the
guru's good qualities.]
This is the most difficult part. Even after taking someone as the teacher,
but the mind that see the faults still arise. Probably one sees more faults
than the qualities. If one conceives the faults of the teacher, then at
that time it is important to stop the arising of those conceptions. That is
the reason why as said in the teaching we should focus on the good
qualities of the person because the more you focus on the good qualities of
the person, the conception of the faults of the person will be weaker. So
this is one way of stopping the conception of faults in the guru i.e. by
constantly just focusing on the qualities.
Another method is that when you see faults, one way to think is to ask
yourself; “Is this really a fault from the side of the guru or I am just
seeing the fault due to my own impure mind?” At such a time that is what
one can think at. Is everything that we see necessarily the only truth? Is
everything that we say necessarily true?
Another piece of advice that is given in the teaching is that we have to
understand how much obscurations we have accumulated. Our obscurations are
so thick that even if all the Buddhas were to come in front of us in full
form with all the major marks and signs, we will not be able to see the
Buddhas in the pure aspects. Even if the Buddha comes in front of us, he
will not appear in the way above how the guru is appearing to us now.
Basically, we do not have the fortune to be able to see the Buddha in the
pure aspects due to our obscurations. We should think that because of our
own obscurations and limitations, the aspect of the teacher is the best
that we can see. We will not be able to see any aspect higher than this. If
we can think in such a way, it helps us to weaken the conception of faults
in the teacher.
Another way of thinking is looking at the holy beings such as the great
masters of the past. There are numerous great masters happened in India and
Tibet. If you just think of these great masters, they are same; they are
born from the womb, they have to eat, they have to pee, they do grow old,
they do fall sick etc. In that respect, they are the same as us. This is
what we can see. If we think about these numerous great masters and holy
beings that had happened in the past, can we say that all of them were
ordinary beings and not even a single one is a Buddha? Not even a single
one is a holy being? I think one will not be able to say that. Definitely
there must be at least one Buddha or holy being among these great masters
who look like us. By looking at these past great masters, definitely there
must be at least one Buddha. We have to understand that the Buddha can only
work for us sentient beings by depending on the ordinary aspect. The Buddha
cannot work for us by appearing in the pure aspect with all the marks and
signs. We don’t have the fortune to see such. So the Buddha has no other
choice other than working for us in the ordinary aspect; at the level that
we are familiar with and at the level that we can associate with. Buddha
has no other better way of helping us. If the Buddha is working for us,
then there isn’t any other better way working for us in the ordinary aspect
that we can see. We are not able to tell whether a person is a Buddha or
not by just depending on the physical characteristics of the person –how
he/she looks like i.e. whether good or bad. We will not be able to
differentiate who is a Buddha and who is not a Buddha based on the
superficial way of looking at thing. But rather whether someone is a Buddha
or not basically depend on the quality of the mind. We can think at this in
relation to our own guru. This is how we should look at the guru; “He is
like a Buddha/ he is a Buddha/ he is equal to the Buddha.” “He is showing
the ordinary aspects to benefit me, to subdue me and to guide me”. If you
are able to think in this way in relation to your teacher, then seeing the
guru in the ordinary aspect does not become a condition for you to lose
faith. Rather than losing faith in your guru when you see the guru in the
ordinary aspects, in fact seeing the ordinary aspect can increase your
faith because you should remember that the Buddha has no higher way to
benefit you other than through this ordinary aspect. Only with this
ordinary aspect, it can help you. Therefore this ordinary aspect is so
precious and so kind. If you think about this, your faith increases. I
think the best way is to recall the good qualities of the guru all the time
and to remember his kindness. If you are able to do this constantly and
even if the conception of faults towards the guru do arises in your mind
that will not obstruct or hinder whatever faith you have in him. We need to
familiarize ourselves and get use to always think about the good qualities
of the guru.
I will to give you an example of a piece of clothing which is very nice but
as soon as there is a small stain on it, you will find it not so nice
anymore. If that piece of clothing get stained which is against your wish,
that piece of clothing will then appear as undesirable. But if you decide
to decorate that piece of clothing with some design with black ink, that
piece of clothing now appear to you as desirable because you did it on
purpose even it is of the same stain.
Khen Rinpoche spoke in English: For example my mole here. Few years ago,
somebody said that mole can be cancerous. I thought it needs to be removed.
After a while, someone else said that having mole near the cheek is good
because you have a lot of food to eat. Then my mind change in different
way; before I see the mole as bad but later it becomes a decoration after
someone had said something about the mole. Anyway I have no idea which is
true. Now it does not bother me so much. This is a similar example on how
our mind can change by depending on how we look at thing. Even if you see
some black dot on your face, depending on how you look at it, it can be
ugly and it can be something positive and pleasant which make you happy;
even it is the same thing. It depends on how you label it. There is nothing
to do with the black dot but it depend on how your mind sees it. Another
example is that when I see people wearing a dress with many strings, it is
not good looking and is considered as ugly; but it is different to the
person who wears it as she like it so much and considers it as good looking
and as the best dress. She is happy with it. Another example is the jean
pant which is purposely torn to expose the knee and sometime even expose
the backside. Actually it does not look nice but it is fashionable or what.
This whole thing depends on our mind. It is the same with antique. In my
hometown, nobody care about the antique things. When it is old, we will
just throw them into the rubbish bin but here in Singapore, it is
different. The antique is use as decoration as something that is nice and
valuable in a nice house. When you look at it, the object is not so nice;
it is worn or something is missing. Depending on how you see it; a bad
thing can become a good thing at your house. For example, your hair, even
if the hair touches your mouth, it is ok with you and it doesn’t bother you
so much. If your own hair falls into your food, the food becomes ugly and
dirty and you feel like throwing away. But this is your own hair. The
concept is changed when something is separated from your body; even the
same hair that is separated from your body and went into your food.
Immediately your mind change. Before the hair is clean but after it fell,
even within second, it becomes unclean. Even the food becomes unclean.
Especially in the restaurant, you reject the food when you see one hair in
it; “I cannot eat the food because there is a hair in it.” Your mind
concept is changed if you just take out the hair and throw it away. You can
even enjoy the meal. Actually the hair is not dirty but it depends on how
our mind labels it. Actually the hair is very clean as nothing does stick
on it. When you go to restaurant, you will complain when you see one hair
in your food. You don’t have to reject the food.  You can still eat the
food by just removing it. It is how we train our mind and if we can change
our mind, it could be better.
In relation to our teacher, it is like looking at the clothing. If you just
focus on that one small little stain, then you will not see it as something
attractive. If you don’t focus on that small little dot you still are able
to use the piece of clothing. Likewise, you can just focus on the good
qualities of the teacher and not to pay attention to the bad qualities.
Sometime it is useful to think in this way; “Whether the teacher has faults
or not, even if he has, it is none of my business” i.e. the teacher’s fault
is not of your business. As I have mentioned earlier, it is best that you
are able to use the faults as the way to increase the faith. When you see
faults, remember to think; “This is what it means by ordinary aspect. The
Buddha has to work for us through this ordinary aspect and ordinary aspect
means having faults. There is no any other way to call an ordinary aspect
then having faults or making mistake.” Then you remember that it is only
through this ordinary aspect that Buddha can work for you. If you can think
in this way, in fact it actually increases your faith in your guru.
As we have already seen in the earlier part of the text, the Lamrim –the
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment- is an instruction that is arrange in a
particular order for any one individual to achieve full enlightenment. It
is arrange in such a way that to be able to lead the student/ disciple into
Vajrayana one day. This is the reason why there is an extensive discussion
of the practice of guru devotion right at the beginning of the Lamrim. This
is also one of the reasons why the citing of all these quotations are from
the Tantra itself.

4 The disadvantages of conceiving faults
In addition, the above tantra says:
    Apprehend the master’s positive qualities,
    do not ever apprehend his faults,
    apprehending his qualities you will gain siddhis,
    apprehending his faults they cannot be gained.
You should act accordingly. Thus if positive qualities predominate in a
spiritual master, but you think about him in terms of the few faults he
has, this will become an obstacle to your own accomplishments. Even if
faults predominate, if you train in confidence from the perspective of his
positive qualities without thinking about him in terms of his faults, this
will become a cause for accomplishments to come about. Therefore, when it
comes to your own spiritual master, whether his faults are big or small,
contemplate the disadvantages of thinking about him from that perspective,
repeatedly generate a mind to abandon this and make it stop.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 81: That is, do as it states  in  the
tantra cited above, the Tantra Bestowing the Initiation of Vajrapani:
   Keep the masters' good qualities in mind
   Never seize upon their faults.
   Keeping their good qualities in mind, you will reach attainments.
   Seizing upon their faults, you will not.
Your guru might have good qualities for the most part, and have only slight
faults. If you examine your guru for those faults, this will block your own
attainments. Whereas, even in the case of a guru who mostly has faults, you
will give rise to your own attainments if you train in faith by focusing on
the good qualities while not looking for the faults.
Therefore, once someone is your guru, whether he or she has small or great
faults, contemplate the disadvantages of examining for his or her faults.
Repeatedly think about eliminating that tendency, and then stop it.]
The advice here is to always keep the good qualities of the guru in your
mind; always to think the good qualities of the guru and not to seize upon
his faults. Whether the guru is a Buddha in reality or not, we just focus
on his good qualities then we will achieve the realization. On the other
hand, even if the guru is a Buddha in reality but if you do not look at him
as Buddha, you will not achieve the realization. It does not matter whether
the guru is a Buddha in reality or not. If you focus on the good qualities
of the guru and you look at the guru as Buddha, then you will achieve all
the realization. If you have that faith, all the realizations will come. So
it doesn’t really depend on whether the guru is a Buddha or not in reality.
It depend on your faith and your way of looking at thing.

If concepts of faults arise due to carelessness, a lot of afflictions, etc.
you should apply yourself to restraint through confession. If you accustom
yourself in this manner, you may see that there are a few faults, but since
your mind holds on to the side of positive qualities, it will not become an
obstacle to your confidence. For instance, the great Jowo upheld the view
of the Madhyamaka, while Serlingpa upheld the view of the True Aspectarian
Cittamatra which is why, in terms of view, one was higher than the other.
However, as he discovered the general stages of the Mahayana path and the
mind of enlightenment relying on him, he regarded Serlingpa as unequalled
among spiritual teachers.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 81: Even when the influence of
factors such as an overabundance of afflictions or a lack of
conscientiousness leads you to conceive a fault in your guru, take pains to
confess this and restrain yourself from ever doing it again. Once you have
done this, the influence of that conception will gradually diminish.
Moreover, pay attention to the good qualities that the guru does have -such
as ethical discipline, learnedness, and faith—and reflect on these
qualities. Once you have become conditioned to this, you may notice that
your guru has a small number of faults. However, this does not impede your
faith because you are focusing on the good qualities. For instance,
although you see that there may be many good qualities in people whom you
dislike, your strong perception of their faults overwhelms any perception
of their good qualities. Likewise, you might notice many faults in
yourself, yet, if the perception of your good qualities is very strong, it
overwhelms any perception of your faults.
Thus, it is similar to the following example. The great Elder held the
Madhyamaka view and Ser-ling-ba held the view of a "true aspectarian"
Cittamatrin. Therefore, Atisha's view was superior to that of Ser-ling-ba.
Still, Atisha upheld Ser-ling-ba as the guru who was unrivaled amongst his
gurus, because Atisha had obtained the spirit of enlightenment and a
general presentation of the stages of the Mahayana path in dependence upon
him.]
We have to remember the context in which this discussion is being held. We
are talking about the relationship between the guru who possesses all the
necessary defining characteristics/ qualities and the disciple who also
possesses the necessary qualification as the disciple; that is, how such a
qualified student relies on the qualified teacher. If a qualified student
were to rely correctly on the qualified teacher, what are the benefits for
him? If a qualified student does not rely correctly on the qualified
teacher, what are the disadvantages?
You may be aware that there are people out there who question this practice
of guru devotion. A lot of people believe that this guru devotion practices
is made up by the Tibetan in order to make themselves powerful. This is a
misconception. The practice of guru devotion or correctly relying on the
virtuous friend is not something that is made up by Tibetan. As I have
mentioned earlier, this Buddhist teaching that are practiced in the Tibetan
tradition has their origin in India. The practice of guru devotion was
taught by the Buddha in many sutras; for example in the Array of Stalks
Sutra which mentioned the nine attitudes that one should cultivate in
relation to one’s guru. This was taught by the Buddha himself. We will not
go through what the nine attitudes are as they are not mentioned in the
Middle Length Lamrim but these nine attitudes are mentioned in the Lamrim
Chen Mo. The nine attitudes are:
   1. The attitude which is like the dutiful child.
   2. The attitude which is like a diamond.
   3. The attitude which is like the earth
   4. The attitude like the foothills
   5. The attitude like a worldly servant
   6. The attitude like a sweeper
   7. The attitude like a foundation
   8. The attitude like a dog
   9. The attitude like a ferry
If you happen to be someone who is wondering about the authenticity of the
practice of guru devotion and if you have doubt about it, then you should
refer to this Array of Stalks Sutra which was taught by the Buddha himself.
In that sutra, the Buddha speak clearly about the attitudes in which we
should devote to the guru in thought.
By remembering the qualities of the guru, you develop faith. By remembering
his kindness, you develop respect.

2B4A-1B3B-1B  Remembering the kindness and being respectful
Second:
In the [Sutra of the] Ten Dharmas it says:
  He looks for me who has roamed in cyclic existence for a long time; he
  awakes me from a long time of obscuration and torpor due to ignorance; he
  pulls me out as I sink within the ocean of existence; he shows good paths
  to me who has entered bad ones; he frees me who has been bound in the
  prison of existence; he is a doctor to me who has long been tormented by
  illness; I should generate the notion of [of him as] rain-clouds,
  pacifying me who has been ablaze with the fire of passion and so on.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 83: The Ten Teaching Sutra says:
  Develop the following ideas with respect to your teachers. I have
  wandered for a long time through cyclic existence, and they search for
  me; I have been asleep, having been obscured by delusion for a long time,
  and they wake me; they pull me out of the depths of the ocean of
  existence; I have entered a bad path, and they reveal the good path to
  me; they release me from being bound in the prison of existence; I have
  been worn out by illness for a long time, and they are my doctors; they
  are the rain clouds that put out my blazing fire of attachment and the
  like.]
Earlier, it was mentioned the Sages [the Buddhas] do not wash away our
negativities with water, they are not able to remove our suffering with
their hands; they can’t transfer their realization to us. How do they
liberate us? They liberate us by showing us the path, in particular, by
teaching us the meaning of emptiness; the ultimate nature of reality.
    Sages do not wash away sins with water,
    They do not clear away beings' suffering with their hands,
    They do not transfer their own knowledge to others;
    They liberate by teaching the truth of reality.
Let’s say that all the Buddhas were to come in front of us right now, what
can they do to us? We are not talking about just one Buddha but all the
Buddhas. What can they do to us? What are our gurus do for us? They teach
us unerringly, the Four Noble Truths, they show us what is positive and
what is negative; they show us the law of cause and effect and so forth. If
all the Buddhas are to come in front of us right now, they will not be able
to do anything higher than what our gurus are doing for us. So if you
really think about this, you will be able to see that even if all the
Buddhas were to come in front of us right now, they will not be able to do
anything better or more than what our teacher are doing. In the first
place, even if all the Buddhas were to come in front of us right now, we
don’t have the fortune to see them. Therefore all the Buddhas have to work
for us by depending on the ordinary aspect of the teacher.
Even if all the meditational deities (as in the four classes of Tantra)
were to come in front of us right now, they will not be able to do anything
extra other than what our vajra masters have done to us through giving us
empowerment and explaining the meaning of the tantra and giving
commentaries. We don’t have the fortune to be able to receive the
empowerment/ initiation directly from the deities. We don’t receive the
tantra teaching directly from the deities but by depending on the kindness
of the guru, we are able to receive all these. In short, we are able to
receive every single teaching on sutra and tantra through the guru. If you
are someone who are travelling on the path to liberation and enlightenment,
then the person who is showing and guiding you on that path is none other
than your guru. If you understand this, then you will be able to see how
the guru is kinder than the numberless Buddhas. Although there are
numberless Buddhas in existent, who is the one that is benefiting us
directly in our life? He is our guru/ teacher. He is the one who is guiding
us on the path to enlightenment, put us on the correct path and stop us
from entering into the wrong path. That person is the teacher in our life.
Basically by thinking along this line, we will be able to develop respect
for the teacher especially if we remember their kindness.  That is so much
on relying in thought. Then what about in relying through action?
{This is not read in class}
The Array of Stalks [Sutra] also says:
  ‘These are my spiritual friends, expounders of Dharma, exhaustively
  teaching the qualities of all that is thoroughly teaching the conduct of
  bodhisattvas’,with these thoughts in mind I came to this place.
  ‘As they give birth to all that, they are like my mother,as they give
  milk of virtues they are like nurses, they cleanse me completely by means
  of enlightenment’s branches.
  These spiritual friends completely exorcize harm, they are like doctors
  releasing from death and old age, showering rain of nectar they are like
  Lord Indra, like the full moon they flourish with white qualities they
  show the direction of peace, just like bright sunlight, regarding friends
  and foes they are like mountains, they have minds as undisturbed as the
  sea, they give perfect support, some say: “like boatmen”‘ with this in
  mind,
    Sudhana, I came here.
    ‘Bodhisattvas bring forth my understanding,
    Buddha’s children cause enlightenment these [beings, these] friends of
    mine are praised by Buddha’ with such wholesome thoughts in mind I came
    here,
    ‘As they save the world they are like heroes, they have become the
    captains, protectors and refuge, they are  the eye bestowing happiness
    on me’ with thoughts like these I honour my spiritual friends.
[The thoughts] expressed here should be remembered through a tune to go
with the verses, substituting oneself for “Sudhana”.

2B4A-1B3B-2 The manner of relying through actions
A The need for reliance through actions
B Condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing [him]
C The extensive explanation of those three
2B4A-1B3B-2A  The need for reliance through actions
The second one:
In the Fifty [Verses about the] Guru it says:
       What need is there to say a lot of words here?
       do everything to make your guru happy
       give up anything that does not please him
       apply yourself to that, examine that!
       This was said by Vajradhara himself:
       ‘spiritual attainments follow the guru’,
       aware of this, use anything there is,
       and make your guru totally[, utterly] happy.
In brief, you try hard to please him and to give up what he does not like.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 84: Asvaghosa's Fifty Verses on the
Guru says:
      What need is there to say much here—
      Do whatever pleases your gurus;
      Eliminate all that displeases them.
      Analyzing this, strive at it.
      Once you have understood Vajradhara's statement,
      "Attainments follow proper reliance on the master,"
      Thoroughly please your gurus
      In all things.
In brief, you must strive to achieve what pleases your gurus and eliminate
what displeases them.]

2B4A-1B3B-2B Condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing [him]
The three means of pleasing [the guru] are (1) offering material things,
(2) serving him and paying him respect with body and speech, and (3)
practicing in accordance with his advice.  In this regard it says in the
Ornament of the Sutras:
       Through homage and pure offerings and service
       and practice you should rely on a spiritual friend.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 85:The three avenues to achieving
what pleases your gurus are offering material gifts, respecting and serving
with body and speech, and practicing in accordance with their words. This
is also stated in Maitreya's Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras:
       Rely on the teacher by way of
       Respect, material things, service, and practice.
And also:
       A steadfast person who practices just as taught by the guru
       Pleases that guru properly.]
By seeing the reasons then one apply oneself in action. Here we are talking
about relying correctly in the guru in action/ practice. This includes:
   1. Making offerings, offering material things
   2. Showing respect and serving such as rising in his presence, making
      prostration and so forth
   3. Putting into practice on whatever he has advised
Next is the discussion on the benefit of correctly relying on the guru and
the faults/ disadvantages of not relying on the guru. Please read on your
own. We are about to finish the section on guru devotion. We will continue
with the “Summary of the meaning of these points” on page 28 of the text.
Student 1: There is a statement in the text which say: “All the qualities
of the Mahayana -small or big- arises from the guru.” What about the
quality of the Hinayana?
Khen Rinpoche: At the right of the beginning, the text talks about the
defining characteristics of the Mahayana guru. Therefore in relation to the
qualified Mahayana guru, all the qualities of the Mahayana path –whether
big or small- do depend on him. We are not talking about any guru. Do you
remember the first three defining characteristics of the Mahayana virtuous
friend? They are qualities pertaining to the three higher trainings. The
three trainings are the main practices of the person of Hinayana path must
cultivate; whether the person is following the Hearer’s vehicle or Solitary
Realizer’s vehicle. Basically they are the Hinayana path. These are the
practices of the Hinayana followers. Since the Mahayana guru must possess
the qualities of having trained in the three higher trainings, the Mahayana
guru definitely must be able to guide the disciples of the Hinayana. In the
first place, if you are planning to practice the Hinayana path, then you
just stick to the Hinayana teacher. You don’t have to look for the Mahayana
teacher as there is no absolute need for this. A qualified Hinayana teacher
must be able to lead Hinayana followers on that path. As such, if you are
Hinayana followers, you need not necessarily rely on Mahayana teacher. The
essence is that the qualities of the Hinayana path –small or big- do not
necessarily depend on Mahayana teacher.
Student 1: What kind of guru devotion practice does the Hinayana followers
do? Do they need to regards their guru as Buddha?
Khen Rinpoche: The Hinayana followers must necessarily have respect for the
teacher. I am not sure whether they look at their guru as Buddha, but I
guess they have to look at their teacher as like a Buddha. Looking at the
guru as Buddha is not just the general Mahayana way of looking. Primarily
it is a teaching or practice of tantra. In tantra, it is highly emphasized
that you must look at your guru as a Buddha. The practice of guru yoga
where you see the deity and guru as inseparable and this come mainly in the
tantra.



Discussion One (24.07.2011) Comments by Khen Rinpoche:
Q6: Does a Mahayanist  need  to  practise  the  Hinayana  teachings  in  its
entirety?
KR: If you all have the same answer, now I would like to post this question
you:  If you need to achieve the state of full enlightenment (omniscience)
for the benefits of others, wouldn’t you need to achieve liberation for
yourself first? Yes or no?
(Students say ‘Yes’)
KR: If you say ‘yes’ then the earlier answer is wrong. I am not saying that
your answer is necessarily wrong. I am saying that your answer to the
second question opposes what you have just said earlier.
KR: What is liberation? Liberation means to be freed from the affliction
.If you say yes, it follows that in order to achieve the state of full
omniscience, and you must first achieve liberation?

Q1: The first greatness of the teachings -enabling one to know that all  the
teachings are free of contradiction- means to understand that they  are  the
path by which one to achieve enlightenment. Some are the main points of  the
path; some are the various branches of the path. What does that mean?
KR: In order to enter the path for the person of great capacity, you must
first train in the paths that are shared with the person of small and
middling capacity. That is no way you can just jump straight into the path
of the person of the great capacity.
So in order to engage in the practices for a person of a great capacity,
that person must also engage in the practices of the person of small and
middling capacity.  For example,   in order to engage in the practices for
a person of great capacity, the person must engage in the practices that is
shared with the person of small capacity. Similarly this person must also
engage into the practices that are done by the person of the middling
capacity.
The essence is that one should not think that the path of the person of
small capacity, the path of the middling capacity, the path of the great
capacity are completely unrelated to one . The point is that even if you
want to enter into the path of the person of great capacity, you must
engage in the prior practices. The practices of the person of the small and
middling capacity assist or help one to be able to enter into the practices
of the person of great capacity.
Although this is what is being said, you have to look deeper and to think
about things. So as a person following the Mahayana Path, you want to do
the practices of the person of the great capacity, if you looked at the
practices for a middling capacity, how does it help you? If you say it is
necessary, how does it help you?
One of the goals of learning here is to develop definite understanding and
certainty in your heart. That is, you got to be so sure and be confident
with your answer which you have thought about it such that if anyone were
to ask you question, you are able to answer with confidence. That is what
we hope to achieve. Everyone is here to study and everyone is doing the
same study. There is no need to be embarrassed, shy or afraid to speak up
and to air your view. Everyone is learning. But when someone is explaining,
everyone should listen and give your support.

Q5: How is the negative karma of abandoning the Dharma accumulated? When
one accumulates such negative karma, how does that harm one?
KR: We are talking about the negative karma of abandoning the dharma in the
context of the qualities of the Lamrim teaching. This Lamrim teaching
possesses four greatnesses and this is the context of the discussion.
It is very common to see people who claim themselves following the Mahayana
Path but say and believe that the practice of the Hinayana is not a
necessary for them as it has nothing to do with them and totally has no
connection. If they really believe in what they say and believe in what
they think, then that it said to be an extremely grave misdeed.
If a person who wants to practice the Mahayana and claim to be a Mahayana
practitioner but believes that Hinayana teachings are not necessary at all
and has nothing to do with him/her, that misconception is a grave misdeed.
If you have such a misconception, for sure you will definitely not achieve
what you want. Supposedly you want to achieve liberation and enlightenment
and hold onto such misconception, there is no way you will be able to
achieve the enlightenment. There is no way for you to practice the Mahayana
Path. On top of that, you accumulate this grave misdeed of negative karma.

Q7: Does a bodhisattva take rebirth in cyclic existence to benefit  sentient
beings? If this is so, how does a bodhisattva then develop  renunciation  of
or disenchantment with samsara?
KR: When bodhisattva takes rebirth in cyclic existence, do they experience
pain or not?
Ven Gyurme: He said no, for example, His Holiness. So His Holiness doesn’t
experience no pain?
KR: Don’t bodhisattvas see cyclic existence as an object to be abandoned
completely and there is nothing good about cyclic existence? Don’t they
regard cyclic existence as something to be given up completely?  Yes or no?
Ven Gyurme: You say yes. When the bodhisattvas enter into cyclic existence
for benefit of us sentient beings, don’t they enter into cyclic existence
enthusiastically and happily with full joy? Yes, no choice right?
KR: Since bodhisattvas enter into the cyclic existence to benefit sentient
beings happily, it follows that the bodhisattvas do not regard cyclic
existence as entirely bad and do not have hundred percent idea that samsara
is something that needs to be abandoned. Do bodhisattvas apprehend samsara
as something to be discarded completely? Can anyone happily take up
something that he/ she have already decided as something that is completely
bad?
Don’t bodhisattvas have a wish to be freed from samsara as quickly as
possible? Do the bodhisattvas want to stay in samsara as long as possible
or as short as possible?
(Students: As long as possible)
Ven Gyurme: Why then generate bodhicitta?
KR: The answer you gave earlier is correct but in order to make your
understanding more stable, people can ask all these questions to see
whether you know the stuffs.
Ven Gyurme: Isn’t there is a contradiction between bodhicitta and the wish
to stay in samsara longer?
KR: The main thing to think about is whether bodhisattvas stay in samsara
for a short time or for a long time. If you think that bodhisattva want to
stay in samsara for a long time, but bodhisattvas have bodhicitta which is
essentially a mind aspiring towards enlightenment and aspiring to benefit
sentient beings; i.e. they want to achieve enlightenment so they can do
perfect work for sentient beings. Bodhisattvas have this thought all the
time: “When can I achieve enlightenment.” If that is the case, how can
bodhisattva stay in samsara for a long time? Isn’t there is a contradiction
between bodhicitta and the wish to stay in samsara for a long time? It
follow that there is a contradiction.
What is generating bodhicitta? It is basically generating the mind aspire
towards enlightenment and aspire to benefit sentient beings. By achieve
enlightenment, only then bodhisattvas can do perfect work for sentient
beings. So bodhisattva always thinking: “When can I achieve enlightenment?
I must achieve enlightenment quickly.” If that is the case how can
bodhisattva stay in samsara for a long time?
(Ven Gyurme summarized to student answer): Bodhisattvas want to achieve
enlightenment quickly. In order to achieve enlightenment, bodhisattvas come
back to samsara to help sentient beings to achieve enlightenment quicker.
KR: Bodhisattvas at all times are completely sick of samsara; they have no
interest to stay in samsara for even one second longer and this is
renunciation. That is the case but it is mentioned in a verse of Guru Puja:
“Even if I have to stay in the fiery house of Avici for the sake of even
one sentient being, I will do it.” Bodhisattvas have that kind of courage
and determination even to benefit just one sentient being. In reality do
they stay as long as they wish to? No. Because of their courage, the
accumulation of the merit and wisdom is enhanced which make them achieve
enlightenment quicker. So you have to think whether bodhisattvas stay in
samsara for short time or long time?

It is important to put effort in participating in the discussion and it is
also important to ask question. Only then the qualities of learning will be
enhanced. It is not enough just to hear the teaching.  A lot of people
leave it at the level of listening and be satisfied; “I come to class to
attend the teaching, I learn and I get it.” But what you think you get it
mean that you have gotten it. You only know whether you have gotten it only
after you have asked question and until you have gained an ascertainment.
You have not understood the topic until you have ascertained it. In order
for us to achieve an ascertainment of whatever topic we are studying
therefore discussion become very important because in the course of
discussion, any faults in your argument or position can be highlighted.
Then you engage in the process of dispelling all the faults or wrong
reasonings. Only then, your understanding will become a real understanding.
Another thing that you need to keep in your mind all the times is that when
you are asked question during the process of discussion, you should not
appear as though you want to fight or motivated by anger or answering it
out of pride because these attitudes have been with us for long time and do
come out. It is just a matter to pay attention to it and trying to make
sure it does not surface.  Anyway it is normal that it happen during the
discussion but if we are mindful all the times, we will be able to stop it
and cool it down when it happen.
