Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 16.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.028994
================================================================================


Student 1: Why the Buddha did not start to teach immediately after he had
achieved enlightenment?
Khen Rinpoche: Once you are enlightened, your compassion is extended to all
sentient beings. In fact, when you have achieved enlightenment, your
compassion becomes fully developed. The Buddha has the ability to teach at
any time but the timing has got to do with the objects to be subdued -the
disciples. When we talk about the dharma, usually one only teaches when
requested i.e. if you have the interest in the dharma, you must request for
it; only then the teaching will be given. As in the earlier section on how
to teach the dharma, it is stated clearly that one should not teach unless
requested. Of course there are exceptions; there are times when the
circumstance and situation is right, one is allowed to teach even if one is
not requested. I guess this is the reason why the Buddha manifested the
deed of not teaching the dharma immediately after he had achieved
enlightenment.
It is important for you to have questions but the questions should arise
from your own reflection outside the class such that you have the question
standby and are ready to ask once you are given the opportunity. When I say
“the time to ask questions”, it does not mean that you come to class and
start to think about questions.
We have finished with the subject of the seven-branch of worship which is
essentially the practice for accumulating the collection of merit and to
purify the mind from obscurations. Next is the preparatory practice of
making request.
Six preparatory practices:
1 Cleaning your dwelling and setting up representations of body, speech and
mind
2 Laying out offerings
3 Sitting posture and mental attitude
4 Visualization of the merit field
5 Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities – Seven-limb
practice
6 Mandala offering and request for blessings

2B4A-2A1A-6 [Mandala offering and request for blessings]
Then, with a clear visualisation of the objects, offer a mandala and with
strong aspiration supplicate many times: “I pray that all mistaken
attitudes towards the spiritual teacher such as disrespect may cease and
that all the non-mistaken attitudes towards him may come about with ease
and I request blessings for a complete pacification of all outer and inner
obstacles”.
The sixth preparatory practice is making request. At this juncture of the
practice, one would have already visualized the merit field in the space in
front of oneself. At this point, one makes supplication and offers a
mandala. Then one makes request for the three great purposes. The three
great purposes are:
1. Request the merit fields to be able to quickly stop all flawed states of
   mind beginning with not respecting the teacher and so forth.
2. Request the merit fields to be able to easily generate all the
   realizations of the paths beginning with correctly devoting to the
   virtuous friends.
3. Request the merit fields to grant their blessings so that all inner and
   outer hindrances/ obstacles to be pacified. In order to achieve the
   first two great purposes, there are all sorts of hindrances/ obstacles.
   Therefore here you make request that all inner and outer hindrances/
   obstacles to be pacified.
If one is a practitioner looking at this request, this request consisting
of the three great purposes basically condenses every single request that
you need to make. The practices of accumulating merits and purifying our
mind from obscurations help us to ripen our minds. Through making request
to the merit fields, we create the cause for the blessings to enter our
minds. In order to generate all the realizations of the paths quickly
within our own mental continuum, it is important that the blessings enter
our mental continuums. In order for that to happen, we have to supplicate
the merit fields and make single-pointed request to the guru.
As mentioned earlier, we visualize the merit fields in the space in front
of us with Guru Shakyamuni Buddha as the principal figure.
On his right are the lineage gurus of the extensive deeds.
On his left are the lineage gurus of the profound views.
Above Guru Shakyamuni Buddha are the lineage lamas of the tantric
practices.
Surrounding them are all the root and other lineage gurus and the
meditational deities.
The way to visualize the dissolution of the merit fields is as followed:
Rays of light emanated from the heart of Guru Shakyamuni Buddha goes to the
edge of the merit fields. The dharma protectors dissolve into the dakas and
dakinis. The dakas and dakinis dissolve into the hearers and solitary
realizers. They dissolve into the bodhisattvas. The bodhisattvas then
dissolve into the Buddhas. The Buddhas then dissolve into the meditational
deities of the four classes of tantra.
All the lineage gurus of the extensive deeds dissolve into Maitreya.
All the lineage gurus of the profound views dissolve into Manjushri.
Above Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, the lineage lamas of the tantric practices
they dissolve into Vajradhara.
In front of Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, all the gurus whom you have dharma
connection in this life dissolve into your root guru.
Up to this point, now what are left are the five sets of the gurus. In
their presence, you feel how fortunate you are able to do this practice.
On the right and left of Guru Shakyamuni Buddha are Maitreya and Manjushri
respectively. Both dissolve into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. Vajradhara also
dissolve into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha.
What is left is your root guru who is in front of Guru Shakyamuni Buddha.
You visualize your root guru dissolve into the principal figure Guru
Shakyamuni Buddha.
For the reason of auspiciousness, you should not visualize your guru
dissolve into light and then dissolve into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. You
visualize your root guru dissolve into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha just liked a
grain being pushes into a slab of butter.
Now, all the gurus surrounding Guru Shakyamuni Buddha have dissolve into
Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. Then you focus on Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. At his
heart is Vajradhara. At the heart of Vajradhara is the blue syllable HUM.
After performing a short seven-branch of worship, one can make a single
pointed request by using use the verse from the Guru Puja practice:
You are my guru, you are my yidam,
You are my daka, dakinis and Dharma protectors.
From now until enlightenment I shall seek no other refuge than you.
In this life, the bardo and all future lives,
Hold me with your hook of compassion;
Free me from samsara and nirvana’s fears,
Grant all attainments,
Be my constant friend and guard me from interferences.
We pile up the requests in this one occasion. We then make a single pointed
whole hearted request to the guru with the attitudes that everything is in
the hand of the guru.
What we have mentioned so far up to here are the seven-limb practice and so
forth and these constitute the preparatory practices for the main
meditational session.  Now, we start with the main practice that sustaining
the relevant meditation.
By depending on what you are going to meditate on, you sustain the object
of meditation in that session. At the conclusion of the practice, you
visualize a replica of Guru Shakyamuni Buddha dissolving into you. Then you
yourself transform into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. You emanate lights from
yourself as Shakyamuni Buddha that go out and touch all sentient beings and
transform all the sentient beings into Shakyamuni Buddhas.

2B4A-2A1B What to do during the main part
  1 How to sustain [meditation] in general
  2 How to sustain [meditation] in this context
2B4A-2A1B-1 How to sustain [meditation] in general
  A Identification of and need for meditation
First: Meditation on the path as it will be explained here serves to make
you fit to make use of any virtuous object you wish.

First, there is an introduction to:
   1) The meaning of meditation
   2) The purpose of meditation
What is meditation? Meditation refers to the act of repeatedly focusing
your mind upon a virtuous object of meditation.
The Tibetan word for meditation is ‘gom’ which has the connotation of
familiarizing yourself with something repeatedly. In this context,
meditation refers to the act of repeatedly familiarizing your mind with a
virtuous object of meditation.
There are many forms of meditation. For example, one can meditate on
impermanence and you can familiarize your mind with the meaning of
impermanence by repeatedly focusing your mind on the meaning of
impermanence. That process should bring about a very strong feeling for
impermanent.
In the case of meditation on impermanence, you take impermanence as the
object of meditation and familiarize your mind with it. So that is one form
of meditation. But in the case of meditation on compassion, you don’t take
compassion as the object of meditation. When we say we are doing the
meditation on compassion, what we are trying to do is to transform the
entity of the mind into compassion.  Therefore the teachings talk about:
   -the meditation that has the aspect of the object and
   -the meditation that has the aspect of the consciousness.
What is the purpose of meditation? The purpose of meditation is to bring
our mind under our control. What is wrong if the mind is not under the
control? When the mind is not under the control, it means that we will be
under the control of our mind and the mind is controlled by the
afflictions. If we let our mind come under the control of afflictions, that
will gives rise to all faults and mistakes which then lead to the
accumulation of negative actions.
Meditation here means to bring our mind under our control. Once we are able
to bring our mind under our control, we can direct our mind as we wish
toward a virtuous object of meditation as long we want. That means making
the mind serviceable.
It is very important for you to understand the meaning of meditation and
the purpose of meditation. You need to keep this in your mind. It is very
common for people to ask: What is meditation? Why do we meditate? The
answer is very clear right here, isn’t it?
Meditation means the act of repeatedly focusing your mind upon a virtuous
object of meditation. This means that we should focus our mind upon a
virtuous object all the time. It is important for us to do that all the
time. Why? Because if the mind is not focusing on the virtuous object of
meditation, that means our mind has not been under our control; but rather
our mind are under the controlled of the afflictions. So the purpose of
meditation is to bring our mind under our control. If our mind is not
brought under our control, that will gives rise to all faults and mistakes
which then lead to the accumulation of negative actions.

B The faults of bad imperfect meditation
Moreover, if you attend to this and that object, thinking to take merely
this number of virtuous objects in any order you wish, nothing will come of
it and having gone wrong from the beginning, your spiritual practice will
continue to be faulty throughout your life.
Before one familiarizes one’s mind with a virtuous object of meditation,
one must know very clearly what one is meditating on, how one is going
about doing it and what is the order of the different meditation topics?
Then one meditates based on that knowledge.  Therefore before you meditate,
you must project the intention to meditate exactly according to what you
have decided based on the knowledge of the meditation topics and the
specific order. So without any addition and omission, you project the
intention to meditate exactly according to how it should be done. It is
said that if one meditates in such a way then the meditation will turn up
well. If one does not follow this discipline but rather just meditate on
whatever come to mind i.e. one meditate on whatever one feel like
meditating and have no clear idea what one want to meditate or meditate
with no specific order, then no positive results will follow. If one
meditate in such a way and make it a habit then one will have difficulty to
meditate properly and it would be difficult for one to able to focus the
mind on a virtuous object. Therefore at the beginning it is very important
for one not to get into this habit.

C How to sustain good meditation
Therefore, you should first of all develop certainty concerning the number
and order of objects to be sustained, then you should unleash a strong
driving force that does not allow thoughts to arise other than in
accordance with what has been ascertained, and sustain with mindfulness and
alertness what has been ascertained without omission nor addition.
Please read from page 32 to page 38 on your own.

Extract from LRCM V1 page 99:  Actual session
i) How to sustain the meditation in general
   That which is known as "meditation" is the act of sustaining  an  object
of meditation and specific subjective aspects by repeatedly  focusing  your
mind upon a virtuous object of  meditation.  The  purpose  of  this  is  as
follows. From beginningless time you have been under the  control  of  your
mind; your mind has not been under your  control.  Furthermore,  your  mind
tended to be obscured by the afflictions and  so  forth.  Thus,  meditation
aims to bring this mind, which gives rise to all faults  and  flaws,  under
control and then it aims to make it serviceable. Serviceability means  that
you can  direct  your  mind  as  you  wish  toward  a  virtuous  object  of
meditation.
   You might try to sustain your meditation by jumping  to  this  and  that
object of meditation. You may consider setting up according to your wish  a
variety of virtuous objects of meditation in no specific order. Though  you
may do this, you will not be able to take up your object of meditation with
this method. Consequently, you will greatly hinder your mind's  ability  to
be directed as you wish toward a virtuous object of meditation. If you have
made this a habit from the start,  the  virtuous  practice  of  your  whole
lifetime will be flawed.
   Therefore, from the beginning, firmly determine the  definite  order  and
enumeration of whatever objects of meditation you  wish  to  sustain.  Then,
strengthen your will by repeatedly thinking, "I will not  set  up  something
that is different  from  what  I  have  determined."  Without  exceeding  or
falling short of what you have  determined,  sustain  your  meditation  with
mindfulness and vigilance.


Allocation of group members with group leaders in BP class
The primary function of the group leaders is to  assist  and  support  class
members in their studies and to establish the manner  in  which  they  study
best such as through:
         • Summaries of lessons
         • Revision classes
         • Tables and charts
         • Questions & answers (i.e. brain teaser questions)
         • Discussion group sessions
Note that these groups allocation is different from the monthly Sunday
discussion group.
The group leader to also offer emotional support and care if members
encounter personal problems and difficulties.
Each group will be scheduled to perform karma yoga of cleaning the gompa,
setting up tables, seating mat cushions, prayer texts and so forth and
clearing of water bowls at the altar.




