Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson36.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.038225
================================================================================


As usual we will spend a few minutes to meditate on Manjushri.
Visualize Manjushri clearly in the space in front of you. As I have
explained before, perform the visualization of the flow of nectars from
Manjushri to yourself and purify all your negativities and obscurations
particularly ignorance. Think that your wisdom has developed. As usual,
make a heartfelt single-pointed request to Manjushri.
If you are encountering any obstacles in your dharma studies you can
visualize the nectars in the nature of his wisdom flow from Manjushri into
you and completely eliminates and purifies all those hindrances. You can
also visualize the nectars in the nature of his wisdom flow into you and
purify all your ignorance, all your obscurations and all your obstacles to
the dharma learning and practices. You think that every single thing is
eliminated from your mind and are purified. The clear light nature of your
mind is in the nature of clarity and awareness and due to the purification,
you are able to shine forth clearly. You must think that all your
ignorance, all your obscurations and all your obstacles are completely
purified and allowing the clear light nature of your mind to be aware of
that.  Then think that your mind becomes something not different from
Manjushri and your mind become like his. As said in the teaching the
stronger your faith and belief in that do make a big difference to your own
mind. If you are able to think the nature of Manjushri’s mind and the
nature of your own mind are inseparable and both are empty of existing
inherently, then it would be very good.
If you are also able to bring to your mind of how Manjushri (the object of
meditation), yourself (the person who is doing the meditation) and your
mind are empty of existing inherently, it will be good as well. This is
similar to what we have discussed in the previous lesson.
As much as possible you can reflect on these various points. Perhaps you
can reflect on those points which you are more comfortable with. Actually
there are many things that one can meditate on. For example, while you
visualize Manjushri in the space in front of you, you can visualize that at
his heart there is moon disc and at the middle of the moon disc is the
syllable DHI encircles by the mantra garland OM A RA PA TSA NA DHI.
Sometime you can just focus on the syllable DHI at his heart. This can help
you to develop single-pointedness of the mind. You can focus on the
syllable DHI at his heart and the way of visualizing the syllable DHI is
that as if your mind is kind of merge with the object syllable DHI.
Anyway, these are the many things you can think about. Perhaps you can
choose the one which you are comfortable with. Let us do that for few
minutes.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Don’t do all.
Usually before class, we recite a series of prayers. We started off with
the prayer “Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha.” When we recite this prayer it is
not about just uttering with our mouth. As we recite the prayer we should
bring the meaning of the prayer to the mind. Very often a lot of people do
not do that. They just utter the words without really thinking about the
meaning and for some of them, this become a habit. So this is a bad habit.
When we recite the prayer we have to bring the meaning to the mind. In this
case when we recite the prayer “Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha” perhaps we can
bring to mind the Buddha’s holy body, speech and mind. So when we recite
the prayer, in this case is Shakyamuni Buddha, and by thinking about
Shakyamuni Buddha we should try to develop a sense of faith and devotion
towards the Buddha. Even though for now we might not be able to sustain
that kind of feeling for even one or two minutes but as much as possible we
should put an effort to develop some of those feelings when we recite the
prayer with faith and devotion.  We have to keep this in mind and getting
into the habit of doing that. I think this is very important and I will not
say this again. Whenever we recite the prayer, right from the beginning we
have to keep in mind that we should put effort into thinking about the
meaning while we reciting the prayer. In the case of reciting the prayer in
the class, we bring forth faith in the Buddha. We need to get into the
habit of thinking about the meaning of the prayer as we recite them. We
need to put effort to get into this habit. I think this is important. It
seems that this is the case for most people when it comes to reciting the
prayer; they just uttering the words. They may be reciting the prayer but
somehow their mind is not really there, there is no feeling in the heart
and the mind does not move. So this is something we need to change.
When it comes to mandala offering, again a lot of time people just recite
and regards it as a traditional practice. That is not the point. The point
is that when doing the mandala offering you have to bring to your mind an
object to whom you have faith in and then you present the mandala offering
towards this object. In your heart you can visualize all the beautiful
offerings and then present it. If you do it even for a short period of
time, even just for one minute, while you are reciting the prayer you can
accumulate so much merits. So you should bring forth to mind the object to
whom you have faith in and then offer the mandala with faith and devotion.
After that you make a single-pointed request to pacify whatever obstacles
you may be facing.
In our context here, we are trying to learn the Buddhadharma. So we should
make single-pointed heartfelt request for all the obstacles and hindrances
in our dharma practices and dharma learning to be eliminated.
We also recite the prayer for going for refuge and generate the altruistic
intention. The purpose of the prayer is to generate your motivation and in
this case is to bring forth the mind of the refuge and the altruistic
intention. You should put effort to be able to generate with some feelings
even for a short period of time. Even though you may not have a lot of time
but make sure that while doing those prayers during the short period of
time the setting of your motivation is done well and is of good quality.
During that short period of time, at least you should try to have some kind
of heartfelt sincere wish thinking: “I am going for refuge and I must
achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings”.
I think it is very important for us to change the habit of just merely
reciting to reciting the prayer mindfully and thinking of the meaning. For
a start, we should take our first small step to think about meaning of
those prayers that we are reciting; which do not take a long time. Make
sure we start with taking this small step to get into the habit of
reflecting the meaning of the prayers as we recite them.

2B4B-2B1A-2B3B  Specifically how to purify [non-virtues] by means of the
four powers
1 How negativites and downfalls need to be purified by various means in
accordance with statements of the Teacher Buddha
2 How to redress downfalls
3 How to redress negative actions
4 How the four powers are complete with all the antidotes
5 The manner of purification
6 How it is necessary to strive not to be tainted by faulty conduct from
the start

We started with the discussion on how to purify our negative karma. In
order to do a good practice of purifying our negative karma, an ideal and
perfect practice of purification involves few prerequisites and
understandings. First we need to have a conviction in the ability of the
Buddha as a valid person and as an infallible refuge. On the basis of that
one then develops faith and conviction in whatever the Buddha had taught
which includes having faith and conviction in the Buddha’s explanation on
the working of karma and their results. As you know when the Buddha talks
about karma in general he explains that:
    1. Karma is certain and definite
    2. Karma increase
    3. You will not experience the result of an action that you did not do
    4. Once the action is done its result will not disappear and it will
       ripen one day.
Based on these prerequisites and understandings then we will be able to
engage in the proper practice of purification. One of the most important
factors in ensuring a proper purification of our negativities is having the
heartfelt regret for having done all those nonvirtuous actions in the past.
As we have already discussed in the previous lesson, in order to have a
real heartfelt regret for the nonvirtuous action that we have already done
in the past we first must have proper understanding of the result of the
nonvirtuous action that we have already committed in the past. As we have
already discussed these and there are many examples: any one nonvirtuous
action will have three results: the fruitional effects, the causally
concordant effects and the environmental effects.
If one has a good understanding of these effects of nonvirtuous action we
will be able to have really strong regret from our heart then definitely we
will think: “I must definitely do something with my negative karma. I must
purify it.” When you have such a heartfelt sincere wish to purify your
negative karma then naturally you will look for ways to purify your
negative karma by looking for the remedies and the antidotes. In the last
lesson we looked at the six different antidotes or remedies by which we can
purify our negative karma.
The six kinds of remedies:
   1. Dependence on the profound sutras
   2. Interest in emptiness
   3. Dependence in recitation
   4. Dependence upon images (holy objects)
   5. Dependence on worship
   6. Dependence on names
We can do any of these remedies to purify our negativities and
obscurations.
  -We can recite and reflect the meaning of the profound sutras.
  -We can meditate on the ultimate nature of reality- emptiness.
  -We can depend on the recitation of different mantras for purification.
  -We can erect the representation of the Buddha and different holy
  objects, making holy objects.
  -We can make various offerings.
  -We can recite the names of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas.
If we do any of these with the intention to purify our negativities and
obscurations it is said that our negativities and obscurations will be
purified.
We should engage in these purification practices on the basis of having
generated strong regret on the nonvirtuous action that we have already
accumulated in the past. As we know that there is this purification
practice of Vajrasattva. From the basis of having strong regret for the
nonvirtuous action that we have already accumulated in the past, we do the
meditation and recitation practice of Vajrasattva. If we recite the mantra
of Vajrasattva twenty-one times a day as mentioned in the teaching it will
stop the negative karma from increasing. In the future, if you are aspired
and being able to do a retreat on Vajrasattva, then by doing the practice
as according to the tradition that is layout and sustain well the different
visualizations during the retreat, if you recite the long Vajrasattva
mantra for a hundred thousand times, as mentioned in the teaching, all the
obscurations and negative karmas can be purified. So we should aim and work
towards that one day.
(The four opponents powers:
   1. The power of eradication
   2. The power of applying remedies
   3. The power of turning away from faults
   4. The power of the foundation)

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 253:  3" The power of turning away from
faults
The third power is actually restraining yourself from the ten non-virtuous
actions. In the Sun Essence Sutra, the Buddha said that this restraint
destroys all karma, afflictions, and obscurations of the teaching created
physically, verbally, or mentally by way of killing and the like. The third
power eliminates bad actions that you have previously created yourself,
caused others to create, or have rejoiced in others creating. Confession
that lacks an attitude of wholehearted restraint becomes merely words.
Dharmamitra’s Commentary on the "Sutra on the Discipline" explains that the
Buddha was thinking of this fact when he said in scripture, "Is there
subsequent restraint?" Therefore, it is very important to have an attitude
of restraint within which you have conviction not to commit that action
again. Moreover the development of this attitude depends on the first
power.]

The third power is the turning away from faults which is restraining
yourself from engaging the ten nonvirtuous actions again in the future. It
is essentially making a pledge and promise to yourself  that you will not
engage in the nonvirtuous actions again.
Even for a minute or even for a short period of time you can make a pledge
by promising that you will not engage in any of the ten nonvirtuous actions
and it has to be heartfelt.
Question: If we really make the pledge “I will not engage in any of the ten
nonvirtuous actions” will it become a lie or not?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Is it true or not when you promise that?
Anyway the point is that power of turning away from faults refers to having
a strong and stable determined pledge to not engaging in nonvirtuous
actions. It is mentioned in the teaching that in order for us to develop
the proper power of turning away from faults, we first must have develop
well the first power - the power of eradication i.e. in order to be able to
really restrain ourselves from non-virtues again in the future it boils
down to whether we have a real regret of non-virtues or not.  As I have
mentioned in the last lesson, when we talk about negativities, there are:
- the negativities that we have already accumulated in the past or
- the negativities that will be accumulated in the future.
The first two powers - the power of eradication and the power of applying
remedies- take care of the negativities that we have already accumulated in
the past.
For the power of turning away from faults, we have to apply the restraint
so that we control ourselves from engaging in non-virtues again. This is
said to be important because if we have this we will not accumulate fresh
negativity.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 254: 4" The power of the foundation
The fourth power is going for refuge to the  three  jewels  and  cultivating
the spirit of enlightenment. With regard to this,  the  Conqueror  spoke  in
general about a variety of means through which beginners could remove  their
sins. However, a complete remedy requires all four powers to be present.
The sins are removed in several ways. One  way  is  when  small  sufferings
occur instead of the great sufferings of rebirth in the  miserable  realms.
Another is that, even if you are born in a  miserable  realm,  you  do  not
experience its sufferings. Still another is that a  mere  headache  in  the
present life serves to remove the sin. Likewise, the sins whose effects you
must experience  for  a  long  time  may  become  ones  whose  effects  you
experience for only a short time or that you need not  experience  at  all.
There is no certainty about how sins are removed,  because  it  depends  on
whether the purifier is of great or little strength, whether the remedy  is
one in which the four powers are complete or  incomplete,  intense  or  not
intense, of long or short duration, and so forth.
The statement in both sutra and texts on discipline that  "karma  does  not
perish even in one hundred eons" is made with regard to the karma for which
you have not cultivated a remedy with the  four  powers.  However,  if  you
purify yourself with a remedy having the aforementioned four powers, it  is
said that you will even remove karma that you are bound to experience]

The fourth power is the power of the foundation which is going for refuge
to the Three Jewels and cultivating the spirit of enlightenment-bodhicitta.
If these two attitudes are generated well in our mind that itself purifies
the obscurations and negativities. In the oral tradition, it is explained
that when we create negative karma it is either:
 -in relation to the Three Jewels or
 -in relation to sentient beings
If it is a negative karma you can say that it is subsumed in one of them.
If one goes for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and does it well
then we purify the negativities and obscurations that we have accumulated
in relation to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
By generating love for sentient beings and by developing compassion for
them in particular if we are able to develop the altruistic intention to
achieve enlightenment for sentient beings then that purifies the
negativities and obscurations that we have accumulated in relation to the
sentient beings.
The text goes on to talk about the way in which the negativities are
purified. When we say negativities are purified it does not mean that they
are purified completely or are purified partially. Now the text will
discuss on this:
“With regard to this, the Buddha spoke in general about a variety  of  means
through  which  beginners  could  remove  their  negativities.  However,   a
complete remedy requires all four powers to  be  present.  The  negativities
are removed in several ways. One way is when small sufferings occur  instead
of the great sufferings of rebirth  in  the  miserable  realms.  Another  is
that, even if you are born in a miserable realm, you do not  experience  its
sufferings. Still another is that  a  mere  headache  in  the  present  life
serves to remove the negativity. Likewise, the  negativities  whose  effects
you must experience for a long  time  may  become  ones  whose  effects  you
experience for only a short time or that you need  not  experience  at  all.
There is no  certainty  about  how  negativities  are  removed,  because  it
depends on whether the purifier is of great or little strength, whether  the
remedy is one in which the four powers are complete or  incomplete,  intense
or not intense, of long or short duration, and so forth”.
Remember that one of the way of classifying karma is:
    - Karma whose result that you will definitely experience
    - Karma whose result that you will possibly experience
Let us look at the karma whose result that you will  definitely  experience.
Let us say that you have created a nonvirtuous karma whose result  that  you
will definitely experience, is there anything you can do about  it?  Can  it
be purified? The answer is “Yes,” the  karma  whose  result  that  you  will
definitely experience can  be  purified  if  you  purify  your  negativities
through applying the four powers in their entirety.
Basically there is no contradiction by saying that karma whose  result  that
you will definitely experience can be purified although  it  says  that  the
karma whose result that you will definitely experience. Here what  it  means
is that if you don’t purify it with the four opponent powers then  you  will
have to experience the result. If you purify that karma  whose  result  that
you will definitely experience through applying the four powers, that  karma
can be purified, that mean that you will not have to experience its  effect.

By purifying our negativities through the application of  the  four  powers,
the negativities are purified. What is the  meaning  of  one’s  negativities
being  purified?  Purification  of   the   negativities   means   that   the
purification practice weakens the capacity of the karma to bear  fruit  such
that it will not bring forth its result. The karma  lacks  the  capacity  to
bear fruit. It does not mean that the karma has been eradicated. As said  in
the text:

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 255: In this way, confession,  restraint,  and
so forth weaken the capacity of karma to bear fruit.  Such  karma  will  not
bear fruit even when it comes in contact with  other  conditions.  Likewise,
it is said that anger and the production of wrong views weaken  the  ability
of roots of virtue to give effects.]

This is the same as how anger and the development of wrong views weaken  the
ability of merits or virtues for it to give effect. Usually we hear that  if
we get angry or generate wrong views it will destroy our virtues. What  this
means is that anger and wrong views weaken the ability  of  your  merits  to
give effect of something positive.
It is incorrect to think that: “It is alright to accumulate  negative  karma
as it can be purified.” As mentioned in the teaching that it is much  better
not to create the negative karma from the beginning.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 255: You have not found a remedy that
destroys the seeds of the afflictions. Yet, you have weakened the karma
with a contrary condition. Consequently, even though other conditions do
assemble, the karma does not fructify. You can see many such situations
among external and internal causes and effects.
Therefore, although you strive at the accumulation of much virtuous karma,
if you do not guard against the causes that destroy virtuous karma such as
anger, the virtuous karma will not give its effect, as stated above. Hence,
you must strive to guard against causes that destroy virtuous karma and
make an effort to remedy nonvirtuous karma.]

The text says:
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 257: Through confession and restraint you  can
purify yourself of negativities without any remainder. However, there  is  a
vast difference between the purity of  having  never  been  tarnished  by  a
fault from the beginning and the purity attained through confession of  that
fault. For example, the Bodhisattva Levels says:
  You can redress the occurrence of a root infraction through adopting  the
  bodhisattva vow. However, it will  be  impossible  to  attain  the  first
  bodhisattva level in this lifetime.
Further, the Sutra Gathering All the Threads states  that  even  though  you
clear away negativities, you will need at  least  ten  eons  to  attain  the
level  of  forbearance  [second  of  the  four  levels  of   the   path   of
preparation].
Therefore, complete purification means to completely purify yourself of  the
arising of unpleasant effects. However, since you greatly  extend  the  time
needed to attain such things as knowledge of the  path,  strive  not  to  be
tarnished by faults from the start. The Buddha said  that  for  this  reason
noble beings do not consciously engage in even the subtlest of  negativities
or infractions, even for the sake of their own lives. If  it  was  the  case
that purity through confession was similar to faults that have  never  taken
place, then there would be no need to act in this way.
This is also evident in the world. Although an injured hand,  foot,  and  so
on may heal, they are different  from  the  ones  that  have  never  had  an
injury.]

Student 1:  When you are meditating on emptiness as an antidote, you bring
to mind all phenomena, including our virtuous activities. How will that
meditation then also not weaken the positive effects of the virtuous karma
that one has accumulated even though they are not the object of our regret
and purification?  (Audio details from 65)
Khen Rinpoche: In the last lesson we talked about  the  non-objectifying  of
the three circles. I have mentioned that when you reflect  on  emptiness  it
causes your virtues to increase and it causes your  non-virtues  to  weaken.
So when we reflect on how the virtuous karmas do not exist  from  their  own
side it causes that virtuous karma to strengthen. In the  teaching  it  does
not say that it cause the virtues to become weaker. But when we  reflect  on
how the nonvirtuous karmas do not exist from their own side  it  causes  the
nonvirtuous karma to weaken. As I have mentioned in the  last  lesson,  when
we reflect on emptiness –the ultimate  nature  of  reality-  it  causes  the
apprehensions of true existence, the afflictions, to  weaken.  Basically  it
causes the root of all our cyclic existence to weaken. When  we  reflect  on
how the  negativities  are  empty  of  existing  inherently  it  causes  our
afflictions to weaken. So when our afflictions are weakened the  ability  to
bring forth their effect is also weakened.
(Some discussions which are not audible)
That is the reason why that  the  teaching  says:  “Everything  arises  from
emptiness”.
Student 2: In that sense does it means that if one  has  realized  emptiness
one don’t really need all the four powers to purify.  For  example,  if  you
have the realization of emptiness  do  you  really  need  regret  for  every
single negative action to purify all the negative actions?
Khen Rinpoche: When you have  directly  perceived  emptiness  wouldn’t  your
regret become stronger?
Student 2: What I meant is do you need to regret for every  single  negative
action to purify all the negative actions?
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that you already have the  direct  perception  of
emptiness, do you need to focus on all non-virtues that you have created  in
order to purify them?
Student 2: Yeah
Khen Rinpoche: How can you remember each  and  every  single  non-virtue  in
order to purify them? The thing is that when you  generate  regret  you  are
thinking about all the negative karmas that you have created  in  this  life
and in the past lives.
Student 2: How do you want to restrain specifically such as I don’t want  to
kill?
Khen Rinpoche: The ten nonvirtuous actions are non-exhaustive  and  they  do
not represent all the negative karma that anybody can  create  but  the  ten
nonvirtuous actions are the ten main  one.  When  you  apply  restraint  you
think: “I will not engage in actions such as the ten nonvirtuous actions.”
Student 2: In the text, under attitude, it says nonvirtuous action is to  be
complete with the present of ignorance, anger or  attachment.  For  virtuous
action to be complete, does it have to be accompanied by non-ignorance, non-
anger or non-attachment?
Khen Rinpoche: The ten virtuous actions are opposite to the ten  nonvirtuous
actions. Like the ten nonvirtuous actions, the ten virtuous actions  require
basis, attitude, performance and culmination. A  virtuous  action  need  not
necessarily be motivated by something  that  which  is  not  an  affliction.
Basically  for  most  people,  their  virtuous  actions  are  motivated   by
afflictions with ignorance as its root. In this context here, for  a  person
of small capacity, whatever she or he does is motivated  by  ignorance.  The
karma that causes us to have a good rebirth is  primarily  motivated  or  is
driven by ignorance.
Student 1: How does the meditating on the emptiness of  the  virtuous  karma
lead to an increase in the virtuous karma  especially  in  the  cases  where
these virtuous karmas have ignorance as an affliction?
Khen Rinpoche: If you think about it, what is it that obscures the  virtues?
It is affliction. So when you reflect  on  emptiness,  the  affliction  that
obscures that virtue becomes weaker. So we have to say  the  virtues  become
stronger.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  This is for everyone to think.  When  you
about the emptiness of the virtues how does virtues increase?
I am not sure. This is something to think about.  The  thing  that  obscures
the virtue is the  affliction.  When  you  reflect  on  the  emptiness  (the
ultimate nature of reality) of a phenomenon which includes  affliction,  the
affliction becomes weaker.  If  the  affliction  that  obscures  the  virtue
becomes weaker then you have to say that the  virtue  becomes  stronger.  If
you reflect on  the  emptiness  of  the  affliction  itself  the  affliction
obviously becomes weaker. If  the  affliction  is  weaker  then  the  virtue
becomes stronger.
When  you  reflect  on  the  emptiness  of  the  virtue  you   weaken   your
apprehension of virtue as true existence. When you weaken your  apprehension
of virtue as truly existence you can say  that  you  causes  the  virtue  to
becomes stronger.
For the non-virtue you cannot apply  the  same  line  of  reasoning  because
virtue and non-virtue are not the same thing as they bring  forth  different
result.
Student 1: In the cases of  virtue  and  non-virtue  that  is  motivated  by
ignorance, the motivating factor -ignorance –is the same. If we  remove  the
base ignorance then both should be weakened.
Student 3: (presenting her view. Audio details from 85 – 88)
This particular section concludes with the measure  of  the  attitude  of  a
person of small capacity.
Ven Gyurme: In simple English, the measure of the attitude of  a  person  of
small capacity means when you will become a person of  small  capacity.  The
text says:
[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 261: b) The measure of the attitude of a
person of small capacity
Previously you have had an uncontrived interest in this life, while your
interest in future lives has merely been an understanding that follows what
others say. You have generated the attitude of a person of small capacity
when these interests change places, and your interest in the future has
become paramount, while your interest in this life has become merely
incidental. However, you must make this attitude stable. Thus, once it has
occurred, cultivate it diligently.]
For us, our  emphasis  is  on  this  life.  We  considered  this  life  more
important than what will happen to us in our future lives.  When  these  two
switch places  i.e.  when  we  consider  that  our  future  lives  are  more
important than this life, then we become a person of small capacity.
For us we are not a person of small  capacity  because  we  still  put  more
emphasis on the happiness of this life. We think that the happiness of  this
life is number one important and the happiness in the future  lives  is  not
as important. When it comes to dharma and if we  have  to  choose  which  is
more important, happiness of this life or the dharma- we  still  choose  the
happiness of this life first and the dharma become  secondary.  As  such  we
are still not even a person of small capacity.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):   Even  not  there.  Are  you  inside  the
person of small capacity?
Because we consider the happiness of this life and the affairs of this  life
as more important and we place more emphasis on it rather the  happiness  of
the future lives so we are not even the person of small capacity.
Person of small capacity is someone who consider the  future  lives  as  the
most important thing i.e. more important than  this  life.  When  a  person,
after having gone for refuge to Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, live  an  ethical
life in accordance with the law of karma  and  emphasizing  to  achieve  the
happiness in the future lives, then this person can be called  a  person  of
small capacity.
Then there may be some qualms regarding the measure of  the  attitude  of  a
person of small capacity. Some people may say: “In the Buddha’s teaching  we
are told to renounce the entire samsara even though the good  things  within
cyclic existence. If that is the case, then seeking  a  good  rebirth  is  a
contradiction.”
On one hand you are supposed to renounce the cyclic existence with  all  the
good things which includes good rebirth, long life, resources etc. Then  how
does wanting a good rebirth is not a contradiction?
The answer is that we have to understand that there are temporary  goal  and
ultimate goal. Seeking a good rebirth is something that you should look  for
but is not the ultimate goal but is a temporary goal. Having a good  rebirth
with excellent  body,  resources  and  so  forth  are  temporary  goals  but
nevertheless they are necessarily to achieve the ultimate goals  -liberation
and enlightenment- because  on   the  basis  of  having  good  rebirth  with
excellent body, resources and so forth you can move towards  liberation  and
enlightenment.  Another thing to note is that not everything that is  within
high status such as excellent body, resources, attendants and  so  forth  is
included in samsara because the most excellent body  is  the  Buddha’s  form
body,  the most excellent resources are the enjoyment  of  the  pure  realms
and the  most  excellent  attendants  are  the  embodiment’s  retinue.   So,
basically not everything that is included within this high  status  such  as
excellent body, resources and attendants is within samsara.

[Alt translation LRCM V1 page 261: c) Clearing up misconceptions concerning
the attitude of a person of small capacity
Misconception: In the scriptures it says that you must turn your mind away
from all the excellent things of cyclic existence. Someone could
misinterpret this and think that is improper to develop an interest in high
status [as a human or deity] in which body, resources, and the like are
excellent, because it is within cyclic existence.
Response: There are two kinds of objects of interest: those which you
diligently seek temporarily and those which you diligently seek ultimately.
Even persons who strive for liberation must diligently but temporarily seek
excellent bodies, etc., in cyclic existence. For, they will ultimately
attain certain goodness through a succession of lives in high status.
Further, not everything within high status—excellent body, resources, and
attendants—is included within cyclic existence. The most excellent body is
a buddha's embodiment as form; the most excellent resources are the riches
of this embodiment's realm; and the most excellent attendants are this
embodiment's retinue. Intending this, Maitreya says in the Ornament for the
Mahayana Sutras that you achieve high status as a human or deity by means
of the first four perfections:
  Excellent resources and body
  And excellent retinue—high status.
Again, it is said in many texts that you achieve a buddha's embodiment as
form by means of the first four perfections.
Therefore, those who achieve omniscience accomplish a great amount of
exceptional ethical discipline, generosity, patience, and the like for a
long time. Consequently, they diligently seek the effects of these as well
-exceptional high status with its body and so forth.]

Student 4:  What is the level of meditation of emptiness does  one  need  to
do the purification practice? (Audio details from 99– 102)
Khen Rinpoche: This depends on the level in which you are meditating on
emptiness. With respect to meditation on emptiness:
-you can meditate with the correct belief
-you can meditate on emptiness while having ascertained it already or
-you can meditate on emptiness directly if you have the direct perception
Commensurate with the level of meditation on emptiness then you have that
level of purification.  Of course in order to destroy the seed of the non-
virtues, not just to purify but to destroy, you must have the direct
perception on emptiness. Of course it is difficult to meditate on emptiness
right from the beginning, therefore the Buddha taught many methods such as
recitation of mantra of purification, making offerings and so forth. With
these practices the person will be able to accumulate merits and strengthen
his own merits. There are others methods which are mentioned here which we
can accumulate merits. While we engage in those activities to purify the
mind, then merits are accumulated. As you accumulate more merits the
negativities become weaker and your mind become clearer and it makes a
difference to be able to move towards the realization of emptiness
directly.  The more merits that you are able to accumulate, probably you
have to say that the non-virtues that you have become weaker.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):   Can we say that?  If you accumulate a
lot of merits your negative karma will go down.
Ven Gyurme:  Without doing any purification, by accumulating merits, will
your negativities go down?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):   When you do these six things to the
Buddha to accumulate merits, you accumulate merits and your negative karma
become smaller?
If I say your negative karma will become weaker because, through that
merits, you become closer to enlightenment, aren’t you?  If you are nearer
to enlightenment your negative karma has to be weaker.






























