Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 3.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.115646
================================================================================


Praise to Manjushri
We will recite the “Praise to Manjushri” by visualizing Manjushri in the
space in front of us and then recite the mantra (Om Ah Ra Pa Tsa Na Dhi).
With regards to the meaning of Manjushri;
      -there is Manjushri of interpretive meaning (also translated as
provisional meaning) and
      -there is Manjushri of definitive meaning
The Manjushri of definitive meaning is the final or ultimate wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness and that arises as a peaceful deity; which is
the Manjushri of interpretive meaning.
This ultimate wisdom directly perceiving emptiness is also the meaning of
definitive guru as well. When we talk about the guru or the lama, we talk
about the provisional lama and the definitive lama.
The definitive lama (guru) is the same thing as the ultimate wisdom
directly perceiving emptiness. Since that is the case, therefore the guru
and Manjushri are one essence i.e. they have the same entity.
When we talk about the interpretive Manjushri or the interpretive guru,
other than having different aspects performing different activities,
otherwise, when we look at the definitive meaning of both, they are the
same. Therefore they are one. So before we recite the “Praise to
Manjushri”, the first thing is to visualize Manjushri as inseparable from
your root guru in the space in from of you. Try to do that well and also
try to develop single-pointed faith and devotion towards guru Manjushri.
This is what we do at the beginning of the Seven Limb practice. The first
thing to do is to develop single-pointed faith and devotion towards guru
Manjushri. On that basis, next we visualize making extensive offerings.
What we should actually offer is our root of virtues and all the merits
that we have already accumulated. That is like the cause. We visualize our
root of virtues or merits are transformed into the form of different
offering substances filling the whole of the space and then offer those to
guru Manjushri.
(The seven limbs are:
        1. prostration
        2. making offerings
        3. confessing our negativities and obscurations
        4. rejoicing the virtues
        5. beseeching them to not to pass away into nirvana
        6. requesting the Buddha to turn the wheel of Dharma
        7. dedication of merits)
Next is the limb of confession, which is the third limb. Because of having
made all these extensive offerings by filling the whole space to guru
Manjushri, then think  a very special kind of great bliss and happiness is
generated in guru Manjushri ‘s  holy mind. As the result of that, visualize
a stream of nectar flow from his holy body into us. This stream of nectar
purifies all our negativities and obscurations. Think that all our
negativities and obscurations are completely purified.
Next is feeling happy and rejoicing the merits and virtues. We have just
developed single-pointed faith and devotion to guru Manjushri. That itself
help us to accumulate immeasurable amount of merits. Likewise we have made
an extensive offering. That itself also help us to accumulate a lot of
merits. Similarly having confessed our negativities, we manage to purify
quite a bit of obscurations. Within that short time which last for one or
two minutes, we already accrued so much benefits.  That itself is something
to feel happy about and to rejoice.
Likewise, we should feel happy and rejoice with the very fact that there
are many people like us here coming to class will accumulate so much merits
and root of virtues. We should reflect on that and think; “How wonderful
and how amazing” and then feel happy.
Similarly in this world of our, there are many people out there and many
beings out there who sincerely trying to benefit others. Likewise, there
are many dharma practitioners. We just sincerely rejoice and feel happy
with what they are doing.
For the next limbs -beseeching them to not to pass away into nirvana and
requesting to turn the wheel of Dharma- we should pray and generate the
wish that: “May all the people in this world who sincerely benefiting
others, all the practitioners and including everyone here and oneself to
have long life so be able to continue to do these things.”
Lastly, we dedicate the merits and the root of virtues that we have
accumulated. We should pray and think: “May these root of virtues and the
merits that we have accumulated be a greatest benefit to all the living
beings.” Another way of saying is that we can dedicate these merits to
achieve the state of full enlightenment for the benefit of all living
beings.
Ideally we should spend more time on the practice of Seven Limb whereby we
can do more in depth details practice but due to lack of time, we can only
do this for a couple of minutes each time before we start the class. The
whole point of explaining this to you is to give you an idea. So in the
future, I don’t have to repeat this over and over again whenever we recite
the “Praise to Manjushri.” Sometime I will remind you but at other time, I
may not say anything and at that time, you should know what to think.

Stages of the Path
In the last lesson, I talked about the three scriptural collections and the
three higher trainings. I also mentioned how the three scriptural
collections are differentiated. You have to understand those points.
2B1B-2B How Atisha attained the realizational qualities of its correct
accomplishment
2B1B-2B1 How all realizational qualities are contained in the three
trainings
Second: As, generally speaking, all the scriptural teachings by the Jina
are contained in the three precious collections, the realizational
teachings are also contained in the three precious trainings.
2B1B-2B2 How Atisha was accomplished in the three trainings
In the last lesson, we did looked briefly on how Lama Atisha gained the
good qualities of knowledge and how he engaged in the practices of hearing
and reflecting on the teaching. Now, we look briefly on how Lama Atisha
gained the good qualities of the experiential knowledge or realization. In
the text, it talks about how Lama Atisha practiced the three higher
trainings.
2B1B-2B2A [Ethical discipline]
2B1B-2B2A-1 Transition to ethical discipline
Here it talks about how Lama Atisha practiced the higher training in
ethics.
In this regard the training in ethical discipline is often praised in the
[Buddha’s] excellent teachings and in the commentaries as the foundation of
all good qualities such as the training in concentration and wisdom.
Therefore, it is necessary, first of all, to have realizational qualities
in terms of ethical discipline.
This paragraph is saying that of the three higher trainings, the higher
training in ethics should come first because the higher training in ethics
serve as the basis or foundation for the higher training in concentration.
Then by having a good practice of the higher training in concentration,
then one will be able to train well in the higher training in wisdom. The
higher training in ethics is the foundation for the higher training in
concentration which then acts as the foundation for the higher training in
wisdom.
In our studying of Buddhadharma, it is about the same because when we come
for such a course, we are not the only person in the class as there are
many more people in the course. So there is a need for rules and
regulations as well. When we come to doing this course, we need some kind
of discipline. We need to try to ensure that we do come to class and we
need the discipline to read the text on our own. We also need the
discipline to revise the material. For those of you who are committed to
this course, you need the discipline to be able to take the exam.
Maintaining the discipline with regards to coming to class, reading the
material, revising and taking exam make a huge difference in being able to
continue your studies and to stay focus on what we are trying to do here.
If we are to maintain a good discipline with regards to what I have just
said; coming to class and without missing class, reading the text, and so
forth, that make a huge difference because if you have the interest and you
maintain this discipline, then whatever you set up to learn, you will get
to learn and understand the topics. What you achieve at the end of the day
is likened to training in wisdom because you have achieved knowledge.
When we talk about the three higher trainings, we shouldn’t think that it
has nothing to do with ourselves. Of course, we have to know what the three
higher trainings are. The higher training in ethics is the foundation for
the higher training in concentration which then acts as the foundation for
the higher training in wisdom. That is fine and good but the point is that
we have to be able to relate it to ourselves. Here, in relation to what we
are trying to do here is studying. We have to relate to what we are trying
to do. We should maintain a strong discipline with regards to coming to
class, reading the material, revising and taking the exam. What happen if
we don’t adopt such a discipline with regards to our study? The result will
be very obvious. If we don’t keep to discipline, then obviously we will not
have that strong interest to focus on our studies. If the interest and the
focus on the studies are not strong, then obviously we are not going to
learn much. That is the result.
2B1B-2B2A-2 How Atisha was actually accomplished in ethical discipline
The text goes on to explain how Lama Atisha possessed the higher training
in ethics. We talked about someone possessing the three set of vows. The
three set of vows are:
   1. individual liberation (pratimoksha vows)
   2. bodhisattva vows
   3. tantric vows
Within the category of pratimoksha vows, there are:
      -pratimoksha vows for the ordained
      -pratimoksha vows for the lay person
2B1B-2B2A-2 How Atisha was actually accomplished in ethical discipline
Next, we look at how Lama Atisha possessed the superior vows of individual
liberation (pratimoksha vows).
A How Atisha possessed the highest vows of individual liberation
In this regard there are three [kinds]: How he possessed the first of
those, the highest vows of individual liberation: Having received the
bhikshu vows, he protected them the way a yak protects its coat - a yak is
so attached to its coat that it rather risks its life, trying to save a
strand of tail hair that has got caught on a tree, than to part with it,
even if it sees its life is being threatened by a hunter. That is how
Atisha protected every detail of the foundation of trainings, not to speak
of the major [rules of the] foundation of trainings which he had
undertaken, so that he came to be called the elder who is a great upholder
of discipline.
When we take the vows of individual liberation, as in the case of Lama
Atisha who is a fully ordained monk, there are many fundamental training to
be adopted: some are major and some are minor. In the case of Lama Atisha,
even those so-called minor trainings, he would cherish them more than his
life.  Losing his life is not important to him but keeping even the minor
trainings purely is important to him. Here we are talking about the
important of keeping the ethics.
B How Atisha possessed the bodhisattva vows:
Bodhisattva vows: He practiced numerous instructions for training the mind
of enlightenment which is rooted in love and compassion. Especially, in
attendance upon Serlingpa, he trained for long in the highest instructions
passed on by the venerable Maitreya and Manjugosha through Asanga and
Shantideva. Thereby the mind of enlightenment that cherishes others more
than oneself, arose in his heart. This aspirational mind gave rise to the
mind of active involvement 1 and due to his excellent behaviour, i.e. his
engagement in the trainings following the promise to train in the vast
conduct of bodhisattvas, he never transgressed the rules of Buddha’s
children.
Note 1: active involvement is also translated as the engaged mind of
enlightenment
The text is saying that Lama Atisha on the basis of generating bodhicitta,
he kept his bodhisattva vows very purely without even transgressing any of
it.
C How Atisha possessed Vajrayana vows
Vajrayana vows: Owing to the fact that he had the meditative stabilisations
of the generation stage where one’s own body is seen as that of a deity and
of the completion stage of the [indestructible] vajra mind, he became chief
among yogis. In particular, he protected his tantric commitments properly
by not transgressing the prescribed rules.
2B2B-2B2A-3 Proper protection [of ethical discipline]
Here it talks about how Lama Atisha protected his vows: the vows of
individual liberation, bodhisattva vows and tantric vows purely.
Not only did he courageously undertake the trainings in ethical discipline
of the three vows, he also upheld them as he had promised. He kept the vows
without transgressing the rules associated with them, and even if he
transgressed them ever so slightly, he quickly, very quickly purified this
by means of a suitable ritual restoring the given vow.
If we look at what is being written here, the text is not emphasizing that
it is important to be courageous to jump into taking all the vows. The text
is placing the emphasis on keeping whatever vows you are committed to and
keeping the vows purely. But we are doing the completely opposite. When
come to taking the vows, we take it very casually but after taking the
vows, we do not pay much attention to it and we do not place much emphasis
of keeping them purely. As stated here in the text, after taking on
whatever vows, we should protect it and keeping them as purely as possible.
If there is any infraction occurs, then we should immediately confess and
purify that transgression.
2B1B-2B2B Atisha’s accomplishments in the training in concentration
1 Common
2 Uncommon
Here, the text talks about how Lama Atisha possessed the training in
concentration.  In the training in concentration, there is:
      - common concentration
      - uncommon concentration
His training of concentration has two [aspects]: Common concentration: He
had achieved the serviceability of the mind of calm abiding and, as regards
uncommon concentration, he had the extreme stability of the generation
stage. Furthermore, he completed the three or six years of modes of conduct
of yogic realization disciplines.
With regards to common concentration and uncommon concentration, those of
you who did the previous BP should know this and those of you who are new;
it doesn’t matter now as we will cover this in the future. At the end of
this 5 years program, you will understand what are common concentration and
uncommon concentration, generation stage and completion stage.
2B1B-2B2C His training of wisdom
1 Common
2 Uncommon
His training of wisdom has two [aspects]: The common one: He had attained
the concentration of special insight which is the union of special insight
and calm abiding. The uncommon one: he had attained the special
concentration of the completion stage.
2B1B-3 The deeds he did for the sake of the teachings, having attained
those positive qualities
After having gain those good qualities, what Lama Atisha do to further the
teaching?
The deeds he did for the sake of the teachings are of two [types]: his
deeds in India and his deeds in Tibet.
2B1B-3A Deeds in India
First: At the palace of great enlightenment in Bodhgaya he defeated
proponents of base, non-Buddhist doctrines by means of the Dharma three
times, thus maintaining the Buddha’s teachings. Eliminating the taints of
ignorance, misconception and doubt also with regard to the teachings of his
own upper and lower systems, he spread the teachings, so that he was
regarded as a crown jewel by [proponents of] all factions beyond
partiality.
2B1B-3B Deeds in Tibet
2B1B-3B1 Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring the
tradition
Deeds in Tibet: Lha Lama and his nephew sent the two great translators Gya-
tson-seng and Nagtso Tsultrim Gyalwa to India one after the other. As they
took great pains again and again to invite [Atisha], he came to Upper Ngari
during [the reign of] Jangchub O and was requested to purify the Buddha’s
teachings. Thereupon, he spread the teachings by composing the Lamp on the
Path to Enlightenment, a text bringing together all the points of sutra and
tantra and condensing them into applicable stages, as well as other texts.
Specifically, he spent three years in Ngari, nine years in Nyetang and five
years elsewhere in Central Tibet and Tsang teaching the fortunate all the
scriptures and instructions of sutra and tantra without exception. Thereby
he restored the tradition of teachings that had declined, made those that
remained flourish, and corrected those that had been soiled by the errors
of misconception, ensuring that the precious teachings were freed from all
flaws.
There are two different accounts with regards to the time when Lama Atisha
went to Tibet. This text stated that Lama Atisha left for Tibet at the age
of 59. Other account stated that he left for Tibet at the age of 57. There
are also slightly different accounts as to the time he remained in Tibet.
Based on this text, Lama Atisha went to Tibet at the age of 59 and passed
away at the age of 73 at the place called Nyetang. From here, we can
understand the source of Buddha’s teaching that was flourished in Tibet.
Also from this, Tibetan Buddhism is not something created by the Tibetan.
Tibetan Buddhism has its source from India.
In the early dissemination of the Buddhadharma in Tibet, the Dharma king
invited the great Nalanda scholars Santaraksita to Tibet. Guru
Padmasambhava was also invited to Tibet. They caused the teachings to
flourish.  After sometime, a Chinese monk, who came from China, proclaimed
himself to be a scholar arrived in Tibet. He was promoting the view that
all conceptual thoughts, whether good or bad, are useless and basically,
just need to focus on nothing. In order to dispel the view as propounded by
Ha-shang, a great Indian master Kamalasila, who was a great scholar in
Nalanda, was invited to Tibet. He then refuted and dispelled the wrong view
and by doing so, the pure Buddhadharma was able to flourish again. So
Kamalashila made the Buddha’s teaching pure again.
Along the way, came the reign of a perverted Tibetan king by the name of
Langdharma who persecuted Buddhism during his reign. Buddhadharma then
declined during that period. At that time, there were people who were not
real practitioners and were not real yogis pretended to be yogis engaged in
all sort of activities that caused great harm to the Buddhadharma such as
causing harm to the practice of celibacy; basically - the mainstay of -
monastic life. Due to the behavior of these yogis and the persecutions by
the King Langdharma, Buddhadharma declined. In order to reinstate the pure
Buddhadharma, the Dharma king invited Lama Atisha to Tibet to restore the
purity of the dharma.
It is possible that there are people wondering about the origin of Tibetan
Buddhism. People say all sort of things about Tibetan Buddhism but if you
understand the history of Tibetan Buddhism, you can see that Tibetan
Buddhism is not made up by Tibetan. Tibetan Buddhism has its pure source.
You can see that great Indian masters were invited to Tibet to propagate
pure Buddhadharma and most, if not all, of the great masters that were
invited from India were all great masters and scholars hailing from the
great monastic university of Nalanda.
Geshela spoke in English: His Holiness has said many times that Tibetans
are very clever because:
      -they get the best dharma from India as the best dharma was existed in
India as at that time,
      -they got the best food from China and
      -they got the best clothes from Mongolia as Tibet is a cold place and
Tibetan needs warm clothing.
Tibetan got all the best things.
2B1B-3B2 Identifying the three causes of excellence in the composition of
commentaries
Next, the text goes on to explain the qualities that a person must have
before he can composes a treatise.
There are three causes of excellence in the composition of a text
clarifying the Muni’s intentions: being learned in the five areas of
knowledge, having received instructions for the application of their
meaning which transmit the instructions of the perfectly complete Buddha in
an unbroken line of exalted [masters], and having received the permission
to teach through the vision of a protector deity. If a text can be composed
with any one of these [causes of excellence] - it will turn out all the
more excellent if all three are complete. This great master [, Atisha,]
possessed all three.
There are three idea qualifications for an author of texts that elucidate
the intent of the Buddha. The author:
- should have mastered in the five topics of knowledge,
- should have received instructions for the application of their meanings
 which transmit the instructions of the perfect complete Buddha in an
 unbroken line of exalted masters and
- should receive permission to teach through the vision of a chosen deity
2B1B-3B3 The ability to ascertain the Jina’s intentions due to Atisha
possessing these three causes
A The care of protector deities
“the care of protector deities”  - with regards to how his deities look
after him
As for the care of protector deities, it says in the Praise:
        Of the glorious Hevajra,
        of the Samaya-vyuha-raja,
        of heroic Lokeshvara,
        noble, reverend Tara and others,
        you had visions and permissions,
        therefore, dreaming and directly
        you perpetually heard teachings
        both the ones profound and vast.
B How Atisha’s lineage is uninterrupted
[Atisha] held numerous lineages of masters such as the two lineages of the
shared vehicle and of the great vehicle, with regard to which there are the
two – perfection and secret mantra vehicles. In the perfection vehicle he
held three lineages: the lineages of the view and of conduct, the latter
having been passed on from Maitreya and from Manjugosha. In the secret
mantra he had received five types of transmission as well as many other
lineages such as the lineage of tenets, the lineage of blessings and
lineages of various instructions. The Gurus from whom he heard
[instructions] directly are mentioned in the Praise:
        The gurus you always relied on were
        Sintipa, Serlingpa,
        Bhadrabodhi, Jñanasrimany
        with high accomplishments.
        In particular you held
        the profound and vast instructions
        that had been transmitted from one to another
        [all the way] from Nagarjuna.
It is well known that he had twelve gurus who had attained high
accomplishments as well as many others.
Here, it says that Lama Atisha frequently had the vision of the deities
such as Tara and Chenrezig in which he could communicate with them directly
and also receiving teachings directly from them as well. It also happened
in his dream. As for the lineages, he possessed the lineages that are of
the shared vehicle (common) and of the great vehicle (Mahayana).
The Mahayana has two divisions:
    - causal perfection vehicle (Paramitayana)
    - mantra vehicle (Mantrayana)
For now, you just need to remember the difference between perfection
vehicle and mantra vehicle. We will discuss in more details in the future.
“In the perfection vehicle he held three lineages: the lineages of the view
and of conduct,…”
With respect to the perfection vehicle (Paramitayana), there are two
lineages:
    -the lineage of profound view
    -the lineage of extensive deeds (or conduct)
Within the lineage of extensive deeds, it has two divisions:
   -the lineage that came from Maitreya who passed down to Asanga
pertaining to the practice of bodhisattvas and the training in bodhicitta
and so forth
  -the lineage that came from Manjushri who passed down to Shantideva
pertaining to the mind training or with regards to conduct and so forth
In general, there are two lineages but if the lineages are further divided,
then there are three lineages.
“In the secret mantra he had received five types of transmission..” –the
five systems of lineages are:
   1. the lineage of all of Tantra
   2. the lineage of Guhyasamaja (which is the father tantras)
   3. the lineage of the mother tantras (such Heruka Cakrasambhara)
   4. the lineage of Action and Yoga
   5. the lineage  of Yamari
C The fact that he was learned in the five areas of knowledge
The fact that he was learned in the five areas of knowledge has [already]
been explained.
For all these reasons this master was able to ascertain the Jina’s
intentions skilfully.
2B1B-3B4 The special qualities of his disciples
Next, the text talks about the disciples that Lama Atisha had.
A His disciples in India, Ngari and Tibet
The master who was like this had an incredible number of disciples in
India, Kashmir, Oddiyana, Nepal, and Tibet, however, the main ones were
four great scholars in India who matched the master himself in their
knowledge: Pitopa, Dharma-akaramati, Madhyasinha and Ksitigarbha. Some also
add Mitraguhya as the fifth. In Ngari it was the great translators Rinchen
Sangpo and Nagtso as well as the ordained king Jangchup O, in the province
of Tsang Gargewa and Gokugpa Lhaytsay, in Lhodrak Chagpa Trichog and Gewa
Kyong, in Kham Nayjorwa Chenpo, Gonpawa, Sherab Dorje and Chadar Tonpa and
in Central Tibet there were the three, Khu, Ngog and Drom.
B The foremost disciple
Again, among these it was the great lineage holder Dromtonpa Gyelwa
Chungnay who had been prophesied by Tara and further spread the exalted
activities of the master.
This was a summary description of the author’s greatness. You should come
to understand it more extensively in the great biographic texts.
Basically this is a biography that gave short account of Lama Atisha.


Showing the greatness of the teachings for the sake of generating respect
for the instructions
2B2 Showing the greatness of the teachings
2B2A Identifying the teachings
Second: As for the teachings, the source text of the present instructions
is Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment.
2B2B Presentation [of this text] as the three: complete, easily applicable
and a particularly noble system
Although Jowo composed numerous texts, the Lamp on the Path to
Enlightenment is their perfect completion - like a root. As it indicates
all the points of both sutra and tantra in summary fashion, it is complete
in terms of content. As it makes the gradual taming of the mind its main
topic, it is easy to put into practice. As it is ornamented by the
instructions of the two masters, who were skilled in the systems of the two
trailblazers, it is a particularly noble system compared to others.
At the beginning, it is very important to understand what exactly is
Buddha’s teaching. One of the main topics in understanding the Buddha’s
teaching is pertaining to the Four Noble Truths2.
Note 2: The Four Nobles Truths are:
   1. True Suffering
   2. True Origin
   3. True Cessation
   4. True Path
First we have to understand what the two truths are. The explanation of the
two truths is basically an explanation of what reality is and is not an
explanation of something that does not exist. A detail explanation of the
two truths will come later in other module. However, it is important to
gain some slight understanding of what the two truths are.
In relation to any chosen object or any phenomenon, every phenomenon/ each
object has two truths. In the aspect of the object, we talk about how it
appears and how it exists. There is a side of an object whereby there is a
disparity between how it appears and how it actually exists.  But there is
another side of the object whereby there is a concord between how it
appears and how it actually exists.
You can think of any object or phenomenon. Whatever phenomenon that is
brought to the attention of your mind, you look at how does it appears to
you. Almost whatever you focus on, it appears to you as if it is self-
instituted, existing right there from its own side, very solid and real
from its own side such that the object existent does not depend on your
mind.
We can tell this from our own experience. When we look around, things
appear so real right there.  So this is how things and events (phenomena)
appear to our mind. They appear so real right there from their own side,
self-instituted, independent and nothing whatsoever to do with our mind.
Their existents as if have nothing to do with our mind. We are examining
whether that particular object does exist in the way it appears because it
appear as real right there from its own side, self-instituted and has
nothing to do with our mind. If that is the reality of that object, then if
we will to investigate the object, we will discover that object does not
exists in the way it appears i.e. although it appears in that way, it does
not exists in that way. If something really exists in the way it appears to
us -i.e. it appears so real from its own side, self-instituted and has
nothing to do with our mind- then when we look for it, we should be able to
find it at the end of the investigation. But at the end of the
investigation, that particular thing cannot be found.
Although the imputed object when sought cannot be found, it does not mean
that object is non- existent. If we arrive at the conclusion that the
imputed object when sought cannot be found is non-existent, then we will
fall into the extreme of annihilation or extreme of non-existence.
Although when we look at the imputed object to see whether it really exists
in the way it appears to us –appears to be so real and right there from its
own side- and we don’t find that object at the end of the investigation,
this does not means that object is non-existent; it exists. But how does it
exist? It exists in dependent on other factors. Therefore we talk about
dependent arising. Things exist in dependent arising.
There are different levels of dependent arising:
 - Dependent arising at the level of causality - how things and events are
   dependent on their causes.
 - Dependent arising in which things and events exist as aggregation of
   different factors; which talk about parts that come together to form a
   certain object.
 - Dependent arising in terms of imputation and conceptuality; imputing
   this and that
First, we need to really understand and to establish what the two truths
are. In order to establish the two truths, first we need to understand what
dependent arising is. If you are able to establish dependent arising and
understand it, then you will be able to establish that there is a
relationship between cause and effect. Once you are able to establish
dependent arising at the level of causality, then you can establish the
Four Nobles Truths.
If you are able ascertain and understand dependent arising especially at
the level of causality, then you would be able to validate the Four Nobles
Truths. Why? This is because if you can understand causality, then you will
be able to establish how True Suffering arises from True Origin of
sufferings. You will also be able to establish how True Cessation of
suffering arises in dependent on True Path. So you will have a better
understanding of Four Nobles Truths. Within the Four Nobles Truths, on the
basis of understanding of causality, you will be able to understand that
True Path is something that can be accomplished. It is not just an
imagination; it is a possibility. It is an existent that can be developed
in our mind. When you see True Path is a possibility and is something that
can arise in our mind, then you can also feel in your heart, the
possibility of an end to suffering. When you see the possibility of True
Path as something that you yourself can also achieve, then you will see
that True Cessation of suffering or liberation is possible. If you really
feel that these two are possible and do exist, then you will be able to
infer that there must be people out there have achieved these two. Once you
are able to infer that, then you will also be able to believe that it is
possible for these persons to possess True Path and True Cessation and as
they gradually progress on the path as they practice, they will definitely
be able to gradually remove all their defilements and then achieve
enlightenment. Then for you, enlightenment and Buddhahood become a real
possibility and it is a real existent.
This understanding of the Four Nobles Truths is very closely related to the
Three Jewels because as a Buddhist, we go for refuge to the Buddha, the
Dharma and the Sangha. If you understand the Four Nobles Truths well, then
the Three Jewels will become alive for you. To your mind, it is an
existence; something that definitely exist.
The Dharma Jewel is the True Path. The people who possess the True Path and
True Cessation in their mind is known as Sangha Jewel. For those people who
have completed the path and have removed all their defilements, they become
Buddha. In that sense, the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha come alive to
you.
This is something you should focus on and think about. On the basis of the
two truths, you understand the Four Nobles Truths. Once you have understood
the Four Nobles Truths well, it really helps you to understand the Three
Jewels to the extent that for you the Three Jewels become a possibility.
For you, the Three Jewels become something that is to be achieved and can
be achieved. When you see that it is possible for you to become the Three
Jewels, it make a huge different to your determination and to your interest
of wanting to become that.
For today, you just remember the key points so that you have something to
think about. We will continue to find out what the two truths are. For now,
you just need to know that the two truths are:
      -the ultimate truth and
      -the obscurational truth
On the basis of understanding what the two truths are and if you are able
to establish the two truths well, then you will be able to validate the
Four Nobles Truths. Once you are able to establish the Four Nobles Truths,
then you will see that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha –the Three Jewels- is
something that can be achieved and can be attained.
This is something that we need to focus on as we go along. So it is
important to constantly think about these different points. You have to
think:
-what is the connection?
-why is that if I am able to understand the two truths then the Four Nobles
Truths can be validated or verified?
-why is that if I can understand the Four Nobles Truths, then I will be
able to understand what the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is?
We need to have these lines of thought and to think about it.  The next
lesson we will look at the four greatness of this teaching. Please read
from page 8 to 11.

(Ng Swee Kim shared his BP experience)

