Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 21.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.421027
================================================================================


I think we really have to ask ourselves every now and then; “Why should I
learn and practice the dharma?” Of course, all of us want to achieve
happiness in this life. That’s for sure. But what we need is not just the
happiness of this life alone. What we need is the happiness in all our
future lives to come; we need to be happy from life to life. As it is
mentioned in the teachings, the method to achieve this happiness especially
the happiness from life to life, is none other than the dharma. That’s what
the text has said. But as to whether this is true or not, this is something
we have to investigate for ourselves. Having asked ourselves that question
and if we are clear as to why we need to practice the dharma then the
second question which we have to ask ourselves is; “Am I capable of
practicing the dharma or not?” or “Am I in any position to practice it or
not?”  Well, the answer is ‘yes’. Why? Because all the favorable conditions
are there for us to practice the dharma. This is something which we have to
see for ourselves.
These two questions are extremely important. Every now and then you should
ask yourself these two questions. If you are able to answer these questions
yourself, then you will engage in dharma practice. If you are able to see
for yourselves the need to practice the Buddhadharma, you will then
practice the dharma. In order to be able to practice the dharma, you must
understand how to go about doing it. You must understand what are the
things that you going to practice. When you practice the dharma, you do it
through the threefold activity of hearing the teachings, reflecting on them
and then meditating on those teachings. In order to meditate and
familiarize yourself, that must first be preceded by having reflected well
on the teachings. In order to be able to engage in reasonable reflection on
the Buddha’s teachings, you first must have heard the Buddha’s teachings
and have extensive learning on it. Therefore, there is a need to
learn/study the teachings of the Buddha. You have to see the point. At the
end of the day, you have to learn the Buddha’s teachings. Once you’ve seen
the point, you should act on it. You should then strive and put effort into
it.
As we have seen in the text that we now have the human life of freedoms and
endowments; we possess the eight freedoms and the ten endowments. These are
the favorable conditions for putting the dharma into practice. After having
achieved this human life of freedoms and endowments, how are we supposed to
take full advantage of it? In the text, it talks about three ways in which
we can take full advantage of this human life of freedoms and endowments:
 -the practices for the person of small capacity
 -the practices for the person of medium capacity
 -the practices for the person of great capacity
How does a person of small capacity take full advantage of a human life of
freedoms and endowments? Such a person is motivated to achieve high status
i.e. good rebirth in the next life. Motivated by this goal, he then engages
in the unmistaken method to achieve this high status/ good rebirth. For a
person of small capacity, he has to overcome the current preoccupation of
the happiness of this life to seek the happiness for the future lives.
How does a person of medium capacity take full advantage of a human life of
freedoms and endowments? Such a person is primarily interested in achieving
liberation from suffering. With that goal in mind, he then trains in the
method /path that will enable him to achieve this liberation that is devoid
of all sufferings. For a person with medium capacity, not only does he
needs to overcome the preoccupation with the happiness of this life, he has
also need to reverse or do away with any form of attractions; even to the
happiness of the future lives. A person of medium capacity trains in
developing disenchantment with the cyclic existence. He basically seeks to
achieve the state of liberation from suffering. However he does this
primarily for himself.
A person of great capacity is someone who trains in the Mahayana path -the
path of the great vehicle- in order to achieve the state of full
enlightenment; not for oneself but for others. This person who trains in
the Mahayana path has the thought; “I must definitely achieve full
enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings.”
So, these are the different ways in which the person of the three
capacities takes full advantage of a human life of freedoms and endowments.

Having said about the three types of persons, we must understand that in
the context of Lamrim –the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment - when we
refer to the path of the persons of small capacity and the persons of
medium capacity, the Lamrim does not describe the path of a person of small
capacity just to develop a mere interest to achieve a good rebirth or the
path of a person of medium capacity just merely for the sake of someone to
achieve liberation alone. You must understand that in the context of the
Lamrim, the paths of the person of small capacity and the person of medium
capacity are taught as preliminaries i.e. as something to be practiced for
someone who is aspiring to become a person of great capacity and for
someone who is a person of great capacity. You have to understand that the
paths of a person of small capacity and of medium capacity are branches of
the Mahayana path i.e. they are the branches of the path of a person of
great capacity. In the context of the Lamrim, the paths of the three types
of persons -small, medium and great capacity- is the method that leads any
one single individual to the state of full enlightenment. Such an
instruction is called the Lamrim –the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment.
There are few important things that you must understand. When does the
Mahayana path start for any individual? In order to enter the Mahayana we
must develop the uncontrived bodhichitta -the altruistic intention to
achieve full enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. A person
of great capacity needs to develop that. In order for that bodhichitta
realization to arise, it is indispensable for that person to first generate
the realization of love and compassion. The development of love and
compassion must necessarily precede the development of bodhichitta. In
order for anyone to develop love and compassion, one must first understand
how one is deprived of happiness i.e. how one suffers. In relation to
suffering, you must first understand how you are devoid of happiness. You
must first see for yourself how you are stuck in samsara with feeling in
your heart and your mind is moved. That realization must necessarily
precede the development of love and compassion.
If we realize how we ourselves are tormented by the various sufferings of
cyclic existence and how we are devoid of happiness in cyclic existence,
and based on that personal experience, we then switch our attention to the
situation of other sentient beings in the cyclic existence. Then we
contemplate on how these sentient beings are tormented by the various
sufferings and how they are devoid of happiness in samsara. Then that
reflection on the suffering of other sentient beings become correct.
On the basis of having understood our own suffering in samsara, when we
turn our attention to other sentient beings and contemplate on how they are
also suffering in samsara, that contemplation becomes perfect. This
contemplation would then serve as the prerequisite for us to develop love
and compassion for them.
What is love and what is compassion?
 -Love is the attitude that wishes for others to be happy.
-Compassion is a mind that wishes others to be free of suffering.
On the basis of personal own experience of how samsara is, then when we
think of the sufferings of other sentient beings and how they are devoid of
happiness in samsara, that contemplation becomes perfect and real. Then,
you’ll be able to develop some real love and compassion for others.
If you understand these points and when you think about it, you will
realize that for someone who wishes to practice the Mahayana path, you will
then understand that the practices of a person of medium capacity are a
necessity for someone who aspires to be a person of great capacity. In
order to be a person of great capacity, you would also need to understand
the sufferings of the lower realms. A real understanding of the kind of
sufferings that happens in the lower realms would become a condition for
one to be able to become a person of great capacity. We have to reflect on
how we will have to endure those unbearable sufferings of the lower realms
if we ourselves were born in the lower realms. It is only on the basis of
reflection and realization of our own personal experience of how we
ourselves are stuck in samsara and how we are devoid of real happiness in
samsara, we can then come to empathize with others and develop real love
and compassion. With these, we will then be able to enter the Mahayana path
to develop bodhichitta. Without developing this real love and compassion,
there is no way we will ever develop the pure bodhichitta. It becomes so
important to see how the paths of the three types of persons are related.
If we have this feeling that they are unrelated i.e. the paths of the
persons of the small, medium and great are unrelated to one another, that
it is a huge mistake. It becomes very important for us to not only to gain
an understanding but a thorough and decisive ascertainment that these three
paths are related and they do assist one another.
The next section deals with the training in the path that is shared with
the person of small capacity.
Student 1: Please explain the two great purposes for differentiating the
three types of persons and guiding students as accordingly to LRCM Vol 1
page 139:
Question: If the teachings for the persons of small and medium capacities
are prerequisites for the person of great capacity, they may as well be
considered stages for the path of the person of great capacity. Why use the
expression, "stages of the path shared with the persons of small and medium
capacities"?
Khen Rinpoche: As I have mentioned earlier, you should be clear as to what
the three types of person are. I also have said that the Lamrim is an
instruction to lead one single individual to achieve the state of full
enlightenment. The Lamrim is not primarily to teach how a person of small
capacity to achieve their goal alone. The Lamrim is also not primarily to
teach how a person of medium capacity to achieve their goal. The primarily
purpose of Lamrim is to show how an individual to be led onto the path of
enlightenment. The reason why we use the expression “the path that is
shared with the person of small capacity” or “the path that is shared with
the person of medium capacity” is to stop any kind of pride that a person
without any training may have think right from the beginning; “I am the
person of the great capacity, therefore I do not need anything else. I
don’t have to do other practices.” Therefore this is to destroy that kind
of pride. The other reason of why we use the expression “the path that is
shared with the person of small capacity and medium capacity” is to benefit
these three types of person. The answer is in the text:
Reply: There are two great purposes for differentiating three types of
persons and guiding students accordingly:
(1) it destroys the presumption of asserting that you are a person of great
capacity despite not having developed the states of mind common to persons
of small and medium capacities, and
(2) it is of great benefit for those whose minds have the greatest, medium,
and least capacity.
How does it benefit them? Even the two persons of higher capacities must
seek high status and liberation, so it is not wrong to teach students of
medium and great capacities the practices that develop the attitudes of
persons of small capacity and persons of Medium capacity. They will develop
good qualities.
Those persons of least capacity may train in higher practices, but this
will lead to their giving up their lower perspective without rising to a
higher perspective, and thus they would be left with nothing. Furthermore,
there could be persons who have the fortune to have already produced the
higher paths in past lives. If they are taught the paths shared with
persons of lower capacity and they then train in them, they will quickly
give rise either to those good qualities developed previously or to those
not developed before. Consequently, as they have already developed lower
paths, they can be led to successively higher paths, and thus their own
path from practice in earlier lives will not be delayed.
Although the  Lamrim  essentially  is  to  help  an  individual  to  achieve
enlightenment and become a person of great capacity, then we  can  just  say
it is the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment but the Lamrim is  not  called
that alone. The Lamrim is usually referred to as the Stages of the  Path  of
the Three Types of Being. Why do we have to call Lamrim  like  this?  It  is
precisely for the reason which I have explained earlier.
Student 2: Do enlightenment and full enlightenment mean the same  thing?  If
we say full enlightenment, does that mean there is half enlightenment?
Khen Rinpoche: The English translation is  enlightenment  but  the  word  in
Tibetan is called “jang chub”. There are three kinds of “jang chub”:
 -Hearers’ enlightenment
 -Solitary Realizers’ enlightenment, and
 -Mahayana enlightenment [the enlightenment of the great vehicle]
Since there are three paths  –Hearers  path,  Solitary  Realizers  path  and
Mahayana path- so there are also three enlightenments; the enlightenment  of
the  three  respective  paths.  Therefore,   you   have   three   types   of
enlightenments.
Are the Hearers’ enlightenment and  the  Solitary  Realizers’  enlightenment
full and complete? The answer has to be ‘no’ because  neither  the  Hearers’
nor the Solitary Realizers’ enlightenment are full and  complete.  Only  the
Mahayana’s enlightenment is considered to  be  the  complete  and  full.  In
order for the state of enlightenment to be full and complete one  must  have
freed oneself from the  two  obscurations  [obscuration  to  liberation  and
obscuration to omniscience]. In order for the state of enlightenment  to  be
full and complete, you must have eliminated both  the  afflictions  together
with their imprints. Only after having eliminating these  two  obscurations,
then it is said that you have achieved the full and complete enlightenment.
If you remember from an  earlier  lesson,  we  talked  about  achieving  the
welfare of sentient beings. The welfare of sentient beings consist  of  both
the provisional (temporary) goals and the ultimate(final) goals.
  -Temporary goal is achieving high status/ good rebirth.
  -Final goal refers to definite goodness. In the  text,  definite  goodness
is split into two:
      -Liberation from cyclic existence and
      -Omniscience /full enlightenment.
Student  3:  Rinpoche,  earlier  you  mentioned  that  in  order   to   have
bodhichitta, we first have to understand the sufferings of the lower  realm.
My question is; “If I have not been there, how am I experience this sort  of
thing. I can’t remember whether I have been to the lower realm”.
Khen Rinpoche: If you  really  know  what  suffering  is  through  your  own
experiences then obviously when you see the same thing happening to  others,
it is easy to empathize or feel it.
(Khen Rinpoche spoke in English):  There  was  one  monk  who  never  had  a
toothache in his life. When his friend, another monk, had a  toothache  told
him how he was feeling sick and in great pain, he  did  not  understand  the
situation. One year later when he had a  toothache,  then  he  realized  how
painful it is.
If you understand the suffering on your individual basis, then you  will  be
able to understand what others are going through. As a human being, we  have
our fair share of problems and how we are under the control  of  sufferings;
how our wishes are not fulfilled and how our desires are not met.  Based  on
this, we can then infer other sentient beings have the same  problems.  With
that inference, you would be able to  understand  the  sufferings  of  other
human beings based on your own experiences. You don’t  have  to  take  their
rebirth as that human being and to become like them in order  to  understand
what they are going through. For those beings that are lower than us,  let’s
say the animals, based on our own experience as human being,  we  can  infer
and come to understand the kind of sufferings that  the  animals  are  going
through. They are ignorant and are unable to tell us what they want.  Unlike
us, they are unable to speak. So, based on our  human  experiences,  we  can
come to an understanding what they are going through. The hungry ghosts  are
in a far  worse  state  than  the  animals.  Generally  speaking,  we  don’t
directly perceive the hungry  ghosts,  but  we  can  use  the  common  human
experience to infer their state of existence and their sufferings.  In  this
human world of ours, there are many human beings who are like hungry  ghosts
are suffering, sick, deprive of sustenance and so forth. When  you  look  at
these human beings, you can have a fair understanding of what it is like  to
be a hungry ghost. When you watch the news, you can see places  where  there
is water but it is not fit for drinking and they don’t have  any  food.  For
us, they are like hungry ghosts and are not even a decent  existence.  Based
on our own experience of being deprived of food  and  water,  we  can  infer
what others are going through when they do not have  food  and  water;  like
the hungry ghosts. Even though we can see the animal realm, but  within  the
animal kingdom, there are so many species. We cannot  claim  to  know  every
single species. But when we talk about the hungry ghost and hell  realms  in
which people are not able to see them, how do we come  to  understand  their
existence? We can come  to  understand  their  existent  through  logic  and
reason. On the topic such as the existence of the lower  realms,  especially
those that we cannot see such as hell beings and hungry ghosts, we can  come
to the realization of their existence through logic and reasoning.  We  need
to understand the logic  and  reasoning  that  can  help  us  to  infer  the
existence of these rebirths. We can only achieve such an  inference  through
learning and this will takes a bit of time. We will get into this as  we  go
along. The main thing is to use logic and reasoning.
One way to think about this is karma. All  our  actions  have  consequences:
our virtuous actions will lead us to the results of our  happiness  and  our
non-virtuous actions will lead us to  the  results  of  our  suffering.  The
suffering  that  we  will  experience  due  to  our  negative  actions  will
commensurate with the  weight  of  the  negative  action.  The  heavier  the
negative actions, the heavier will be the suffering –  the  worst  state  of
existence is the lower realm. This is one way of looking at it. We can  also
use our own common human experience. As an individual,  when  we  are  happy
and in good mood, generally we appear to be  pleasant  and  happy.  But  the
next moment, due to some causes and conditions,  our  mood  changes  and  we
become upset.  Our  demeanor  will  change  as  well.  The  way  we  present
ourselves to others and how we look also changes as well. We even  may  look
terrifying like the hell guardians. When we get upset and angry,  everything
looks different to us; everything -the surrounding and the people around us-
 appear as unpleasant. The ways the environment and  the  people  around  us
appear to us depend very much on our state of mind. When we have  that  kind
of feeling, we feel miserable and unhappy.
When you talk about mind,  there  are  virtuous  states  of  mind  and  non-
virtuous states of mind and that commensurate with  the  results  of  either
happiness or suffering. From this, we can infer that the possible states  of
existence. As there is negative and positive karma  so  it  is  possible  to
talk about relatively happier states of existences and relatively states  of
existences that are filled with problems and sufferings. Through  logic  and
reasoning, you can posit the different states of  existences  and  depending
on your state of mind, you have different karma. So, when we talk about  the
lower realms, it is not that we just have to accept it  because  it  is  the
Buddha’s teachings or someone came along and  created  this  idea.  This  is
something that can be established with thinking.  Depending  on  the  states
of existences that you are born into, the lower the state of  existence  you
are born into, the more suffering you will experience.  One  can  say  that.
Why can’t we say that?  Just comparing  an  animal  rebirth  with  a  hungry
ghost rebirth, a hungry ghost will have more  suffering.  Then  comparing  a
hungry ghost rebirth with a hell  being  rebirth,  a  hell  being  has  more
suffering.  This is due to the varying degrees  of  negative  karma  as  the
weight of negative karma differs from action to action. The relatively  less
heavy negative karma would mean rebirth as an animal. The  heavier  negative
karma would throw you into the  hungry  ghost  rebirth.  Then  the  heaviest
negative karma would land you in the hell realm. The result  that  you  will
experience will commensurate with the negative actions.  With  this  we  can
understand that these  are  the  various  states  of  existences  and  their
accompanying sufferings.  This is something to think  about.  Therefore,  it
is not necessary that you have to do something to trigger  off  your  memory
of you being in the hell realm before.
The point is that we have to start with something that is based on our own
experiences. In order for us to empathize with the suffering of others and
to know what others has gone through, we must at least have some
understanding of   what is suffering. It is impossible not to have any
suffering at all but some people thought that as everything is goes well,
they have no idea what suffering is and it is difficult for them to
understand what others have gone through.  If we don’t get food for one
day, how do we feel? If we don’t get water for one day, how do we feel? For
example, if you have experienced headache before, then you will know what
others are talking about when they complain about headache.  The best way
of empathizing with the suffering of others is to understand suffering base
on your individual experiences so you can infer what others are going
through.
Student 4:   Root text page 48  2B4B-2A2B-2A-2  Answer : There are two
major purposes …….Moreover, through being taught the common path and
through training, those with the good fortune of superior capacity will
soon develop positive qualities that had or had not arisen before whereby
they can be guided to higher and higher [levels], once the lower ones have
arisen. Their path will not be prolonged.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 140:  Furthermore, there could be
persons who have the fortune to have already produced the higher paths in
past lives. If they are taught the paths shared with persons of lower
capacity and they then train in them, they will quickly give rise either to
those good qualities developed previously or to those not developed before.
Consequently, as they have already developed lower paths, they can be led
to successively higher paths, and thus their own path from practice in
earlier lives will not be delayed.]
Question: Who are those “with the good fortune”? Why do they needs to
develop positive qualities when they had already arisen?
Khen Rinpoche: “Those with the good fortune” refer to persons of great
capacity. The persons who have the fortune to have already produced the
higher paths in past lives. These persons had trained in these paths before
– paths that are shared with other capacities. If they are trained again in
these paths in this life, they will produce these paths quickly and those
qualities that are not produced will be developed quickly.
Student 5: Would you agree that full enlightenment means no longer existing
i.e. one has broken the chain of samsara  so that one will not be born
again in any other realms? If full enlightenment means no longer existing,
how can a being who has attained enlightenment due to his bodhicitta helps
sentient beings?
Khen Rinpoche: When we have achieved omniscience -the state of full
enlightenment- we do not become nothing.
At the beginning of the path, the purpose of generating bodhicitta is for
sentient beings.
In the middle, one trains in the path to accumulate the collection of
merits and wisdom for sentient beings.
At the end, one becomes a Buddha for sentient beings.
It would be incorrect to say that after having doing all these and at the
end one becomes nothing. When one has achieved enlightenment one will never
take rebirth again under the control of karma and the afflictions i.e. the
continuity of taking rebirth under karma and afflictions is completely cut.
As a Buddha, he is able to benefit sentient beings in various forms. In
order to understand this, you really must understand what a Buddha is. When
we talk about Buddha, there are four bodies of the Buddha. We need to have
very clear understanding of what these four bodies of the Buddha are.  The
four bodies of a Buddha:
   1. Nature truth body (svabhavadharmakaya)
   2. Exalted wisdom truth body (jnanadharmakaya)
   3. Complete enjoyment body (sambhogakaya)
   4. Emanation body (nirmanakaya)
So if you have a good understanding of what the four bodies of a Buddha are
then you would be able to decisively conclude that one does not disappear
into nothingness when one has achieved enlightenment. According to the
lowest philosophical schools in Buddhism, which are called Vaibhashika
–followers of the Great Exposition School- assert that when one achieve
both nirvana with remainder and nirvana without remainder, in the sense
that one become nothing. This is the lowest school of thought and this is
not the ultimate view. According to them, when one achieve liberation, the
continuity the body and mind will be forever severe.













[pic]

Comment by Khen Rinpoche on analytical meditation & stabilizing meditation
in the Discussion Session (28 Aug 2011)
There is a difference between stabilizing meditation and calm  abiding.  The
topic of calm abiding comes towards the  end  of  the  Lamrim  text  and  is
treated separately because there are a lot of details in it.
The two main obstacles  for  developing  calm  abiding  are  excitement  and
laxity (both coarse and subtle forms). In order  to  achieve  calm  abiding,
you have to go through the nine mental stages.
Calm abiding refers to the ability to focus the mind on  any  chosen  object
not influence by laxity and excitement and able to stay  on  the  object  as
long as one want. As mentioned in the text, there is one measure in term  of
time, you are able to do that for at least four hours.  This  is  what  calm
abiding is.
When you have achieved  calm  abiding  you  gain  the  physical  and  mental
pliancy where the body and mind become serviceable.  You  also  achieve  the
special blissful feeling which is called the bliss of physical  pliancy  and
the bliss of mental pliancy. For us, when we engage in virtue, we get  tired
because our body gets tired and exhausted. However, when you  have  achieved
calm  abiding  you  do  not  feel  that  kind  of  tiredness  and  are  very
serviceable for virtue.
In the stabilizing meditation (also  translated  as  placement  meditation),
you must be familiar with the object of  meditation  and  you  have  already
ascertained it well. Placement meditation is that you  place  your  mind  on
the object of meditation without being distracted.
Regarding the  obstacles  to  the  meditation,  are  laxity  and  excitement
necessary obstacles for developing calm abiding or are  they  also  obstacle
for any form of meditation? You need to think about this.
When you are engaging in analytical meditation, if excitement creeps in,  is
it helpful or harmful with your analytical  meditation?  Is  excitement  and
laxity harmful for analytical meditation?
You say it is harmful? But when you engage  in  analysis,  it  brings  about
distraction as you need to think a lot of things from  the  various  angles.
At that time you mind is  excited.  Is  your  mind  moving  during  analysis
helpful for the meditation? As it is said that  laxity  and  excitement  are
harmful for meditation, are  they  harmful  for  analytical  meditation?  Is
analytical meditation necessarily preceding stabilizing meditation?
In order to do stabilizing meditation,  you  have  to  know  the  object  of
meditation well. In order to be clear of the object of meditation, you  must
have thought about it. Therefore before you do stabilizing  meditation,  you
already thought about things and that is analysis.
We  are  not  saying  that  analytical   meditation   necessarily   precedes
stabilizing meditation. At times the answer is not that important but it  is
the thinking and reasoning process. You don’t have worry about  whether  the
answer is  correct  or  wrong  but  the  process  of  critical  analysis  is
important. There are always things that are left unsettled  or  without  any
conclusion. Not every discussion will end up with a  conclusion.  Even  many
great masters and scholars also left  many  things  that  are  undecided  or
unsettled. So we don’t have to worry about these. That is the reason why  we
need more questions and more doubts.  With  more  doubts,  then  there  will
improvement. That is the only ways we  can  improve.  If  you  think  it  is
alright not to have any doubts or questions, then there  is  no  benefit  at
all. It doesn’t mean that if you don’t ask any question and you don’t  think
about it, you can be more sharp or more intelligent. That is  not  necessary
the case. The more you ask, the more you  think  and  the  more  doubts  you
have, the greater will be your wisdom.
Student 1: In any  one  meditation  session,  can  you  do  both  analytical
meditation and stabilizing meditation?
Khen Rinpoche:  You  can  do  both  analytical  meditation  and  stabilizing
meditation in one session but they cannot be done at any one time. You  need
to alternate them i.e. you do analytical meditation and after having  gained
an ascertainment then you switch to stabilizing meditation. You  place  your
mind on what you have ascertained. At that  time  you  don’t  do  analytical
meditation. Also at the time when you do analytical meditation, you  do  not
do stabilizing meditation. You  alternate  them.  Both  meditations  do  not
occur at the same time. By alternating  between  analytical  meditation  and
stabilizing meditation, they assist one another.
(Path  to  Enlightenment  by  Geshe  Loden)   Calm  abiding  is  a   special
concentration possessing the bliss of pliancy that arises in  dependence  on
the nine stages of mental abiding and has  the  faculty  of  being  able  to
direct the mind to an object as wished.
Concentration is a general term for focusing the mind on an object,  whereas
calm abiding is a particular type of concentration. With the realization  of
calm abiding you have a very deep concentration, not  obstructed  by  laxity
and excitement, that is accomplished by a special tranquility,  or  blissful
pliancy, of body and mind.




