Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson47.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.149737
================================================================================


As we have not yet finished with the twelve links of  dependent  arising,  I
would like to say a little bit more about it.
You have to know the twelve links of dependent arising individually  and  in
the correct order starting from ignorance up to aging and death.   You  have
to memorize them. After that, you have to know:
   1. The three projecting causes:  Ignorance,  compositional  activity  and
      consciousness
   2. The four projected results: Name and form, six  sources,  contact  and
      feeling.
   3. The three causes of actualization: craving, grasping and existence
   4. The two results of actualization: birth and aging and death

|Projecting Causes |Projected       |Causes of          |Results of           |
|                  |Results         |actualization      |actualization        |
|1.Ignorance       |4.Name and Form |8.Craving          |11.Birth             |
|2. Compositional  |5. Six sources  |9. Grasping        |12. Aging and death  |
|factors           |6. Contact      |10. Existence      |                     |
|3. Consciousness  |7. Feeling      |                   |                     |


What is the function of the causes of projection? The function  is  to  make
the projected results possible or suitable to arise.
What is the function of the causes of actualization?  The  function  is  not
only to make the results of actualization possible or suitable  to  manifest
but also force, empower or add strength to the results of actualization.
In the discussion of the twelve links of dependent arising;
 -there are two sets of causes:
      1. Causes of projection, and
      2. Causes of actualization
-there are two sets of effects:
      1. Effects of projection, and
      2. Effects of actualization
Let say, one is going to the reborn in  the  lower  realm.  Before  one  can
receives the aggregates of the lower realm beings, for  example  as  animal,
both the projecting causes and the actualizing causes must  exist  prior  to
that happening. Both the projecting causes and the actualizing  causes  must
be from one cycle of the twelve links.
For example, someone,  who  is  motivated  by  ignorance,  accumulates  very
strong karma to be reborn in the lower realm and the imprint of this  strong
non-virtue is left on the mental continuum.  So, there are three  projecting
causes.
Let’s say in that same life, this  imprint  which  is  left  on  the  mental
continuum, is nurtured and nourished by craving and grasping,  and  then  is
existence.  So, within that same life, these six are completed i.e.  of  the
twelve links, six have already completed.
In short, ignorance give rise to someone  to  create  very  strong  negative
karma to be born in lower realm and the imprint of that action  is  left  on
the consciousness.  In that same life, that imprint is nurtured  by  craving
and grasping which then give rise to existence.  That  person  is  confirmed
going to the lower realm. Of the twelve links, six  have  already  completed
and what are left are the results:
  -four are the  results of projection, and
  -two are results of actualization
These six results are to be experienced in  the  immediate  next  life.  So,
this is how the twelve links of dependent  arising  of  the  same  cycle  is
completed in two lifetimes.
Summary:  In  this  life,  you  have  three  projecting  causes,  and  three
actualizing causes. For the effects, you have the projected results and  the
result of actualization; but these two results are not  experience  in  this
life. These two effects are experienced  in  the  next  life.   So  the  six
causes of this life will give rise to the six  results  in  the  next  life.
So, in order for the twelve links of dependent arising of the same cycle  to
be completed, you need two lives.
Having said that, it is not necessary for  the  twelve  links  of  dependent
arising to be completed in the two lifetimes;  while  it  can  be  completed
within two lifetimes, but it is  not  necessary  so.  This  is  because  the
twelve links of dependent arising can be completed within  three  lifetimes.
How is this so?
Let’s go back to  the  earlier  example:  In  this  life,  someone,  who  is
motivated by ignorance, accumulates very  strong  non-virtue.   This  action
leaves an imprint on the mental continuum -consciousness.  Towards  the  end
of this life, the imprint of going to the lower realm  (which  was  left  on
the mental continuum) is not  nurtured  or  not  nourished  by  craving  and
grasping, but rather the imprint  of  a  positive  action  is  nourished  or
nurtured by craving and grasping.  So, instead of going to the lower  realm,
one is headed for a good rebirth. So,  in  this  scenario,  only  the  three
projecting causes have been completed.
Let’s say this person is reborn as a human being because human  being  is  a
good rebirth.  However, in that lifetime as a human being, the imprint of  a
negative action that will cause him to go to the lower realm,  is  nourished
and nurtured by craving and grasping in that lifetime. That  gives  rise  to
the potential existence.  Therefore, in  that  second  lifetime,  the  three
actualizing causes are completed.
So, during the lifetime as a human being, the imprint that will  cause  this
person to be born in lower realm is nurtured and nourished  by  craving  and
grasping. Then comes the potential existence and that confirmed  the  person
is going to the lower realm.  After that person dies, he gets the  body  and
the aggregates of the lower realm being.   So  the  six  results:  the  four
results of projection and the two results of actualization are completed  in
that third lifetime.
So, this is how the twelve links of dependent arising of the same  cycle  is
completed in three lifetimes:
   -In the first lifetime, you have three causes of projection.
   -In the second lifetime, you have the three causes of actualization, and
   -In the third lifetime, you have the four results of projection and  two
   results of actualization.
This is not taught in the Middle Length Lamrim (MLLR) but is taught  in  the
Lamrim Chenmo (LRCM).  In the teaching of  the  twelve  links  of  dependent
arising, it is explained of how the twelve links  of  dependent  arising  of
the same cycle is completed within either two or three lifetimes. You  don’t
need more than three lifetimes to complete the cycle of the twelve links.
In order to experience the four results of projection and  the  two  results
of actualization, the two sets of causes -both  the  projecting  causes  and
the  actualization  causes  -must  be  completed  before  the  results   can
manifest.
This is related to the qualm that is mentioned in the LRCM (page 319)  which
was highlighted by one student in the previous  class.  Before  this  qualm,
there is a quotation which says that twelve links is divided into  two  sets
of causality.

[LRCM V1 page 319] The Compendium of Knowledge:
What sort of categories do you obtain by abbreviating the factors? There
are four types: the projecting factors, the projected factors, the
actualizing factors, and the actualized factors.
What are the projecting factors?  Ignorance, compositional activity, and
consciousness.
What are the projected factors?    Name-and-form, the six sources, contact,
and feeling.
What are the actualizing factors?       Craving, grasping, and existence.
What are the actualized factors?   Birth, aging, and death.
First, it talks about the projecting causes, then the projected effects,
then the actualizing causes and then the actualized effects.  Having said
that, somebody raises the following qualm:
Qualm: Well then, do the two types of causality—one with respect to
projection and the other with respect to actualization—demonstrate one
instance of causality wherein one person takes rebirth or do they
demonstrate two instances? If the former, it would be incorrect to claim
that the actualizing factors, craving and so on, occur after the
establishment of the group of factors beginning with resultant period
consciousness and ending with feeling [the projected factors]. If the
latter, there would be no ignorance, compositional activity, or causal
period consciousness [projecting factors] in the latter cycle of causality
[the ordering of projection], and no craving, grasping, or existence
[actualizing factors] in the former cycle of causality [the ordering of
actualization].
Question; Do you need the qualm?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Or you don’t need the qualm?
It is not in the MLLR. I brought this up because some of you may be
interested. Actually there is no need to talk about this. If you haven’t
read this, then there is no point for me to talk about this now. It will be
a waste of time. For those of you who have completed the previous Basic
Program, this is something you can pay attention to.  There is still many
things we have not learned or have yet to understand. We should read the
LRCM. For those of you who are doing this module for the first time, you
just have to focus on what is taught in the MLLR.
The qualm arises because, for the particular order of the twelve links of
dependent arising that we know, when talk about the projecting causes and
the actualizing causes, the text talk about the projecting causes then the
projected effects, then the actualizing causes and the actualized effects.
This is the basis for the qualm to arise.
The usual presentation of the twelve links is from the first to the twelfth
link but that presentation is not indicative of how the twelve links of one
cycle are completed. The order is different in terms of how the twelve
links of the same cycle actually evolve. That general presentation of the
twelve links is not taught from the perspective of how the twelve links of
the same cycle are completed but rather from the perspective of showing:
    -how we have come from the previous life into this life, and
    -how we are going on to the next life.
In a previous life, having motivated by ignorance, one creates the karma.
The karma is left on the consciousness.  That is the consciousness of the
causal period.  When that karma ripens in this life, one gets the name and
form.
For the third link consciousness, you can look at it from:
    - The perspective of the causal period, or
    - The perspective of the resultant period
When we come into this lifetime, there is a consciousness. That is the
resultant period consciousness.
So, you come into this life, the link of name and form is established, then
six sources, then contact and then feeling. Then craving, grasping and
existence will bring us to the next life. In the next life, we are born, we
age and we die.
So, the usual way of presenting the twelve links in the order from first
link to twelfth link is from the perspective of:
   -how we came from the previous life into this life, and
   -how from this life we are going on to the next life
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Leave it there. Now we go to the easy
one.
You have to understand how the twelve links of dependent arising of the
same cycle is completed in either two lifetimes, or three lifetimes. Those
of you who are reading from LRCM on your own, you may want to take note of
the second last paragraph from p320:
Therefore, the two factors of (1) craving, which is an actualizing factor,
and (2) feeling, which gives rise to this craving, are not in the same
sequence of dependent-arising. The feeling that gives rise to craving is an
effect of some other sequence of dependent-arising.
This paragraph says that the sequence in the twelve links of dependent
arising, from feeling to craving is not an explanation of the twelve links
of dependent arising of the same cycle; in fact, it is the twelve links of
dependent arising of two different cycles.
As mentioned earlier, the twelve links of dependent arising of the same
cycle can be completed in either two lifetimes or three lifetimes.  When we
say the twelve links of dependent arising of the same cycle can be
completed within three lifetimes, it does not necessarily means three
consecutive lifetimes because the intervening period between the projecting
causes and the projected effects can be very long; as long as eons. Having
said that, if I will to say:
“It follows that the twelve links of dependent arising of the same cycle
need not necessary to be completed within the three lifetimes because the
eon is such a long period of time.”  What are you going to say?
Actually there is no need for  any  qualm,  because  if  you  have  listened
properly to my very good explanation, then this is not a  problem  now.  So,
if somebody were to say, “The  intervening  period  between  the  projecting
causes and the projected effects can be eons, that  mean  I  can  take  more
than three lifetimes to complete the twelve links of  dependent  arising  of
the same cycle.”  Then, what are you going to say?
Student 1: As Khen Rinpoche said that the third lifetime is not  necessarily
a consecutive lifetime,  which  means  it  does  not  run  sequentially  one
lifetime after another. So that would explain the  possibility  of  the  big
gap. [Refer to audio 59:04 -59.19]
Ven Gyurme:  Lifetime two and lifetime three is not consecutive?
Student 1: It said that one cycle can be completed in two  lifetimes  or  it
can be completed in three lifetimes but the third one  doesn’t  seem  to  be
consecutive.
Khen Rinpoche: The text is very clear: It will  be  completed  within  three
lifetimes.  So, if somebody will to challenge  the  position  of  the  text:
“No, you don’t need three lifetimes  because  the  teaching  also  says  the
intervening period between the projecting causes and the  projected  effects
can be an eon.” What are you going to say?
Khen Rinpoche: What? You didn’t answer for that? How do you answer?
Ven Gyurme: You said the first and second  is  necessarily  consecutive  and
the second & third is not consecutive?
Student 1: That means the one and two also not consecutive.
Khen Rinpoche: If I say: “You don’t need three  lifetimes  to  complete  the
twelve links of dependent arising of the same cycle. In fact, you need  many
more lifetimes because within an eon, you can die numberless times  and  you
have numberless lifetimes”.
Student 1: It sounds like…..
Khen Rinpoche: Not sound, you have to answer for that.
Student 1: [Refer to 61:24-63.01]
Khen  Rinpoche:   You  mean  the  twelve  links  are  completed  within  one
lifetime?
Student 1: No, two lifetimes because Lama Tsongkhapa said so.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to explain
Student 1: [Refer to audio 63:03-64.10]
Khen Rinpoche: In essence, what is the answer to the qualm  about  the  very
long intervening  period?  Let’s  say  that  within  an  eon,  we  can  take
numberless rebirths, for example 100,000 rebirths to  finish  one  cycle  of
the twelve links.
Student 1: It  sound  like  it  depends  when  the  actualizing  causes  are
activated. [Refer to audio 64:58-65.14]
Khen Rinpoche: Explain how even  if  there  is  a  long  intervening  period
between the projecting causes and the projected effects,  the  twelve  links
of dependent arising of the  same  cycle  must  be  completed  within  three
lifetimes.
Explain how there is no contradiction that you can wait for numberless  eons
and yet it is completed within three lifetimes.
Student 1: [Refer to audio 66:32-68.00]
Ven Gyurme: The one eon is within which lifetime?
Student 1: The one eon can be between one and two or two and  three.  [Refer
to audio 68.08-68.40]
(Discussion within students: 68.44-70.10]
Khen Rinpoche: What is the reason why lifetimes two and lifetime three  have
to be consecutive; whereas lifetime one and two need not to be  consecutive?

Student 2: Because of the potential existence which is about to  ripen  from
seed to sprout. For something to actualize, the projecting  causes  and  the
actualize causes must complete. Once the actualizing  causes  is  completed,
there is no stopping of it from ripening [Refer to audio 70:24-71.25]
Ven Gyurme: So, lifetime number two and three necessarily  consecutive;  one
and two not necessarily.
Khen  Rinpoche:  There  can  be  a  long  intervening  period  between   the
projecting causes and the actualizing causes.   During  that  period,  other
cycles of the twelve links of dependent arising can be operating,  but  once
the actualizing causes come into being, then you have the projected  effects
and the actualized effects.
To summarize, the twelve links of dependent arising of the  same  cycle,  if
it is to be completed in two lifetimes, how? Lifetime number one: the  three
projecting causes and the three actualizing causes  are  completed.  In  the
immediate next lifetime, you  have  the  six  results:  the  four  projected
results and the two actualized results.
If the twelve links of  dependent  arising  of  the  same  cycle  is  to  be
completed over three lifetimes:
-in the first lifetime, you have the three projecting causes
-between the first lifetime and the second lifetime, it can be a  very  long
intervening period, it doesn’t matter how long.
-come the second lifetime, when the three actualizing causes  are  manifest,
then in the immediate next lifetime, you have the six results.
This is how the twelve links of dependent  arising  of  the  same  cycle  is
completed over three lifetimes.
So after having the three projecting causes, there  can  be  an  intervening
period until the three actualizing causes manifest and  that  would  be  the
second lifetime. Consecutively, the third lifetime is immediately after  the
second lifetime. In the third lifetime, you have the six results.

Student  3:  In  relation  to  the  second   link   (karmic   formation   or
compositional factor) and third link (consciousness), is it only  the  karma
that is accumulated that will leave karmic imprints  on  our  consciousness?
[Refer to audio 75:41-76.50]
Ven Gyurme: If it is the projecting karma, is it necessarily  a  karma  that
is accumulated?
Student 3: I was not looking in that sense. My second question:  When  I  am
doing the purification practice, from which parts of the twelve links  am  I
purifying? [Refer to audio 76:57-78]
Ven Gyurme: You are only purifying negative karma.   Are  you  saying:  What
are the results of your purification?
Student 3: [Refer to 78:09: 78:35]
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You are asking:  From  the  twelve  links,
which one you are purifying?  You  are  asking  that?  I  think  everything.
Everything.
Khen Rinpoche: Whether it is karma done or karma accumulated, it  leaves  an
impression on the  mind.  Once  the  karma  is  accumulated,  it  leaves  an
impression on the  mind.   It’s  only  a  matter  of  the  strength  of  the
imprints; otherwise, something is left on the mind.
Does the projecting karma that will impel a rebirth in the lower realm  have
to be both karma done and karma accumulated?  This  is  something  to  think
about. In the discussion of karma, we saw how karma accumulated is  a  karma
whose result which we will definitely experience.  So, tying this  with  the
projecting karma, is it the same?
If you look at the wheel of existence, there is a monster holding firmly  on
it and even has its mouth on it. This symbolizes  impermanence.  This  shows
that once we are born in cyclic  existence,  it  doesn’t  matter  where  and
what, we definitely have to die.  As we are born under the control of  karma
and  affliction  as  the  causes,  therefore  it  is  impermanence  and   we
definitely have to die.
Of the Four Noble Truth, the wheel of existence  shows  the  true  suffering
and true origin.
You have the forward process of the twelve links  of  dependent  arising  of
the thoroughly afflicted class. You also have the  reverse  process  of  the
twelve links of dependent arising of the thoroughly afflicted class.   These
two show the true suffering and true origin.
Then you have the forward process of the twelve links of  dependent  arising
of the thoroughly purified phenomena. You also have the reverse  process  of
the twelve links of dependent arising of the thoroughly purified  phenomena.
 So, these two show the true path and the true cessation.
Let’s look at the forward process of the twelve links of  dependent  arising
of the thoroughly afflicted class:
From ignorance ( compositional activity (  consciousness  (  name  and  form
(six sources  (  contact  (  feeling  (   craving  (  grasping  (  potential
existence ( birth ( aging and death.
Then the reverse process of the twelve links of  dependent  arising  of  the
thoroughly afflicted class:
Starting from aging and death ( birth ( potential  existence  (  grasping  (
craving ( feeling ( contact ( six sources ( name and form ( consciousness  (
compositional activity ( ignorance.
So, by meditating on the forward process and  the  reverse  process  of  the
twelve links of dependent arising of  the  thoroughly  afflicted  class,  we
come to understand the true suffering and the true origin.
The forward process  of  the  twelve  links  of  dependent  arising  of  the
thoroughly purified class. By stopping  ignorance,  you  stop  compositional
activity. By stopping compositional activity, you stop consciousness and  so
forth.
Then you have reverse process of the twelve links of  dependent  arising  of
the thoroughly purified class.  The stopping of aging and death has to  come
from the stopping of birth and the stopping of birth has to  come  from  the
stopping of potential existence and so forth.
So, meditating on the forward process and the reverse process of the  twelve
links of dependent arising of the thoroughly purified class  is  for  us  to
understand the true path and true cessation.
In the upper right hand corner of the drawing, the Buddha is pointing  to  a
pure, stainless and beautiful full moon.  That  represents  true  cessation.
There should be two verses beneath the moon which symbolize the  true  path.

The verse says that you need to put effort and to think about the  fault  of
the cyclic existence. You should generate  the  determination  to  be  free.
Next it says that the essence of the Buddha teachings is  the  three  higher
trainings and you should practice the three higher  trainings  in  order  to
conquer the afflictions and then overcome the four maras.
Another verse says that those who desire liberation should be  conscientious
and the main method for disciplining or subduing  the  mind  is  the  wisdom
realizing selflessness. The basis for actualizing the wisdom is to have  the
strong practice of ethics as explained in the Vinaya.   So,  one  needs  the
good practice of ethics as the foundation to actualize wisdom. If  one  does
that, one is certain to achieve liberation whereby you will  not  experience
any suffering.
In short, the full moon symbolizes true cessation. The  verses  beneath  the
moon talk  about  the  importance  of  the  practice  of  the  three  higher
trainings to achieve liberation. So these verses symbolize the true path.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): OK, that’s it. Now the  twelve  links  are
finished. I will start with the path of the  person  of  great  capacity  on
Thursday.
Student 4: For a person who has realized emptiness, be it once  returner  or
stream enterer, which part of the chart has it  stop;  is  it  compositional
factor and the rest remain? [Refer to audio: 96.34-97.01]
Ven Gyurme Are you asking about stopping a new cycle or stopping  a  current
cycle or the cycle already in progress?  In the first place, is it  possible
to start a new cycle or not?
Student 4: If he is a once returner, he still has the projecting  karma  for
a new cycle. As he is to become an arahat soon, which parts  of  the  twelve
links he has stopped? [Refer to audio: 97:27-98]
Khen Rinpoche:  Stream enterer, once returner, never- returner etc.  do  not
accumulate fresh projecting karma. In  order  to  experience  the  projected
effects, they must be preceded by the actualizing causes  like  craving  and
grasping. Do they have these?
Student 4: I think they should have.
Student 5: For the training that is  common  with  the  type  of  person  of
medium capacity, is the correct view or the view of emptiness  is  important
at this point in time? [Refer to audio 99:26-100]
Ven Gyurme: The correct or final?
Student 4: The final, the Consequent Middle Way’s view of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: It depends on from  which  tenets  perspective  that  one  is
explaining the topic.
Student 4: When talking  about  the  12  l  and  the  preceding  chapter  on
afflictions, the reference point seem to be of Asanga  and  Dharmakirti  who
are from the Mind-Only School’s perspective.
Khen Rinpoche: Most of the presentation on  mind  such  as  afflictions  and
also karma are based on Abhidharma; either  the  higher  Abhidharma  or  the
lower Abhidharma.  Because the explanation is  based  on  these  two  texts,
therefore  the  explanations  of  ignorance  and  the  view  of   transitory
collection are done in  accordance  with  their  views.  Starting  from  the
Autonomy  Middle  Way  School  and  below,  all  of  them  shared  the  same
presentation  of  the  view  of  the  selflessness  of  a  person.  So,  the
explanation given here is from that perspective.
Student 4: When coming to this topic of training, am I  right  to  say  that
there is no need for us to treat the teaching  to  be  in  accord  with  the
final view of emptiness? [Refer to audio: 103:12-103:55]
Ven Gyurme: It depends on how you ask the question.   Are  you  saying  that
it’s sufficient just to practice this and then you can achieve liberation?
Student 4: [Refer to audio: 104:05: 104:36]
Khen Rinpoche (Spoke in English): Look like I understand you question,  look
like I didn’t understand you question.
Student 4: Can we leave the understanding of this  teaching  just  according
to the lower school of tenets? [Refer to audio: 104:54- 105.10]
Khen Rinpoche: Well, it’s not exactly like that.  Remember I  did  say  that
with regards to ignorance, there are so many  different  views  as  to  what
ignorance is.  So, depending on which tenets perspective  you  take.  If  we
take the shared assertion of the Sutra  school,  Mind-only  School  and  the
Autonomy Middle Way School’s explanation on the selflessness  of  a  person,
we can stick with what is in the text. But if we based  the  explanation  on
the perspective of the Consequent Middle Way  School,  then  this  would  be
incorrect.
Student 4: [Refer to audio: 106:54-107]
Khen Rinpoche: It depends from which tenets’  perspective  you  explain  the
path that is shared with the person of the medium capacity.   Basically  you
are not happy so you want the Consequence’s view, right?
Student 4: Something like that.

