Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 4.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.240280
================================================================================


2B2 Showing the greatness of the teachings
2B2C Presentation of [this text] as possessing the four greatnesses
1 The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory
2 The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings dawning on you as useful
instructions
3 The greatness of allowing you easily to find the meaning intended by the
Buddha
4 The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself
2B2C-1 The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory
The greatness of these instructions of this text has four [aspects]. The
first of these [is] the greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-
contradictory.
This instruction possesses the greatness of enabling us to recognize that
all the teachings are free of contradiction.
A Identifying the teachings
Everything the Jina has said.
First, what constitute the teaching that is being mentioned here?
Everything the Conqueror or the Jina had explained. If we delve little bit
into the meaning of the teaching or the doctrine, the teaching of the
Buddha can be divided into:
     1. Scriptural teachings
     2. Realizational teachings
First, we are trying to identify what is the teaching in term of the first
greatness: The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory.
In this context, the teaching here is mainly referred to the scriptural
teachings.
As I have explained earlier, the scriptural teachings, when elaborated, one
can talk about the three scriptural collections.  The three scriptural
collections are the scriptural teachings.
What about the realizational teachings? The realizational teachings are the
three higher trainings.
The three higher trainings are: (1) Higher training in ethics (2) Higher
training in concentration (3) Higher training in wisdom
One can also understand the scriptural teachings to mean those scriptures
that contain the information as to how or what we should put into practice.

The realizational teachings refer to the teachings or methods that we are
supposed to put them into practice.
This is another way of understanding the scriptural teachings and the
realizational teachings.
We do talk about preserving the Buddhadharma or upholding the Buddhadharma.
The Buddhadharma basically consists of these two: the scriptural teachings
and the realizational teachings.
Essentially, preserving and upholding the Buddhadharma means preserving and
upholding the scriptural teachings and the realizational teachings.
How does one preserve and uphold the scriptural teachings?
One preserves and upholds the scriptural teachings by first learning the
scriptures so one understands and holds the scriptures. On the basis of
understanding all the scriptures which come from learning and studying
them, then one causes others to gain a similar understanding of the
scriptures. If one does this, this is what we mean by preserving and
upholding the scriptural teachings.
Then how does one preserve and uphold the realizational teachings?
The realizational teachings are basically the three higher trainings. On
the basis of possessing the three higher trainings in one’s mental
continuum, on the basis of one’s realization or experience and then spread
those teachings to others, this is what we mean by preserving and upholding
the realizational teachings.
So far, what we have being discussing are very important. Basically we have
to understand:
      -what is the Buddha’s teaching
      -what is it really means to preserve and uphold the Buddha’s teaching
From one’s own side, one should see how one can contribute to the upholding
of the Buddha’s teaching. It is the responsibility of each and every one of
us here to preserve and uphold the Buddhadharma because all of us believe
and accept the Buddha’s teaching as something that is wonderful, very good,
and very pure. We should always think how we can contribute to the
preservation and the flourishing of Buddha’s teaching in this world. The
preservation and flourishing of the Buddhadharma does not depend solely on
the existent of the texts and the scriptures. The texts and scriptures are
all there but the preservation and flourishing of the Buddhadharma does
depend on the people who understand the meaning of those scriptures. In
order to preserve and to cause the teaching to spread, first, the meaning
of the scriptures must be understood by people. So we have identified with
the teachings.
B How all these teachings are recognized as non-contradictory
They all come to be understood as one person’s path to Buddhahood.
That is to say some are primary points of the path - others are appropriate
secondary points. [Alternative translation: Some are the main points of the
path; some are the various branches of the path]
When we talk about how the teachings are free of contradiction, we mainly
refer to the realizational teachings.
We talk about the path of a person of small capacity, the path of a person
of middling capacity and the path of a person of great capacity. We
understand that the path of the three types of person helps one another;
they do assist one another, then one has realized that the realizational
teachings are free of contradiction.
Let’s take the path of the person of middling capacity as an example. The
person of middling capacity strives mainly to overcome the attraction to
the future lives in samsara. A person of middling capacity strives to
develop the intent or the wish to achieve liberation. So the person strives
to develop the thought of renunciation or the determination to be free from
cyclic existence. This is the main focus of this person. But as a
preliminary or as a branch practice, this person must first cultivate the
meditation on human life of freedom and endowment. For example, this person
must cultivate as preliminary or as a branch meditation on death and
impermanence.
Then let’s look at the person of great capacity. The main focus of the
person of great capacity is trying to develop bodhicitta (altruistic
intention) and the development of bodhicitta must be based on the
development of great compassion. In order for this person to develop great
compassion, the person must first understand what suffering is. The person
must first understand suffering individually in relation to his own
existence i.e. his own life. As a preliminary, in order to develop great
compassion, this person must reflect and understand the suffering of
samsara particularly in relation to himself. Only on the basis of gaining
the understanding of suffering of samsara and when that practitioner
changes the object to other sentient beings, there is a reason or basis for
him to be able to develop a great compassion for others. That person is
able to develop the feeling of being unable to bear the suffering of
others. In order for this to happen, the practitioner must first understand
how he himself is suffering in samsara. So without the preliminary
understanding, there is no way that one can really develop pure perfect
compassion for others.
When we talk about realizing the teaching as non-contradictory, in the
context of a person whose main goal is enlightenment, that person must
first trains in the path that are shared with the person of small and
middling capacities. That means that if your goal is enlightenment,
nevertheless, you still must train the preliminary practices. First, you
must overcome the preoccupation of the happiness of this life. One does so
through reflecting on topics such as human life freedom and endowment,
death and impermanence. The practitioner also has to overcome the
attraction to the happiness of the future lives in samsara. The
practitioner does that through generating renunciation or the determination
to be free from cyclic existence. These are practices that are shared with
the person of small and middling capacities. These practices help to
develop bodhicitta that one has not yet developed and also help to increase
the bodhicitta that one has already developed.
Those of you who have attended classes and have heard this before, this
(teaching) will not sound so alien. For those of you who have not heard
many teachings and if you are hearing this (teaching) for the first time,
it is unlikely you will understand everything. This is alright. If you have
the interest, you need to just work on it by thinking about it and reading
it up again. Slowly, you will able to gain an understanding of what I have
just said.
Geshela spoke in English: I think, maybe two or three years ago, I went to
Sera and I stayed there for about ten days. During that period, I went to
receive teaching from my teacher. I carried my book when I visited my
teacher. On the first day, he said: “I am very happy that your book is wear
and tear and become black.”  At that time I was not sure what he was
talking about but he was very happy about that. I didn’t get what he meant
at that time. Some said that is the sign that I have read the book. If the
book is pure white, then nothing has happen.  So make sure your book is
black. The first time when my teacher said it is black, I don’t know why he
said that. Actually it means that I have read a lot, that was why my book
has torn down and become black. So it is good to read again and again. If
you just read one time and if don’t understand, don’t stop there but try to
read it again and again. It is not like reciting Sanghata Sutra in which
you don’t have time to think because you try to finish it fast. There is no
time for you to think. It is not like that. You need to read through it
slowly and think about it.
Let’s take the example of the sentence: “Some are the main points of the
path; some are the various branches of the path”. Just the sentence alone,
you should read it and think over it again and again: “What is this
sentence saying?” So it is very important to read and to think about it and
in this case, you should think and then come to a definite understanding of
what are the main points of the path and what are the various branches of
the path.
For those who have heard the Lamrim before, then you should have more
things to think about when you read this particular sentence.  Then you
notice that there is a misconception that the practice the lower path and
the practice of the Mahayana are contradictory i.e. if you are practicing
the Mahayana, then you don’t have to practice the lower path. So there is a
huge misconception among the people out there. They seem to identify people
of the different traditions; those monks who are in the saffron robes are
the practitioners or the followers of the Hinayana- the lesser vehicle.
Then the Chinese monks are the followers of Mahayana whereas the Mongolian
and Tibetan are practicing the Vajrayana – the secret mantras. That means
we basically classified people according to these groups. When we look at
these peoples from the various groups, we feel as if all of them cannot be
put together and they are contradictory. So this is the huge misconception
out there. So Lama Tsongkhapa explains it is wrong to have such
misconception. If you regard the Hinayana and Mahayana are contradictory
and opposing each another like heat and cold, then it would be very sad and
wrong. Then Lama Tsongkhapa goes on to explains why this is so.  The fact
the teachings are non-contradictory and are proven through logics and
reasonings.
C How it is demonstrated through scripture and logic that it would be
contradictory not to accept this
In this regard it is the bodhisattva’s wish to work for the welfare of the
world. For that purpose it is also necessary to care for all three types of
disciples and therefore train in their respective paths.
The main wish of a bodhisattva is to benefit sentient beings. The
bodhisattva generates the bodhicitta (or the altruistic intention) mainly
to work for the benefit all sentient beings.
In general, in term of the object to be subdued, it is translated as
disciple. Generally, there are infinite types of disciples. Here we can
categorize them into three types of disciples.
In order to benefit the respective type of disciples, we need to generate
in them the qualities and the practices that are associated with that
particular kind of disciples. In order for you to be able to do that, you
yourself as aspiring bodhisattva must have realized what you are about to
teach. Another way of saying: a bodhisattva work for the benefits of all
sentient beings; which mean the bodhisattva works for the people who are
predisposed towards the lesser vehicle- the Hinayana. In order for a
bodhisattva to works for someone who are of the Hinayana lineage, the
bodhisattva must be able to place that particular person on the Hinayana
path and lead that person on the Hinayana path. In order for that
bodhisattva to do that, he must know what the Hinayana path is. In order
for the bodhisattva to know what the Hinayana path is, he must have the
experience of having travelled or practiced the Hinayana teachings.
Therefore the bodhisattva must practice the Hinayana teachings in order to
work for the people of the Hinayana lineage.
From this, as a bodhisattva, if you think; “The Hinayana path is not
necessary and I don’t have to get myself involve in it.” You can see,
through reasoning, this is wrong. In fact, we need to do so because in
order for the bodhisattva to benefit the person of the Hinayana lineage,
you must know the Hinayana path; which comes from the practice of Hinayana
teachings itself. From here, you can see it is proven through reasoning.
Here, we are saying that as a bodhisattva, you cannot abandon the Hinayana
teachings. Do you see the reason? You have to see the reason for yourself
in order to eradicate the huge misconception that the Hinayana path is not
needed for someone practicing the Mahayana. How else can you remove that
misconception and the wrong view that is so prevalent other than using
logics and reasonings that I have just presented to you? Do you understand
the reason? This is something that you have to get it. This is establishing
how the teachings are non-contradictory through reasons. As a support to
the use of reasons, next is employing scriptural authorities.
This is because it is explained by the venerable Maitreya that knowing
paths of the three vehicles constitutes the means of realizing the
bodhisattvas’ goals.
That is establishing the fact that the teachings are non-contradictory
through scriptural authorities.
Scriptural quotation from one of Maitreya’s text: “Knowing the paths of the
three vehicles is the method for bodhisattvas to achieve the goal they have
set.” The Buddha also says something similar in the Perfection of Wisdom
Sutra: “The bodhisattvas should produce all paths -whatever is a path of a
Hearer, a Solitary Realizer or a Buddha- should know all paths. They should
also perform the deeds of these paths and bring all of them to completion”.

The Buddha says that the bodhisattvas not only should produce these three
paths but they also must thoroughly know these paths. The bodhisattvas
should bring all these paths to completion but that is not the end. After
the bodhisattvas have brought these paths to completion, they must work for
the benefits of the sentient beings.
Here you can clearly see that the Buddha himself says that as a follower of
a Mahayana (the great vehicle), one must trains in the path of Hinayana.
Therefore, to hold on to the view that as a practitioner of a Mahayana, one
does not need the Hinayana, then that is a huge mistake.
There are other proofs that the teachings are non-contradictory.
D Establishing that the teachings are non-contradictory
In the Mahayana path there is the common and the uncommon1. The former is
that which originates from the Hinayana collection of scriptures - except
for some peculiarities that are not common, to do with the thought of
aspiring to individual liberation and the like.
Note 1: common and the uncommon also translated as the shared and the
unshared
When we talk about Mahayana path itself, there are two divisions:
    - Shared Mahayana path
    - Unshared Mahayana path
“The former is that which originates from the Hinayana collection of
scriptures” –means the shared Mahayana path which refers to those practices
in the Mahayana that are shared (or common) with the Hinayana. This
includes the teachings on refuge, karma, the general and the specific
sufferings of cyclic existence, renunciation or the thought to be liberated
from cyclic existence, the presentation of the Four Nobles Truths, the
presentation of the twelve links of dependent arising, the presentation of
the stages of the three higher trainings. These teachings originate from
the Hinayana collection of scriptures are also the practices that must be
practiced by a person following the Mahayana path.
“except for some peculiarities that are not common, to do with the thought
of aspiring to individual liberation and the like” –[alternative
translation: apart for some exceptions that are not shared to do with the
thought of aspiring to individual liberation and the like”] – Therefore
Mahayana followers must practice all those things taught in the Hinayana
scriptural collection,  with only a few exceptions, such as diligently
seeking a blissful peace for oneself alone. The general way of progressing
along the path as taught in in the Hinayana scriptural collection is
something that is to be practiced by those following the Mahayana with only
a few exceptions. An exception is an uncommon feature of the Hinayana to
just focus on achieving individual liberation for oneself. For a Mahayana
follower, one does not cultivate that.
Unshared Mahayana path refers to those practices that are only specific to
the Mahayana and not any other path.
Next, stating the other proofs that the teachings are non-contradictory.
Apart from that, it is not that faults are partially ceased and qualities
are partially completed in perfectly complete buddhahood, but rather all
kinds of faults have been eliminated and all types of good qualities are
complete. Consequently, as the Mahayana, achieving this, also brings about
the cessation of all faults and the development of all good qualities, the
path of the Mahayana comprises all the various aspects of qualities of
abandonment and realization of all other vehicles.
That is why the sections of the Mahayana path, which brings about
Buddhahood, comprise all the Buddha’s teachings, for there is no utterance
of the Muni that does not cause the cessation of some faults and the
development of some good qualities, and because it is not the case that all
of this is not brought about by the Mahayana.
The point to realize here is that the teachings are non-contradictory.
There is no contradiction between the Hinayana teaching and the Mahayana
teaching. If you are the followers of the Mahayana, you must practice the
Hinayana teaching. As to why this is the case, you have to see for yourself
the reason; for this is proven through reasons and the scriptural
authorities.
The way of entering the Mahayana path is that you have the Hinayana
teaching as the foundation. Upon this basis, you add-on the Mahayana
practices. That is how you progress along the Mahayana path. It is not that
you enter the Mahayana right from the beginning by discarding the Hinayana
practices. That is not the case. So if you understand the reasons and the
proofs of why the Hinayana practices are essential for someone following
the Mahayana path, then you will be able to eliminate this huge
misconception either in your own mind or others. Otherwise, without the
understanding of what we have been discussed here, then we will think the
Hinayana and the Mahayana as if these two are like hot and cold; they are
contradictory and have nothing to do with one another. If you have that
kind of attitude and start to think like this, then when you think of the
Hinayana teaching, there is a likelihood of you looking down at the lesser
vehicle –the Hinayana. There is also a likelihood of thinking: “What is the
use of the Hinayana teachings? It has nothing to do with me.” These
negative thought and misconception may arise in our mind if we do not
understand the reason. If we do understand the reason, then we will be able
to appreciate the teaching of the Hinayana and also be able to have a pure
view on them. It is very important to realize that the teachings are non-
contradictory but knowing the teachings are non-contradictory comes from
the knowledge which comes from studies and understanding the teachings.
Without learning in details from the various teachings and various texts,
it is quite difficult to appreciate and to understand that the teachings
are non-contradictory. In fact, they do complement one another. In order
for this to come about, therefore, studying and learning is very important.

Having saying all these, it is possible to develop a doubt or qualm in
relation to the Mahayana versus Vajrayana. It is possible that people think
that Mahayana path and the Vajrayana path are unrelated; they have nothing
to do with one another as if they are two separate things and are
contradictory.
E Clearing up doubts
If you think: ‘That may be true for the Paramitayana2, but not for those
entering the Vajrayana’:
Although the way you train in the Paramitayana - in countless clear
distinctions that clarify giving etc. - is different from mantra2, the
behavioural basis - the generation of the mind 2- and the coarse form of
the path of training in the six perfections, the behaviour, is nevertheless
the same and therefore something shared by them.
[Alternative translation: The substance of the path of the perfection
vehicle comprises the thought that is the development of the spirit of
enlightenment and the deeds of training in the six perfections.]
Note 2: Paramitayana is Causal Perfection Vehicle. Mantra is Vajrayana. The
generation of the mind is bodhicitta.
When we talk about the Vajrayana, we must understand that the Vajrayana is
the path of the Mahayana. The Mahayana path comprises of two:
     1. The Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana)
     2. The Vajra Vehicle (Vajrayana)
Whether a path is a Mahayana or not, it is determined primarily by the
presence of bodhicitta (altruistic intention). If it is a Mahayana, the
common Mahayana practices are generating bodhicitta and the practicing of
the six perfections.
This mean that even a follower of the Mahayana Vajrayana must cultivates
bodhicitta and also must cultivates the practice of the six perfections. Is
there such a thing as training in following the Vajrayana but discarding
the bodhicitta and the practice of the six perfections? The answer is NO!
Having said that, then obviously there is a difference between the Mahayana
Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana) and the Mahayana Vajrayana.
In the Mahayana Perfection Vehicle, it is taught that one has to cultivate
the practice of the six perfections for immeasurables length of time such
as collecting merits over a period of three great countless eons. Although
the practice of the six perfections is taught and must be practiced by
someone who is following the Vajrayana but it is not taught in Vajrayana
that the practitioner has to practice the six perfections for such a long
period of time.
As I have mentioned earlier, for those who are hearing this for the first
time, it would be unlikely that you are able to understand everything of
what is being mentioned here. That is normal; so you don’t have to worry
about this. For those of you who have been studying all these while and
when you read this now, I guess you probably would understand what I am
saying. One of the reason why those of you who are hearing this for the
first are not able to understand everything the first time round because
the Lamrim, the Stages of the Path, is a teaching which condensed all the
subject matters of the entire Buddhadharma into a relatively short text. It
is wide ranging in terms of subject matters. Therefore, if you have not
heard this before or has not done any prior studies, it would be a little
bit challenging and it is normal for not able to understand everything now.
The point is not to get discourage.
Here we are talking about the difference between the Mahayana Perfection
Vehicle (Paramitayana) and Mahayana Vajra Vehicle (Vajrayana). Both are
Mahayana paths. We are saying that both are non-contradictory. It is almost
impossible to come to that understanding if you have not studied these two
paths because in order to understand these two are non-contradictory, you
must first know the presentation of the Mahayana paths i.e. what
constitutes the whole Mahayana vehicle. You must also have studied and
understood the presentation of the whole tantric (Vajrayana) paths and
grounds. Only after having understood these two paths in details, then you
will be able to understand that these two teachings are non-contradictory.
For today, you just need to keep the following in your mind:
Lama Tsongkhapa has mentioned in the text that all the teachings are free
of contradiction; which means that there is no contradiction between the
Hinayana and the Mahayana path. As a follower of a Mahayana, you also must
practice the Hinayana teaching. Similarly there is also no contradiction
between the Mahayana Perfection Vehicle and Mahayana Vajra Vehicle.
Followers of both paths need to practice bodhicitta and the practice of the
six perfections.
In Vajra peak it says:
   Not even to sustain one’s life,
   the bodhi mind should be abandoned
   [[Alternative translation:  Even to save your life, do not give up
   bodhicitta.]
and:
   The practice of the six perfections,
   must not be abandoned ever.
This is also taught in numerous other mantra texts. In many authentic
sources for the mandala ritual of highest yoga tantra it says that a set of
two vows must have been taken:  A common and an uncommon one and indeed,
the former refers to bodhisattva vows. The precious teacher also said:  “My
guru who knew how to accommodate all the teachings by means of the path [as
if in] a square…”  [Alternative translation: My guru is the one who knows
how to bring all of the teachings within the four-sided paths]
 These words form the basis of a major investigation.
“These words form the basis of a major investigation” – means this is
something that is useful to think about.
As mentioned in the empowerment rituals of Highest Yoga Tantra, when taking
Highest Yoga Tantra’s empowerment, one needs to take both the shared and
unshared vows. The shared means something that is common to the four
classes of tantra. The shared or common vows refer to the bodhisattva vows.
Doing homework or doing exam should not be the cause of worry or stress. If
you want to learn and have chosen to commit to the program, then you should
follow-up with the commitment. Those of you who are not able to commit the
full program, as for now, or are not ready for exam, you can come to the
class as much as you can and pay attention and relax. Those who want to do
the full 5-years program and also has decided not wanting the certificate
or taking the exam, that is also completely fine with me. So there is no
cause of worry. Some people who want to study but are worry with the exam
and feel so stress about taking exam. So it is your choice. If you choose
to do the full 5-years program but decide not to take the exam, this is an
individual choice. The most important thing here is that all of you must
enjoy your presence here. You must enjoy the process of studying. There is
a purpose for homework and exam. All of us are the same because if there is
no pressure being applied on us, we will take thing easy. However, if there
is some pressure being applied on us, for some, this is necessary and is
good as it make them study. The very purpose of holding exam and test is to
help you in your study- that is the only reason. Of course, during the
preparation for the exam, obviously you need to meet with some difficulties
and hardship. On the basis of recognizing the purpose of holding such test
and exam, then you just need to put up with the minor difficulties that
come along the way.
Homework
The point here is that you have to write after you think. The purpose of
this thought process is to come to a feeling in your heart that the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha do exist; not some kind of imagination or fairies tales.
It is important that you write what you feel in your heart. The purpose of
this exercise is making the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha to come alive in your
mind. So write what you think. Think of yourself being at the situation
that you have to help someone to clear his/her doubts. For example, if
someone comes along and asks you: “Can you explain in simple term what are
the two truths and the Four Nobles Truths? How can I make the Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha come alive for myself?” How are you going to help the
person with the questions? Write what you are going to say from your heart
to that person.
To prepare short essay to answer the following questions:
 1. Explain the nature of reality i.e. explain simply how the two truths
    are present on any chosen basis or object.
 2. On the basis of understanding of the two truths, how does that
    understanding validate the Four Noble Truths?
 3. After having understood how the two truths validate the Four Noble
    Truths, how does that understanding help you to validate the existence
    of the Three Jewels (the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha)?
 4. What are the main obstacles that prevent you from actualizing the Three
    Jewels?
 5. What are the favorable conditions for actualizing the Three Jewels?


Deadline for handing up homework: Tuesday, 5th July 2011
