Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson53.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.140746
================================================================================


Meditation:  For the next few minutes, try to meditate with an alert mind
and with some concentration. Bring Buddha to your mind and then make
offerings and so forth; in particular set a proper motivation for listening
to the teachings and, as much as possible, develop a virtuous frame of
mind.
We are now looking at the topic on generating bodhichitta; translated here
as the spirit of enlightenment. What is bodhichitta? Bodhicitta is an
aspiration for enlightenment. In order to develop an aspiration for
enlightenment, one needs to have developed well a mind that is intent on
others welfare. In order to have developed well a mind that it is intent on
others welfare, one must first have affection for everyone. The basis for
cultivating affection for everyone is impartiality.
First we have to cultivate impartiality but cultivating impartiality alone
is not enough. On the basis for cultivating impartiality, we have to
develop affection for all beings. Having to cultivate this affection for
all beings, the instruction here states that:
- cultivating the recognition that all beings are our mothers
- cultivating the remembrance for their kindness and
- cultivating the wish to repay your mothers’ kindness.
With these three, we will then be able to develop affection for all beings.
Having affection for all beings become the basis to generate the mind that
is intent on others welfare. With that as the basis and in order to
generate a mind that is intent on others welfare, the text talks about:
cultivating love, cultivating compassion and then cultivating wholehearted
resolve.
When the cultivation of the love, compassion and wholehearted resolve is
done properly, this will become a condition or cause for one to be able to
properly develop bodhichitta -the aspiration for enlightenment.

|Sevenfold cause-and-effect          |Basis                   |
|instructions                        |                        |
|1.Recognition of all beings are our |Impartiality for all    |
|mothers                             |beings                  |
|Remembrance of your mothers’        |                        |
|kindness                            |                        |
|3. Wish to repay your mothers’      |                        |
|kindness                            |                        |
|4. Love                             |Affection for all beings|
|5.Compassion                        |                        |
|6. Wholehearted resolve             |                        |
|7. Bodhichitta                      |Intent on others welfare|


Those of you who have read the text, can someone answer my question which I
gave you on Tuesday; basically what is the qualm and what is the answer?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): What is the qualm and what is the answer?
Student 1: (audio 18:09 – 18:27)
The important thing is that you have read and have thought about it. It
doesn’t matter whether you got it right or wrong. That is not the point.
The point here is that this is just a chance for you to express what you
have understood from your reading. That is the most important thing. It
doesn’t matter whether it is right or wrong. I always encourage you to read
and also think about what you have read. This is important. For this kind
of class, the way we study here has to be different. Reading and thinking
about it is very important. If somebody will to challenge your
understanding or able to show you the fault of your reasoning or to show
you how your position cannot be substantiated, then it will forever stick
to your mind. Then you will really learn. Otherwise, if you don’t read but
just rely on what I have said in class -I come to class, you come to class
and I just read the text- then it may stay in your mind for maybe one week
or one month, and that is. The way in which we study must be different;
actually there is a big difference. Anyway, this is how I see it is
important. Therefore I always encourage you to read because if you read and
think of what you have read every time, you will have new perspective, new
understanding and maybe more questions. This will increase your interest
and naturally you will have interest to find out more and set to continue.
So, this is the way to read. You have to read and not just read, you have
to read and think about it. Every time you read and think, you may get new
perspective and new understanding. It is very interesting and an amazing
kind of feeling which then fused your interest of wanting to read more. If
you just read it casually just turning the pages and expecting your
interest to continue with such simple reading without thinking, I guess is
quite difficult.
Student 2: Referring to LRCM V2 page 47: (c) The cultivation of
wholehearted resolve
“Even though this thought was described in the context of the practice of
repaying your mothers' kindness, here it indicates that it is insufficient
to have the compassion and love which merely think, "How nice it would be
if they had happiness and were free from suffering." For, the thought that
assumes responsibility shows that you must develop the compassion and love
which have the power to induce the resolve."
I thought the qualm is similar to what one of the student asked that
day………………  (audio 25:00 – 26:28)
Khen Rinpoche: In essence, what is the qualm?
Student 2: (audio 26:39 – 27:06)
Ven Gyurme: That sound like an answer type of answer. So, what is the
qualm?
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Before you give the answer, you must know
the qualm. We will continue these two hours to discuss this section until
you get it correct. What is the qualm?
Khen Rinpoche: Whoever is standing there trying to say something, everyone
has to be alert on whatever is being said. You should not think that this
is just the business between two individuals, but rather you have to take
interest in what is being said and how it is being said.
Student 2: The qualm is that some people may think that I do not have to
take the responsibility but just leave is as a wish. (audio 29:22– 29:46)
Khen Rinpoche: When developing wholehearted resolve?
Student 2: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That is the qualm. OK. Sit down.  Today I
think I have to call everyone so just be ready and you must say something.
Make it short and give the qualm. By reading the conclusion, give the qualm
and then if possible give the answer.
Student 3: (audio 30:56– 33:30)
Khen Rinpoche: In the section of recognizing sentient beings as mothers and
cultivating the remembrance of their kindness, there is no discussion of
love whatsoever. There was no discussion about love and compassion in those
sections.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Isn’t it?
Student 3: (audio 34:10– 34:23)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): No, you must understand.
Khen Rinpoche: You said that the love and compassion that is mentioned here
is different from the love and compassion that is mentioned in those
sections.
Student 3: (audio 34:57 – 35:32)
Khen Rinpoche: If someone were to say to you: the love and compassion is
not mentioned in the section of recognizing all sentient beings as our
mothers and remembering of their kindness, then what are you going to say?
Student 3: (audio 35:55 – 36:02)
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, you can see that there is a big difference in
this way of pursuing an understanding of the topic. From this you can see
that from our reading, what we think the text is saying is not necessarily
what it is. This becomes apparent when we are questioned.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English):  Also myself don’t know what is the
qualm. I am just trying to get from you. I didn’t get them still.
Student 4: At the end of meditating of love and compassion, the result
would be thinking: “If only sentient beings have happiness and free from
suffering and how can I cause them to be free from suffering. May I be able
to do so?” The qualm will be that this thought along will be sufficient
enough, and why do you need to proceed to wholehearted resolve? (audio
37:50 – 39:13)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): The qualm makes sense. Everybody think.
Student 4: (audio 39:27 – 39:50)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): If that is the qualm then how to answer
related with your qualm? If that is your qualm, how the answer related to
your qualm. Are you clear about your qualm of what you said just now? Okay,
if you are clear about the qualm then now you are going to answer.
Student 4: This kind of thought is insufficient to generate the mind of
bodhicitta. (audio 40:21 – 40:31)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): When you say this kind of thought? Which
one - compassion and loving kindness?
Student 4: Yes
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Great compassion and great love is not
enough?
Student 4: Not enough for me to proceed to the step of generating
bodhicitta (audio 40:45 – 40:55)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): That itself is not enough?
Student 4: You need one more step which is the wholehearted resolve (audio
40:57 – 41:02)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): What was your qualm just now?
Student 4: The qualm is that at the end of meditating of love and
compassion …(audio 41:07– 41:14)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Between that you need this mind, isn’t
it? Now how is your answer going to be?
Student 4: The qualm is that those minds of love and compassion are not
strong enough for me to generate bodhicitta because there is still a
lacking of this wholehearted resolve; taking personal responsibility to
free them (audio 41:19– 41:40)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I thought that qualm is done before
somewhere.
Khen Rinpoche: The qualm that Student 4 brought up is in LRCM V2 page 32:
2" How wholehearted resolve and the spirit of enlightenment are the effects
of compassion
Qualm: Once you develop compassion through a gradual training of the mind,
you generate the desire to attain buddhahood for the sake of all living
beings. This should be enough. Why is it necessary to have the step of
developing wholehearted resolve in between developing compassion and
generating the spirit of enlightenment?
Reply: Although sravakas and pratyekabuddhas have the immeasurable love and
compassion whereby they think, "If only beings could have happiness and be
free from suffering," these non-Mahayana followers do not think, "I will
take on the responsibility to remove the suffering and to provide the
happiness of all living beings." Therefore, you must develop wholehearted
resolve that surpasses all other courageous thoughts.
Khen Rinpoche: The qualm is: Why do you need wholehearted resolve to come
in between compassion and bodhichitta? The answer is: You need wholehearted
resolve. So, this qualm has already been settled.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): The qualm has to be a little bit
different.
Student 4: The earlier qualm is to help us to bridge the gap between
compassion and bodhicitta, and the gap is wholehearted resolve. After love
and compassion, now is to bridge the gap towards wholehearted resolve.
(audio 45.01-45.36)
Khen Rinpoche: There is no need to bridge the gap because, in the first
place, there is no qualm.
Student 4: OK. Then there is no qualm.
Student 5: (audio 46:35– 47:11)
Khen Rinpoche: How love and compassion will have to result in wholehearted
resolve?
Student 5: Yes, (audio 44:33– 48:08)
Khen Rinpoche: There is a qualm, right? How did the qualm arise? What is
the basis for the qualm to arise? What was said?
I will read from LRCM. The additional outline provided by Trijang Rinpoche
will mark the boundary between what is being discussed in that same
paragraph. According to the small outline: “The actual way to meditate on
wholehearted resolve,” where does that paragraph end?
[LRCM V2 page 47] (c) The cultivation of wholehearted resolve
At the conclusion of meditating on love and compassion think, "Alas, these
dear living beings for whom I feel affection are deprived of happiness and
tormented by suffering; how can I provide them happiness and free them from
suffering?" Thinking in this way, train your mind in at least this thought
in order to take on the responsibility to liberate living beings.
This paragraph precedes the raising of the qualm. That part of the
paragraph that I have just read is the actual way to cultivate wholehearted
resolve. But immediately following this, comes the qualm. Then obviously
this will become the basis for the qualm to arise. So, what is that causing
the qualm to arise?
What I have just read out is the actual way for meditating on wholehearted
resolve but the qualm comes immediately after this; so it becomes the basis
for the qualm to arise. If you look at the smaller outline, it says:
“Clearing up the qualm”. This goes with the couple of the sentences that
start with:
[LRCM V2 page 47]  Even though this thought was described in the context of
the practice of repaying your mothers' kindness, here it indicates that it
is insufficient to have the compassion and love which merely think, "How
nice it would be if they had happiness and were free from suffering." For,
the thought that assumes responsibility shows that you must develop the
compassion and love which have the power to induce the resolve, "I will
provide happiness and benefit to all living beings." It is very effective
if you practice this continuously, being mindful of it in all of your
physical activities during the period of post-meditation and so on, not
just during the meditation session
In the sentence: “Even though this thought was described in the context of
the practice of repaying your mothers' kindness,…., “ what does “this”
refers to?
Student 6: When we are cultivating love and compassion, I understand it
that it is in the meditative session. In order for us to cultivating
wholehearted resolve we have to cultivate love and compassion but it is not
sufficient to just cultivate wholehearted resolve during meditative
session. For the cultivation of this part we have to do it continuously in
the past-meditation. The qualm is: Is it enough to cultivates wholehearted
resolve in the meditative session?  (audio 53:11– 54:05)
Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that it is not sufficient just to practice
wholehearted resolve in meditation.
Student 6: In order to get wholehearted resolve you have to cultivate love
and compassion in order to get that wholehearted resolve but when we get to
the point of wholehearted resolve it is not sufficient to cultivate it
during the meditative session. You must continually to cultivates
wholehearted resolve in the post meditative session.(audio 53:24– 55:05)
Khen Rinpoche: The answer to the qualm is given in the text which says:
“Even though this thought was described in the context of the practice of
repaying your mothers' kindness, here it indicates that it is insufficient
to have the compassion and love which merely think, "How nice it would be
if they had happiness and were free from suffering." For, the thought that
assumes responsibility shows that you must develop the compassion and love
which have the power to induce the resolve, "I will provide happiness and
benefit to all living beings."”
Up to this point, this is the answer. Subsequently the text read: “It is
very effective if you practice this continuously, being mindful of it in
all of your physical activities during the period of post-meditation and so
on, not just during the meditation session.”
So obviously it will be effective if you practice that continuously whether
it is in session or in between session. This doesn’t seem to be the answer
or the qualm even because you have to make a relationship between the basis
of the qualm and the answer to it. It is clear from the text that
wholehearted resolve has to be cultivated whether it is in the session or
in the post meditational session.  There is no question about that.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Good suggestion. Yeah, there is nothing
wrong whatever you have understand, it is good to share from your reading.
Student 7: The person who is reflecting generates the qualm: How can I
provide them with happiness and freedom from suffering? (audio 57:54–
58:36)
 Ven Gyurme: Therefore must achieve enlightenment. So there is no need of
wholehearted resolve.
Khen Rinpoche: Bodhichitta has to come after wholehearted resolve. That is
really clear.
Student 8: (audio 59:27– 60:22)
Ven Gyurme: Wholehearted resolve was already there in the beginning.
Student 8: (audio 60:23– 60:52)
Ven Gyurme: In short, the wholehearted resolve, although is not called by
that name was already present when you are meditating on your mother’s
kindness. You already want to do something then.
Student 8: Correct. May be there is a qualm there. (audio 61:00– 62:35)
Ven Gyurme: The whole idea of wanting to do something yourself is that you
want to repay your mothers’ kindness. You already thought of repaying.
Student 8: At that point in time there may a qualm: What for you practice
this great love and compassion to the point that you wholehearted resolve
to take that responsibility.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Getting closer but I am still not sure.
Student 9: (audio 63:05– 64:29)
Ven Gyurme: If I will to summarize: Don’t assume that after love and
compassion you will have wholehearted resolve.  Therefore we need to train
in wholehearted resolve what?
Student 9: (audio 64:31– 64:57)
Ven Gyurme: You are saying if it the love and compassion that is part of
this sevenfold cause-and-effect, it is not necessarily the love and
compassion that can induce wholehearted resolve, are you saying that?
Student 9: (audio 65:11– 66:17)
Ven Gyurme: Until we realize step six, step four and step five is never
realized?
Student 9: (audio 66:28– 66:52)
Student 10: (audio 67:06– 68:35)
Ven Gyurme: That what was Student 8 has said.
Student 10: (audio 68:40– 69:10)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): If my hearing is not wrong, sounds good.
Student 11: If meditating on the extraordinary attitudes, the wholehearted
resolve is so important, why is it left until the end? What the
wholehearted resolve is not mentioned before love and compassion? (audio
69:19–70:09)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You don’t know why wholehearted resolve
come last? You know what? Too good. Good one only come the last. After you
have meal, you have delicious dessert which only come the last. Joking. I
think what Student 8 and Student 10 have said was very close to there;
whether other people getting that or not? So, must get that.
Student 12: (audio 70:56–71:54)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): Coming to the same, isn’t it? Same as
what they say. I see same point. I think similar point.
In the sentence: “Even though this thought was described in the context of
the practice of repaying your mothers' kindness,….,,” you have to figure
out what “this” refers to?
Don’t you think that ‘this’ refers to the thought; “What can I do to help
these sentient beings who are deprived from happiness and are suffering?”
This is what is mentioned exactly before this particular sentence. So
‘this’ has to refer to the thought which was mentioned just before this
sentence: “how can I provide them happiness and free them from suffering?”
Isn’t this thought has already been mentioned in the section of “repaying
the mothers’ kindness?” You already have the thought of wanting to do
something.
When we come to the section of wholehearted resolve, it is possible to have
the thought that we are talking about this for the first time.
You got the qualm of what I think the qualm is? It is not as if we are
talking about this for the first time but it is possible to have that kind
of thought, isn’t it? The answer is: Yes, it is permissible to say that in
the section of repaying the mothers’ kindness, you develop the mere thought
of thinking; “What can I do to help the suffering sentient beings”.  Even
though this mere thought of wanting to do something for mother sentient
beings who are suffering and who are deprived from happiness while you are
remembering your mothers’ kindness and wanting to repay the mothers’
kindness but that this is insufficient.
You need to develop wholehearted resolve that has to be induced by strong
love and compassion. There is a qualitative difference in the thought. The
essence is that the thought of wanting sentient beings to be free from
suffering and the thought wanting sentient beings to have happiness has to
be strong enough to induce wholehearted resolve. While the thought is
similar but the strength is different as the earlier one is not as strong.
This is what I think the qualm is and its answer. What do you think? Is
there any fault? This is something that you can discuss. Then what the
Student 6 had said come into the picture now. Whether it is during the
meditation or post-meditation session, you have to work on love and
compassion such that it is strong enough to induce wholehearted resolve.
What I did today is to show you the difference it does makes when you think
of what you have read. While it is not possible for everyone to get
everything but the main thing is that everyone just have to try one’s best
and not to be get discouraged or disheartened.
Through a proper cultivation of love and compassion and wholehearted
resolve, then one will be able to develop a mind that is intent on
achieving others’ welfare by oneself alone. Once that is developed, one
would then have a good basis for developing the mind that is intent on
enlightenment.
Now is the last section of the sevenfold cause-and-effect instructions.
[LRCM V2 page 48:] b" Training the mind to be intent on enlightenment
Once you have been inspired by the aforementioned process and have seen
that you need enlightenment for the sake of others' welfare, you develop
the wish to attain it. However, this is not enough. First, increase your
faith as much as possible by contemplating the good qualities of the
Buddha's body, speech, mind, and enlightened activities as previously
explained in the section on going for refuge. Then, as it is taught that
faith is the basis of aspiration, develop the desire to attain those good
qualities from the depths of your heart and induce a certainty that it is
absolutely necessary to attain omniscience even for your own welfare.
Only after having trained the mind in cultivating the recognition that all
sentient beings as our mothers, cultivating the remembrance of their
kindness, cultivating the wish to repay their kindness, love, compassion
and wholehearted resolve, you will see the need to achieve full
enlightenment and then comes the desire to achieve full enlightenment.
Only when you see the need to achieve enlightenment in order to perfectly
work for others, then you will develop the desire to achieve enlightenment.
But it is not sufficient to leave it as that because the bodhichitta that
one is aspired to generate has to be forceful and strong. While you have to
have full conviction and understanding of what it means to be Buddha, our
object of refuge, and to have the understanding of the good qualities of
the Buddha’s body, speech, mind and the enlightened activities to the point
that you develop very strong faith. One has to develop very strong faith
that comes from recollecting the good qualities of the Buddha’s body,
speech, mind and the enlightened activities because this strong faith can
induce the generation of very strong bodhichitta.
By recollecting the good qualities of the Buddha’s body, speech, mind and
the enlightened activities, you will have faith in those qualities and have
faith in the Buddha. This faith will then induce an aspiration in you
wanting to be liked that. This will induce an ascertainment in your mind in
which you know it is an absolute necessity and is important to achieve full
enlightenment in order to perfectly accomplish the welfare of others and
also to fulfill one’s own welfare to the fullest.
Through the cultivations, then come the day an uncontrived aspiration for
enlightenment will arise. That is the time you can say; “I have generated
bodhichitta”.
If you look at what we have discussed today, you can see how important it
is to have a comprehensive overview of the entire teaching. In order to
develop bodhichitta, you need to have faith in the qualities of the
Buddha’s body, speech, mind and the enlightened activities. This is
explained in the section of refuge which comes under the path that is
shared with the persons of small capacity. In order to develop compassion,
you need to have thorough understanding or realization of what suffering
is. So, in order to really develop anything, you need a comprehensive
overview of the entire teaching. When you read this particular paragraph,
do you see that one needs to understand many things and to have a
comprehensive overview of everything? You can see that generating
bodhichitta is not easy as many conditions have to come together.
[LRCM V2 page 48] c" Identifying the spirit of enlightenment, the fruit of
the training
The general definition of bodhichitta, the spirit of enlightenment is as
taught in the Ornament for Clear Realization which is the desire for
perfect enlightenment for others' welfare. With respect to its subdivisions
of bodhichitta, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds follows the Array of
Stalks Sutra and says that it is both aspirational and engaged:
   Just as one distinguishes
   Between wishing to go and going
   Similarly the learned should understand the division
   Of these two in accordance with this sequence.
Although there are many disagreements with regards in this aspect, there is
a statement in the First Stages Of Meditation which state that "May I
become a buddha" or "I will become a buddha" for the sake of all beings and
that as long as you have not taken the [bodhisattva] vows it is the
aspirational spirit that is present, whether or not you are training in the
deeds of generosity, etc. Once you have taken the vows, the spirit present
is the engaged spirit of enlightenment.
Here we are identifying what bodhichitta is and it has the subdivisions of
aspiration and engaged bodhicitta. Bodhichitta is the fruit of the training
of the six preceding causes. Bodhichitta is the thought thinking; “I must
achieve full enlightenment in order to accomplish the welfare of others”.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It is very simple. That is. Not so
complicated.
Here it is an introduction to philosophy.
The definition of bodhichitta is an aspiration that desire full
enlightenment for the welfare of others that is concomitant with the
Mahayana main mind.
When we talk about bodhichitta, in simple term, we say it is an aspiration
or a desire for enlightenment. The reason why there is a definition is to
show the fact that bodhichitta is a main mind, and not a mental factor.
Technically speaking, mind generation is a mind that possesses two
aspirations; which are:
   1. Aspiration for complete enlightenment
   2. Aspiration for the welfare of others
Mind generation is the mind that is concomitant with the aspiration for
enlightenment. The cause of mind generation is the aspiration for others’
welfare accompanied by an aspiration for enlightenment.
When you talk about bodhichitta, you may have the idea that it is an
aspiration. However from the technical point of view, it is not an
aspiration. It looks like an aspiration and it is given the name but it is
not an aspiration. The reason why bodhichitta, mind generation is not an
aspiration because:
- mind generation is a main mind and
- aspiration is a mental factor.
Bodhichitta is a main mind that is accompanied by the two aspirations; in
that sense these two aspirations are concomitant with the main mind.
This is just some additional information. You do not need to worry what is
the main mind and what is the mental factor because the difference between
main mind and mental factors would be covered in the next module (Lorig)
which all of you are looking forward to.
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): All of you are welcome.
If you really explore all these treatises, sometimes it is liked something
that cannot really fit the mind. One of the really distinguishing features
of the dharma is that no matter which valid scriptures you read, there are
so many views and are presented from various views, but at the end of day,
they all are talking about the same thing. That is the amazing thing
because they all arrive at the same conclusion. There are no internal
contradictions between all these various treatises. This is the special
distinguishing features of the Buddha’s teachings. Every time you read the
Buddha’s teaching and think at every word in the teaching you may get the
new understanding and new perspective. This is something that is not shared
with other teachings. His Holiness the Dalai Lama often says that he has
read LRCM many times. Even if you read it hundred times, you will get
hundred different perspectives. I think that is very important. That is why
I keep saying to you: read and think about what you read. You have to think
and analyze otherwise if you just rely on me reading out in class then
there is really not much benefits.
Think about:
   1. The division of bodhichitta into two: aspiration and engage.
   2. What is the quotation from Kamalasila’s The Stages Of Meditation
      saying?
   3. What is the quotation from Engaging of The Bodhisattvas’ Deed saying?
There will no class next week because of Vesak Day preparation but please
read the text. The next section is exchanging self and others. If you have
any questions, please raise it in the next session. When I say read the
text, I am asking everyone to read the text because when you read the text
and when someone would ask me a question and if I were to clarify whatever
doubt, then everyone will benefit because of having read the text.
Class will resume the following Thursday, 10 May 2012

Extract from “Path to Enlightenment in Tibetan Buddhism” by Geshe Archarya
Thubten Loden
Wholehearted resolve: It is true to say that bodhichitta arises from great
compassion, but great compassion is not the immediate cause of bodhichitta.
From the compassionate wish to remove all beings from the suffering of
cyclic existence, the sixth and immediate cause for the development of
bodhichitta is the wholehearted resolve. This is the superlative thought
determined to take responsibility to actually and actively liberate living
beings.
The fifth cause of bodhichitta, great compassion, is wishing that all
beings be free of suffering. This sixth cause entails even greater
compassion which involves the decision, “I will undertake to remove the
suffering of living beings. With love and compassion I will give them
happiness.”
Each of the six causes of bodhichitta progressively generates the next one.
By seeing all beings as mother, you are led to remember their kindness.
Remembering their kindness generates the wish to repay that kindness. The
wish to repay kindness leads to the wish for their happiness which is great
love. Great love develops into great compassion when you see the suffering
of mother beings. The wish to free them from suffering leads to the
wholehearted resolve which is the strong and clear determination to do so.
The first three causes are the basis of bodhichitta and are the foundation
of being able to benefit all beings. With the second three causes come real
love and compassion and you are then able to benefit others. When you have
realized all six causes bodhichitta will arise effortlessly as the effect.
Bodhicitta is the extraordinary and special mind that altruistically wishes
all beings to have enlightenment. It arises directly from the sixth cause,
the wholehearted resolve, through the recognition that at present you are
unable to accomplish that intention because you lack the capability to
benefit even a small number of beings, much less all living beings.
Bodhichitta arises when you realize that to benefit all living beings you
must attain enlightenment, and then determine to do so. The result of
bodhichitta is buddhahood and buddhahood contains the twofold benefit:
benefit for oneself and benefit for others. When you practise bodhichitta,
you hold an attitude of love and compassion for all beings without
discrimination and also have the desire for all beings to attain
enlightenment.
The  two  types  of  bodhichitta  are  wishing  bodhichitta   and   engaging
bodhichitta.
The first is the aspiration to remove the suffering of all beings and bring
them happiness.
The second is actualizing that wish by engaging in the cultivation  of  the
six perfections of a Bodhisattva. Shantideva explained that the  difference
between the two is like thinking about going and actually going.

