Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 8.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.293171
================================================================================


We started with the section on how to actually listen to the teaching. In
the beginning of this section, we are asked to think about the benefits of
hearing the teaching. This is something we need to reflect on. If we listen
to the teaching, what do we stand to gain from it? As it is said in the
teaching, when we hear the teaching, we will come to understand what is it
that we need to abandon and what is it that we need to cultivate. On the
basis of this understanding, then we will be able to engage correctly in
the practice of discarding what should be discarded and we will be able to
engage in those practices that we should be doing. As a result of that, our
mind would be able to abide and remain in virtue.  As a result of that, it
would bring us to achieve the state of full enlightenment.
What we need and what we want is the ultimate happiness. In order to
achieve such a state, we need perfect wisdom. Perfect wisdom arises on the
basis of having a perfect concentration. In order achieve this, we need to
engage in the threefold activity of hearing, reflecting and meditating on
the teaching. Before we can meditate on the teaching, we must first reflect
on the teaching so as to gain an ascertainment. Before reflection can
happen, we must first hear the teaching. Therefore hearing the teaching is
said to be very important.
It is mentioned in the teaching that when we listen to the teaching, we
should listen with an attitude of respect for the teaching and also for the
instructor. If you think about it, the main reason why we should listen to
the teaching with an attitude of respect for the teaching and the
instructor is that we stand to gain more benefits for ourselves. As to how
we should actually listen to the teaching, as mentioned in the text, we
should listen to the teaching by abandoning the three faults of the vessel
and relying on the six ideas.
As I have mentioned before, since you are already here, you should try your
best to listen to the teaching or explanation with a focused mind. One
should also listen to the teaching with a positive motivation; at least you
should think “I am here to listen to the teaching so that I can subdue my
mind.”
Whatever teaching/explanation you hear during the session, you should try
to not forget what you have heard; that means you have to refresh your
memory every now and then. In order not to forget the material during the
session, if there is something important/ significant being discussed,
perhaps you can make notes of that by writing it down and then try to
refresh your memory every now and then on what you have written.
Geshela spoken in English: In the very beginning when we started the basic
program, I read the Lamrim and made a short note in my book. This year,
when I read it, I don’t understand what I wrote because it was too short
and I don’t know how I put it there.  Sometimes when we find something
important, we write very short note but after next year when you read the
note, you don’t understand what you wrote. There is one story. I heard that
there was a meeting in Tibet where people come together. During this
meeting, there was a person who knew how to write and was asked to write
down the minutes of the meeting. This person wrote down the minutes. Then
the following year, there is a similar meeting. When people asked him to
read the last year minutes of meeting, the guy said ‘the letter that I
wrote last year, how I can read this year?’  This is just a joke. So it is
very important not to write notes that end up you cannot read it yourself.
We are also advised to listen to the teachings by relying on the six ideas.
These six ideas are the favorable conditions that are beneficial to us.
   1. Think of yourself as a sick person.
   2. Think of the instructor/teacher as a doctor.
   3. Think of the instructor’s explications as medicine
   4. Think of earnest practice as the way to cure your disease.
   5. Think of the Tathagatas as excellent beings.
   6. Wish that the teaching will endure for a long time.]
2B3A-3A2C Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as medicine
Third: Just as a patient greatly appreciates the medicine put together by
the doctor, one regards the instructions and teachings given by someone
expounding the Dharma as the most important thing, making an effort to hold
them in respect and not wasting them through forgetfulness and the like.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 59: 3.Think of the instructor's
explications as medicine: Just as a sick person has a high regard for the
medicine prescribed by a doctor, so too, you should view the instructions
and explications that the instructor gives as very important, taking great
pains to hold them in high esteem, and not squandering them by lapses such
as forgetting them.]
2B3A-3A2D Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure
1 The contempt of striving for words without practicing them
Fourth: An ill person sees that his illness cannot be alleviated, if he
does not take the medicine the doctor put together, and takes it. Likewise,
once you see that attachment etc. cannot be eliminated without practicing
the instructions the Dharma teacher has taught, you should practice
diligently and not make a great effort at vain words of numerous
classifications without putting them into practice. As a matter of fact,
what good would it be to a leper whose hands and legs are coming off to
resort to a dose of medicine once or twice.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 59: 4. Think of earnest practice as
the way to cure your disease. Sick persons know that their illness cannot
be cured without taking the medicine prescribed by the doctor. They then
take the medicine. Likewise, earnestly engage in practice after you have
seen that you cannot vanquish such afflictions as attachment without
putting into practice the instructions given by the instructor. Do not
devote yourself just to piling up words in great numbers without engaging
in practice. Moreover, one or two doses of medicine will not do anything at
all for lepers who have lost their hands and feet.]
The analogy here is of someone who is down with a very serious illness
seeing a doctor. If you are down with a serious illness, you listen very
carefully to what the doctor has to say.  The doctor then prescribes you
with some medicine. As a patient, you take the medicine as prescribed by
the doctor accordingly. If you are a very sick person and just taking the
medicine once or twice without completing the dose, that will not really
going to help you.
Next is the meaning.
Likewise, for us who have been stricken since beginningless time by the
wicked basis of illness that is the mental afflictions, it is not
sufficient to practice the meaning of the instructions only a couple of
times. This is why we should examine all the complete parts of the path
with discriminating wisdom and be as diligent as a flowing river.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 60: Similarly, to put the meaning of
the instructions into practice just once or twice is insufficient for us
who from beginningless time have been stricken with the virulent illness of
the afflictions. Therefore, analyze with discerning wisdom the entirety of
every aspect of the path and make effort that is like a river's current.]
In the first idea, think of oneself as a sick person, there it mentioned
that we are like someone who is very sick. Why? This is because we have
been stricken with the chronic disease of the three mental poisons since
beginningless time. Since that is the case, we have to engage in constant
practice in order to heal ourselves; not just once or twice. Although a
constant practice is required to overcome this sickness, the practice
mentioned here has to be something that contains the complete path. The
path that we have to cultivate to overcome this sickness has to be
unmistaken.
In order to overcome this chronic disease of the three mental poisons that
has been with us since beginningless time, we need to sustain a constant
practice of a path that is unmistaken. Even if it is unmistaken, the path
must contain all the essential elements without missing; which mean that
the path must be fully complete in all its elements.
In order for us to be able to do this, we must have a thorough
ascertainment of the path; i.e. we must be so sure of what it is without
any confusions or mistakes. In order to gain an ascertainment of the
complete unmistaken path, we must analyze with discriminating wisdom. Once
we have gained an ascertainment of the entire unmistaken path, then
whatever ascertainment we have achieved, we are supposed to sustain that in
practice in a constant manner; just like the constant flow of a river.
It is like it says in the Praise of Confessing:
     ... That is to say our minds are always obscured,
     for long we have served the causes of our ills
     how can a leper whose hands and feet fall off
     and who takes his medicine but rarely derive benefit?
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 60:
       Our minds are constantly confused;
       We have been ill for a very long time.
       What is achieved by the lepers
       Who have lost their arms and legs and only occasionally take
       medicine?]
We are told to rely on the six ideas when we listen to the teachings. Of
the six ideas, the idea of thinking of oneself as a sick person is said to
be very important.
2 The importance of the discrimination of oneself as someone ill
That being so the discrimination of oneself as someone ill is very
important. If it is present, the other ones also arise. However, if this
remains merely words without the meaning of the instructions being
accomplished for the sake of eliminating the mental afflictions, you will
only be a listener. You will resemble an ill person who is not rid of his
illness if, having sought a doctor, he only cares about the medicinal
composition and does not take the medicine – says the King of Concentration
[Sutra].
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 60: Thus, the idea of yourself as a
sick person is extremely important, for if you have this idea, the other
ideas will follow. However, if this idea is mere words then you will not
put the meaning of the instructions into practice in order to clear away
the afflictions, and you will have been merely listening to these
instructions. This is like sick persons who seek out a doctor. If they
apply themselves only to getting the medicine prescribed, but not to taking
it, they will not be freed from their illness.]
It also says:
     If, after I have explained the excellent Dharma,
     you don’t apply it well, although you heard it,
     it is like with patients whose pouches are full of medicine,
     but who still cannot cure their own diseases.
And in the Guide:
     These should be put into practice physically,
     what would be gained by uttering just the words?
     Would it be beneficial to the patients,
     if they just read how the medicine is meant to be used?
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 61:
For, as the King of Concentrations says:
    I have explained this very good teaching
    Yet if you, having heard it, do not practice correctly,
    Then just like a sick person holding on to a bag of medicine.
    Your illness cannot be cured.
Also, Santideva's Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
    Physically, put these instructions into practice,
    What will be accomplished by mere talk?
    Will sick persons be helped
    By merely reading a medical treatise? ]
The point here is that we as individual need to know why we need the
dharma. In order to answer this question, the crux of the matter is that we
have to understand what the dharma does to us. We have to know the kind of
difficulties and problems we are facing and then we have to check and see
if the teachings are able to help us to overcome our sufferings or
problems.
3 The instruction to act [accordingly], having identified [the meaning of]
“persistence”
Therefore the discrimination that persistence eliminates the disease should
be developed. “Persistence” in this statement signifies putting into
practice the topics of adopting and abandoning [of modes of conduct] from
the spiritual teacher’s instructions.  Now, to put them into practice you
need to know them and for that you need to listen and study. Again, after
studying and knowing you need to practice and therefore it is crucial to
engage in the meaning of what has been studied to the best of one’s
abilities.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 61: Therefore, "earnest practice" in
the statement, "Think of earnest practice as what clears away the illness
of the afflictions, " refers to putting into practice the lessons that a
teacher has imparted to you on what should be adopted and what should be
cast aside To do that you need to know the lessons; for this, you need
study The purpose of knowing them through study is to do them Therefore, it
is vital to put the meaning of what you have heard into practice as much as
you are able.]
Here, Lama Tsongkhapa is saying very clearly that in order to practice the
dharma/ Buddhism, you must first study it. Without learning what the
dharma/Buddhism is, there is no way to practice it. What is the purpose of
learning? It is to put whatever that you have learned and study into
practice. This particular piece of advice from Lama Tsongkhapa is something
we have to put into our heart all the time. The basic advice is that we
must learn before we can practice. The purpose of learning is to be able to
put whatever we have learned into practice. This is an important piece of
advice that we have to remember all the time.
Lama Tsongkhapa says that if we just leave it at the level of learning i.e.
just studying alone, we are not going to achieve any great benefit.
Otherwise, at the time of death, you will have regrets with regard to what
you have not accomplished. You will resemble an actor imitating others or
someone interested in sugar eating only the bark of the sugar cane.
If we were to leave it at the level of words without trying to put it into
practice, then we are similar to an actor imitating others. If someone were
to ask you: “Can you do this particular dance,” but you will not be able to
do it.
In Exhortation to the Supreme Intention it says:
    “I failed in my attainments –practice now, what should I do?”
    that is how the childish wail while dying.
    They have not delved deep and the suffering is greatnote
    that these are the faults of delighting in words.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 62:  Also the Exhortation to
Wholehearted Resolve says:
    The foolish are sorrowful at the time of death,
    Saying, "My practice was poor. Now what is to be done?"
    Not having found depth, they will suffer greatly;
    Such are faults of delighting in just the words ]
And:
    Like someone amidst the crowd observing a play,
    discussing the virtues of another hero,
    and failing with regard to his own persistence -
    note that these are the faults of delighting in words.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 62:
    Like an actor before an audience watching a show
    Or like describing the good qualities of someone else who is a hero,
    You fall from earnest practice yourself—
    Such are the faults of delighting in just the words.]
And:
    In the bark of sugar-cane there is no essence,
    the delightful flavour is inside,
    someone eating the bark is unable to find
    the delicious flavour of molasses.
    Similarly, words are like the bark,
    the taste is like the meaning of those words.
    Consequently abandon delighting in words,
    always be conscientious reflecting their meaning!
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 61:
    The husk ot a sugarcane stalk has no substance at all,
    The taste that delights is inside.
    Through eating the husk,
    The delicious taste of molasses cannot be found.
    Just as it is with the husk, so it is with the words,
    The "taste" is in contemplating the meaning.
    Therefore, give up delighting in just the words,
    Always be conscientious, and reflect on the meaning. ]
The text is saying that hearing the teaching is very important and also how
important it is to learn and to study. If one just leaves it at the level
of words then it is not going to bring about any great benefit. On the
basis of what you have heard, you have to reflect and analyze in order for
you to gain a thorough understanding and an ascertainment of what you have
heard. On the basis of reflection, if you ascertain what you have heard,
then this is really like tasting the essence of the sugarcane; which is
more delicious.
2B3A-3A2E Contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagata as an exalted
being
The fifth one consists in developing respect, having brought to mind the
teacher of the Dharma, the Bhagavan.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 62:  5.Think of the Tathagatas as
excellent beings. Develop respect by remembering the one who set forth the
teaching, the Bhagavan  (Buddha).]
We should recollect the Buddha and think of his kindness and then develop
faith, respect and devotion towards the Buddha. This is because for our
benefit, in order to receive the teachings in the past;
      -at times he sacrificed his own life for the dharma
      -at other times, he sacrificed his own processions for the dharma and
      -at other times, he sacrificed his entourage, his loved ones for the
dharma.
So, when we listen to the teachings, we should remember the kindness of the
Buddha who endured countless hardship for us sentient beings. The teachings
that we listen to are none other than his and he was the one who taught all
these teachings. So when we listen to the teachings, we should remember
this fact. This will help us greatly into entering the teachings and
putting them into practice.
2B3A-3A2F Generating the wish for the Dharma tradition to last long
The sixth one consists in the thought: how nice it would be, if based on
listening to such a Dharma, the Jina’s teachings remained in the world for
long.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 62:  6: Wish that the teaching will
endure for a long time. Think, "How wonderful if, in dependence upon
studying such teachings, the Conqueror's teachings would remain in the
world for a long time!"]
These are the six ideas that we have to rely on when listening to the
teachings. Next in the text is how important it is to relate whatever we
learned to our own minds.
2B3A-3B The way in which one needs to listen, having related this to one’s
mind
Apart from that, if you keep your own mind aside while explaining or
listening to the Dharma, the Dharma remaining separate from it, then this
will result in whatever is being explained to miss the point.
The point is that whenever we listen to the teaching, we have to listen to
the teaching with the idea that we are doing it in order to subdue our own
mind. To illustrate this, first stating the analogy:
Therefore, it is necessary to listen in order to reach certainty concerning
one’s own continuum. To illustrate this:  if you want to examine whether or
not there is dirt or some other impurity on your face, you look at yourself
in a mirror and, understanding that there is, remove it. Likewise, when you
hear the Dharma, your faulty behaviour appears in the mirror of the Dharma,
whereupon you feel anguish thinking: ‘that is what my mind has come to’.
Then, as you engage in eliminating faults and attaining qualities, you
necessarily train in accordance with the Dharma.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 62: Furthermore, when you explain or
hear the teachings, if your mind and the teachings remain separate, then
whatever is explained will be inconsequential. Hence, listen in such a way
that you determine how these teachings apply to your mind. For example,
when you want to find out whether or not there is some smudge, dirt, or
whatever, on your face, you look in a mirror and then remove whatever is
there Similarly, when you listen to the teachings, your faults such as
misconduct and attachment appear in the mirror of the teachings. At that
time, you regret that your mind has become like this, and you then work to
clear away those faults and establish good qualities.]
When listening to the teaching and studying the dharma, we should use the
dharma as a mirror to see if our own behavior /action are in accord with
the dharma. If it is not in accord with the dharma, then we have to change.

It is like in the Jataka stories [where] the son of Sutasa asks Prince
Chandra for Dharma teachings in these terms:
    Beholding the forms of my bad behaviour,
    in the dazzling mirror of Dharma,
    anguish arises forceful in me,
    and I turn towards the Dharma.
Knowing this to be the thinking of a [suitable] vessel for hearing the
Dharma, the Bodhisattva gave him teachings.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 63: Hence, you must train in the
teachings The Garland of Birth Stories:
    When I see the form of my misconduct
    Clear in the mirror of the teachings
    I develop a feeling of regret
    And turn my mind toward the teachings.
With this statement Saudasa requested that Prince Sutasoma bestow the
teachings. Thereupon, the bodhisattva prince, knowing Saudasa's state of
mind—that is, knowing that Saudasa had become suitable for hearing the
teachings -gave him the teachings.]
2B3A-3C How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments
In short, thinking: ‘I shall attain Buddhahood for the sake of all sentient
beings, to attain that, I need to train in its causes. Apparently,
Evidently, it is necessary to listen to the Dharma for that, therefore I
shall listen to the Dharma’, you should generate the mind of enlightenment,
consider the benefits of study and listen with joy, abandoning the faults
of a vessel.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 63: In brief, develop the spirit of
enlightenment, thinking:
For the sake of all living beings, I will attain  buddhahood.  In  order  to
attain this, I must train in  its  causes;  for  this,  I  must  know  those
causes. For this, it is evident that I must hear the  teachings.  Therefore,
I will listen with great delight.]
As says here, we should listen to the teachings with joy, with a happy mind
and with delight. One of the ways to produce that kind of attitude is to
remember the benefits of hearing the teachings.
With that, we have finished on the section on how we should listen to the
teachings. This is an important section. We should understand how we should
go about listening to the teaching. When you read these couple of pages
dealing with this topic, it is quite straight forward.
2B3B How to explain
    1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma
    2 Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings
    3 What kind of attitude and activities to explain with
    4 Distinction between who the explanations should and should not be
    given to
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 63:How to explain a teaching in which
both the teaching and its author are great
There are four parts to the explanation:
   1. Contemplating the benefits of explaining the teaching
   2. Developing reverence for the Teacher and the teaching
   3. With what sort of thoughts and behavior you should explain the
      teaching
   4. Differentiating between those to whom you should and should not
      explain the teaching]
2B3B-1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma
First: In the Treasury it says:
      Giving Dharma, free of mental afflictions,
      teach according to sutra and other true texts.
In its auto-commentary it says: “Therefore, those who explain the Dharma
incorrectly and with an afflicted mind craving for material gain, respect
and fame, corrupt their own great merits. Therefore, a pure motivation to
teach the Dharma is extremely important and just like Ngargompa said, it is
crucial to review it beforehand: “I have never explained the Dharma without
meditating upon impermanence before the session.”
In Exhortation to the Supreme Intention two groups of 20 advantages of
giving the gift of Dharma in the absence of material things and the concern
for gain, respect and the like are set forth. Also, in Drag Shul Chan it
says that the merit of a householder giving immeasurable material things is
exceeded by an ordained person giving a single verse of Dharma.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 63: It is very beneficial to impart
the teachings without concern for worldly things-   profit, honor, fame,
and the like For, as the Exhortation to Wholehearted Resolve says:
     Maitreya, there are twenty benefits of the generosity with which you
give a gift of the teaching without concerns for material things, profit,
or honor. What are the twenty?  They are as follows. You will come to have
(1) recollection, (2) intelligence, (3) understanding, (4) stability, (5)
wisdom, (6) supramundance wisdom, (7) little desire, (8) little hatred, and
(9) little ignorance. Also, (10) demons will not find an opportunity to
harm you; (11) the bhagavan buddhas will think of you as a precious, only
child; (12) nonhumans will guard you; (13) deities will bestow charisma and
power on you; (14) enemies will find no opportunity to harm you; (15)
friends will remain steadfast; (16) your words will be trusted; (17) you
will attain fearlessness; (18) you will have abundant happiness; (19) you
will be praised by the wise; and (20) your gift of the teaching will be
worthy of remembrance.
Earlier, it has been said that the listener must adopt a virtuous
motivation when listening to the teaching. But here, with respect to the
instructor, when the teacher/ instructor deliver the teachings, he must do
it with a virtuous motivation.  If one teaches the dharma motivated by
desire for money, material gain, respect, or fame, then the whole teaching
will be the cause for his own merit to greatly decrease. Then it says if
one teaches with a really pure motivation, then there are many benefits to
be gained.
2B3B-2 Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings
Second: When uttering the Mother of the Buddhas the Teacher himself
arranged the seat and so on. Accordingly, the Dharma is a field of
veneration even for Buddhas, so one should bring to mind the positive
qualities and kindness of the Dharma and its teacher, generating respect.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 64: When the Bhagavan [Buddha] set
forth the Mother of Conquerors [the Prajnaparamita], he performed such acts
of respect as arranging the throne himself. Likewise, since the teachings
are respected even by buddhas, when you explain the teachings, be very
respectfull of the teachings and the Teacher [Shakyamuni Buddha] as well,
remembering his good qualities and kindness.]
Traditionally when teachings are being delivered, we see the instructor/
teacher seating on a throne which is elevated. This was the practice of the
Buddha himself. The main reason for this is to show that the teaching that
is being delivered is very holy and very precious.
2B3B-3 What kind of attitude and activities to explain with
A Attitude
B Activities
The third one has two points: attitude and activities.
With what sort of thoughts and behavior you should explain the teaching?
With respect to the kinds of thoughts one should have when teaching, there
are five.
2B3B-3A Attitude
First, [the Sutra] Requested by Sagaramati puts forward five
discriminations: generating the discrimination of oneself as a doctor, of
the Dharma as medicine, of the one listening to the Dharma as a patient, of
the Tathagata as a holy being and of the mode of the Dharma as abiding for
a long time as well as the development of loving kindness towards the
people around.
The envy [born from] anxiety that others are superior, the laziness of
putting things off, the discouragement of fatigue due to explaining things
over and over again, praising oneself and chit-chatting about other
people’s faults, the reluctance to lend texts as well as concern for
material things such as food and clothing should be abandoned, thinking:
those merits from teaching for the sake of my own and others’ enlightenment
are the provisions of my happiness.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 64: With regard to your thoughts,
develop the five ideas set forth in the Questions of Sagaramati Sutra :
think of yourself as a doctor, the teachings as medicine, those listening
to the teachings as sick persons, and the tathagatas as excellent beings,
and wish that the teachings remain for a long time.
Cultivate love for those who have gathered to listen. Give up jealousy that
fears the superiority of others; the laziness of procrastination; the
dispiritedness of being tired due to explaining something again and again;
praising yourself and listing the faults of others; stinginess with regard
to explaining the teaching; and concern for material things such as food
and clothing. Then think, "Just this merit from teaching in order that
others and I attain buddhahood is a favorable condition for my happiness."]
When teaching others, one of the most important things to keep in mind is
to do so out of concern, love and to help the listeners. Also, in the
teachings, one should not be talking about oneself and praising oneself; be
it talking about it directly or indirectly and hinting that the listeners
themselves are ‘lower.’  One should also not fear thinking: “If I were to
teach them, the listeners will know more than me.”  We should teach with
the thought thinking ‘May this action of teaching become the cause for
myself and everyone else to achieve enlightenment’
If someone were to sincerely ask a question on dharma and you are reluctant
to answer it because you are afraid that by answering the question, that
person will know what you know and may even know more than what you know.
This is what stinginess with regard to explaining the teaching. So, if a
person asks a dharma question with sincerity, you should then answer.
2B3B-3B Activities
Second: Having washed and dressed in immaculately clean clothes, you sit
down in a clean and pleasant place on a cushion on a Dharma throne. If you
then chant a mantra subjugating demons, demons and gods of the demonic
category will not get closer to you at all than a perimeter of 100 joyanas
and even if they do, they will not be able to create any obstacles, as it
says in [the Sutra] Requested by Sagaramati. Therefore you should chant
that mantra and - with an extremely radiant facial complexion - give your
explanations conjoined with the conditions for ascertaining their meaning -
examples, proofs and quotations.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 64: With regard to your behavior,
wash and make yourself clean. Then after putting on unsoiled clothing, sit
upon a teaching seat and cushion in a place that is clean and attractive.
It is said in the Questions of Sagaramati Sutra that if you recite the
mantra for overcoming demons, then demons and deities of the demon class
within a radius of  one hundred leagues will not come. Even if they do
come, they will be unable to cause difficulties. Therefore, recite that
mantra. Then, with a radiant face, teach, using examples, reasons, and
scriptural citations and other accessories for ascertaining the meaning.]
It is said that when teaching the dharma, your teaching should not be like
a nest of a crow. Because when you look at how the crows built their nest,
it is not properly constructed. They just built the nest according to
whatever twigs they can find. So one’s explanation should not be like that.
Also, the way of teaching and the material that you are delivering should
not be like how old people eat their food. This basically means that when
you teach, you just talk about all the easy stuff but when you come to the
difficult points, you just skip them. Just like the old people who do not
have any teeth, they can only chew on those things that are soft but when
comes to something that is hard, they will just swallow the whole thing due
to their problem of chewing it.
The way one teaches should not be like how an old person who has to rely on
a walking stick. You rely on a walking stick because you are not steady and
is wobbling around. So, the teachings that you give shouldn’t be like that;
it should be very steady. This means that you deliver your teachings with
adequate analogies, reasons and scriptural quotations.
2B3B-4 Distinction between who the explanations should and should not be
given to
Fourth: In the Sutra on Discipline it says: “do not act without being asked
to”. Accordingly, you do not teach without having been asked and even when
someone asks, you should examine the vessel. However, knowing someone to be
a vessel, it is acceptable to teach even without having been asked, as it
says in the King of Concentration [Sutra]. Further modes of conduct are set
forth in the Sutra on Discipline.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 65: 4. Differentiating between those
to whom you should and should not explain the teaching. Do not explain the
teachings without being requested to do so; as Gunaprabha’s Sutra on the
Discipline says, "It should not be done without request." Even when
requested, it is necessary to investigate to see whether or not the
potential student is suitable to receive the teachings And even when not
requested, it is appropriate to explain the teachings to someone only if
you know them to be a suitable recipient.]
2B3C Generally, how to proceed at the end
[How a session should be concluded in relation to both hearing and
explaining the teaching]
1 What to do at the end - the actual things to do:
The roots of virtue of teaching and listening in this way should be sealed
by means of pure aspirational prayers such as the Prayer of Good Conduct.
2 The benefits of this
There is no doubt that, if the Dharma is explained and listened to in this
manner, in just one session the advantages stated above will arise. Due to
the act of listening and explaining the Dharma hitting home, all the karmic
obscurations accumulated previously by not respecting the Dharma or those
expounding it etc. are purified and all the ones being newly accumulated
are nipped in the bud.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 66: If you explain and listen to the
teachings in such a manner, then you will unquestionably receive the
aforesaid benefits even from a single session. You will clear away all the
karmic obstructions that have accumulated through not taking to heart the
instructions on hearing and explaining the teachings and that result from
not respecting the teachings and the teacher and so forth. Further, you
stop new accumulation of these obstructions.]
3 The general mode of behaviour of saints (excellent beings)
Due to the manner of listening hitting home, the instructions set forth
bring about benefit in the mind. Seeing this, all the earlier saints in
general  were diligent about this and especially the former gurus of this
instruction persevered at it with utmost diligence.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 66: Also, insofar as you  have taken
to heart this way of explaining and listening to the teaching, the
instructions that are explained will benefit your mind. In general, after
all the former excellent beings realized this, they practiced earnestly; in
particular, the former gurus in the lineage of these instructions made very
earnest and great effort in this activity.]
4 The advice to cherish them, as it is a great fault to turn away from them

These are evidently great instructions - if one does not reach certainty
about this and one’s attitude does not change - as is often the case - the
Dharma, so profound and vast, no matter how much it is explained, will be
like a god fallen to [the rank of] a demon and that very Dharma will become
an aid to the afflictions. Therefore, “if you err on the first of the
month, [you will do so] until the fifteenth as they say and since it is
like that, the wise strive at this method of transforming what has been
heard and explained into the path and make every opportunity to explain and
listen into something worthwhile. For this is the best preparation for
teaching the instructions.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 67: This is a great instruction. You
will not transform your mind without being certain about this. Without that
certainty, no matter how extensively you explain the profound teachings,
these very teachings often serve to assist your afflictions, like a helpful
deity that becomes a demon. Consequently, it is said, "If you mistake the
date from the first day of the lunar month, the error lasts until the
fifteenth day." Thus, those with intelligence should work at this way of
successfully hearing and explaining the teachings and should have at least
a portion of these qualifications every time that they explain or listen to
the teachings. This is the most important prerequisite for teaching these
instructions.]
In short, when listening or explaining the teachings, it is very important
to do so with a pure motivation. If listening or explaining the teachings
is done with a pure motivation then many benefits ensue; such as the
benefit of being able to subdue one’s own mind and, of course, being able
to benefit the listeners, yourself and others.  So, if listening to the
teachings and teaching the dharma is done with an impure motivation, one
can forget about subduing one’s own mind, the whole activity will become a
cause/condition for one’s delusion or mental afflictions to increase. As
says here, “these are evidently great instructions” -if one listens to the
teachings or if one teaches the dharma with proper motivation, then itself
will becomes the best preparation or the most important prerequisite for
teaching these instructions.
As says clearly that right from the beginning when you study the dharma,
when you learn the teaching, when you hear the teaching, you must set the
motivation and do that every time when you listen to the teaching. If you
do not do that in the beginning, then it is likely that you will not do it
the second time. Then you may end up listening to the dharma for your whole
life without having set a proper motivation for doing so. If you live your
life like this i.e. you may be listening to the teaching but do not put in
effort into changing the motivation, what will happen?  As says here, all
those acts of listening will not benefit your mind.
Next is the fourth great outline of the Lamrim which is starting with the
instructions explaining how the disciples should be guided on the path. It
starts with the practice of Guru Devotion.











