Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 1.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.071086
================================================================================


Geshela is mainly stating the various reasons why we need to study the
Buddhist treatises.  Perhaps some people might have query or question as to
why we actually need to go about studying the Buddhist treatises. The need
to study the Buddhist treatises is summarized in this particular verse in
“Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha” of the prayer book:
Do not commit any non-virtuous actions,
Perform only perfect virtuous actions,
Subdue your mind thoroughly –
This is the teaching of the Buddha.
Basically this summarizes the reasons why we need to study the Buddhist
treatises.
The first line says: ‘Do not commit any non-virtuous actions.’ We need to
understand the very nature of what makes an action non-virtuous, why do we
need to refrain or restraint ourselves from engaging in non-virtuous
actions and why is there a need to do so? This line which is telling us to
refrain from engaging in non-virtuous actions can be understood in the
context of referring to the Lam Rim or the Gradual Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment. Within that, we have a system that talk about the three
types of persons. In the Gradual Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, this
line is talking about the practices that are related to the persons of the
lower capacity. It talks about karma. Here, it talks about how negativity
is accrual to non-virtuous actions and by engaging in non-virtuous action,
it will accumulate negative karma. What are the corresponding ripening
results that will happen in those negative actions?  This section speaks
about karma and it’s ripening results in great detail.
What difference does it make to know about karma in such details especially
when we read about the Lamrim (The Gradual Path to Enlightenment)?  Here it
talks about the different aspects of negative karma and it gives a detail
presentation of negative karma and the corresponding result that ripens as
the result of those actions. By knowing karma in such great detail, it
makes huge difference to oneself. For example, when one is about to engage
in negativity and as one already has an understanding, that will aid
oneself in restraining from engaging such act.
Having a very deep understanding about karma, especially negative karma and
the non-virtuous actions, it helps us to have this conscientiousness
because we are aware about karma. We would naturally be able to refrain
from engaging negative karma. Otherwise, without the understanding of what
karma is about and what constitute negative action, majority of us would
have absolutely no idea of when we are actually engaging in the negative
karma.
By studying about karma, knowing about negativity or non-virtuous action in
great detail and having in depth understanding of that, then naturally we
will be able to avoid those very heavy negative karmas because of our
understanding or our knowledge regarding this subject.
On the same verse, the second line says: ‘Perform only perfect virtuous
actions.’ This line has the reference to the Lamrim (The Gradual Path to
Enlightenment) teaching pertaining to the persons of the middling capacity
and it is presented in great detail. For example, when we engage in
virtuous actions, whether physical or verbal, usually are very obvious to
ourselves and to the people around us. We can see the actions directly;
physical actions are virtue as well as verbal actions are virtue. However
without a thorough understanding of the nature of virtue as to whether that
virtue will become an actual cause for attaining liberation or freedom from
cyclic existence (samsara), then it is extremely doubtful. We need to equip
ourselves with a good understanding regarding the nature of virtue so we
are able to steer ourselves towards the goal of liberation. Here when it
says; ‘Perform only perfect virtuous actions’, the emphasis on the word
‘perfect’ has the reference to the goal of liberation or the attaining the
freedom from samsara (cyclic existence).
In the same paragraph, the third line says: ‘Subdue your mind thoroughly.’
Within the context of Lamrim (The Gradual Path to Enlightenment), it is
referring to the persons of the greatest capacity or the persons of the
highest scope. Here, what it is saying is that it is not enough just by
merely attaining one’s own personal liberation or to free only oneself from
the cyclic existence.  By just merely achieving that,  one still has not
thoroughly subdue one’s mind in the sense that if one just only attain
personal nirvana, one only remove the obscuration to liberation. One has
yet to remove the obscuration to omniscience. Therefore in order to
thoroughly subdue one’s mind, one has to completely eliminate both
obscurations: obscuration to liberation and obscuration to omniscience.
Then one needs to generate bodhichitta i.e. one needs to cultivate the mind
of enlightenment or bodhichitta mind. The process of doing so is that one
needs to thoroughly eliminate the self-cherishing thought. By thoroughly
eliminate the self-cherishing thought, one can generate pure bodhichitta.
Through that process, one can achieves Buddhahood or the complete perfect
enlightenment of Buddhahood. Only then, one can be considered to have
thoroughly subdued one’s mind by thoroughly eliminating the two
obscurations.
This would constitute the first lesson in this Basic Program. These three
lines here constitute the basis of why we study the Buddhist treatises.
Do not commit any non-virtuous actions,
Perform only perfect virtuous actions,
Subdue your mind thoroughly –
These three lines are the reason for why we are studying the Basic Program
or the Buddhist treatises. We do not engage in this program in order to
pursue it as academic subject or to become a fine scholar; but rather we
study the entire Basic Program in order to be able to achieve these three
things:
      -to be able to perfectly restraint oneself from the negative actions
and engaging negativities,
      -to be able to engage in perfect virtuous actions and
      -to subdue one’s mind.
These three are the very basis of the entire Basic Program. Throughout the
entirety of the process of the Basic Program, you should remember these
three reasons. We engage in this study is in order to be able to achieve
this. Whatever stage throughout the program when you are studying, you
should remember these three reasons.
Here, the emphasis is on the subject of studying the classical texts of
Buddhism. What difference does it make whether we study them through
hearing and contemplating on them or not? If we study the great classical
texts of Buddhism through hearing and contemplation, it makes a huge
different. For example, if we do experience any difficulty or hardship, we
are able to have very extensive resources to fall back on.  We even have
greater extend of understanding through logics, reasonings and scriptural
authorities to help us in the analysis and solving our problem. On the
contrary, if we do not study the great Buddhist treatises, we will not
equip with all the wisdoms that the great Buddhist treatises are there to
provide us with.  Without having the wisdom of the great Buddhist
treatises, we will not have the necessary logics or reasonings to be able
to have a more well-grounded approached towards solving problems and
overcoming our hardships. Through this, we can understand that it make a
huge difference to ourselves when we study the great classics of Buddhism;
our mind become more expansive and we have a greater resources of wisdom to
fall back on.
As we can see in our ordinary life, when different people encounter the
same problem or hardship, those whose mind that is more expansive and have
greater resources of wisdom to fall back on, they have a greater ability to
analyze and resolving their problem from the different angles by using the
different kind of logics. Those hardships or problems do not overwhelm them
as much as those people who have absolutely no knowledge, no logics and no
reasonings and they are unable to counteract their problems from the
different angles.
Of course, we are not denying the factor of faith –the religious devotion
and faith. There are people who have extremely strong devotion or faith
through intercessory prayer and by praying to the gurus as well as the
deities with single-pointed devotion, they are able to overcome their
problems. There are certain numbers of people who are blessed with such
gift. It is extremely rare to have this natural gift of strong devotion
that helps to overcome problems with intercessory prayer. Not many people
have such strong faith and a single pointed devotion. So majority of us do
not have this option.
A lot of people have entered the door of Buddhism with a lot of religious
zeal at the very beginning. They may have overwhelming faith to his guru
and to the Three Jewels. However, later in life, along the way they might
encounter hardship and problem through which there is no immediate answer.
Then they have the tendency to have their faith weaken or slip entirely
away from them. Such things do occur to Buddhists in general when their
faith is not strong enough i.e. when encounter with problem and unable to
resolve it, one’s faith will just slip away.
If we do not equip ourselves with an extensive understanding of the
scriptural and the wisdom of the Buddhadharma (Buddha teaching) that are
available for us, then once we encounter even a slightest setback in life,
our faith will easily slip away from us. On the contrary, if we were to
engage in hearing and contemplation on the great classics of the
Buddhadharma, for example, engaging in hearing and contemplation on the
complete path to enlightenment to Buddhahood like the Lamrim, then one is
equipped with such a great wisdom that the Buddhadharma has provided for
us.  So when we meet with small setback in our life or even with great
hardship or even the darkest moment in our life, it will not affect our
faith. On the contrary, we will be able to have the tool or the ability to
transform those obstacles or the darkest moment of our life into a fuel for
our practice of Buddhadharma. On contrary, our faith increases due to the
wisdom that we have acquired from hearing and contemplation on the Buddhist
classics.
As we continue into the Basic Program, the topics tend to get more profound
and more complex.  From here, I would like to present you:
      -what different does it makes to actually engage in the actual study
of the great classics,
      -what are the benefits and the qualities that you can acquire and can
achieve, and
      -what are the disadvantages or what you stand to lose if you do not
study the great classics.
Here we are doing the comparison of the benefits and the losses.
From the outset when we are studying the Buddhist treatises, if our mind is
not stable, we will encounter situation whereby we might find the treatises
that we are studying are not beneficial to us. We might start to have doubt
whether these teachings are actually helping us or not. There is a
possibility of experiencing such doubt.
From the outset we should not just study randomly on any scriptures or
texts that come to us or that we can get our hands on; but rather we should
have a very systematic approach towards building up a very strong
foundation that become the basis to be supported by all the others
different Buddhist scriptures and philosophies. That would support our own
personal growth of knowledge and wisdom. Right from the very beginning, we
need to establish an extremely firm foundation by studying text that is
very comprehensive. That would form a foundation for the entire path. Along
the way as we go deeper into the subject and into the complex classics,
those classics can serve as backup that reinforce and further strengthen
one’s core understanding of the Buddhadharma.
We also need to be aware that there are all sorts of different kinds of
books out there; books by different authors, by different teachers, and
teachers from different lineages and different backgrounds.  As a beginner,
if you have not already grasped the core essence of the Buddhadharma,
sometimes by reading the different kind of books, instead of helping you to
grow in wisdom, sometimes these books may serve to confuse you. You may
read books with different contents that seem to contradict each other and
you start to ask yourself why the Buddha teachings are contradicting with
each other.  This is because you have yet to really firmly grasp the core
understanding of what the Buddhadharma is.  These books instead of serving
to reinforce your core understanding of the Buddha’s teachings, they
confuse you even more.
Also, when we come to such a profound teaching such as Buddhadharma,
whether it is teaching or learning about the Buddhadharma, one will come to
experience the different kinds of obstacles in one’s life that will
sometime hinder one from progress in studying and learning the
Buddhadharma.
Therefore, right from the outset, we need to have a very strong
determination to carry through one’s study irregardless of whatever may
happen or whatever obstacles may happen in one’s life. As a support of that
and what is the most important for us, it is not only to study but also to
make strong prayers to one’s guru, to one’s deity and to the Three Jewels
to grant us the divine intervention in our life to ward off whatever
obstacles and provides us with all the conducive circumstances that aid us
in completing our study. For example, when we come into a particular module
such as the Middle Lam Rim and that particular module might take, say four
months. Then from the outset when we begin with that particular module, we
need to make extremely strong and intense prayers to the guru, the lineage
gurus, all the deities and as well as the Three Jewels to grant us divine
intervention so that we are able to complete the study of the particular
module without any kind of obstacles and with all the conducive
circumstances and to be able to experience the fruition of the study of
that module.
When we are seriously talking about studying, hearing and contemplating the
Buddha teachings or the Buddha treatises, from the view point of the Buddha
with reference to the scriptural authority, we can say that actually there
is no better time to study the Buddha’s teachings than now. Right now, we
are equipped with all the conducive conditions to study and to engage in
hearing and contemplation on the Buddha teachings. There is nothing that is
missing or lacking from our life right now that we need to wait for another
occasion or later time to be able to engage in hearing to such teachings.
We need to generate a strong resolution right from the beginning to take
this study right to the very end of the course and to generate such a great
determination with the understanding that there is no greater time than now
to study the Buddha teachings. Now it is the golden time and it is the best
opportunity. Everything is perfect for us right now to study the Buddha
teachings.
Sometime along the way we might feel discourage due to our intellectual
limitation. We might feel that we do not think fast enough or we do not
have enough intelligence to comprehend the content of the particular
modules that we are studying. However, there is a need to be reminded that
there is a saying: “One should not be afraid of limited intelligence but
rather one should afraid of lack of determination”.  One should not let the
lesser intelligence be the setback for oneself but rather what one should
try to safeguard oneself from is the lack of determination. Hence we can
understand that it is extremely important to have determination. One should
not feel the setback just because one is unable to immediately understand
what is being taught. Here, what really brings one to the end of the path
of studying and practice is determination. Even if somebody is extremely
intelligent and is able to understand everything once it is being said or
expressed, sometimes these people do not have determination. After
sometimes, you see them slipping away because the determination is not
there even though they are actually equipped with the intellectual ability
to quickly and thoroughly understand what is being said. However, because
they do not have the determination, they are unable to complete their study
and practices. Therefore, determination is extremely important; even of
greater importance than intellectual ability. One should always take hearts
in one’s study even though one may not be able to understand what is being
said here. Eventually you will come to understand the knowledge or wisdom
of the content that is being taught.
Geshela spoke in English: Sometimes I do ask questions directly to you
people. You must be able to answer. I mean you don’t need to worry if you
can’t answer, it doesn’t matter but you must prepare. This is the way to
learn.
(Fred Cheong shared his Basic Program experience.)
Geshela spoke in English: Many of you know the reason why Kyabje Lama Zopa
Rinpoche has so many centers all over the worlds. His main idea is to teach
Buddhadharma to the people. He always mentions that. To build center is not
liked building temple just to let others to come and pray. This is not his
main goal. His main goal is to educate people with Buddhadharma. In this
way, we can benefit numberless of people. If you just come and pray, how
much you can benefit other people? It only benefits your own self. Maybe it
will give you some peace in your mind. If you come here to study and know
all the knowledge of Buddhadharma, how much benefit can you give to others?
More than that. So there is a huge difference by just having temple with no
class and (for people to) just make prayers. Maybe we can benefit some
people but we can’t reach many people. If we have 230 people studying and
at the end of the day maybe ten people are good in study, these people can
help another 200 to 300 people. They can benefit other people; to guide
them and to teach them what is right and what is wrong. So this is the
benefit that we will get from studying. The main purpose of having Amitabha
Buddhist Center is to educate people about the Buddhadharma. That is the
whole point of having temple there. So far, we are doing very good.  When
we started the five years (Basic Program), about 100 people signed up but
then it dropped down to 60 to 70 people. But it was still very good as
about 60 to 70 people were able to come to class for 5 to 6 years. From
what I see, I don’t think they came to the class because they are devoted
to me. They see the point of studying and they see the Buddhadharma are
interesting. That is the main reason why they come to Amitabha Buddhist
Center. It is not because I am great then they come here. I don’t see that.
This time we have more people, about 230 to 240. I don’t think so,
definitely, that everybody can continue with this class. Maybe many of you
will continue with the class but not everyone. Those of you who want to
study and sign up for the five years program, I will set up some groups. I
will appoint those who have completed the Basic Program and had taken the
exam to look after you. What they are going to look after you is whatever
your question. You must ask question to your leader through email or
whenever you come here. I will form some groups and I will appoint leaders.
These people will have the responsibility to answer your questions. In this
way, those who had completed the Basic Programs can also learn more. They
have the responsibility to answer the question; but don’t ask me for the
answer. They must be able to answer by themselves. If they are not able to
answer, you can tell me. We all have good karma to gather together. As I
have mentioned before and you have to remember that, I can’t give you
everything of what I know. I can only share with you only 30% and the
remaining 70%, you must work for it. If you do that and if you don’t
achieve anything the next five years, you can come and complain to me. Only
that. Otherwise you don’t tell me that you don’t understand.


