Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson41.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.257308
================================================================================


Meditation on Manjushri
Visualize Manjushri in the space in front of you. On that basis, accumulate
merits and purify the mind of all the obscurations through the practice of
the seven-branch worship. After that, do the visualization of the flow of
lights and nectars into you and purifying all obscurations. Then make a
single-pointed request to Manjushri to pacify all the obstacles that hinder
your dharma studies and practices.
Student 1: As stated in the text: “Pride means observing -either internally
or externally- qualities that are high, low, good, or bad, and, based on
the view of the transitory collection, allowing your mind to become
inflated; you assume an aspect of superiority”. How does one develops pride
by focusing on qualities that are low or bad?
Khen Rinpoche: If you focus on someone who is relatively lower than you,
you may hold yourself as superior in relation to that person.
Question: On the action and path of action, of the ten non-virtuous
actions, can we talk about the three mental actions? Of the three mental
non-virtues, can you give an illustration that is both an action and path
of action?
In the previous lesson, we were talking about the view of the transitory
collection.
The view of the transitory collection is a mind that observes on one’s
aggregates and apprehends the ‘I’ to exist as self-sufficient.
How the view of the transitory collection apprehends the ‘self’ or the ‘I’?
The view of the transitory collection focuses on the aggregates and
apprehends the ‘I’ to exist differently/ separately from the body and the
mind.
This is the mode of apprehension of the view of the transitory collection.
We do apprehend ourselves in such a way. We never ever think that the ‘I’
is imputed in dependent upon the aggregates. We never think that the person
or the ‘I’ is dependent on the collection of the aggregates.
In reality, our aggregates (body and mind) must first appear to our mind
before we can have the idea of the person or the ‘I’. But that is not how
we apprehend ourselves or the I’. For us, the ‘I’ appear first only then we
think of our aggregates and think “This is my body. This is my mind.” In
reality, it should be the other way round.
We believe that the ‘I’, the person or the self is different from the
aggregates: either the body or mind. How we can tell that? For example,
when we see an attractive person with beautiful physical appearance, we may
think “How nice if I can exchange my body with that person.” Why do you
think in such a way? This is because we conceive the ‘I’ to be different
from the aggregates (the body and mind). Not only we want to exchange our
body with someone else, sometime we also wish to have the mind of someone
who is more intelligent than us. If we have the choice, we would happily
exchange our mind. What does this indicate? This indicates that we believe
that the self, the person or the ‘I’ is different from the mind. This show
that we innately hold onto to the self, the person or the ‘I’ and believe
the self, the person or the ‘I’ is something that is completely different/
separate from our body and mind. But according to the Buddhist
philosophical view, such self, person or ‘I’ that is completely separate/
different from the body and mind does not exist. We are not saying the body
and mind is the self, the person or the ‘I’ but rather the ‘I’ does exist
in dependent upon the body and mind. The ‘I’ cannot exist without depending
on the body and mind. We must posit the self, the person or the ‘I’ exist
in dependent on the body and mind. An ‘I’ that does not depend on the body
and mind does not exist.  In short, the mind that apprehends a self-
sufficient substantially existent person is called the view of the
transitory collection.
This is something that you have to read and to think about in order to get
some understandings. In Buddhism, we always ask for blessing with various
prayers. “Blessing” is not something that we can just receive it suddenly.
It is not so straightforward and easy. In order to receive blessing, we
have to work at it.
The word “byin labs” in Tibetan is translated as “blessing” in English and
it has the connotation of transformation or change. We believe positive
change or transformation can take place but in order for that to happens,
we need to work for it. For example, in order for us to generate real faith
in the Buddha we have to work at it such as reflect on the qualities of the
Buddha’s exalted body, speech and mind. So by bringing to our mind and
recollecting the qualities of the Buddha, some kind of faith in the Buddha
will then arise in the heart. When you have the virtuous feeling, then that
is what we call ‘blessing.’ Let’s take our studies as an example. In order
for us to learn the material, we have to read the material, think about it,
paying attention in class, asking question and so forth. If you do all
these on the basis of having the desire and the wish to learn that subject
and with putting in effort, finally when you can understand of what you
have wanted to know, you will then feel happy. I guess that special feeling
of happiness is called ‘blessing.’ This also applies to other thing. Here
in order to well in your studies, it is not so easy because you need many
conditions and factors to come together before you can have any success.
This is something that we all have to keep in the mind all the time.
Here we are being introduced to the concept of the view of the transitory
collection. Of course the word itself is challenging. When we talk about
the view of the transitory collection, in this context we are talking about
the self-sufficient substantially existent person. Again the phrase ‘self-
sufficient substantially existent person’ is challenging. But we have to
know the words, learn all these technical terms and then try to understand
the meaning.
In simple English, the view of the transitory collection means it is the
belief that ‘I’ exist separately/ differently from the body and mind. That
is the meaning of self-sufficient substantially existent person.
For this topic, if there is anything that you don’t understand you can
clarify then at any time.
Student 2: (Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: The essential meaning of self-sufficient and substantially
existent is the same. What it means is that it is not dependent on
something. We can also say substantially existent as imputably existent.
Student 3: Who is the ‘I’? What is the ‘I’?  I still cannot get it? (Detail
refers to audio 42 –43.40)
Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You mean you don’t know yourself?
Khen Rinpoche: Precisely, because of not knowing the ‘I’ and never ever
been able to really identify what the ‘I’ is, we have been circling in the
cyclic existence. We always think that the self, the person or the ‘I’
exists completely separate from the body and mind i.e. without depending on
the body and mind. We conceive ourselves in such the way all the time.
Although such an ‘I’ such as the ‘I’ which does not depend on body and mind
does not exist but we believe that such an ‘I’ does exist. That is the
reason why we circle in the cyclic existence. So this way of apprehending
an ‘I’ is called the view of the transitory collection. This is ignorance
and is the root of cyclic existence.
The ‘I’ that exist without depending on the body and mind does not exist.
The ‘I’ that exist completely separate from the body and mind does not
exist. The mind that believe in such an ‘I’ is called the view of the
transitory collection and is the root of cyclic existence; which is
ignorance. Then how does the ‘I’ exist? The self, the person or the ‘I’ is
merely imputed in dependent upon the aggregates.
When you eliminate all the aggregates one by one you will not be able to
find an ‘I’ that is separate from the aggregates. If, at the end, you can
find an ‘I’ that stand out and is separate from the aggregates, then you
can say that the ‘I’ is independent and is self-sufficient. But through
eliminating the aggregates one by one you will not be able to find an ‘I’
that is separate from the aggregates. After having eliminating the
aggregates one by one you will not be able to find an ‘I’ that is self-
sufficient. Therefore, self-sufficient self, person or ‘I’ does not exist.
But the ‘I’ does exist. Then how does the ‘I’ exist?  After having
eliminating the aggregates one by one you will not be able to find an ‘I’
that can exist without depending on the aggregates, so self-sufficient
substantially existent person does not exist.
Having say that we still have to explain how the ‘I’ does exist. The ‘I’
definitely exist. If it does not exist in that way then it has to exist in
some other way. The conclusion is that the ‘I’ exist as imputed in
dependent upon the aggregates. There is no other way how the ‘I’ possibly
can exist.
Student 4: Does the innate apprehension of self-sufficient substantially
existent person come about due to being influenced under the wrong tenets?
Khen Rinpoche: Not necessary. The innate apprehension of a self does not
depend on having being influenced by wrong tenets. The word ‘innate’ show
the way of looking at thing that arises naturally without depending on some
other factors.
Student 4: Is it possible for the innate apprehension self-sufficient
substantially existent person and the innate apprehension of inherently
existent person to manifest simultaneously? Can you please give an
illustration of an innate apprehension of inherently existent person?
Khen Rinpoche: I will not talk about the innate apprehension of inherently
existent person now because there are new students here. If I were to
introduce that now, it may confuse some of them. For the time being in the
context of what we have been looking at, it is sufficient to think of the
view of the transitory collection as apprehending the person as self-
sufficient substantially existent person. The main thing is to gain an
understanding now. Those of you have some background of this you can take
up this question and bring it up for discussion.
Question: Are the apprehension self-sufficient substantially existent
person and the apprehension of inherently existent person are of the same
or different mind? Can these two arise simultaneously?
What is the view of the transitory collection? It refers to a particular
mind that apprehend the ‘I’ or believe the ‘I’ or the person to exist
without depending on the body and mind. When we think of the ‘I’ we think
it is something that is completely separate or unrelated to our body and
mind. So this way of apprehending the ‘I’ is called the view of the
transitory collection.
It is sufficient for you to understand this for now. At the end of the day
if you are able to explain the meaning of the view of the transitory
collection then it is enough. We will continue with the other afflictions.
7. An extremist view (or the view holding on to an extreme) is an
afflictive intelligence that observes the self as apprehended by the view
of the transitory collection and regards that self either as permanent and
eternal, or as subject to annihilation in such a way that there will be no
rebirth from this life into a future life.
Object of observation: the self as apprehended by the view of the
transitory collection.
Question: What is the self as apprehended by the view of the transitory
collection?
The self that is apprehended by the view of the transitory collection is
the self-sufficient person. Then there is a mind that apprehends this
particular self (as apprehended by the view of the transitory collection)
as permanent and eternal. Such an apprehension is called the view holding
on to an extreme.
Then there is an apprehension of this self-sufficient substantially
existent person as something that is not going on to the future life and it
is also called as the view holding on to an extreme. How do you explain
that? The self as apprehended by the view of the transitory collection does
not exist but there is a view that apprehends that this self is not going
on to the next life. This is an extreme view of annihilation. How does it
become a view of annihilation?
Student 5: (Detail refers to audio 67.28 –68.34)
Khen Rinpoche: We are trying to look at the self that is apprehended by the
view holding on to an extreme.
The object that is observed by this view holding to an extreme is the self
as apprehended by the view of the transitory collection. Is this self-
sufficient person? Yes. Then there is an apprehension of this self-
sufficient person to exist permanently and eternally. This is one of the
views holding to an extreme, view holding on to an extreme of permanence.
There is a belief that this self –self-sufficient person- does not goes on
to the next life and this is called the view of annihilation.
In the first place, the self-sufficient substantially existent person does
not exist. If it does not exist, obviously it is not going to the next
life. If you hold the view it is not going on to the next life, how then
does that become a view of annihilation? What are you annihilating? What
extreme are you falling into? Is it not a factually concordant mind?
Student 6:  We may hold the view to say that this self-sufficient
substantially existent self does not go on to the next life. At the same
time we end up eliminating also the self that does exist as not going to
the next life.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that the mind which believes the self-sufficient
substantially existent person is not going on to the next life is a valid
mind.
Student 6:  (Detail refers to audio 74.30 –75)
Khen Rinpoche: If you take the ‘I’ that is apprehended do not go on to the
next life to be the existent person and you believe that such a existent
‘I’ does not goes on to the next life then it became the view of
annihilation.
At the same time if we say that the apprehension of the existent ‘I’ to be
permanent, eternal and not changing, is it alright to say that it is the
view of permanent?  If I raise the qualm: “Isn’t the mind which apprehends
self-sufficient substantially existent person as not going to the next life
a concordant mind? It is factually concordant because in reality the self-
sufficient substantially existent person does not exist.
Student 7: There is a difference between object of observation and the mode
of apprehension. Object of observation can be concordant with reality, for
example, the person that exists. The mode of apprehension is to apprehend
it to be different from aggregates. Therefore it is not a valid cognizer
because the mode of apprehending it is discord with reality. That mode of
apprehending the person to be annihilatory and does not move on to the next
life is an afflicted view because the person that is observed by this view
does exist. And since it is apprehended as not moving to the next life, it
is an afflicted view.
Khen Rinpoche: If you posit the object of observation of the view holding
to the extreme to be the self, the person or the ‘I’ that exist and object
of the mode of apprehension to be the self-sufficient person, then it may
be easier.
If you posit the object of observation of the view holding on to the
extreme to be the self, the person or the ‘I’ that exist, then it is easy
to explain this view by focusing on the self, the person or the ‘I’ that
exist and apprehend it either to be permanent or to cease at the time of
death.
If you go one step further, what about changing it to truly existent
person? In relation to this view, again there is a view of permanent and
the view of annihilation. So there can be a view of non-existence or the
view of true existence. It is easier if the object of observation of this
view to be the ‘I’ that exist but if the self-sufficient person is the
object of observation then we have to think about it.
The view holding on to the extreme of annihilation is essentially a
thought: “Such and such a thing does not exist whatsoever.” If the object
of observation of this view is the self-sufficient person then it is
difficult to explain how the view which apprehends such a person does not
exist after this life as a view of annihilation.
Student 8:  (Detail refers to audio 84.10-85.22)
Khen Rinpoche: We always have to be mindful that there is an ‘I’ that exist
and there is an ‘I’ that does not exist. In general, we are not saying that
an ‘I’ does not exist. The ‘I’ does exist but it does not exist in the way
that is apprehended by the view of the transitory collection.
The ‘I’ that is believed to exist by the ego, that ‘I’ does not exist. It
will be wrong to say that ‘I’ does not exist. ‘I’ does exist but it does
not exist in the way that is apprehended by ego or, for example, by the
view of the transitory collection.
The ‘I’ definitely does exist because the ‘I’ is established by worldly
convention as we do say: “I am going. I am coming. I am eating. I am
circling in cyclic existence.” So there is an ‘I’ that exist. If you say
that ‘I’ does not exist, then who is the one circling in samsara and who is
the one going to achieve enlightenment? This contradicts even the common
sense. Worldly convention is the common sense.
Here the mind which apprehends the self does not exist is called the wrong
consciousness or perverse consciousness. It is very important to
distinguish correctly between the ‘I’ or the person that exist and the ‘I’
or the person that does not exist whatsoever. The problem is that we are
unable to distinguish between these two and we mix them up. We need to
think about whether it is alright to posit the ‘I’ that exist to be the
object that is observed by the view holding to the extreme and apprehend
this existent ‘I’ (which exist) to be the permanent and eternal or to view
it as something that will not go beyond this life.
8. A belief in the supremacy of wrong views (conception of bad views as
supreme) is an afflictive intelligence that observes one of the three views
–the view of the transitory collection, view holding on to an extreme, and
a wrong view- along with a view-holder's aggregates on the basis of which
such a view occurs, and regards such a view as supreme.
Object of observation: one of the three views which are the view of the
transitory collection, view holding on to an extreme, and a wrong view.
For example, there is a view that observes the view of the transitory
collection and think this view is supreme is the conception of bad views as
supreme. Likewise, if you focus on the view holding on to the extreme as
supreme, then this is the conception of bad views as supreme. It is the
same if you are observing wrong view and thinking that this view as
supreme.
Can someone who had completed the Basic Program explain the sentence:
“along with a view-holder's aggregates on the basis of which such a view
occurs”?
There is a person who holds on to one of these three views - the view of
the transitory collection, view holding on to an extreme, and a wrong view.
If we take a belief in the supremacy of wrong views to be the view that
apprehends the five aggregates of the person holding on to those three
views and believe that this person’s aggregates are supreme i.e. like the
aggregates of someone who has achieved liberation. This is not a conclusion
but it is something that I think. This is something we need to think about.
What about if I say that this is what it means.
So we have finished with the view of the transitory collection, view
holding on to an extreme and conception of bad views as supreme. First you
need to know that there are such views and on that basis, you have to know
the meaning.
Summary:
The view of the transitory collection is a mind which thinks the self, the
person or the ‘I’ is completely separate from the body and mind. The object
of observation of the view of the transitory collection is the self or the
‘I’.
The view holding on to an extreme is a view that apprehend the ‘I’ that is
observed by the view of the transitory collection to be either permanent or
not going to the next life.
The conception of bad views as supreme is a mind which thinks the view of
the transitory collection is supreme. It also refers to the mind which
regards the view holding to an extreme to be supreme and the mind that
regards a wrong view to be supreme.
You know the words and roughly the meaning and you should not just leave it
there. You should take it forward by thinking about it, reading the text
and then discuss. We have not come to a decisive understanding of the views
yet so you should not leave it at this level of explanation.
Medicine Buddha retreat at Kopan (Oct 20- Nov 1)
Retreat would be 7~8 days and follow-up with about 3~4 days pilgrimage.
I am encouraging the new Basic Program student to go. The retreat does not
involve counting so much mantra. If you want to accumulate the mantra, you
can do it during the break time and not during the retreat. The retreat
will be of total silence. The rule is total silence throughout the retreat.
If you think you can make it then you can join the retreat. If you think
that you cannot make it then don’t join the retreat. It is important that
you make the decision. Once you go there and you want to talk then that is
not correct. Please think about that.
This time Geok Hua is going to help me to lead the retreat as she has some
experiences on meditation. I will come as much as possible. For those who
want to go, please think about it. We have rooms for 60 to 70 people and I
can’t take more than that. For the cost, Geok Hua and Catherine Lau will
announce it to you.

For reference only
Extract from “Meditations on the Path to Enlightenment” by Geshe Acharya
Thubten Loden (page 268-273)
The view of the transitory collection is a deluded view that observes the
appropriated aggregates and conceives of them as “I” and 'mine'. It is
'understanding with delusion' in that the observed object, a self merely
imputed on the collection of the five aggregates, does exist
conventionally. However, the deluded view of the transitory collection
apprehends such a self to be permanent, independent and inherently existent
when this type of self is, in fact, non-existent. The 'collection' refers
to the collection of the parts that are the basis of the label “I”: that
is, the five aggregates, the four elements, the eighteen constituents and
so on. They are impermanent and therefore referred to as the transitory
collection. The view of the transitory collection conceives them to be a
permanent, partless, independent, inherently existent self. By establishing
this deluded view of an inherently existent “I”, the view of inherently
existent 'mine' follows—that is, my body, feelings etc. The view of
inherently existent “I” and 'mine' is the base of all other delusions and
causes one to engage in actions that are a source of cyclic existence.
Holding extreme view is a deluded view that observes the “I”, as it is
conceived by the above view of the transitory collection, and holds it to
be either permanent, in the sense of being unchanging, or annihilated by
completely ceasing at the time of death. The extreme of permanence is known
as the high extreme and the view of nihilism is the low extreme. The high
extreme sees the self as permanent and unchanging. The low extreme sees the
self as utterly non-existent and thus lacking conventional existence. These
two extremes obstruct one from engaging the middle way as presented by
Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti.
Holding false views as supreme is a mental factor that, in observing the
view of the transitory collection, extreme view, or perverse view, holds
any of them to be supreme. It has the function of exaggerating deluded
views and giving them strength, making it more difficult to abandon them.
Holding false ethics and conduct as supreme is a deluded view observing
faulty ethics and faulty conduct believing that these will bring
liberation. Faulty ethics is practising a code of rules, believing them to
be pure moral conduct, when in fact they are totally deluded. Examples are
those who cut off their fingers without a correct motivation believing that
they are practising generosity, or those who practise fasting in the belief
that this practice alone will bring enlightenment. There are some who
engage in an ascetic practice called the five fires. In the hottest part of
the day they light a fire in each of the four directions and sit in the
middle, with the hot, midday sun being the fifth fire. They burn their
bodies in the belief that they are practising pure ethics with such
austerities. This is a completely deluded view and such practices only make
you hot! An Indian king, Dasrad, killed a horse every day believing that
once he had killed a thousand he would attain liberation. Not only is it
impossible to attain liberation by harming beings, but such views take you
further from it. Some people engage in faulty conduct as a result of seeing
through limited clairvoyance their previous rebirth as an animal. Not being
able to see beyond that, they believe that such an animal rebirth is the
cause of being human this life because it immediately preceded the human
life. They then practise by behaving like an animal, walking on all fours,
eating grass and so on in the deluded belief that doing so will create the
cause for another human life. Others burn themselves in great fires or lie
naked on ice believing that this will prevent rebirth in the hot and cold
hells.
Perverse view (wrong view) is a deluded view that denies the existence of
something that does exist, such as the law of cause and effect, or affirms
the existence of something that does not exist, such as Ishvara being the
creator of cyclic existence. The person who denies any relationship between
negative actions and suffering, and positive actions and happiness is an
example of someone who has deluded view denying something that does exist.
The person who firmly believes that sacrificing chickens gives him
spiritual power is an example of someone who has deluded view affirming
something that does not exist. If you ask such a person why sacrificing
chickens is beneficial, he will have no satisfactory answer.

*******************************************
Page 303, Meditation on Emptiness by Jeffey Hopkins:
A “self sufficient” person is a “substantially existent” person. In general
both terms refer to an object that can appear to the mind without depending
on the appearance of other objects; thus, the opposite of “substantially
existent” is “imputedly existent.”
Here, in the coarse selflessness, “imputedly existent” is identified as
eliminating the possibility that the person is an entity independent of the
aggregates of the mind and body.
All Buddhist schools, except Prasangika and the Vaibhashika sub-schools
that advocate a self, say that a person is “imputedly existent’ in the
sense of not being a separate entity from the mental and physical
aggregates. However, these schools propound that the person is either:
-the composite of these aggregates, or
-one of them, or
-their continuum, or
-the continuum of one of them.
For Prasangika, however, this is incorrect; a person is neither separate
from the mental and physical aggregates themselves; rather a person is
merely imputed in dependence upon the aggregates.
The imputedly existent person of the other schools is considered by the
Prasangikas to be substantially existent because the latter say that the
meaning of “substantially existent” is to be finable separate from or among
the bases of imputation of the object.”


