Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 7.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.185063
================================================================================


Remember what Lama Tsongkhapa says in his “In Praise of Dependent
Origination?”  He said he feel very fortunate that he was able to develop
faith in the Buddha and this faith arose from understanding his teaching.
He was able to develop that faith before the end of his life. You can see
that the faith Lama Tsongkhapa had developed in the Buddha came from the
understanding of the Buddha’s teaching. This is very important for us that
one day we can develop faith in the Buddha that comes about through the
understanding of the Buddha’s teaching. So what do you have to do to
develop this kind of faith? You should learn the teaching of the Buddha.
Come the day when you can see how true the Buddha’s teaching are, then
naturally faith in the Buddha will arise from the bottom of your heart. So
you can see that developing the real and deep faith in the Buddha is not an
easy thing. Why? In order to develop this kind of faith you need to first
understand what the Buddha taught. In order to understand what the Buddha
taught, you need to examine what he taught. You have to study and learn the
teaching. Then from learning the teaching, you will understand the meaning
of his teaching and can see how true it is and how it can fit into your own
experience. Only then you will be able to have that kind of real devotion
towards the Buddha.  “In Praise of Dependent Origination,” Lama Tsongkhapa
use the below analogy:
      42
      Seeing the qualities of this teaching
      Pulls [hard] from your heart,
      Just like what a hook does to a fish;
      Sad it is not to have heard it from you.
When you think of this example, if you want to catch a fish, you have to
use a hook. At the hook, you have to put bait which the fish like. When the
fish sees the bait, uncontrollably, the fish will swim towards the bait.
This is how the fish got caught.
Likewise, in order for us to develop this kind of captivating faith towards
the Buddha, we first must see the qualities of his teachings. When we see
how wonderful his teachings are, uncontrollably, we will be drawn to
develop that kind of captivating faith towards the Buddha.
We all would like to develop that kind of faith and it is important for us
to have that kind of devotion. We need this kind of devotion but how such
deep devotion arises in the first place? If we think about it and no
matters from which angle we look at it, at the end of the day, the only way
to really to be able to develop this kind of real deep devotion and faith
towards the Buddha is to understand his teachings. In order to do that, we
have to study his teachings. So we have no other choice but to study his
teachings. That is the only way out. I don’t think that there is any other
way out. This is what I think as well. This is one of the reasons why we
are here to learn the Buddha teachings. The more we study his teachings,
the more we realize the depth and the profundity of the Buddha teachings.
The more we see the depth and profundity of the Buddha teaching is, the
more we believe the Buddha is really someone special.

Stages of the Path
We have finished with the four greatnesses of the Lamrim - Stages of the
Path to Enlightenment. One of the reasons for us to understand the four
greatnesses of the Lamrim is that we will be able to develop respect and
faith in it. What we are studying here is Lamrim –Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment. We are studying this so that we can put the Lamrim into
practice. So the object of study and the object of practice is the same –it
is the Lamrim. If, at the end of the study of this Lamrim, we still think
that there is something else other than Lamrim to practice; such as taking
some empowerments and thinking that the real practice is by doing the
sadhana of the deity or reciting some mantras, then it is a mistake and is
wrong. Please remember to keep this in mind all the time. This applies to
everyone as most people are like that. A lot of people who have received
the teaching of Lamrim but despite of having heard the teaching of the
Lamrim, they think that there is something else to practice. That is the
reason why many people run after empowerment. After taking the empowerment,
they put in effort doing the sadhana and the deity practice thinking that
is the real practice. Then they start to think of doing deity retreat but
forgetting what one had heard in the Lamrim teaching of the main things to
be put into practice.
The Lamrim show the path of the persons of three different capacities. So
the practice of Lamrim is the fundamental practice and it is indispensable
because without this indispensable fundamental practice of the Lamrim,
there is no way to practice Tantra.
Explanation of how Dharma possessed of the two greatnesses should be
listened to and explained
The two greatnesses here are:
   1. greatness of the teaching author (who is Lama Atisha)
   2. greatness of the instruction
2B3 How Dharma possessed of the two greatnesses should be listened to and
explained
A How to listen
B How to explain
C Generally, how to proceed at the end [How a session should be concluded
in relation to both hearing and explaining the teaching]
If you think about this Lamrim, it is really a wonderful instruction and is
something which is very good. The Lamrim starts with eliminating the major
misconceptions and wrong views that most people have. After eliminating
these misconception and wrong views, then it explain how we should learn
the teaching: how we should listen to the teaching and how we should
explain this instruction. It talks about how to listen and what are the
benefits if you listen to the teaching in a particular way and in a
particular mind set. What we have heard so far and what we are going to
look at now- how to listen to the teaching- is to put them into practice.
Many people have the idea that perhaps the real essence of the teaching is
coming soon while now is just the preliminary and one may need not to pay
much attention to these things. But, actually, all these are meant to be
put into practice immediately.
2B3A How to listen
1 Considering the advantages of listening to the Dharma
2 Developing respect towards the Dharma and those who teach it
3 The actual way to listen
2B3A-1 Considering the advantages of listening   [Contemplating the
benefits of hearing the teaching]
First: from the Verses on Listening:
   Through listening you come to know the dharmas,
   through listening misdeeds are turned away,
   through listening all trivia are abandoned,
   through listening nirvana is achieved
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 56: The Verses about Hearing in the
Collection of Indicative Verses says:
   Through hearing, phenomena are understood,
   Through hearing, wrongdoing is overcome,
   Through hearing, what is meaningless is eliminated,
   Through hearing, nirvana is attained.]
“Through hearing, phenomena are understood” – this means that through
hearing the teaching, we come to understand what are the thing that we
should cultivate and what are the thing we should discard. On the basis of
understanding this -what is to be cultivated and what is to be discarded-
we will be able to turn away from wrongdoings and misdeeds, in particular,
we will be able to engage  in the training in ethics.
Then through contemplating correctly on what you have to abandon and what
you have to cultivate, then you eliminate what is meaningless i.e. you will
be able to engage in training in concentration.
“Through hearing, nirvana is attained” – on the basis of a good training in
concentration, then one would be able to trains well in wisdom. Through
actualizing wisdom, one will be able to achieve nirvana.
Remember the three scriptural collections? (Vinaya teaching, Sutra
collections and Abhidharma teaching)
In the second line, “Through hearing, wrongdoing is overcome”, one can
relate that to hearing the collection of vinaya teaching; which is the code
of ethical conduct. Through hearing the vinaya, one comes to understand how
one should trains in ethics.
“Through hearing, what is meaningless is eliminated” –through hearing
teaching on the sutra collection, one will understand how to give up all
those meaningless distractions. Through that one will be able to trains in
concentration.
“Through hearing, nirvana is attained”-through hearing on knowledge or
Abhidharma, then one can develop wisdom. With wisdom, one will be able to
achieve nirvana.
Student 1: Will the layperson has the access to the vinaya teaching?
Geshela:  The pratimoksha vows –the vows of individual liberation- can be
divided into eight categories i.e. there are eight types of the pratimoksha
vows. The eight types of the pratimoksha vows can be subsumed into two:
   1. The vows of the householder
   2. The vows of the ordained
Although the emphasis of the vinaya is on the conduct and vows for the
ordained, since householders like you need to engage in training in ethics,
the training in the householder is also being explained in the vinaya. One
can study the section in the vinaya that deals with the householder.
These four [lines] say that in dependence on listening an understanding of
the points that should be adopted and abandoned gradually develops. From
this knowledge – ethical discipline that counteracts wrongdoing. Then, once
you have turned away from meaningless pursuits, concentration where the
mind can stay on a wholesome object as long as you wish arises. Then,
through training in wisdom realizing the suchness that is selflessness, the
root of samsara’s fetters is cut and you attain liberation.
      In the Jataka stories, too, it says:
      He who through listening fills his mind with faith,
      grows firm rejoicing in that which is excellent.
      Wisdom is born and bewilderment vanishesthis
      is well worth paying for with one’s own flesh.
      Listening is the lamp against mental darkness,
      the greatest wealth no robber can carry away,
      the weapon destroying the enemy - ignorance
      best of friends giving guidance in skilful means;
      near and dear, if you are poor or not;
      inoffensive cure against ills of sorrow,
      the foremost army destroying an army of faults,
      it is the best fame, and treasure and splendour as well.
      If you meet noble beings - the best of gifts,
      and in assemblies it is the delight of the wise.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 56: Also, the Garland of Birth
Stories (Jataka-mala) says:
   Through hearing, you become faithful
   And your delight in virtue becomes steadfast;
   Wisdom arises and delusion will vanish—
   This is worth buying even with your flesh.
   Hearing is a lamp that dispels the darkness of delusion,
   The supreme wealth that cannot be carried off by thieves,
   A weapon that vanquishes the foe of confusion,
   It is the best of friends, revealing personal instructions, the
   techniques of method.
   It is the friend who does not desert you in times of need,
   A harmless medicine for the illness of sorrow,
   The supreme battalion to vanquish the troops of great misdeeds,
   It is the best fame, glory and treasure
   It is the supreme gift when you meet with noble beings
   Among an assemblage, it delights the wise.]
Let’s us take the examples of:-
   1. If one hears the teaching on the qualities of the Three Jewels
   2. If one hears the teaching on the presentation of karma [the law of
      cause and effect]
   3. If one hears the teaching on the Four Nobles Truths.
Through hearing the teaching, one comes to understand what these topics are
and what they mean. Through hearing the teaching, you will be able to
develop the faith of conviction in this.
For example, through hearing the teaching on the qualities of the Three
Jewels, once you understand of what you have heard and then develop the
faith of conviction in the Three Jewels, you will naturally worship the
Three Jewels. From your own side, you worship the Three Jewels, pay homage
and make offerings to the Three Jewels.
When one hears the teaching on the presentation of karma [the law of cause
and effect], if one develop faith of conviction in karma, you know what to
abandon and what to cultivates, then you will be able to live your life in
accordance to the law of karma; you will be able to live an ethical way of
life.
Similarly, if one hears the teaching on the Four Nobles Truths, you come to
develop faith of conviction in this teaching especially with regards to how
you should practice the teaching and what you have to abandon and what you
have to give up. This will bring great benefit to your practice.
With developing all these faith of conviction, one will become very stable.
This is what the teaching says: “If you hear the teaching, this is what you
get and these are the benefits.” In your life, you have to see whether that
is the case for you.
Basically this is our goal. We aim to experience these benefits, so we have
to try it out. Once we taste the benefits of hearing the teaching by
ourselves then the interest to continue to learn and to study the teaching
will naturally arise. Hearing has an impact on our mind especially if we
hear something over and over again. Let’s say you keep on hearing “Killing
is no good and is really bad” over and over again. Somehow it has an impact
on your mind such that if you are about to engage in the act of killing,
because of having heard this many times, you then remember that this act is
a misdeed.
Here we are talking about merely hearing the teaching. When we hear
something, it definitely leaves an impression on our mind; it leaves an
imprint. Let’s say someone tell you: “No, you cannot eat this food because
it will harm your health.” Even though you have heard this once, it may be
many years later when people offer this particular food to you, you may
remember what you have heard that this particular food will harm your
health. This is the potential of just hearing something.
as well as:
      Having listened make the attainment the essence of practice,
      and you will be released from the stronghold of births with ease.
Keep thinking again and again about these and other advantages of listening
and generate resolute faith from the bottom of your heart.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 57:
   The result of hearing is to engage in substantive practice,
   You will be released with little difficulty from the fortress of
   rebirth.
Develop enthusiasm from the depths of your heart with regard to these
benefits of hearing.]
“Keep thinking again and again about these and other advantages of
listening and generate resolute faith from the bottom of your heart” and
“The result of hearing is to engage in substantive practice” – this shows
that although it is beneficial to just hearing the teaching, but that alone
is not enough. The point is that after hearing the teaching, the result of
hearing should be put into practice as much as you are able to. Why? If one
put the teaching into practice, “You will be released with little
difficulty from the fortress of rebirth.”
Birth is the cause of all the problems because if you have birth, you will
have aging, sickness and death. Once you are able to stop birth, then you
will not have to experience all these sufferings that comes along.
“You will be released with little difficulty from the fortress of rebirth”
– here it talks about a specific kind of rebirth and not the type of
rebirth in general. The rebirth that we need to stop refers to the rebirth
that occurs due to karma and the afflictions. We are not talking about
stopping all kinds of rebirths.
2B3A-2 Developing respect towards the Dharma and those who teach it
Second: from the Ksitigarbha Sutra:
      Listen filled with one-sided pointed faith and respect,
      without any mockery nor disrespect towards them,
      worship the exponents of the Dharma,
      producing the notion of them as resembling Buddhas.
In accordance with this quotation you should view them as resembling a
Buddha, offer them service with things like lion thrones, worship them with
gifts and give up disrespect.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 57:  The Sutra of Ksitigarbha says:
   Listen to the teachings with one-pointed faith and respect.
   Do not censure or deride the speaker;
   Honor your instructors~-
   Develop the idea that they are like a buddha.
Thus, as this says, view the instructor as being like a buddha. Eliminate
disrespect; honor him or her with homage and goods by offering a lion
throne and the like.]
As I have mentioned before, the purpose of listening to the teaching is to
subdue the mind. If we listen to the teaching with such an attitude as
described here in this sutra, we will only benefit. As says in the sutra,
we must respect the dharma that is being taught; we must respect the
instructions. Since the instructor is the one who is explaining the meaning
of what we learn, likewise, we need to respect the instructor. If we listen
to the teaching with such an idea, it makes a different to the mind and it
will benefit the mind. The teaching may then move your mind and your heart.

The Buddha seeing the purpose, then taught that we should adopt such
attitude when listening to the teaching as it will only benefit the
listeners.
In the Bodhisattva Levels it says that you should be free from arrogance
and, towards the teachings and those who expound them, from disregard and
you should respect those two.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 57:  Also, as the Bodhisattva Levels
sets forth, listen without the afflictions [of arrogance and contempt] and
without bringing to mind the five conditions of an instructor."
And in the Jataka stories it says:
    Sit on a seat that is very low,
    develop the glory of discipline,
    see with eyes imbued with joy,
    while drinking the nectar of the words.
    Bow down in respect and concentration,
    with mind that is pure and free of stains
    like one who is ill heeds the doctor’s words,
    respectfully listen to the Dharma.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 57:  Also, it is as is said in the
Garland of Birth Stories:
    Stay on a low seat.
    Show the glory of discipline.
    Look with an eye of delight.
    Show respect and one-pointed obeisance,
    As if drinking a nectar of words.
    Show reverence and listen to the teaching
    With clear delight and a mind undefiled,
    Like a patient listening to the words of a doctor]
When we listen to the teaching, we should listen to the teaching with faith
and respect. We should listen to the teaching by thinking that we are like
a sick person- a patient visiting a doctor. This will be explained in more
detail soon. When we are sick and we visit a doctor, we pay attention and
listen carefully to what the doctor is saying. Likewise, when we attend the
teaching, we should do so as well.
2B3A-3 The actual way to listen
A Indication of how to listen in general
B The need to listen, having related this to one’s mind
C How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments
2B3A-3A Indication of how to listen in general
1 Giving up the three faults of a vessel
2 Relying on the discriminations
This section is about how we should listen to the teaching through:
      - abandoning the three faults of a vessel and
      - relying on the six ideas / attitudes
Lama Tsongkhapa uses the analogy of a vessel with faults.
2B3A-3A1 Giving up the three faults of a vessel
First: If a vessel is turned upside down or held the right way round but
unclean or clean but with the bottom leaking, then even if rain is made to
fall on it by the gods, it cannot go in, or even if it goes in, it will be
polluted by the dirt and therefore will not fulfil the purpose of being
drunk and the like or even if it is not spoiled by dirt, it will not stay
but leak out.
Next is applying the analogies to the meanings.
In the same way it is to no great purpose to hear the Dharma, if you sit in
a place where it is being explained, but do not listen well, or listen, but
take it wrong - with a faulty motivation and the like - or if, even in case
these faults are not present, the words and the meaning you grasped at the
time of hearing are not consolidated and get lost through forgetfulness
etc. Therefore, one should be free from these [faults].
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 58:  Abandoning the three faults of a
vessel
A vessel might have the following three faults:
1.  turning upside down, or
2.  though held right side up, being dirty, or
3.  though clean, having a leaky bottom.
If it has these faults, then even though a rainfall from clouds assembled
by the deities falls on it, the rain will
1. not go inside; or,
2. go inside, but be unable to fulfill its function—to be drunk,
etc.—because it is contaminated by filth; or
3. not be polluted by filth, yet not remain inside and drain away.
Similarly, even though you are staying in a place where the teachings are
being explained, there is no great purpose in your hearing the teachings if
you
1. do not pay attention; or,
2. though paying attention, misunderstand what is heard or listen with a
bad motivation such as attachment; or,
3. though lacking these faults, do not solidify the words and meanings
taken in at the time of hearing but let them fade due to forgetting them
and so forth.
Therefore, free yourself from all of these faults.]
|Three faults of a|even though a rainfall   |even though you are staying in a     |
|vessel           |from clouds assembled by |place where the teachings are being  |
|                 |the deities falls on it, |explained, there is no great purpose |
|                 |the rain will            |in your hearing the teachings if you |
|turning upside   |not go inside            |do not pay attention                 |
|down             |                         |                                     |
|though held right|go inside, but be unable |though paying attention,             |
|side up, being   |to fulfill its           |misunderstand what is heard or listen|
|dirty            |function—to be drunk,    |with a bad motivation such as        |
|                 |etc.—because it is       |attachment                           |
|                 |contaminated by filth    |                                     |
|though clean,    |not be polluted by filth,|though lacking these faults, do not  |
|having a leaky   |yet not remain inside and|solidify the words and meanings taken|
|bottom           |drain away               |in at the time of hearing but let    |
|                 |                         |them fade due to forgetting them and |
|                 |                         |so forth                             |


This is basically describing our situation. It is pointing out the faults
of most people here may have. First, one may come to class but one’s mind
is somewhere else. One may be sitting here physically but one may not be
paying attention to what is being said. Even if one is listening to the
teaching, but one may not have the proper motivation for listening to the
teaching. For example, one may not having any intention of putting the
instructions into practice as one is curious to find out thing or one may
have some other bad intention. Even if one listen attentively with a
positive motivation but if one may not pay much attention to what was being
said after the teaching such as one forget what was said in the class.
Whenever we listen to the teaching with these faults then our listening to
the dharma in those instances will serve no great purpose whatsoever. This
is what Lama Tsongkhapa says. How should we free ourselves from these
faults?
The antidotes to these three are set forth in three phrases in the sutras:
“Listen well - intensely - and keep in mind!”
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 58:  The remedies for these three
faults are indicated in the sutras in three phrases: "Listen well,
thoroughly, and hold it in mind!" ]
The three phrases "Listen well, thoroughly, and hold it in mind!" show the
antidotes to the three faults:
“Listen well” is the antidote to the fault of a dirty vessel. Listen well
means listen to the teaching with a proper motivation such that we can
listen to the teaching by thinking; “I am here to subdue my own mind.” or
“I am here to listen to the teaching so I can benefit others” or “I am here
to listen to the teaching so I can put it into practice.”
“Listen thoroughly” is the antidote to the fault of an upturn vessel. Since
we have come to the class to listen to the teaching, we must as well pay
full attention to what is being said.
“Keep in mind” is the antidote to the fault of a leaky vessel. One should
listen to the teaching intensely by paying attention to whatever is being
said.  We should make it firm in our mind. We should try with different
means to ensure to that we do not forget what was being said during the
teaching.
|Remedies    |Antidote to the fault of        |Means that you should               |
|Listen well |being a dirty vessel            |listen to the teachings with a      |
|            |                                |proper motivation by thinking, “I am|
|            |                                |here to listen to the teachings to: |
|            |                                |-subdue my mind or                  |
|            |                                |-so that I can benefit others or    |
|            |                                |-so that I can put them into        |
|            |                                |practice.”                          |
|Listen      |being an upturned vessel        |pay full attention to what is being |
|thoroughly  |                                |said                                |
|Hold it in  |being a leaky vessel            |listen intensely by paying attention|
|mind        |                                |to whatever is said and try         |
|            |                                |different means to ensure that you  |
|            |                                |do not forget what was said during  |
|            |                                |the teachings.                      |


These advices of listening to the teaching through abandoning the three
faults of a vessel can also be applied generally to other areas of our
study. Whatever one is studying and whenever one is learning, first, if it
is a teaching, one should pay attention during the teaching and listen
attentively and to listen the teaching with a virtuous motivation such as
“I am doing this study so I can benefit others in the future”. One should
listen without forgetting what was said during the teaching. One should
remember the teaching after it has being given.
And in the Bodhisattva Levels we are told to listen with the desire to know
everything, single-pointedness, attention, a humble mind, and the thought
of all sentient beings reflecting with complete composure.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 58:  Moreover, as the Bodhisattva
Levels sets forth, listen while wanting to understand everything, staying
one-pointed, attentive, with vour mind focused, and reflecting with
complete composure.]
2B3A-3A2 Relying on the six discriminations
Ven Gyurme: In the context of the Tibetan text, it should be translated as
“six ideas” as the word “discriminations” does not work in this case.
A Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient
B Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the Dharma as a
doctor
C Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as medicine
D Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure
E Contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagata as an exalted being
F Generating the wish for the Dharma tradition to last long
      [Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 58-60:
   1. Think of yourself as a sick person.
   2. Think of the instructor as a doctor.
   3. Think of the instructor’s explications as medicine
   4. Think of earnest practice as the way to cure your disease.
   5. Think of the Tathagatas as excellent beings.
   6. Wish that the teaching will endure for a long time.]
2B3A-3A2A Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient
      First: In Engaging,  it says:
       Even when stricken with ordinary illness
       one has to follow the words of the doctor
       how much more so, if a hundred
       ills like lust strike you down all the time!
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 59: 1.Think of yourself as a sick
person: Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds says:
      Since you must follow a doctor's advice,
      Even when stricken by ordinary illness,
      What need is there to mention those who are constantly stricken
      With the illness of so many faults, attachment and the like?]
As is mentioned here, owing to mental afflictions like attachment etc. we
always suffer from diseases causing long-lasting and severe suffering that
is difficult to cure. Therefore we first need to diagnose them as such.
Kamawa said: “If it is not in accord with the actual situation, our
meditation goes off in the wrong direction. We have been stricken with a
serious illness due to the three poisons, the illness is very grave, but we
do not know we are ill at all.”
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 59: As Shantideva says, you have been
sick for a long time with the illness of the afflictions such as attachment
-an illness that is long-lasting, intractable, and causes strong suffering.
Therefore, you must recognize this to be your situation. Gamapa (Kamaba)
said that if we were not in fact sick, then meditating on our sick
condition would be misguided. However, stricken with the virulent and
chronic disease of the three mental poisons [attachment, hostility, and
ignorance], we are extremely sick, but we are completely unaware that we
are ill.]
The first idea that we need to cultivate when we listen to the teaching is
to think of ourselves as a sick person. Here Lama Tsongkhapa says very
clearly that we have been stricken with:
      - illness for a very long time.
      - illness that is very difficult to cure and
      - illness that bring about great suffering.
The illness that Lama Tsongkhapa is talking about here is the three mental
poisons: attachment, anger, bewilderment (ignorance).
We have this illness since time without beginning; since beginningless
rebirth. It has always been there and no matter what we do to it, it is
still there. It brings about all the undesirable experiences in this life
and it will also bring about all the undesirable experiences in the future
lives. It becomes very important for us to recognize that we ourselves
individually are in such situation.
2B3A-3A2B Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the Dharma
as a doctor
Second: If we are stricken with a serious illness like for example a wind
or gall disease, we look for a specialist in medicine and meeting one we
are extremely happy, listen to what he says, treat him with respect and
acknowledge him. In the same way one looks for a spiritual guide teaching
the Dharma and, having found one, accomplishes what he says, taking it not
as a burden but as an ornament, acting with respect and reverence towards
him.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 59: 2. Think of the instructor as a
doctor. For example, when you are stricken by a severe illness such as a
wind or bile disorder, you seek a skilled doctor Upon consulting your
doctor you are greatly delighted and listen to whatever your doctor says,
revering him or her respectfully. Likewise, seek in this way a teacher who
imparts the teachings. Once you have found your teacher, venerate your
teacher with respect and do what he or she says. While doing this consider
it a privilege, not a burden. ]
This is what we have to think from our side.


2B3A-3A2C Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as medicine
Third: Just as a patient greatly appreciates the medicine put together by
the doctor, one regards the instructions and teachings given by someone
expounding the Dharma as the most important thing, making an effort to hold
them in respect and not wasting them through forgetfulness and the like.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 59: 3.Think of the instructor's
explications as medicine: Just as a sick person has a high regard for the
medicine prescribed by a doctor, so too, you should view the instructions
and explications that the instructor gives as very important, taking great
pains to hold them in high esteem, and not squandering them by lapses such
as forgetting them.]

Summary of today teaching:
As said here that we should listen to the teachings:
- through abandoning the three faults of a vessel. What are the three
faults of the vessel?
- cultivating the six ideas. These six ideas are the favorable conditions
to help us. What are the six ideas?
The Buddha says the three phrases: "Listen well, thoroughly, and hold it in
mind!" which are the antidotes for the three faults. What are the
antidotes?
You should think about this yourself. If you listen to the teaching with
these ideas which I have mentioned so far, does it benefit you or not?
The teaching says that whenever you are listening to the dharma, you have
to listen to the teachings through abandoning the three faults and
cultivating the six ideas. You have to try it out for yourself and see
whether it make any different to your mind. Once you see the difference by
yourself through the experience, you will come to the understanding that
they are true. Then you will be able to appreciate Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lamrim
teaching. It is no big deal or of no real benefits whatsoever for being
able to list out the three faults and the six ideas. The benefits come by
trying them out and putting them into the practice.
When you are listening the teaching, you cultivates the idea of abandoning
the three faults. Then you see whether it make any different to your mind.
Once it does make a difference to your mind, you will be able to see how
true it is based on your own experience. In order for that experience to
happen, you must try it. If you leave it as something to be counted, then
you will not able to taste the benefits.  The teachings are saying that
whenever you listen to the dharma teachings –all dharma teachings- this is
the kind of attitude that you need to cultivates and the kind of faults
that you need to abandon. So you have to verify for yourself.
Student 2: On page 13, what does it means by “Bodhisattva levels” and the
three mental poisons?
Geshela: The “a Bodhisattva level” here is a treatise composed by Arya
Asanga and it talks about the practice of the various stages of the
bodhisattva path.
The three mental poisons are: attachment, anger, bewilderment (ignorance).



























