Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/lesson 15.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:29.987392
================================================================================


All sentient beings including all of us do possess the Buddha lineage/
Buddha nature/ Buddha potential in our mental continuum. This Buddha
lineage basically refers to the potential to become a Buddha; the seed to
achieve enlightenment. In order for a sprout to arise, first there must be
a seed. All of us do possess that seed in our mind to achieve full
enlightenment. This potential has always been there in our mind since time
without beginning. However, just having that potential alone doesn’t mean
that we will automatically achieve enlightenment. Although the potential is
there, we need to increase the potential. How do we do it? As I have
explained in the earlier class, we need to put in the different conditions.
We need to accumulate the collection of merits and wisdom. We need to
purify our mind of all obscurations. In particular, we need to engage in
the three-fold activities of hearing, reflection and meditation on the
teachings. Just as you want the sprout to arise, many conditions such as
water, fertilizer and so forth must first come together for that seed to
transform into the sprout.  Just having the seed alone doesn’t mean that
you will get the sprout. Likewise, in order for this Buddha potential in
our mind to be fully ripened, we need to develop the potential. In order to
develop the potential, all the different conditions must come together. We
need to bring all the different factors to activate the potential and to
strengthen/ increase it in order to allow the potential to manifest and to
arise. Just to give an illustration, the cause of the butter is milk. You
can get butter out of milk; but if you just leave the pot of milk sitting
there without doing anything to it, although it has the potential to become
butter, by itself it will not become butter unless you churn the milk.  It
is the same for achieving enlightenment. Likewise, just having the Buddha
nature -the potential to achieve enlightenment- alone is not sufficient. We
need to work on it so that the potential is activated and ripens.
Khen Rinpoche: I guess most of you or perhaps all of you may not have seen
how butter is produced. Have you seen? When I was young, around eight or
nine years old, one of my relatives was a nomad. They lived in a jungle and
have many yaks. One day I went there with my grandmother. We walked there
from my house. They get the milk from the yaks twice a day i.e. in the
morning and evening. Every morning after they got the milk (from the yaks)
they let the yaks go into the jungle. At night time, when the yaks come
back, they get the milk again.  As there are about hundred yaks, they
collected plenty of milk. They will boil the milk and then pour the milk in
a wooden churn after it has cooled down. They will plunge a wooden paddle
repeatedly into the tall wooden churn which has the height up to the chest.
They have to do this for one to two hours. After a while, small pieces of
butter will be produced. That is the only one time I saw how they make
butter. As my home had only few yaks, we did not make any butter.
We have looked at the first of the seven branches of worship; which is the
branch of prostration. As I have mentioned in the previous session, even
with regards to making prostration, if you have studied and learned what is
involved in making prostration, with that knowledge it makes a difference
to your mind when you actually make a prostration. That is my experience as
well. Learning and studying makes a difference to our motivation and our
interest.
During the course of my study in the monastery, we have to memorize
whatever we have studied. At the time of memorizing, we will just recite in
order to refresh the memory but we do not know the meaning (of what we are
reciting). But then I always have the interests to find out exactly what I
am reciting. Whenever you learn something new, it makes a difference if you
learn the meaning of the words; even just for one or two sentences.  It
makes you want to find out more. In that sense, that helps me to have the
strong aspiration and interest to find out more. If you have already
memorized the text beforehand and at the same time you have some
understanding, then whatever recitation you are going to engage in, you
will know what you are reciting and you will able to reflect and meditate
on it at the same time. When you see the point, it further strengthens your
interest to want to find out more and to learn more. We have so many things
to recite –such as prayers and so forth. The whole point of engaging in
these recitations is that these words serve as the reminder for us to think
about certain subjects or certain topics. The purpose of reciting the
different prayers is to remind us the meaning of the dharma, what we need
to reflect and what we need to practice. We need to engage in the
recitations because this is the condition for us to think about
particularly the meaning of the words. But in order to understand the
meaning of the words, the only way is to find out through studying or
learning. Therefore, we definitely have to study and to learn.
This is a very important point which I always bring it up in class. It is
very important to study. You yourself have to understand the message. You
have to see it for yourself why it is so important to study. You have to
check whether studying does help you and your practice or not. After you
have done some learning, does it make any different to your practice? Does
it make any different to your ability to reflect when you recite the
prayers. Are you able to reflect better on the meanings? This is something
that you have to see it for yourself because once you have seen it for
yourself and realize how helpful it is to you, your faith and interest will
increase.
This is something which I always bring it up. So please continue to study
hard. Please remember the point of why you have to do it and then generate
the determination to continue your study. If all of us were to do this,
then I guess we do accomplish the main purpose of having this building. The
whole point of having a center is to have education i.e. to help people to
learn and then practice. Then it also fulfills the purpose of me being here
as my main purpose of being here is to impart teachings. As you know, His
Holiness the Dalai Lama always emphasizes on the need to study. He always
says we must study. Lama Zopa Rinpoche has been saying the same thing as
well. So if we do continue our education and do our study, we are basically
fulfilling their deepest wishes.  One of their deepest wishes for having
center is to have education so people can really learn and then practice.
This is what really makes our gurus happy. When we say what pleases the
gurus -what pleases His Holiness and what pleases Rinpoche- is fulfilling
their deepest aspiration. If they are pleased, definitely they have longer
life. Pleasing the gurus in the form of learning and practice the dharma is
definitely the condition for them to live long. Of all the different kinds
of pujas and prayers that you make for your gurus, there is no better pujas
then to do what is pleasing the guru. Please keep this in mind and continue
to pay attention to your learning.

Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B [Respectful pleasing offerings]
  1 Surpassable offerings
  2 Unsurpassable offerings
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-1  Surpassable offerings
Surpassable offerings [are set out in] the two stanzas “the best
flowers...” The best flowers are marvellous specimens of divine and human
flowers. Garlands are many different kinds of flowers mixed and strung
together. Both together [refer to] all actual and imaginary flowers.
“Cymbals” are the sounds of traditional instruments and the like. “Scented
unguent” is a mixture of fragrant perfumes. “Sublime parasols” are the
finest of parasols. “Butter lamps” are fragrant, radiant lights from things
like incense or butter as well as radiant jewel lights. “Incense” refers to
combinations of fragrant substances and to a single one. “Sublime garments”
are the finest of clothes. A “supreme scent” is water and the like pervaded
by a scent that fills the billion world-systems with fragrance. The
“vessels of powder” are packaged powders of fragrant incense suitable for
scattering and burning or the coloured sand powder
of a mandala in multiple layers wide and high like Mount Meru.
“Arrangement”, joined at the end to all the above, [means] a lot, decorated
and variegated.
With respect to the second branch of worship –offerings- there are both
surpassable offerings and unsurpassable offerings.  The surpassable
offerings is expressed by the two verses in the King of Prayers:
I offer to the conquerors
Exquisite flowers, the best garlands,
Musical instruments, ointments, excellent umbrellas,
Superior lamps, and choice incenses.
I make offerings to the conquerors
With the best garments, superior perfumes,
Fragrant powders piled as high as Mount Meru—
All in the most excellent arrangements.
The different offerings that are mentioned in these two verses such as
flowers, incense and so forth are those offerings made by worldly persons.
These are surpassable offerings.
With regards to whom we make all these offerings, they are the Buddhas and
bodhisattvas. We should think that we are making offerings to the
numberless Buddhas and bodhisattvas who are equal to all the atoms in the
world.
With regards to the offering substances, even if you are offering just one
flower, you should visualize mentally that you are offering numberless
flowers and each of these numberless Buddhas and bodhisattvas receives
numberless flowers that you have emanated. For the flowers, there are
flowers in this human world and there are also flowers in the god realms.
There are flowers of different colors, different shapes and different
smells. So bringing all these different varieties of flowers to your mind,
you emanate numberless of them and then you offer.
Here it says; ‘all in the most excellent arrangements’ –when you offer the
flowers, visualize that you offer all these flowers of different colors,
shapes and smells from the human realm and god realm that are  arranged in
the form the seats, in the form of the celestial mansions and so forth.
When we make offerings, we should remember that we are making offerings to
numberless objects of refuge. With regards to the offering substances, for
example a flower, we should emanate numberless of flowers of different
colors, shapes, sizes, smells and so forth and we then should make these
offerings with virtuous motivation as I have explained in earlier lessons.
We should do it with faith in the objects of refuge; the faith that arises
from seeing the qualities of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. If we are able
to do such practice with these different visualizations and attitudes, even
though we are physically offering just one flower, we can accumulate very
powerful merits.
You have to see the reason why we have to do these visualizations.  The
point is that even though we physically offer just one flower, if we can
think in these different ways that I have just mentioned and because of the
wider mental perspective, we will accumulate more merits. The amount of
merits we accumulate commensurate with the objects of refuge such as the
Buddhas, bodhisattvas and the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha that we bring to
our mind. If you think that you are making offering to the numberless
objects of refuge then your merits that you accumulate will commensurate
with that numberless.
[Alternative translation LRCM V1 page 96: "Exquisite flowers" are
wonderful, loose flowers such as those of the human and divine regions.
"Garlands" are various flowers that are alternately strung together. Both
of these terms include all types of real and imagined flowers. "Musical
instruments" are stringed, wind, and percussion instruments. "Ointments"
are ointments of fragrant incense for the body. "Excellent umbrellas" are
the best umbrellas. "Lamps" includes luminous precious jewels as well as
fragrant and luminous lamps such as butter lamps. "Burning incenses" are
single-fragrance and mixed-fragrance incenses. "The best garments" are the
best of every kind of apparel. "Superior perfumes" is said to be scented
water given in offering bowls; it includes such water as that which is
infused with a smell that spreads its odor into a universe of three billion
world systems. "Fragrant powders" are equal in height and width to Mount
Meru. They are also either alternating rows of colored sand for drawing a
mandala or fragrant incense powders suitable to be scattered or burned
which have already been wrapped into parcels. "Arrangements" refers to all
the above; they should be predominantly good, ornamental, and varied.]

2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-2 [Unsurpassable offerings]
  A The actual [offerings]
Unsurpassable offerings [are set out in] the single stanza “whatever
offering ...” - the surpassable ones are offerings of worldly beings,
therefore this here is [about] everything good that is emanated by powerful
beings such as bodhisattvas.
The next verse in the King of Prayers describes the unsurpassable offerings
I imagine all unsurpassable and vast offerings
For all the conquerors.
With the strength of my faith in auspicious deeds
I bow down and make offerings to all the conquerors.
The unsurpassable offerings are completely good things created by those
with power such as bodhisattvas e.g. bodhisattva Samantabhadra.  Wish
fulfilling jewels, wish granting tree and great treasure vase are
unsurpassable offerings created through the power of the bodhisattvas.
Generating bodhichitta -altruistic intention to achieve enlightenment for
the benefits of sentient beings is an unsurpassable offering.
Generating great compassion in your mind is also an unsurpassable offering.
Upholding the dharma:  I have talked about the meaning of upholding the
dharma in the earlier class. When we talk about the dharma, there are two:
scriptural teaching and realizational teaching. Upholding these two
teachings become an unsurpassable offering.
Transforming our root of virtues into the aspect of offering substances and
then offer it, that is also considered as unsurpassable offering.

B The motivation for prostrations and offerings
The last two lines are to be joined to all the previous [sets of] two in
order to complete them. They indicate the motivation of prostrations and
offerings as well as the object.
With the strength of my faith in auspicious deeds
I bow down and make offerings to all the conquerors.
The last two lines of the verse show the motivation that we need. So
motivation becomes very important. Whenever we make prostrations and
offerings, we should do it with the very strong faith in the objects of
refuge; the faith arises from seeing their qualities. We also should make
prostration and offerings with the strong intention to achieve their states
i.e. to become them.

2B4A-2A1A-5B1C [Confession of negative actions]]
Confession of negative actions [is set out in] the one stanza “desire ...”
In dependence on the cause, the three poisons, and by means of the three
bases, the body etc., their nature is that I have done them (that is, that
I have actually created them), that I have made others create them, and
that I rejoiced in those created by others, all of which are generally
subsumed under “whatever I have done”. If through recollecting their
faults, you regret those done previously and sincerely confess them with a
mind of restraining from them in the future, the increase of deeds done
earlier and the continuity of future occurrences will be severed.
The next verse in the King of Prayers describes the third branch of worship
- confession of the negativities.
Whatever negativities I have done
With body, speech, or mind
Under the influence of attachment, hostility, or ignorance
I confess each and every one of them.
The negativities that we have accumulated were primarily motivated by
afflictions such as the three mental poisons -ignorance, anger and
attachment- and we accumulate these negativities through our three doors:
body, speech and mind.
We accumulate negativities when we cause/ ask someone to engage in the
negative action. It is no difference from committing those negativities by
ourselves.
When we rejoice in others engaging in negativities, this act of rejoicing
is also said to be negative.
In order to engage in confession, we have to see the faults of the
negativities. We ourselves will have to experience the result of whatever
negativities that we have accumulated. Even one negative action will
manifest in the form of different results and we ourselves will have to
experience those results. The details of these results will come later in
the section of karma.
The point is that by understanding the disadvantages of the negativities,
we need to develop regret for the negativities that we have already
accumulated in the past. By reflecting on the faults and the damage that is
done to us by the negativities that we have already accumulated, then we
will be able to develop sincere regret. If we do sincerely feel regret
about it then automatically we will refrain from engaging in those
negativities again. Therefore generating regret becomes very important.
In order to be able to develop sincere regret, it depends on having the
faith of conviction in the cause and effect -karma. This faith of
conviction in karma becomes very important before we can develop this
sincere regret for the negativities that were accumulated in the past; as
in the outline of the Lamrim: the faith of conviction in karma is the root
of all the happiness.
If we have real faith of conviction in karma then we will have sincere
regret. If we have sincere regret then I guess restraining ourselves from
those actions again in future will be almost automatic. When we engage in
confession, we primarily need to have these two attitudes:
      -regret for the negativities accumulated in the past and
      -an attitude of restraint towards future wrong doing
What is the difference does it make if our confession is endowed with these
two attitudes: regret for the negativities accumulated in the past and an
attitude of restraint towards future wrong doing?
If we have regret for our past negativities then the negativities that we
have already accumulated in the past will not increase. When we have the
attitude of restraint towards future wrong doing, we would put a stop to
create new negative action.
In order to completely purify any negative actions and in order to
completely purify all negativities, the practice of confession has to endow
with four opponent powers. These four opponent powers will be covered later
on.
Four opponent powers: The power of the object, the power of regret, the
power of the opponent force and the power of commitment

2B4A-2A1A-5B1D [Rejoicing]
Rejoicing [is set out in] the single stanza “the Jinas of the ten
directions ...”
As you recall the benefits of the five persons’ virtue, you develop joy.
The next verse in the King of Prayers describes the fourth branch of
worship - rejoicing.
I rejoice in all merit, whatever it may be,
Of all the conquerors of the ten directions, conqueror's children,
Pratyekabuddhas, those with more to learn,
Those with no more to learn, and all ordinary beings.
Rejoicing here means to rejoice in the merits/ virtues of the five types of
persons. Who are the five?
Five types of person are:
   1. The conquerors of the ten directions -the Buddha
   2. The conqueror’s children - the bodhisattvas
   3. Pratyekabuddhas – solitary realizers
   4. Those with no more to learn – the hearers
   5. Ordinary beings
In order for us to be able to really feel happy and rejoice in the Buddhas’
merits and qualities, we first must understand/ realize what qualities they
do possess. Similarly in order to be able to really be able to feel happy
and rejoice in the bodhisattvas’ merits, we need a complete understanding
of the bodhisattvas’ path that they travel, the types of practices they do
and the kind of qualities that they gain throughout the whole
path.Similarly, in order to be able to really feel happy and rejoice in the
qualities and in the merits of the solitary realizers and the hearers, we
also need to understand the things that they do while travelling on the
path.
Even just to be able to rejoice, you need to be able to know all their
qualities that come from studies. So from here you can see that you have no
choice but really need to study/ learn. Therefore to be able to do a good
practice of the seven-limb, we first need to study and here we are just
talking about the preliminary as the practice of the seven-limbs is part of
the preparatory practices. If that is the case, it goes without saying that
when we come to the actual body of the practice -sustaining the meditation
of the path- definitely that can only happen with study.
When we rejoice, we feel happy and take delight in virtues. We can either
rejoice in our own virtues or the virtues of others. Rejoicing in our own
virtues increases those virtues which we have already accumulated and it
induces us to engage in more virtues in the future. Therefore with that, we
accumulate a lot of merits.
Why should we rejoice in our own merits? What do we get? Because when we
rejoice in our merits, we feel happy about something positive that we have
done, then it is more likely to cause us to engage it in the future. It is
also said that we accumulate merits/ virtues when we rejoice in the merits
of others. As mentioned in the teachings:
- if we rejoice in the merits of someone lower than us, we accumulate more
merits than that person.
- if we rejoice in the merits of someone who is of the equal in qualities,
we accumulate similar merits.
- if we rejoice in the merits of someone who is higher than us we get
merits commensurate with the level of our mind.
Actually we accumulate the merits easily when we rejoice in the merits of
others. Although that is the case, we usually divide the world into three
groups of people:
   1. Those who are on our side - friends
   2. Those who are not on our side - enemies
   3. Those who are neutral - strangers
When we rejoice in the merits of others, it becomes an easy way to
accumulate merits. But sometimes when we see the people whom we don’t like
engage in virtues, instead of rejoicing in their virtuous action, we feel
jealous and get upset. We may even develop the negative sense of
competition of wanting to compete with that person. This happens in the
absence of rejoicing. But if you are able to rejoice in the virtuous action
of that person, all the negative thoughts are stopped. Do you see the
point? You see the reason why we need to engage in rejoicing.
Naturally, it is difficult for us to feel happy when we see the people whom
we don’t like is experiencing good things or is doing virtues. We find it
is difficult to rejoice on that. In fact, it is the most difficult.
Rejoicing in the merits of others is relatively easier but to rejoice and
really feel happy about the good things that the people whom we don’t like
are doing is really difficult. Nevertheless, this is something which we
have to train ourselves. Why should we train? We have to see the point. If
we don’t rejoice, it means the absence of rejoice. We get upset, we feel
jealous and we have the negative sense of competition.  At the end, who
suffer?  We are the one. We feel unhappy inside, our mind are disturbed,
there is no peace, therefore we are the one who suffer the loss; not anyone
else. By seeing the point, we will purposely engage in this practice. Yes,
this is difficult.  Although it is difficult but by seeing the reason, we,
as much as possible, just have to try.

2B4A-2A1A-5B1E [Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned]
Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned [is set out in] the single
stanza “in the ten directions ...” You exhort those who have awoken to
complete buddhahood in fields of the ten directions, are detached and have
found unobstructed exalted knowledge, to teach the Dharma, emanating the
same number of bodies for a long time.
The next verse in the King of Prayers expresses the fifth branch of worship-
 imploring the merit field to turn the wheel of the teaching.
I implore all the protectors,
Lights of the world in the ten directions
Who have reached buddhahood, which is without attachment,
To turn the peerless wheel of the teaching
Here, we implore the Buddhas of all directions to turn the wheel of the
teaching/ dharma. There is a historical precedent for this. After the
Buddha had achieved enlightenment, he showed the aspect of the deed of not
teaching immediately. Then the worldly god, Brahma, offered a thousand-
spoked golden dharma wheel and implored the Buddha to teach. After that
request, the Buddha then turned the first wheel of dharma by teaching the
Four Noble Truths. Likewise, we can visualize ourselves as Brahma, not just
one but countless replicas of ourselves, each holding a thousand-spoked
golden dharma wheel implore the Buddha to turn the wheel of dharma.
You make the request with this visualization and then think that the Buddha
accepts your request. By doing this practice, we create the cause to be
fortunate enough to be able to hear and practice the teachings of the
Buddha from life to life. Doing this practice make a difference. From life
to life, wherever we are born in the three realms, we will be born in the
situation whereby we will hear the teachings of the Buddha.

2B4A-2A1A-5B1F [Supplication]
Supplication [is set out in] the single stanza “Showing the passage into
nirvana ...” You supplicate those who show how to pass beyond sorrow in
fields of the ten directions to stay, not passing into nirvana for as many
eons as there are particles of dust in the universe in order to bring about
the benefit and happiness of migrating beings.
The next verse in the King of Prayers expresses the sixth branch of worship-
 supplication
I supplicate with palms joined in prayer
Those wishing to demonstrate their final nirvana—
Please stay for eons equal in number to the particles of the universe
In order to bring happiness and benefit to all beings.
The longer the Buddha abides in the world, the more benefits the sentient
beings will be able to receive from their presence. Therefore, we
supplicate sincerely from our heart that the Buddha will remain for
numberless eons, for as long as hundred eons. We should do these practices
regularly. What do you get if we do this branch of supplicating the Buddhas
do not pass into nirvana? If we do this constantly, we will receive the
benefits of having our life obstacles being pacified and to be able to live
a life without sickness. If we sincerely supplicate the Buddhas do not pass
into nirvana then our supplication becomes a condition for them to remain
in the world. The longer they remain the more benefits the sentient beings
will be able to receive. Then ours supplication becomes a contribution to
the welfare and happiness of the sentient beings.

2B4A-2A1A-5B1G [Dedication]
The limb of dedication [is set out in] the single stanza “Prostrations and
...” All the roots of virtue represented by the previous six limbs are made
common [property] of all sentient beings and never come to an end since
they have been dedicated with strong determination to perfect
enlightenment.
The next verse in the King of Prayers expresses the seventh limb -
dedication
Whatever merit I have accumulated, however slight,
From obeisance, offering, confession,
Rejoicing, imploring, and supplication—
I dedicate it all to enlightenment.
How should we dedicate the merits that we have accumulated from paying
homage, making offerings, confession, rejoicing, imploring and
supplication? We should dedicate it as the cause for ourselves and for all
sentient beings to achieve full complete enlightenment.  By making this
kind of dedication, it brings about the fulfillment of all wishes. Why?
Because, here you are dedicating all the merits that you have gathered as
the cause for you and all sentient beings to achieve enlightenment. So, if
you really think about it, this dedication does cover everything i.e. every
single dedication is contained within this dedication.

2B4A-2A1A-5B2 The need to take the meaning of the words to heart
If you thus develop an understanding of the meaning of those words and
gently do as was taught without allowing your mind to wander, you will hold
immeasurable heaps of merit.
If you develop an understanding of the meaning of the words of the seven-
limb prayer, if you remember the meaning of this prayer and put it into
practice , then when we recite this prayer and put it into practice without
a wandering mind, we will be able to accumulate immeasurable amount of
merits.

2B4A-2A1A-5C Categorization of the individual [elements]
Accordingly the five limbs prostrating, offering, requesting, supplicating
and rejoicing constitute the collection of accumulations. Confessing
purifies obscurations, one aspect of rejoicing, the cultivation of joy at
one’s own virtue, multiplies the virtue. By means of dedicating the virtues
of collecting, purifying and multiplying, however small, are multiplied
manifold, and what would come to an end after producing a temporary effect
is made inexhaustible. In brief, there are the three:
1) accumulation, (2) purification, as well as (3)  multiplication and
   making inexhaustible.
You accumulate the collections of merit and sublime wisdom - the favorable
conditions -through performing the five branches of obeisance, offering,
rejoicing, imploring, and supplication.
With these five branches you accumulate wisdom and merits. What does
confession do?
Through confession you clear away the obscurations, which are the
unfavorable conditions. Cultivating delight in the virtue that you have
done -which is part of rejoicing- will also increase your virtue. You may
have few virtues as a result of accumulation, purification, and increase,
but you will expand them enormously through dedication. Although virtuous
effects may arise temporarily and then dissipate, through dedication they
will never dissipate. To summarize, the seven branches of worship are
included in the following three: accumulation, purification, and bringing
about an expansion and a lack of dissipation.
Whenever we engage in virtue, we should dedicate those merits/ virtue
accumulated. Through dedication, it ensures your virtue would not go to
waste and the dedication makes the virtue inexhaustible. If we really
dedicate our merits sincerely from our heart towards enlightenment, it will
make these differences.
Question from Khen Rinpoche: There are these two lines in Golden Light
Sutra: the Buddhas never ever pass away into parinirvana and the teachings
never ever decline. Any comments? The Buddhas don’t pass away? The teaching
is never declined?
Student 1: My interpretation is that there is always a Buddha’s form that
never passes away and the dharma never decline because the realized dharma
which is in Buddha’s mind is always there. I mean the dharma in this world
may decline but there is realized dharma in Buddha’s mind never decline.
Khen Rinpoche: Very good.
Student 2: (summarized by Ven Gyurme) Do we also ask the bodhisattvas not
to pass away into nirvana? Why are we requesting them not to pass into
nirvana if we don’t see them in the first place?
Khen Rinpoche: It does not mean that you can’t ask someone to live long if
you don’t see them. You can ask someone who live in America to live long
although you don’t see them. You can actually make the request. It is okay
to request the bodhisattvas to not pass away because they are here to
benefit sentient beings. As I have mentioned before that even if the person
is an ordinary being and whose existent is beneficial for others, it is
okay to request the person to live for a long time. It is not a problem. We
should ask them. Because the longer they remain in the world, the more
benefits they can bring to the world. So there is no problem to request
them to live for a long time.
You should read the text. Especially for the new students, if you have any
doubt, you should bring it out in class. The more questions, the better
they are. The next section of the text will deal with the topic on
meditation.

“The benefits of the seven limb prayer” extract from “Path to Enlightenment
in Tibetan Buddhism “by Geshe Acharya Thubten Loden
The seven limb practice benefits both oneself and others. Its purpose is to
purify karma and to accumulate merit. Each of the seven limbs serves as an
opponent to a particular delusion:
Prostration is an opponent to all negativity, especially pride. Generally a
proud, arrogant person will feel most uncomfortable bowing down to another
while doing prostrations.
Offering is the opponent to miserliness. By practising offering you
condition your mind with generosity.
Confession is the opponent of all delusions. Through the four opponent
powers you will purify any negative karma.
Rejoicing is the particular opponent of jealousy. Jealousy is a negative
attitude to the qualities, knowledge or happiness of others. It leaves you
unhappy, whereas rejoicing gives a feeling of happiness because your
jealousy and dissatisfaction decrease.
Requesting to receive teachings is the opponent of abandoning the Dharma.
You create negative karma by criticizing other doctrines, while holding
your own to be superior.
Beseeching the Buddhas to remain is the opponent of disrespect for kind and
holy beings such as gurus, Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, Foe Destroyers, parents
and so on.
Dedicating the merit of virtuous actions opposes anger and purifies
negative karma created through anger.
Each of the seven limbs acts to purify negative karma, to accumulate merit
or to increase the accumulations.
Prostration, offering, rejoicing in others' virtue, requesting and
entreating accumulate merit.
Confession purifies negative karma.
Rejoicing in one's own merit and dedication cause all virtues to increase.
Each branch of the seven limbs is a cause for a specific result:
Prostration creates the cause to receive the Buddha's crown protrusion and
other major marks and minor signs showing the perfect qualities of a
Buddha.
Offering is the cause of wealth in this and future lives. It opposes
miserliness, the cause of poverty. With the wealth resulting from
practising charity you are able to support many, so they can continue with
their practice of Dharma.
Confession is the cause of receiving the four bodies of a Buddha because it
removes the two obstructions to enlightenment: the obstructions to
liberation (greed, ignorance, hatred and so on), and the obstructions to
omniscience (the subtle habit of delusion and so on).
Rejoicing is the cause of a beautiful or handsome body and the special
attractiveness of a Buddha's body.
Requesting teachings is the cause of the Buddha's holy speech.
Beseeching the Buddhas to remain is the cause of a long life.
Dedication is the cause of all knowledge and qualities of a Buddha.
.








