Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Reference Material/MLR_RootText_LTK_translPhQuarcoo_PENULTIMATE_May08.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:51.531488
================================================================================

 
  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
 
(Lam rim ‘bring ba) 
  
by 
 
Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
with additional outlines by Trijang Rinpoche 
 
 
 
     
Translated from the Tibetan 
by 
Philip Quarcoo 
 
  
PENULTIMATE EDITION 
May 2008 
 
  
 
 
 
  
© FPMT, Inc. 
May 2008 
 
All rights reserved 
 
No part of this work may be reproduc ed in any form or by any means,  
electronic or mechanical, including photoc opying, recording, or by any information 
storage and retrieval system or technolo gies now known or later developed,   
without permission in writing from FPMT, Inc. 
 
iii Table of contents 
Note from the ed itor........................................................................................................... .......iv 
 
CHAPTER I:  INTRODUCTION............................................................................................. 1 
Expression of veneration an d the vow of composition............................................................... 1 
General introductory explanation of the instructions be ing taught  here................................... 1 
Showing the greatness of the author in order to make the te achings venerable ........................ 2 
Showing the greatness of the teac hings for the sake of generating respect for the instructions 7 
Explanation of how Dharma possessed of the tw o greatnesses should be listened to and 
explained ...................................................................................................................... ............. 11 
Explanation of the stages by which a student of  the actual instructions should be guided ..... 19 
 
CHAPTER II SM ALL SCOPE................................................................................................. 50 
Explanation of the stages of th e path common to lesser beings............................................... 50 
Explanation of how to be mindful of death -  that one will not stay in this world for long .... 50 
Explanation of what will become of you in fu ture worlds: How to think about the happiness 
and suffering  of the two [t ypes of] migr ating beings................................................................ 58 
Explanation of how to rely on method s for the happiness of future  worlds............................ 64 
 
CHAPTER III INTERM EDIATE SCOPE............................................................................. 104 
Explanation of the stages of the pa th common to  inte rmediate beings ................................ 104 
Explanation of how to develop th e mind striving for libe ration............................................ 104 
Explanation of how the nature of the path leading to liberation   is established.................... 126 
 
CHAPTER IV GREAT SCOPE UP TO CALM  ABIDING ................................................. 132 
How to train the mind on the stag es of the path of great beings ........................................... 132 
Demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway to the 
Mahayana, including an expl anation of it s benefits ............................................................... 133 
The explanation of how to genera te the mind of enlighte nment .......................................... 135 
Explanation of how to train the mind by mean s of the sevenfold instruction on cause and 
effect......................................................................................................................... ............... 136 
Explanation how to train the mind through eq ualizing and exchanging oneself and others 147 
Explanation of how to assume the mind  generation by me ans of a ritual ............................. 152 
Explanation of how to train in the conduct having generated the mind [of enlightenment] 164 
Explanation how to train in the conduct of the jinas’ chil dren in general ............................ 174 
 
CHAPTER FIVE  CALM ABIDING AND SPECIAL INSIGHT.......................................... 204 
Explanation of how to train in the last two perfection s in part icular .................................... 204 
Explanation of how to train in calm ab iding, the entity of concen tration............................. 212 
Explanation of how to train in spec ial insight, the e ssence of wisdom .................................. 249 
Explanation of how calm abidin g and special in sight un ite................................................... 321 
 
CHAPTER SIX   CONCLUSION....................................................................................... ...325 
Explanation of how to train in th e uncommon vehicle,  the Vajrayana ................................. 325 
 
NOTES.......................................................................................................................... .......... 328 
 iv Note from the editor 
 
 The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are in small lettertype, 
to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s ow n outline which is in larger lettertype. Lama 
Tsongkhapa’s outline is extracted from the main text. The division  of the text in chapters is 
added by the editor; the main titles are probab ly added by the editor of the Tibetan text. 
 
The numbers in brackets { } correspond to the Tibetan text of the Middle Lam-Rim published 
by Sera Je Computer Project, Sera Je  Monastic University, Bylakuppe, 1999. 
 
The initial draft translation by Philip Quarcoo wa s used by the Basic Program at Istituto Lama 
Tzong Khapa, and provisional changes were made by  Ven. Joan Nicell as clarification, to add 
missing words, or to make slight corrections based on checking the original Tibetan. In this penultimate edition Philip has incorporated many of Joan’s suggestions, and he carefully 
revisited his earlier work in preparation for pu blication, checking it against the Tibetan and 
re-translating where needed.   
 Olga Planken, editor FPMT Edcuation Department May 2008  
 
 1  Middle length explanation of the st ages of the path to enlightenment 
to be practiced by the three [types of] beings 
with supplementary insertions  and a thematic structure 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
Respectfully I prostrate at the feet of the venerable saints who are full of compassion. 
This here is the middling of three Lamrim texts - a great, a middle length and a small one - which the gentle 
protector, Dharmaraja1 Tsongkhapa composed. It is also widely known as the “small Lamrim”. Its source text 
has three sections: 
1 The introductory elements of the explanations 
2 Composition of the explanations themselves 
3 Their completion 
1 The introductory elements of the explanations 
Expression of veneration and the vow of composition 
1A  Expression of veneration 
Bhagavan2, Lord of this world system of forbearance, 
Jina’s3 regent, Jamgon, Lord of the Dharma, 
Manjughosha, single father of all the sugatas4, 
Nagarjuna and Asanga, foretold by the Jina,  
bowing to you with respect 
1B  Vow of composition 
                                              I shall once more 
give explanations here in a summary fashion 
of the gradual path of the most profound view 
and of vast conduct - making it easy to access. 
General introductory explanation of the instructions being taught here 
1C  Identification of the Dharma to be explained in the context of what the title means 
{2} The Dharma to be explained here consists in how the fortunate are lead to the level of 
buddhahood through the stages of the path to enlightenment. It  summarises all the points of 
the Jina’s excellent speech, [following] the trad ition of the two great trail-blazers Nagarjuna 
and Asanga, constitutes the Dharma system of supreme beings progressing to the state of 
omniscience, and contains all the stages without omission that the three [types of] beings need 
to practice. 
2 Composition of the explanations themselves 
A Correspondence with the manner of explanation proposed by the scholars 
B The actual explanations in accordance with that 
2A  Correspondence with the manner of explanation proposed by the scholars
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 2  The scholars of glorious Vikramashila [monastery ] considered it vital to start off with three 
preliminaries, i.e. the greatness of the author of the teachings, the gr eatness of the teachings 
and the way to explain and listen to them.  
2B  The actual explanations in accordance with that 
1 Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the teachings are venerable 
2 Showing the greatness of the teachings in order to generate respect towards the 
instructions 
3 How the teachings which are great in two ways should be listened to and explained 
4 The stages by which a disciple should be guided through the actual instructions  
In accordance with that, the guide to the stages of the path to enlightenment has four [parts]: 
Showing the greatness of the au thor in order to show that the teachings are venerable, 
showing the greatness of the teachings in order to generate respect towards the instructions, 
how the teachings which are great in two ways sh ould be listened to and explained, and the 
stages by which a disciple should be guided through the actual instructions.  
Showing the greatness of the author in order to make the teachings venerable 
2B1 Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the teachings are venerable 
A The root and actual author 
B His greatness 
2B1A The root and actual author 
First: the author: Generally speaking, the presen t instructions are the ones that the venerable 
protector Maitreya gives in his Ornament of Clear Realization . In particular, they are based on 
Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment , so that its author is also the author of the present text. 
Other than under the name of Great Master Dipa mkara Shri-jñana he is also widely known as 
the glorious Atisha. 
2B1B Atisha’s greatness 
1 How Atisha took birth in an excellent family 
2 How Atisha achieved his good qualities on that basis 3 Having achieved them, how Atisha performed deeds for the sake of the teachings 
His greatness is threefold: How he took birth in  an excellent family, how he achieved his good 
qualities on that basis, and having achieved th em, how he performed deeds for the sake of the 
teachings. 
2B1B-1 How Atisha took birth in an excellent family 
{3} According to the translator’s5 praise: 
 
Due east in the excellent country of Sahor6 
lies a city of great size, 
namely Vikramanipura. 
In its midst: the royal court, 
an extremely spacious palace 
called “the one with golden banners”. Its pleasures, might and wealth resemble those of king Tongkhun of China. King of that land is Kalyanasri  and his queen is called Shriprabha. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 3  The royal couple have three sons: 
Padmagarbha, Candragarbha, and Shrigarbha they are called. 
Again, Prince Padmagarbha has 
five royal consorts and nine sons- the oldest one, named Shriguna, is a Mahapandita 
widely known as Dhanashri. 
His youngest brother, called Shrigarbha, is the Bhikshu Viryacandra. 
The middle one is Candragarbha- 
he is our exalted guru. 
2B1B-2 How Atisha achieved his good qualities on that basis 
A How Atisha attained the positive qualities of comprehensive scriptural knowledge 
B How Atisha attained the realizational qualities of its correct accomplishment 
How he attained his positive qualities has two [parts]: how he attained the positive qualities of 
comprehensive scriptural knowledge and how he attained the realizational qualities of its 
correct accomplishment. 
2B1B-2A How Atisha attained the positive qualities of comprehensive scriptural knowledge 
1 How Atisha learnt the areas of general knowledge 
First: By the age of 21, having studied the fo ur areas of knowledge common to Buddhists and 
non-Buddhist - language, logic, crafts and medici ne - he had become an excellent scholar. In 
particular, the great Drolungpa relates ho w, at the age of 15, having heard the Lines of 
Reasoning7 just once, he debated with a non-Buddhist intellectual renowned for his erudition 
and beat him - which spread his fame far and wide. 
2 How Atisha learnt Mantra 
Then he requested complete empowerment from th e master yogi of the main temple on Black 
Mountain, the glorious Rahulagupta who had received direct visions of Hevajra and a prophecy from Vajradakini, {4} receiving the secr et name Jñana-guhya-vajra. Up to the age of 
29 he studied the Vajrayana under numerous hi ghly realized gurus and thereby became 
knowledgeable in all texts and instructions. When the thought “only I am knowledgeable in 
the secret mantra” occurred to him, dakinis po inted out, in his dream, several volumes of 
mantra he had not seen before. That lowered his pride.  
3 How Atisha was ordained and learnt the collections of inner knowledge 
Both in his dreams and directly the gurus and protectors then made known to him that vast 
benefit would accrue for the teachings and ma ny beings, if he took monastic vows as 
appropriate. Upon their encouragement he had himself ordained. The great upholder of 
monastic discipline, Shilarakshit a, an elder of the Mahasamghi ka tradition who had attained 
the concentration in which you single-pointedly  enter [ultimate] reality on the path of 
preparation, officiated as abbot. Candragarb ha received the name Shri Dipamkara-jñana. 
 Afterwards, up to the age of 31, he studied the lower and upper divisions of inner 
philosophical knowledge, in particular, for 12 years, the Great Detailed Explanation8 under 
Guru Dharmarakshita in Odantapuri. As he was ve ry well versed in the scriptures of the four 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 4  original traditions, he had an in fallible grasp of the tiniest deta ils in modes of behaviour that 
should be cultivated and rejected according to  the various philosophical schools, like [for 
instance the monastic rules concerning] accepting gifts. 
2B1B-2B How Atisha attained the realizational qualities of its correct accomplishment 
1 How all realizational qualities are contained in the three trainings 
[2 How Atisha was accomplished in the three trainings] 
2B1B-2B1 How all realizational qualities are contained in the three trainings 
Second: As, generally speaking, al l the scriptural teachings by the Jina are contained in the 
three precious collections, the realizational teac hings are also contained in the three precious 
trainings. 
2B1B-2B2 How Atisha was accomplished in the three trainings 
A Ethical discipline 
B His training of concentration 
C His training of wisdom 
2B1B-2B2A [Ethical discipline] 
1 Transition to ethical discipline 
2 How Atisha was actually accomplished in ethical discipline 
3 Proper protection [of ethical discipline] 
2B1B-2B2A-1 Transition to ethical discipline 
{5} In this regard the training in ethical discip line is often praised in the [Buddha’s] excellent 
teachings and in the commentaries as the foundation  of all good qualities such as the training 
in concentration and wisdom. Therefore, it is ne cessary, first of all, to have realizational 
qualities in terms of ethical discipline.  
2B1B-2B2A-2 How Atisha was actually accomplished in ethical discipline 
A How Atisha possessed the highest vows of individual liberation 
In this regard there are three [kinds]: How he possessed the first of thos e, the highest vows of 
individual liberation: Having received the bh ikshu vows, he protected them the way a yak 
protects its coat - a yak is  so attached to its coat that it rather risks its life, trying to save a 
strand of tail hair that has got caught on a tree, than to part with it, even if it sees its life is 
being threatened by a hunter. Th at is how Atisha protected every detail of the foundation of 
trainings, not to speak of the major [rules of  the] foundation of trainings which he had 
undertaken, so that he came to be called the elder who is a great upholder of discipline. 
B How Atisha possessed the bodhisattva vows: 
Bodhisattva vows: He practiced numerous instructions for training the mind of 
enlightenment which is rooted in love and compassion. Especially, in attendance upon 
Serlingpa, he trained for long in the highest instructions passed on by the venerable Maitreya 
and Manjugosha through Asanga and Shantideva . Thereby the mind of enlightenment that 
cherishes others more than oneself, arose in his heart. This aspirational mind gave rise to the 
mind of active involvement and due to his exce llent behaviour, i.e. his engagement in the 
trainings following the promise to train in the vast conduct of bodhisattvas, he never 
transgressed the rules of Buddha’s children. 
C How Atisha possessed Vajrayana vows 
Vajrayana vows: Owing to the fact that he had th e meditative stabilisations of the generation 
stage where one’s own body is seen as that of  a deity and of the completion stage of the 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 5  [indestructible] vajra mind, {6} he became chie f among yogis. In particular, he protected his 
tantric commitments properly by not transgressing the prescribed rules. 
2B2B-2B2A-3 Proper protection [of ethical discipline] 
Not only did he courageously undertake the trainings in ethical discipline of the three vows, 
he also upheld them as he had promised. He kept the vows without transgressing the rules 
associated with them, and even if he transgre ssed them ever so slightly, he quickly, very 
quickly purified this by means of a suitable ritual restoring the given vow. 
2B1B-2B2B Atisha’s accomplishments in the training in concentration 
1 Common 
2 Uncommon 
His training of concentration has two [aspects ]: Common concentration: He had achieved the 
serviceability of the mind of calm abiding an d, as regards uncommon concentration, he had 
the extreme stability of the generation stage. Fu rthermore, he completed the three or six years 
of modes of conduct of yogic realization disciplines. 
2B1B-2B2C His training of wisdom 
1 Common 2 Uncommon  
His training of wisdom has two [aspects ]: The common one: He  had attained the 
concentration of special insight which is the union of special insight and calm abiding. 
The uncommon one: he had attained the spec ial concentration of the completion stage. 
2B1B-3 The deeds he did for the sake of the teachings, having attained those positive qualities 
A Deeds in India 
B Deeds in Tibet 
The deeds he did for the sake of the teachings  are of two [types]: his deeds in India and his 
deeds in Tibet. 
2B1B-3A Deeds in India 
First: At the palace of great enlightenment in Bodhgaya he defeated proponents of base, non-
Buddhist doctrines by means of the Dharma three times, thus maintaining the Buddha’s 
teachings. Eliminating the taints  of ignorance, misconception an d doubt also with regard to 
the teachings of his own upper and lower systems,  he spread the teachi ngs, so that he was 
regarded as a crown jewel by [proponents of] all factions beyond partiality.  
2B1B-3B Deeds in Tibet 
1 Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring the tradition 
2 Identifying the three causes of excellence in the composition of commentaries  3 The ability to ascertain the Jina’s int entions due to these three causes {8} 
4 The special qualities of his disciples 
2B1B-3B1 Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring the tradition 
Deeds in Tibet: Lha Lama9 {7} and his nephew sent the tw o great translators Gya-tson-seng 
and Nagtso Tsultrim Gyalwa to India one after the other. As they took great pains again and 
again to invite [Atisha], he came to U pper Ngari during [the reign of] Jangchub O10 and was 
requested to purify the Buddha’s teachings.  Thereupon, he spread the teachings by 
composing the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment , a text bringing together all the points of 
sutra and tantra and condensing them into a pplicable stages, as well as other texts. 
Specifically, he spent three years in Ngari, nine  years in Nyetang and five years elsewhere in 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 6  Central Tibet and Tsang teaching the fortunate all the scriptures and instructions of sutra 
and tantra without exception. Thereby he re stored the tradition of teachings that had 
declined, made those that remained flourish, an d corrected those that had been soiled by the 
errors of misconception, ensu ring that the precious teachings were freed from all flaws.  
2B1B-3B2 Identifying the three causes of excellence in the composition of commentaries 
There are three causes of excellence in the composition of a text clarifying the Muni’s11 
intentions: being learned in the five areas of knowledge, having  received instructions for the 
application of their meaning which transmit the instructions of the perfectly complete 
Buddha in an unbroken line of exalted [masters],  and having received the permission to teach 
through the vision of a protector deity. If a text can be composed with any one of these 
[causes of excellence] - it will turn out all th e more excellent if all three are complete. This 
great master [, Atisha, ] possessed all three. 
2B1B-3B3 The ability to ascertain th e Jina’s intentions due to Atisha possessing these three causes {8} 
A The care of protector deities 
As for the care of protector deities, it says in the Praise : 
 
Of the glorious Hevajra, 
of the Samaya-vyuha-raja, 
of heroic Lokeshvara, noble, reverend Tara and others, you had visions and permissions, 
therefore, dreaming and directly 
you perpetually heard teachings 
both the ones profound and vast. 
B How Atisha’s lineage is uninterrupted 
[Atisha] held numerous lineages of masters such  as the two lineages of the shared vehicle and 
of the great vehicle, with regard to which th ere are the two – perfection and secret mantra 
vehicles. In the perfection vehicle he held th ree lineages: the lineages of the view and of 
conduct, the latter having been passed on from  Maitreya and from Manjugosha. In the secret 
mantra he had received five types of transmission as well as many other lineages such as the lineage of tenets, the lineage of blessings and li neages of various instructions. The Gurus from 
whom he heard [instructions] directly are mentioned in the Praise: 
 
The gurus you always relied on were 
Sintipa, Serlingpa,  Bhadrabodhi, Jñanasri- many with high accomplishments. In particular you held the profound and vast instructions 
that had been transmitted from one to another 
[all the way] from Nagarjuna.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 7  It is well known that he had twelve gurus wh o had attained high accomplishments as well as 
many others. 
C The fact that he was learned in the five areas of knowledge 
The fact that he was learned in the five area s of knowledge has [already] been explained. 
For all these reasons this master was able to  ascertain the Jina’s intentions skilfully. 
2B1B-3B4 The special qualities of his disciples 
A His disciples in India, Ngari and Tibet 
{9} The master who was like this had an incred ible number of disciples in India, Kashmir, 
Oddiyana, Nepal, and Tibet, however, the main ones were four great scholars in India who 
matched the master himself in their knowledg e: Pitopa, Dharma-akaramati, Madhyasinha and 
Ksitigarbha. Some also add Mitraguhya as the fifth. In Ngari it wa s the great translators 
Rinchen Sangpo and Nagtso as well as the orda ined king Jangchup O, in the province of 
Tsang Gargewa and Gokugpa Lhayt say, in Lhodrak Chagpa Trichog and Gewa Kyong, in 
Kham Nayjorwa Chenpo, Gonpawa, Sherab Do rje and Chadar Tonpa and in Central Tibet 
there were the three, Khu, Ngog and Drom.  
B The foremost disciple 
Again, among these it was the great lineag e holder Dromtonpa Gyelwa Chungnay who had 
been prophesied by Tara and further spread the exalted activities of the master.  
This was a summary description of the author’s greatness. You should come to understand it 
more extensively in the great biographic texts.  
Showing the greatness of the teachings 
for the sake of generating respect for the instructions 
2B2 Showing the greatness of the teachings 
A Identifying the teachings 
B Presentation [of this text] as the three: complete, easily applicable and a particularly noble system 
C Indication of the four greatnesses 
2B2A Identifying the teachings 
Second: As for the teachings, the source  text of the present instructions is Lamp on the Path to 
Enlightenment . 
2B2B Presentation [of this text] as the three: comp lete, easily applicable and a particularly noble system 
Although Jowo composed numerous texts, the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment  is their 
perfect completion - like a root. As it indicate s all the points of both sutra and tantra in 
summary fashion, it is complete  in terms of content. As it makes the gradual taming of the 
mind its main topic, it is easy to put into prac tice. As it is ornamented by the instructions of 
the two masters {10} who we re skilled in the systems of the two trail-blazers 12, it is a 
particularly noble system compared to others. 
2B2C Presentation of [this text] as possessing the four greatnesses 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 8  1 The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory 
2 The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings dawning on you as useful instructions 
3 The greatness of allowing you easily to find the meaning intended by the Buddha 
4 The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself 
2B2C-1 The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory 
The greatness of these instructions of this text has four [aspects]. The first of these [is] the 
greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory. 
A Identifying the teachings 
Everything the Jina has said. 
B How all these teachings are recognized as non-contradictory 
They all come to be understood as one person’s  path to Buddhahood. That is to say some are 
primary points of the path - others  are appropriate secondary points. 
C How it is demonstrated through scripture and logic that it would be contradictory not to accept this 
In this regard it is the bodhisattva’s wish to  work for the welfare of the world. For that 
purpose it is also necessary to care for all thr ee types of disciples and therefore train in their 
respective paths. This is beca use it is explained by the vene rable Maitreya that knowing paths 
of the three vehicles constitutes the mean s of realizing the bodhisattvas’ goals. 
D Establishing that the teachings are non-contradictory 
In the Mahayana path there is the common an d the uncommon. The former is that which 
originates from the Hinayana collection of script ures - except for some peculiarities that are 
not common, to do with the th ought of aspiring to individual liberation and the like.  Apart 
from that, it is not that faults are partially ceased and qualities are partially completed in 
perfectly complete buddhahood, but rather all ki nds of faults have been eliminated and all 
types of good qualities are complete. Conseque ntly, as the Mahayana, achieving this, also 
brings about the cessation of all faults and the development of all good qualities, the path of 
the Mahayana comprises all the various aspects of  qualities of abandonment and realization of 
all other vehicles. {11} That is why the sections of the Ma hayana path, which brings about 
Buddhahood, comprise all the Buddha’s teachings, for there is no utterance of the Muni that 
does not cause the cessation of some faults an d the development of some good qualities, and 
because it is not the case that all of th is is not brought about by the Mahayana. 
E Clearing up doubts 
If you think: ‘That may be true for the Paramitayana13, but not for those entering the 
Vajrayana’: Although the way you train in the Paramitayana - in countless clear distinctions 
that clarify giving etc. - is different from mant ra, the behavioural basis - the generation of the 
mind14 - and the coarse form of the path of training in the six perfections, the behaviour, is 
nevertheless the same and therefor e something shared by them. In Vajra peak  it says: 
 
Not even to sustain one’s life, 
the bodhi15 mind should be abandoned 
and: 
The practice of the six perfections, 
must not be abandoned ever. 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 9  This is also taught in numerous other mant ra texts. In many authentic sources for the 
mandala ritual of highest yoga tantra it says that a set of two vows must have been taken: a 
common and an uncommon one and indeed, th e former refers to bodhisattva vows16. The 
precious teacher also said17: “My guru who knew how to a ccommodate all the teachings by 
means of the path [as if in] a square…” These words form the basis of a major investigation. 
2B2C-2 The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings dawning on you as useful instructions 
Second: the greatness of all of the Buddha’s teac hings dawning on you as useful instructions 
A The distinction of pure and impure manners of comprehending 
Anyone construing the great scriptures to be explanatory teachings that do not contain the 
points of practice who thinks that guidance in dicating the meaning of the essential points of 
practice exists separately from them, and holds that even in the holy Dharma the explanatory 
and accomplishing teachings are found in different places {12}, will create an obstacle for the 
origination of deep respect towards the immacula te sutras and tantras as well as the treatises 
clarifying their intent. One should be aware th at the karmic obscuration of abandoning the 
Dharma is accumulated by despising them, saying  that they only outline external knowledge 
without presenting the inner meaning. Hence, for those who want libe ration, the infallible, 
supreme instructions are indeed the great script ures. Nevertheless, it is possible that, due to 
poor intelligence etc., one cannot reach certaint y through relying on these scriptures only as 
supreme instruction. Therefore and one must seek  certainty with respect to them by relying 
on excellent direct instructions, but one should  not think that the great scriptures do not 
contain the heart of the matter because they only  outline external knowledge while the direct 
instructions are supreme because they present the inner meaning. 
B How all the Buddha’s teachings dawn on you as useful instructions  
The great Yogi Jangchub Rinchen said: 
 
Someone who has reached certainty concerning a handy little volume, 
cannot be said to know all the topics of direct instructions, this is said 
about someone who understands all of the Buddha’s teachings as instructions.  
We need the kind of understanding Great Jowo [Atisha]’s disciple Gompa Rinchen Lama expressed saying he had ground his body, speec h and mind to dust in a single meditation 
session on Atisha’s instructions and that th ereby the understanding had now arisen in him 
that all scriptures are instructions.  In the words of the precious [Drom] Tonpa:  
If, after studying the Dharma a lo t, you feel the need to search 
elsewhere for a way of applying the Dharma, you are mistaken.  
Likewise, those who study the Dharma a lot over a long period and, completely ignorant as to 
how to set about it, develop the wish to prac tice Dharma, do not understand and therefore 
err in the manner described abov e. {13} As it says in the Treasury
18: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 10  The Buddha’s teachings have two aspects: 
their nature is scripture and realization.  
In accordance with this dictum, the teaching is  nothing apart from the scriptural teaching and 
the realizational teaching. 
 The scriptural teaching is how the Dharma shou ld be practiced and establishes the manner of 
accomplishment, while the realizational teaching  is what is [thus] established. Since one 
practices in accordance with what is to be es tablished, these two act as cause and effect. To 
give an analogy: when you have a horse ra ce, the horse is first shown the course and 
afterwards, likewise, it runs there. It would be ridiculous to show it a course and then have 
the race elsewhere. When it co mes to attainments, how could it be appropriate to accomplish 
something after having determined something el se through listening and reflecting? That is 
also expressed in the last volume of Stages of  Meditation: “Whatever has been realized by the 
wisdom arising from listening and reflecting is precisely what should be cultivated by means 
of the wisdom arising from meditation. Just li ke a horse runs along the course it has been 
shown.” 
C Indication of analytical meditation as a means of making all teachings appear as instructions 
Thus, through summarising all the topics of paths set out in the excellent teachings and 
commentaries - starting from how to rely on a sp iritual teacher up to calm abiding and special 
insight - they are all condensed into stages of  practical application in terms of performing 
stabilizing meditation where stabilizing meditati on is required and analyzing with the wisdom 
of individual investigation where analytical  meditation is required. Thereby, these 
instructions guide you so that all the excellen t teachings dawn on you as instructions. Then 
the certainty develops that they should be understood as supreme instructions, and the 
misconception that they should be underst ood as mere background [knowledge] for the 
Dharma rather than as actual instru ctions {14} is completely reversed. 
2B2C-3 The greatness of allowing you easily to discover the Jina’s intention 
Third: the greatness of allowing you ea sily to discover the Jina’s intention 
A For beginners the Jina’s intention is not easy to find without a guru’s oral instructions 
Although the great texts, teachings along with their commentaries, form the supreme 
instructions, completely uneducated beginners  cannot find the inte ntion - even though 
delving into it - without relying on excellent dire ct instructions, and even if they find it, they 
spend a lot of time and enormous effort. 
B It is found through a guru’s oral instructions 
If they rely on a guru’s direct instructions  and the like, it becomes easy to understand. 
2B2C-4 The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself 
Fourth: the greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself: 
A Showing that abandoning the Dharma as the biggest misdeed 
As explained in the White Lotus [Sutra]  and the Chapter of the Truthful One , it amounts to 
abandoning the Dharma, if you hold that so me utterances of the Buddha are means of 
attaining Buddhahood while others are obstacle s to Buddhahood, dividing them into good 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 11  and bad, appropriate and inappropriate or Mahayana and Hinayana, and thereupon holding 
that a bodhisattva needs to train in some and not in others because yo u fail to understand 
that all the words of the Buddha directly or in directly teach means of attaining Buddhahood. 
In the Sutra Gathering All the Threads  it says that the karmic ob scuration due to abandoning 
the Dharma is so subtle that it is hard to re cognize. Concerning the grave disadvantages that 
ensue if you abandon the Dharma, it says in the King of Concentration Sutra : 
 
Someone here in Jambudvipa 
tears down all the stupas found, someone abandons a class of sutras the latter’s misdeed is far more grave.  Someone even murders arhats- as many as sand grains in the Ganges  someone abandons a class of sutras {15} the latter’s misdeed is far more grave.  
Although there generally appear to be many w ays in which the Dharma might be abandoned, 
the one described previously seems to be the grea test, which is why we should try hard to give 
it up. 
B When there is a realization along the lines of the first two greatnesses, the misdeed stops by itself 
That is to say since this is reversed simply  by gaining certainty regarding what was shown 
above, the misdeed stops by itself. 
C You should come to realize such certainty from the White Lotus Sutra and other texts 
This certainty should be sought by studying the Chapter of the Truthful One  as well as the [Sutra 
of the] Excellent Dharma’s White Lotus . The other ways of abandoni ng the Dharma should be 
learnt from the Sutra Gathering all the Threads . 
 
Explanation of how Dharma possessed of the two greatnesses should be 
listened to and explained 
2B3 How Dharma possessed of the two greatnesses should be listened to and explained 
A How to listen 
B How to explain 
C Generally, how to proceed at the end 
The third one has three points: how to listen, ho w to explain and generally how to proceed at 
the end. 
2B3A How to listen 
1 Considering the advantages of listening to the Dharma 
2 Developing respect towards the Dharma and those who teach it 
3 The actual way to listen 
The first one has three points: consid ering the advantages of listening19, developing respect 
towards the Dharma and who teaches it and the actual way to listen. 
2B3A-1 Considering the advantages of listening 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 12  First: from the Verses on Listening20:  
 
Through listening you come  to know the dharmas, 
through listening misdeeds are turned away, 
through listening all trivia are abandoned, through listening nirvana is achieved  
These four [lines] say that in dependence on listening an understanding of the points that 
should be adopted and abandoned gradually develops. From this knowledge - ethical 
discipline that counteracts wrongdoing. Then, once you have turned away from meaningless 
pursuits, concentration where the mind can stay on a wholesome object as long as you wish 
arises. Then, through training in wisdom realizin g the suchness that is selflessness, the root of 
samsara’s fetters is cut and you attain liberation.  
 In the Jataka stories , too, it says: 
 
He who through listening fills his mind with faith, 
{16} grows firm rejoicing in  that which is excellent.  
Wisdom is born and bewilderment vanishes- this is well worth paying for with one’s own flesh. 
 
Listening is the lamp against mental darkness, the greatest wealth no robber can carry away, the weapon destroying the enemy - ignorance  best of friends giving guidance in skilful means; near and dear, if you are poor or not; inoffensive cure against ills of sorrow, 
the foremost army destroying an army of faults, 
it is the best fame, and treasure and splendour as well. If you meet noble beings  - the best of gifts, 
and in assemblies it is the delight of the wise.  
as well as:  
Having listened make the attainment the essence of practice, and you will be released from the stronghold of births with ease.  
Keep thinking again and again about these and other advantages of listening and generate 
resolute faith from the bottom of your heart. 
2B3A-2 Developing respect towards the Dharma and those who teach it 
Second: from the Ksitigarbha Sutra: 
 
Listen filled with one-sided faith and respect, 
without any mockery nor disrespect towards them, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 13  worship the exponents of the Dharma, 
producing the notion of them as resembling Buddhas.  
In accordance with this quotation you should view them as resembling a Buddha, offer them 
service with things like lion thrones, worship them with gifts and give up disrespect. In the 
Bodhisattva Levels  it says that you should be free from  arrogance and, towards the teachings 
and those who expound them, from disregard an d you should respect those two. And in the 
Jataka stories  it says: 
 
Sit on a seat that is very low, 
develop the glory of discipline, see with eyes imbued with joy, while drinking the nectar of the words.  Bow down in respect and concentration, with mind that is pure and free of stains like one who is ill {17} heeds the doctor’s words, respectfully listen to the Dharma.  
2B3A-3 The actual way to listen 
A Indication of how to listen in general 
B The need to listen, having related this to one’s mind C How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments 
2B3A-3A  Indication of how to listen in general 
1 Giving up the three faults of a vessel 
2 Relying on the discriminations 
The third one has three [points]: Giving up the three faults of a vessel and relying on the six 
discriminations. 
2B3A-3A1 Giving up the three faults of a vessel 
First: If a vessel is turned upside down or he ld the right way round but unclean or clean but 
with the bottom leaking, then even if rain is made to fall on it by the gods, it cannot go in, or 
even if it goes in, it will be polluted by the dirt and therefore will not fulfil the purpose of 
being drunk and the like or even if it is not spoi led by dirt, it will not stay but leak out. In the 
same way it is to no great purpose to hear the Dharma, if you sit in a place where it is being 
explained, but do not listen well, or listen, but take it wrong - with a faulty motivation and the 
like - or if, even in case these faults are not present, the words and the meaning you grasped at 
the time of hearing are not consolidated and get lost through forgetfulne ss etc. Therefore, one 
should be free from these [faults]. The antidote s to these three are set forth in three phrases21 
in the sutras: “Listen well - intensely - and keep in mind!” And in the Bodhisattva Levels  we are 
told to listen with the desire to know everything, single-pointedness, attention, a humble mind, and the thought of all sentient beings.  
2B3A-3A2 Relying on the six discriminations 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 14  A Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient 
B Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the Dharma as a doctor 
C Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as medicine 
D Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure  
E Contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagata as an exalted being 
F Generating the wish for the Dharma tradition to last long 
The second one has six points: contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient, of 
the one expounding the Dharma as a doctor, su bsequently generating the discrimination of 
what has been taught as medicine, the discrimi nation of persistent practice as the cure, 
contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagatas as exalted beings and generating the wish 
for the Dharma tradition to last long. 
2B3A-3A2A Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient 
First: In Engaging22 it says: 
 
Even when stricken with ordinary illness 
{18} one has to follow the words of the doctor how much more so, if a hundred ills like lust strike you down all the time!  
As is mentioned here, owing to mental affliction s like attachment etc. we always suffer from 
diseases causing long-lasting and severe suffering that is difficult to cure. Therefore we first need to diagnose them as such. Kamawa said: “If it is not in accord with  the actual situation, 
our meditation goes off in the wrong direction. We have been stricken with a serious illness 
due to the three poisons, the illness is very gr ave, but we do not know we are ill at all.” 
2B3A-3A2B Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the Dharma as a doctor 
Second: If we are stricken with a serious illness like for example a wind or gall disease, we 
look for a specialist in medicine and meeting one we are extremely happy , listen to what he 
says, treat him with respect and acknowledge hi m. In the same way one looks for a spiritual 
guide teaching the Dharma and, having found on e, accomplishes what he says, taking it not 
as a burden but as an ornament, acting with respect and reverence towards him. 
2B3A-3A2C Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as medicine 
Third: Just as a patient greatly appreciates the medicine put together by the doctor, one 
regards the instructions and teachings given by  someone expounding the Dharma as the most 
important thing, making an effort to hold them in respect and not wasting them through 
forgetfulness and the like. 
2B3A-3A2D Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure 
1 The contempt of striving for words without practicing them 
Fourth: An ill person sees that his illness ca nnot be alleviated, if he does not take the 
medicine the doctor put together, and takes it. Likewise, once you see that attachment etc. 
cannot be eliminated without practicing the in structions the Dharma teacher has taught, you 
should practice diligently and not make a great effort at vain words of numerous 
classifications  without putting them into practi ce. As a matter of fact, what good would it be 
to a leper whose hands and legs are coming off to resort to a dose of medicine once or twice. 
{19} Likewise, for us who have been stricken since beginningless time by the wicked basis of 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 15  illness that is the mental affl ictions, it is not sufficient to  practice the meaning of the 
instructions only a couple of times. This is why we should examine all the complete parts of 
the path with discriminating wisdom and be as diligent as a flowing river. It is like it says in 
the Praise of Confessing: 
 
... That is to say our minds are always obscured, 
for long we have served the causes of our ills how can a leper whose hands and feet fall off and who takes his medicine but rarely derive benefit? 
2 The importance of the discrimi nation of oneself as someone ill 
That being so the discrimination of oneself as so meone ill is very important. If it is present, 
the other ones also arise. However, if this remains merely words with out the meaning of the 
instructions being accomplished for the sake of  eliminating the mental afflictions, you will 
only be a listener. You will resemble an ill person  who is not rid of his illness if, having sought 
a doctor, he only cares about the medicinal composition and does not take the medicine - says 
the King of Concentration [Sutra] . It also says: 
 
If, after I have explained the excellent Dharma, 
you don’t apply it well, although you heard it, it is like with patients whose pouches are full of medicine, 
but who still cannot cure their own diseases. 
 
And in the Guide : 
 
These should be put into practice physically, what would be gained by uttering just the words? Would it be beneficial to the patients, if they just read how the medicine is meant to be used? 
3 The instruction to act [accordingly], having identified [the meaning of] “persistence” 
Therefore the discrimination that persistence eliminates the disease should be developed. 
“Persistence” in this statement signifies putting into practice the topics of adopting and 
abandoning [of modes of conduct] from the spir itual teacher’s instructions. {20} Now, to put 
them into practice you need to know them and for that you need  to listen and study. Again, 
after studying and knowing you need to practice and therefore it is crucial to engage in the 
meaning of what has been studied to the best of  one’s abilities. Otherwise, at the time of 
death, you will have regrets with  regard to what you have not accomplished. You will resemble 
an actor imitating others or someone interested in sugar eating only sugar cane. In Exhortation 
to the Supreme Intention  it says: 
 
“I failed in my attainments - now, what should I do?” 
that is how the childish wail while dying. They have not delved deep and the suffering is great- 
note that these are the faults of delighting in words. 
And: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 16  Like someone amidst the crowd observing a play, 
discussing the virtues of another hero, and failing with regard to his own persistence - 
note that these are the faults of delighting in words. 
And: 
In the bark of sugar-cane there is no essence,  
the delightful flavour is inside, 
someone eating the bark is unable to find 
the delicious flavour of molasses. Similarly, words are like the bark, 
the taste is like the meaning of those words. 
Consequently abandon delighting in words, always be conscientious reflecting their meaning! 
2B3A-3A2E Contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagata as an exalted being 
The fifth one consists in developing respect,  having brought to mind the teacher of the 
Dharma, the Bhagavan. 
2B3A-3A2F Generating the wish for the Dharma tradition to last long 
The sixth one consists in the th ought: how nice it would be, if  based on listening to such a 
Dharma, the Jina’s teachings rema ined in the world for long.  
2B3A-3B  The way in which one needs to listen, having related this to one’s mind 
Apart from that, if you keep your own mind aside while explaining or listening to the 
Dharma, the Dharma remaining separate from it, then this will result in whatever is being 
explained to miss the point. Therefore, it is ne cessary to listen in order to reach certainty 
concerning one’s own continuum. To illustrate th is: {21} if you want to examine whether or 
not there is dirt or some other impurity on your face, you look at yourself in a mirror and, 
understanding that there is, remove it. Likewi se, when you hear the Dharma, your faulty 
behaviour appears in the mirror of the Dharma, whereupon you feel anguish thinking: ‘that is 
what my mind has come to’. Then, as you engage  in eliminating faults and attaining qualities, 
you necessarily train in accordance wi th the Dharma. It is like in the Jataka stories  [where] the 
son of Sutasa asks Prince Chandra fo r Dharma teachings in these terms: 
 
Beholding the forms of my bad behaviour, in the dazzling mirror of Dharma, anguish arises forceful in me, and I turn towards the Dharma.  
Knowing this to be the thinking of a [suitable ] vessel for hearing the Dharma, the Bodhisattva 
gave him teachings.  
2B3A-3C  How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments 
In short, thinking: ‘I shall a ttain Buddhahood for the sake of all sentient beings, to attain 
that, I need to train in its causes. Apparently, it  is necessary to listen to the Dharma for that, 
therefore I shall listen to the Dharma’, you should generate the mind of enlightenment, 
consider the benefits of study and listen wi th joy, abandoning the faults of a vessel. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 17   
2B3B How to explain 
1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma 
2 Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings 
3 What kind of attitude and activities to explain with 
4 Distinction between who the explanations should and should not be given to 
The second one has four points: Considering the benefits of expl aining the Dharma,. 
generating respect for the teacher and the teaching s, what kind of attitude and activities to 
explain with, distinction between who the explan ations should and should not be given to. 
2B3B-1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma 
First: In the Treasury23 it says: 
 
Giving Dharma, free of mental afflictions, 
teach according to sutra and other true texts. 
 
In its auto-commentary it says: “Therefore, those who explain the Dh arma incorrectly and 
with an afflicted mind craving for material gain, respect and fame, {22} corrupt their own 
great merits. Therefore, a pure motivation to  teach the Dharma is extremely important and 
just like Ngargompa  said, it is crucial to review it be forehand: “I have never explained the 
Dharma without meditating upon im permanence before the session.”  
 In Exhortation to the Supreme Intention  two groups of 20 advantag es of giving the gift of 
Dharma in the absence of materi al things and the concern for gain, respect and the like are 
set forth. Also, in Drag Shul Chan24 it says that the merit of a householder giving immeasurable 
material things is exceeded by an ordained  person giving a single verse of Dharma. 
2B3B-2 Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings 
Second: When uttering the Mother of the Buddhas25 the Teacher26 himself arranged the seat 
and so on. Accordingly, the Dharma is a field of veneration even for Buddhas, so one should 
bring to mind the positive qualities and kindne ss of the Dharma and its teacher, generating 
respect. 
2B3B-3 What kind of attitude and activities to explain with 
A Attitude 
B Activities 
The third one has two points: attitude and activities. 
2B3B-3A Attitude 
First, [the Sutra] Requested by Sagaramati  puts forward five discriminations: generating the 
discrimination of oneself as a doctor, of the Dh arma as medicine, of the one listening to the 
Dharma as a patient, of the Tathagata as a ho ly being and of the mo de of the Dharma as 
abiding for a long time as well as the develo pment of loving kindness towards the people 
around. 
 The envy [born from] anxiety that others are superior, the laziness of putting things off, 
the discouragement of fatigue due to explaining things over and over again, praising oneself 
and chit-chatting about other people’s faults, the reluctance to lend texts as well as concern 
for material things such as food and clothing  should be abandoned, thinking: those merits 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 18  from teaching for the sake of my own and ot hers’ enlightenment are the provisions of my 
happiness. 
2B3B-3B Activities 
{23} Second: Having washed and dressed in i mmaculately clean clothes, you sit down in a 
clean and pleasant place on a cushion on a Dharma throne. If you then chant a mantra 
subjugating demons, demons and gods of the demoni c category will not get closer to you at all 
than a perimeter of 100 joyanas27 and even if they do, they will not be able to create any 
obstacles, as it says in [the Sutra] Requested by Sagaramati.  Therefore you should chant that 
mantra and - with an extremely radiant facial complexion - give your explanations conjoined 
with the conditions for ascertaining thei r meaning - examples, proofs and quotations. 
2B3B-4 Distinction between who the explanations should and should not be given to 
Fourth: In the Sutra on Discipline  it says: “do not act without being asked to”. Accordingly, you 
do not teach without having been asked and even when someone asks, you should examine 
the vessel. However, knowing someone to be a ve ssel, it is acceptable to teach even without 
having been asked, as it says in the King of Concentration [Sutra ]. Further modes of conduct are 
set forth in the Sutra on Discipline.  
2B3C Generally, how to proceed at the end 
1 What to do at the end - the actual things to do:  
The roots of virtue of teaching and li stening in this way should be sealed28 by means of pure 
aspirational prayers such as the Prayer of Good Conduct.  
2 The benefits of this 
There is no doubt that, if the Dh arma is explained and listened to in this manner, in just one 
session the advantages stated above will arise. Due to the act of listening and explaining the 
Dharma hitting home, all the karmic obscuratio ns accumulated previously by not respecting 
the Dharma or those expounding it etc. are purified and all the ones being newly 
accumulated are nipped in the bud. 
3 The general mode of behaviour of saints 
Due to the manner of listening hitting home, the instructions set forth bring about benefit in 
the mind. Seeing this, all the earlier saints in  g e n e r a l  { 2 4 }  w e r e  d i l i g e n t  a b o u t  t h i s  a n d  
especially the former gurus of this instructio n persevered at it with utmost diligence. 
4 The advice to cherish them, as it is a great fault to turn away from them 
These are evidently great instructions - if one does not reach certainty about this and one’s 
attitude does not change - as is often the case  - the Dharma, so profound and vast, no matter 
how much it is explained, will be like a god fa llen to [the rank of] a demon and that very 
Dharma will become an aid to the afflictions. Th erefore, “if you err on the first of the month, 
[you will do so] until the fifteenth29“ as they say and since it is like  that, the wise strive at this 
method of transforming what has been heard and explained into the path and make every 
opportunity to explain and listen into somethin g worthwhile. For this is the best preparation 
for teaching the instructions. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 19  Explanation of the stages by which a stud ent of the actual instructions should 
be guided 
2B4 The stages by which a student should be guided through the actual instructions 
A The root of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher 
B The stages of how to train the mind once you have relied 
The fourth one has two points: th e root of the path - how to rely on a spiritual teacher - and 
the stages of how to train the mind once you have relied. 
2B4A The root of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher 
1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty 
2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain it 
The first one has two points: the somewhat elab orate explanation for ge nerating certainty and 
the condensed presentation of how to sustain it. 
2B4A-1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty 
A The need for relying on a spiritual master since all good qualities depend on him 
B The actual way to rely  
2B4A-1A  The need for relying on a spiritual master since all good qualities depend on him 
First: As all goodness, starting off from the development of a single positive quality and the 
decrease of a single fault in the mind of the di sciple has its root in the sublime friend, the way 
to rely on him is important in the beginning. 
2B4A-1B  The actual way to rely 
1 Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous spiritual friend 
2 Characteristics of the one who relies 3 The way he relies on him 
4 The benefits of reliance 
5 The drawbacks of not relying 
6 Summary of the meaning of these [points] 
In this regard there are six points: characterist ics of the one to be re lied on, the virtuous 
spiritual friend, characteristics of the who relies , the way he relies on him, the benefits of 
reliance, the drawbacks of not relying {25} an d a summary of the meaning of these [points]. 
2B4A-1B1 Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous spiritual friend 
A Identification of a “guru” 
B His characteristics  
2B4A-1B1A Identification of a “guru” 
First: Although, generally speaking, in terms of the individual vehicles, a lot is said [about 
this] in the [Buddha’s] excellent words along with the commentaries, here only a virtuous 
spiritual friend guiding on the path to Budd hahood, the Mahayana, by gradually guiding on 
the path of the three [types of] beings, will be presented. 
2B4A-1B1B His characteristics  
1 Highest characteristics 
2 Middling characteristics 
3 Minimum characteristics  
2B4A-1B1B-1 Highest characteristics 
A Good qualities he himself needs 
In Ornament of the Sutras  it says that the disciple needs to rely on a spiritual teacher possessed 
of ten properties: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 20   
A spiritual teacher with discipline, calm, complete peace, 
more qualities, effort, rich in scriptural transmissions, 
who has thoroughly realized suchness, is eloquent, 
loving, and no more discou raged - on that one rely! 
 
Furthermore it says that someone who has not disc iplined himself, for that reason is not in a 
position to discipline someone else. A spiritual master disciplining others has to be someone 
who has first disciplined his own mind. You m ay wonder: “Well then, in what way does it 
need to be disciplined?” To accomplish anything at all that occurs to you and then label it a 
realizational quality because it exists in the mind , is  o f n o  ben efit . T his  is  w hy a s ys t em  o f 
mental discipline compatible with the general teachings of the Jinas is necessary. That has 
been ascertained as the three precious training s, and therefore, ethical discipline and the 
other two have been set forth. In this regard “disciplined” refers to the training in ethical 
discipline. In the Individual Liberation30 it says:  
 
In accord with the unruly horse of the mind 
always wilfully straying away: 
a bridle strutted with hundred sharp nails - that’s individual liberation  
Someone skilled at breaking in wild horses ta mes them by means of a good bridle. The sense 
powers pursue wrong objects {26} like wild hors es. Ethical discipline subjugates them as one 
engages in inappropriate activities and through many efforts  makes one engage in what ought 
to be done. Someone trained in it has likewise tamed the horse of the mind.  
 “Calm” means having developed the trai ning of concentration where, based on 
mindfulness and introspection with regard to engaging in positive and counteracting unwholesome behaviour, the mind abides in a state of inner calm. “Complete peace” means 
that based on calm abiding of a serviceable mi nd the training of wisdom has been developed 
through individual analysis of the correct mean ing [of reality]. However, it is not enough 
merely to have developed - thus, by means of th e three trainings - the qualities of realization 
that act to tame the mind. As the quality of scriptural knowledge is also needed, [we have] 
“rich in scriptural transmissions” meaning that the three collections
31 and so forth have been 
studied extensively. According to Geshe [Drom] Tonpa: 
 
For someone to be called a Mahayana guru, he must generate boundless 
understanding when he explains, and when he practices, he must show 
what is of benefit and direct sign ificance in the last days of the 
teachings. 
 
“Realization of suchness” refers to the training  in wisdom - realization of the selflessness of 
phenomena. Alternatively, it is mainly held to be manifest suchness. However, even if this is 
not present, it is said that this [criterion] is also fulfilled by a realization through scriptures 
and reasonings. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 21   That being so, even if he has scriptural kn owledge and realizations, it is not enough for 
them to be inferior or equal to that of the di sciple and therefore someone with more qualities 
is needed. In the Verses32 it says: 
 
People relying on someone inferior wither, 
those relying on one of their peers stay the same, those relying on leaders achieve excellence. Therefore rely on those ahead of you Possessed of discipline, perfect peace, and the most exalted wisdom- if you rely on any such a lord, {27} you even end up ahead of him.  
That is why. Puchungwa said: “As I listen to th e accounts of the saints, I look up to them” 
and Tashi: “I take the old men at Radreng as a model
33.” Accordingly, we need someone with 
more qualities as a model to look up to. Thos e six properties like this are qualities you 
yourself attain [for your own welfare]. 
B Positive qualities necessary for the welfare of others 
The remaining ones are qualities for ta king care of others. As they say: 
 
The Capable Ones34 do not wash away evil with water, 
they do not remove the suffering of beings by hand, 
they do not graft their realizations on others- 
they liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature. 
 
 As is being expressed here, apart from taking ca re of others, having ta ught them the path in 
an unmistaken manner, nothing can be done washing away negativities with water and the 
like. Out of the four characteri stics for this, “eloquent” means experienced with regard to the 
stages of guidance and skilled at putting th e meaning across to the minds of those to be 
tamed. “Loving” means having a pure moti vation to teach the Dharma and teaching 
motivated by compassion without regard for mate rial gain or respect. We need someone like 
Potowa [who] said to Chengawa: “Son of Lima , however many explanations of the Dharma I 
have given, not once have I claimed the applause  as my own. There is no migrating being that 
is not pitiable.” “Energetic” (“with energy”) means constantly delighting in the welfare of 
others. “Having abandoned discouragement” (“no  more discouraged”) means not to become 
weary due to explaining things over and over again, but rather to bear the hardships of 
explaining. 
2B4A-1B1B-2 Middling characteristics 
Potowa said: “The three trainings, realization of suchness and a loving heart - those five are 
the main thing. My master Shangtsun is not very  {28} learned in everything, as he cannot bear 
disenchantment either, he does not impress on  his mind the kindness he received. However, 
as he has the above[-mentioned] five, whoever is  in his presence benefits. Nyanton is by no 
means eloquent and each time he makes a dedica tion the only thing he knows is that, again, 
nobody understood anything, but as he has those five, people near him benefit.” 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 22  2B4A-1B1B-3 Minimum characteristics  
A The actual minimum of characteristics 
Even if it is difficult, due to the times, to find someone who has the complete set of 
characteristics like that, it is said that you sh ould not rely on anyone whose faults are greater 
or whose faults and positive qualities are equal, but on someone whose positive qualities 
exceed the faults. 
B The expediency of association with the characteristics 
Such a spiritual master bringing about complete liberation is a perpetual root of aspiration. 
Therefore, those wishing to rely on a spiritual teacher should be aware of them and make an 
effort looking for someone who possesses the char acteristics. Those wishing to have disciples 
rely on them should also strive to acquire these characteristics. 
2B4A-1B2 Characteristics of the one who relies, the disciple 
A Faults of someone who does not have and benefits of someone who does have the five 
characteristics 
Second: From the Four Hundred35: 
  
Impartial, intelligent, full of endeavour - 
thus is explained a vessel for teachings. 
Otherwise qualities of the teacher, have no effect – there’s no  change in the listener. 
 
As it says in the commentaries: someone endowe d with the three characteristics is a suitable 
vessel for listening. If all three are complete, th e positive qualities of the one expounding the 
Dharma appear as positive qualities and do not appear as faults. Not only that: the positive 
qualities of the listeners also appear as such to that person and do not appear as faults. If the 
characteristics of a vessel are not complete, th e listener, under the power of his faults, will 
classify even an extremely,, perfectly pure sp iritual teacher who expounds the Dharma, among 
those who have faults, and perceive an  exponent’s faults as qualities. 
B Explaining the specifics of the [various] characteristics in detail 
{29} In this regard “impartiality” (“unbiased”) means being without bias. If you have a bias, it 
will make you obscured and you will not perceive positive qualities, due to which the meaning 
of excellent explanations is not found. It is ju st as it says in Essence of the Middle Way:  
 
With a biased - thus anguished - mind36  
peace can never be realised.  
To be biased means to be attached to one’s  own approach and to hate other people’s 
approach. Having examined some thing like this in your own continuum, you should give it 
up. If you wonder whether that by itself is sufficient: even though impartial, someone to 
whom good ways of explaining appear as faulty  ones, due to not having the intelligence to 
distinguish them, is not a suitable vessel. Ther efore one needs to have the intelligence that 
understands those two. Are those two sufficient? Even if one has the two, [impartiality and 
intelligence], someone who is just like the listener  to the Dharma in a [lifeless] picture is not a 
suitable vessel. Therefore one [also] needs to have great endeavour. The commentary states 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 23  that adding the two, respect for the Dharma and the expounder of Dharma as well as an 
attentive mind, five [characteristics] are set forth. 
C Specifics of achieving the conducive conditions an d eliminating the adverse conditions for having the 
four characteristics 
That being so there are four: (1) great endeavour with regard to the Dharma, (2) an excellently 
attentive mind while listening, (3) great respec t in the Dharma and the expounder of Dharma 
and (4) holding to good explanations having re jected faulty ones. Intelligence is a conducive 
circumstance for those four and the impartiality  is what eliminates adverse circumstances. 
D The need to strive for those characteristics 
You should examine whether or not all the attributes that would make you suitable for being 
guided by a spiritual teacher are complete and cultivate joy, if they are. If they are not 
complete, you should strive henceforth including future lives  at the causes for making them 
complete. 
2B4A-1B3 The way he relies on him 
A Explanation of the need to rely on someone with the characteristics 
B The actual manner of relying on someone who has the characteristics 
2B4A-1B3A Explanation of the need to rely on someone with the characteristics 
{30} Third: Thus someone possessed of [the ch aracteristics of] a vessel should examine - the 
way explained above - whether or not a teacher has the characteristics and if so, obtain the 
kindness of the Dharma from him.  
2B4A-1B3B The actual manner of relying on someone who has the characteristics 
1 The manner of relying in thought 
2 The manner of relying through actions 
With regard to the manner of re lying on a spiritual teacher from whom you generally obtain 
the kindness of the Dharma and who, especially , guides your mind well by means of perfectly 
complete instructions, there are two points: th e manner of relying in thought and the manner 
of relying through actions. 
2B4A-1B3B-1 The manner of relying in thought 
A The root, training in confidence 
B Through remembering his kindness, developing respect 
The first one has two points: the root, training  in confidence and through remembering his 
kindness, developing respect. 
2B4A-1B3B-1A The root, training in confidence 
1 Explanation of confidence as the basis of all qualities 
First: In the  Jewel Tala Dharani  it says: 
 
The preparatory practice of confidence bears- like a mother- 
all positive qualities, guards them and makes them increase. 
 
This says that confidence gives birth to positive  qualities that have not yet arisen and, once 
they have come into existence, it sustains and increases them. In the Ten Dharmas37 it also 
says: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 24  That which guides to liberation, 
the foremost yana38 is confidence. 
Therefore, the intelligent, rely on pursuing confidence. 
In those who are without confidence 
wholesome qualities do not arise, Likewise, in seeds that were burnt by fire, no green sprout can germinate. 
 In these terms confidence is said to be the foun dation of all positive qualities through forward 
and reverse pervasion. 
2 Identification of confidence 
Generally speaking, there are many types of conf idence: in the Jewels, in actions and effects, 
and in the Four Noble Truths, however, here it is confidence in the spiritual master. 
3 The need to discriminate a Buddha with regard to the spiritual master 
Furthermore, as for the way of looking at  the spiritual master, it says in the Vajrapani 
Empowerment Tantra : 
 
Oh Lord of secrets, how should a di sciple see the master? Just like he 
would see the Buddha Bhagavan.  
{31} Similar statements can be found in the co llection of Mahayana sutras and in the vinaya. 
Their meaning is this: If you understand that someone is like a buddha, a mind conceiving 
faults in him will not arise, but rather a mind thinking about his positive qualities. Likewise, with regard to a spiritual master, you should purposely abandon any concepts of faults in every respect while training the mind  conceiving positive qualities. 
4 The disadvantages of conceiving faults 
In addition, the above tantra says: 
 
Apprehend the master’s positive qualities, 
do not ever apprehend his faults, 
apprehending his qualities you will gain siddhis, apprehending his faults they cannot be gained. 
 
You should act accordingly. Thus if positive qualities predominate in a spiritual master, but 
you think about him in terms of the few faults he  has, this will become an obstacle to your 
own accomplishments. Even if faults predomin ate, if you train in confidence from the 
perspective of his positive qualities without thinki ng about him in terms of his faults, this will 
become a cause for accomplishments to come ab out. Therefore, when it comes to your own 
spiritual master, whether his faults are big or sm all, contemplate the disadvantages of thinking 
about him from that perspective, repeatedly ge nerate a mind to abandon this and make it 
stop. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 25  5 The way of restraining concepts of faults 
If concepts of faults arise due to carelessness, a lot of afflictions, etc. you should apply yourself 
to restraint through confession. If you accustom  yourself in this manner, you may see that 
there are a few faults, but since your mind holds on  to the side of positive qualities, it will not 
become an obstacle to your confidence. For in stance, the great Jowo upheld the view of the 
Madhyamaka, while Serlingpa upheld the view of the True Aspectarian Cittamatra which is 
why, in terms of view, one was higher than the other. However, as he discovered the general 
stages of the Mahayana path and the mind of enlightenment relying on him, he regarded 
Serlingpa as unequalled among spiritual teachers. 
2B4A-1B3B-1B Remembering the kindness and being respectful 
Second: {32}  
In the [Sutra of the] Ten Dharmas  it says: 
 
He looks for me who has roamed in cy clic existence for a long time; he 
awakes me from a long time of  obscuration and torpor due to 
ignorance; he pulls me out as I sink  within the ocean of existence; he 
shows good paths to me who has entered bad ones;  
he frees me who has been bound in the prison of existence;  
he is a doctor to me who has long been tormented by illness;  I should generate the notion of [o f him as] rain-clouds, pacifying me 
who has been ablaze with the fire of passion and so on. 
 
The Array of Stalks
39 [Sutra]  also says: 
 
‘These are my spiritual friends, expounders of Dharma, 
exhaustively teaching the qualities of all that is 
thoroughly teaching the co nduct of bodhisattvas’, 
with these thoughts in mind I came to this place. ‘As they give birth to all that, they are like my mother, 
as they give milk of virtues they are like nurses, 
they cleanse me completely by means of enlightenment’s branches. These spiritual friends completely exorcize harm, they are like doctors releasing from death and old age, 
showering rain of nectar they are like Lord Indra, 
like the full moon they fl ourish with white qualities 
they show the direction of peac e, just like bright sunlight, 
regarding friends and foes they are like mountains, they have minds as undisturbed as the sea, they give perfect support, some say: “like boatmen”‘ with this in mind, Sudhana, I came here. ‘Bodhisattvas bring forth my understanding, Buddha’s children cause enlightenment these [beings, these] friends of mine are praised by Buddha’ with such wholesome thoughts in mind I came here, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 26  ‘As they save the world they are like heroes, 
they have become the captains, protectors and refuge,  they are {33} the eye bestowing happiness on me’ 
with thoughts like these I ho nour my spiritual friends. 
 
[The thoughts] expressed here should be rememb ered through a tune to go with the verses, 
substituting oneself for “Sudhana”. 
2B4A-1B3B-2 The manner of relying through actions 
A The need for reliance through actions 
B Condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing [him] C The extensive explanation of those three 
2B4A-1B3B-2A The need for reliance through actions 
The second one: 
In the Fifty [Verses about the] Guru  it says: 
 
What need is there to say a lot of words here? 
do everything40 to make your guru happy 
give up anything that does not please him 
apply yourself to that, examine that! 
This was said by Vajradhara himself: 
‘spiritual attainments follow the guru’, aware of this, use anything there is, and make your guru totally[, utterly] happy. 
 
In brief, you try hard to please him and to give up what he does not like. 
2B4A-1B3B-2B Condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing [him] 
The three means of pleasing [the guru] are (1) offering material things, (2) serving him  and 
paying him respect with body and speech, and (3) practicing in accordance with his advice. In 
this regard it says in the Ornament of the Sutras : 
 
Through homage and pure offerings and service 
and practice you should rely on a spiritual friend. 
2B4A-1B3B-2C The extensive explanation of those three 
1 Offering mate rial things 
As regards the first one it says in the Fifty [Verses] : 
 
Through things not normally given - your son and your wife and through your life you should forever rely on the master of your sacred commitments needless to say: through fi ckle possessions [as well]. 
And: 
Giving that amounts to always offering gifts to all the Buddhas. Offering that accumulates merit, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 27  which turns into the highest attainments41. 
2 Serving and paying respect with body and speech 
The second one [involves] bathing him, anoi nting him, massaging him, wrapping him up, 
cleaning him, nursing him when he is ill et c. and talking about his positive qualities. 
3 Practicing in accordance with his advice 
The third one [consists in] {34} practicing without going agains t the instructions, this being 
the main one. In the Jataka stories  it says: 
 
The offering to be made in return for his help, 
is practice in accordance with his instructions. 
2B4A-1B4 The benefits of reliance 
A Benefits such as one’s approaching the state of a buddha 
Fourth: It says [in the scriptures] that you will  approach the state of a buddha, that the Jinas 
will rejoice, that you will not be deprived of vi rtuous spiritual friends, that you will not fall to 
the lower realms, and that you will not easily succumb to bad karma and afflictions. As you 
do not transgress the conduct of bodhisattvas, [remaining] mindful of it, your accumulation 
of good qualities will grow higher and higher  and all your temporary and ultimate goals will 
be accomplished. 
B Bad karma is exhausted and [the benefit] exceeds even that of offerings to numerous Buddhas 
Furthermore, through serving and paying respec t to the spiritual teacher, the karmas for 
experiencing the lower realms is exhausted direct ly in this lifetime through only slight harm 
to body and mind or experiences in dreams. It is said that there are enormous benefits that 
outshine the roots of virtue of making offerings etc. to innumerable Buddhas.  
2B4A-1B5 The drawbacks of not relying 
A The way it ruins this  life and future ones 
Fifth: If you make someone your spiritual teache r and then back off in your reliance on him, 
a lot of illnesses and negative forces will cause harm in this life, and in future lives you will 
have to experience the immeasurable sufferings of the lower realms. In the Fifty [Verses]  it says:  
 
Do not ever agitate the minds 
of your masters - not in any way, if you do so due to some delusion you will necessarily roast in hell. It has been explained authentically, that all those who disparage their masters, will be dwelling in horrific hells- such as the Avici - that were taught. 
 
{35} In a passage from the Commentary on Difficult Points of the Black Opponent [of Yama]  it also 
says: 
Whoever hears a single verse of Dharma, 
and does not perceive the spiritual teacher
42, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 28  will be born among dogs a hundred times, 
and afterwards as someone of low cast.  
B No positive qualities are attained and earlier ones deteriorate 
Apart from that positive qualities that have not arisen do not arise and those that have 
deteriorate and vanish. 
C The disadvantages of relying on unwholesome spiritual friends and bad companions 
If you rely on unwholesome spiritual friends and bad companions, again, positive qualities 
diminish, faults increase and there will be unde sirable results. Therefore it was taught that 
this should be avoided in every way. 
2B4A-1B6 Summary of the meaning of these [points] 
A The importance of proper reliance on the root of perpetual striving 
Sixth: That being so, the instru ctions widely known as Guru Yoga should also be understood 
according to what has been explai ned before. It will not be enough to do the visualisation in 
just one meditation session, though. When you do one Dharma practice  from the bottom of 
your heart, you should long rely on a spir itual teacher who guides you unmistakenly. As 
Chekawa also said about that time span: “when you rely on a guru, there will be doubtful 
questions whether to give up”. Accordingly, sinc e there will only be loss without profit if you 
do not know how to rely, it becomes evident th at the cycles of teachings about relying on a 
spiritual teacher are more important than any ot her ones and the root of perpetual striving. 
B The need for confession and vows, if that proper reliance does not come about - because it is a great 
fault 
With our coarse mental afflictions we have often allowed many faults of reliance on a spiritual 
teacher to occur in regard to listening to th e Dharma - not knowing how to rely or knowing 
how to but not doing so. It is difficult for an awareness of that to develop through confession 
and vows. {36} Having understood the advantag es and disadvantages as explained previously 
you should therefore sincerely confess any occurre nces that are not in accordance with proper 
reliance, developing many strong resolves. 
C How the realization of reliance is not far away, if you act in that manner 
If you act in that manner, you will before too long become like the bodhisattva Sadaprarudita 
and the young Sudhana who was insatiable in his quest of a spiritual teacher.  
2B4A-2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain it 
A The actual way to sustain it 
B The reason why it needs to be sustained by means of two modes of sustaining 
The second one has two points: the actual way how to sustain it and the reason why it needs 
to be sustained by means of two modes of sustaining. 
2B4A-2A The actual way to sustain it 
1 What to do during the meditation session itself 
2 What to do during the periods between sessions 
The first one has two points: what to do during the meditation session itself and what to do 
during the periods between sessions. 
2B4A-2A1 What to do during the meditation session itself 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 29  A What to do in preparation 
B What to do during the actual [meditation session] 
C What to do at the end 
The first one has three points: what to do in  preparation, during the actual [meditation 
session] and at the end. 
2B4A-2A1A What to do in preparation 
1 [Cleaning your dwelling and setting up representations of bo dy, speech and mind] 
2 [Laying out offerings] 
3 [Sitting posture and mental attitude] 
4 [Visualiazation of the merit field] 
5 [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities] 6 [Mandala offering and request for blessings] 
First: the six preparatory practices: 
2B4A-2A1A-1 [Cleaning your dwe lling and setting up representati ons of body, speech and mind] 
Following the life story of Serlingpa you should clean your dwelling and set up 
representations of the exalted body, speech and mind. 
2B4A-2A1A-2 [Laying out offerings] 
Beautifully lay out an arrangement of offerings that were honestly acquired. 
2B4A-2A1A-3 [Sitting posture and mental attitude] 
On a comfortable seat straighten up your body. Assume a suitable position in cross-legged or 
half cross-legged posture making sure that th e mind is fused with going for refuge and 
bodhicitta. 
2B4A-2A1A-4 [Visualisation of the merit field] 
In the space in front of you should imagine that  there abide the lineage lamas of vast conduct 
and profound view and countless buddhas, bodhisattvas, arhats, arya hearers, and 
pratyekabuddhas along with their attendants, [thus] visualising the merit field. 
2B4A-2A1A-5 [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities] 
A The reason why it is necessary to accumulate [merit] and purify [negativities] 
B Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail 
C Categorization of the individual [elements] 
2B4A-2A1A-5A  The reason why it is necessary to accumulate [merit] and purify [negativities] 
It is exceedingly difficult for [wholesome] paths to arise in yo ur continuum, if the favourable 
conditions for their arising, the accumulations,  have not been accumulated, and their adverse 
conditions, the obscurations, have not been puri fied. Therefore you need to purify the mind 
by means of the seven-limb practice, which brin gs together the key points of accumulation 
and purification. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B  Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail 
1 The actual detailed explanation 
2 The need to take the meaning of the words to heart 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1 The actual detailed explanation 
A [The limb of prostration] 
B [Offerings] 
C [Confession of evil deeds] 
D [Rejoicing] E [Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned] F [Supplication] 
G [Dedication] 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A [The limb of prostration] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 30  1 [Prostration combining the three doors] 
2 [Prostrations of the three individual doors] 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-1 [Prostration combining the three doors] 
{37} With regard to the limb of prostration, the prostration combining the three doors is [set 
out] in the single stanza “Whoever...” This is  not [prostration] to the world spheres of one 
direction and to the buddhas of one time. Rather, focusing on all the Jinas residing in the 10 
directions and three times, you prostrate body , speech and mind to them with respect and 
from the bottom of your heart. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-2 [The prostrations of the three individual doors] 
A [Physical prostration] 
As regards the prostrations of the three individual doors, there are three points:: 
 Physical prostration [is set out in] the sing le stanza “excellent behaviour...” You focus 
on all the Jinas belonging to the directions and times as the objects of your mind, as though 
you directly perceive them. Emanating your own body in manifestations as numerous as fine 
particles you should prostrate. Furthermore, ha ving generated the power of confidence in the 
excellent conduct of the objects, you are motivated by that. 
B [Mental prostration] 
Mental prostration [is set out in] the single stan za “on one fine particle...” - on top of each 
minute particle buddhas as innumerable as dust  particles reside encircled by bodhisattvas. 
You generate the resolute faith of re collecting their positive qualities. 
C [Verbal prostration] 
Verbal prostration [is set out in] the single stan za “praising those...” From each of the bodies 
innumerable heads emanate and from each of  the heads again innumerable tongues which 
sing inexhaustible praises of the objects’ positi ve qualities to sweet melodies. Here “melodies” 
are praises and their “branches”, that is their ca uses, are the tongues. The word “ocean” refers 
to a lot. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B [Respectful pleasing offerings]  
1 [Surpassable offerings] 2 [Unsurpassable offerings] 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-1 [Surpassable offerings] 
Surpassable offerings [are set out in] the two stan zas “the best flowers...” The best flowers {38} 
are marvellous specimens of divine and human fl owers. Garlands are many different kinds of 
flowers mixed and strung together. Both together  [refer to] all actual and imaginary flowers. 
“Cymbals” are the sounds of traditional instru ments and the like. “Scented unguent” is a 
mixture of fragrant perfumes. “Sublime parasols” are the finest of paraso ls. “Butter lamps” are 
fragrant, radiant lights from things like incense or butter as well as radiant jewel lights. 
“ I n c e n s e ”  r e f e r s  t o  c o m b i n a t i o n s  o f  f r a g r a n t  s u b s t a n c e s  a n d  t o  a  s i n g l e  o n e .  “ S u b l i m e  garments” are the finest of clothes. A “supreme  scent” is water and the like pervaded by a 
scent that fills the billion world-systems with fr agrance. The “vessels of  powder” are packaged 
powders of fragrant incense suitable for scattering and burning or the coloured sand powder of a mandala in multiple layers wide and hi gh like Mount Meru. “Arrangement”, joined at 
the end to all the above, [means] a lot, decorated and variegated.  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-2 [Unsurpassable offerings] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 31  A The actual [offerings] 
Unsurpassable offerings [are set out in] the single stanza “whatever offering ...” - the 
surpassable ones are offerings of worldly beings, therefore this here is [about] everything good 
that is emanated by powerful beings such as bodhisattvas.  
B The motivation for prostrations and offerings 
The last two lines are to be joined to all the pr evious [sets of] two in order to complete them. 
They indicate the motivation of prostrations and offerings as well as the object. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1C [Confession of negative actions]] 
Confession of negative actions [is set out in] th e one stanza “desire ...” In dependence on the 
cause, the three poisons, and by means of the three bases, the body  etc., their nature is that I 
have done them (that is, that I have actually created them), that I have made others create 
them, and that I {39} rejoiced in those created by others, all of which are generally subsumed 
under “whatever I have done”. If through reco llecting their faults, you regret those done 
previously and sincerely confess them with a mind  of restraining from them in the future, the 
increase of deeds done earlier and the contin uity of future occurrences will be severed. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1D [Rejoicing] 
Rejoicing [is set out in] the single stanza  “the Jinas of the ten directions ...” 
As you recall the benefits of the five persons’ virtue, you develop joy. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1E [Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned] 
Requesting for the wheel of Dhar ma to be turned [is set out in] the single stanza “in the ten 
directions ...” You exhort those who have awoken  to complete buddhahood in fields of the 
ten directions, are detached and have found  unobstructed exalted knowledge, to teach the 
Dharma, emanating the same number of bodies for a long time. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1F [Supplication] 
Supplication [is set out in] the single stanza “Showing the passage into nirvana ...” You 
supplicate those who show how to pass beyond sorro w in fields of the ten directions to stay, 
not passing into nirvana for as many eons as th ere are particles of dust in the universe in 
order to bring about the benefit and happiness of migrating beings. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1G [Dedication] 
The limb of dedication [is set out in] the single stanza “Prost rations and ...” All the roots of 
virtue represented by the previous six limbs are made common [property] of all sentient 
beings and never come to an end since they have  been dedicated with st rong determination to 
perfect enlightenment. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B2 The need to take the meaning of the words to heart 
If you thus develop an understanding of the meaning of those words and gently do as was taught without allowing your mind to wander, you will hold immeasurable heaps of  merit. 
2B4A-2A1A-5C  Categorization of the individual [elements] 
Accordingly the five limbs prostrating, offeri ng, requesting, {40} supplicating and rejoicing 
constitute the collection of accumulations. Co nfessing purifies obscurations, one aspect of 
rejoicing, the cultivation of joy at one’s ow n virtue, multiplies the virtue. By means of 
dedicating the virtues of collecting, purifying and multiplying, however small, are multiplied 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 32  manifold, and what would come to and end after producing a temporary effect is made 
inexhaustible. In brief, there are the three: (1 ) accumulation, (2) purification, as well as (3) 
multiplication and making inexhaustible.  
2B4A-2A1A-6 [Mandala offering and request for blessings] 
Then, with a clear visualisation of the objects,  offer a mandala and with strong aspiration 
supplicate many times: “I pray that all mistaken attitudes towards the spiritual teacher such as 
disrespect may cease and that all the non-mi staken attitudes towards him may come about 
with ease and I request blessings for a complete pacification of all outer and inner obstacles”. 
2B4A-2A1B What to do during the main part 
1 How to sustain [meditation] in general 
2 How to sustain [meditation] in this context 
The second one has two points: ho w to sustain [meditation] in general and in this context. 
2B4A-2A1B-1  How to sustain [meditation] in general 
A Identification of and need for meditation 
First: Meditation on the path as it will be explai ned here serves to make you fit to make use of 
any virtuous object you wish.  
B The faults of bad meditation 
Moreover, if you attend to this and that obje ct, thinking to take merely this number of 
virtuous objects in any order you wish, nothing will come of it and having gone wrong from 
the beginning, your spiritual practice will continue to be faulty throughout your life.  
C How to sustain good meditation 
Therefore, you should first of all develop ce rtainty concerning the number and order of 
objects to be sustained, then you should unle ash {41} a strong driving force that does not 
allow thoughts to arise other th an in accordance with what has been ascertained, and sustain 
with mindfulness and alertness what has been  ascertained without omission nor addition. 
2B4A-2A1B-2  How to sustain [t he meditation] in this context 
A By thinking about the benefits of reliance and the faults of non-reliance 
Second: You should first think about the benefi ts of reliance and about the faults of non-
reliance. 
B How to train in faith by means of thinking about his positive qualities 
Then you repeatedly resolve  never to allow your mind to get lost in conceiving faults in the 
guru and think of qualities like discipline and meditative stabilisation that you yourself have 
perceived in him, cultivating the faith that is a mi nd having the aspect of faith until it arises.  
C Training in the respect that remembers kindness 
Then you should, in accordance with the above quotations from the sutra collection, consider 
the [instances of] beneficial kindness that you received and are still receiving and sincerely cultivate respect until it arises. 
2B4A-2A1C What to do at the end 
1 What should actually be done at the end 
2 Times and duration of meditation 
2B4A-2A1C-1 What should actually be done at the end 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 33  Third: By means of the Prayer of Good Behaviour  and the Seventy about Aspiration  the 
accumulated virtue should be dedicated with  strong determination to the temporary and 
ultimate aspirations. 
2B4A-2A1C-2 Times and duration of meditation 
A Indication of the times of meditation  
Thus you should meditate in four sessions - at dawn, in the morning, in the afternoon and in 
the evening.  
B How to meditate in the beginning 
Moreover, if [your sessions are] long in the be ginning it is easy to fall under the power of 
laxity and excitement. As it is difficult to correc t this state of mind once you have got used to 
it, you should have many short sessions. If yo u break off the session  when there is still a 
desire to meditate, you will really want to ente r meditation the next ti me, too. They say that 
otherwise, you will be overcome by nausea  at the sight of your practice place. 
C How to sustain [the meditation] once it has stabilized a bit and adv ice on how to avoid exhaustion 
When it has stabilized a bit, you should prolon g the sessions, sustaining them all {42} free 
from the faults of being excessively tense or re laxed. Thereby small obstacles, over-exhaustion 
and drowsiness will be pacified. 
2B4A-2A2 What to do during the periods between sessions 
A General practices enhancing the object [of meditation] 
B The causes of calm abiding and special insight 
2B4A-2A2A General practices enhancing the object [of meditation] 
Generally speaking, there are numerous practice s enhancing the object such as prostration, 
circumambulation and recitation, however, the ma in point is that, having made an effort at 
the essence of the session, if, during the inte rvals where you leave the session, you let go 
carelessly without relying on mindfulness and introspection with respect to the observed 
object and aspect - which is the cause of sustai ning [the meditation] - the outcome will be very 
little. Therefore, you should also be concerned with the Dharma [texts] teaching that [object] 
in between sessions, and recall it again and ag ain. By various means you should accumulate 
the collection of conditions fa vourable to the arising of posi tive qualities, and by various 
means purify the adverse conditions, the obscur ations. Your determination with respect to 
the discipline you have accepted, the basis of everything, should be reaffirmed a lot. 
2B4A-2A2B The causes of calm abiding and special insight 
1 Controlling the sense doors 
2 Vigilant behaviour 
3 Knowing the right measure of food 
4 Exerting oneself not sleeping and practicing yoga, and what to do when lying down to sleep 
Apart from that, train in the collection of four ca uses for an easy arising of the paths of calm 
abiding and special insight, the four accumulations. 
2B4A-2A2B-1  Controlling the sense doors 
In this regard: When the six consciousnesses arise in dependence upon objects and sense 
powers, after that attachment and aversion arise toward the six pleasant and the six 
unpleasant objects of mental consciousness. Controlling the sense doors guards against their 
arising. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 34  2B4A-2A2B-2  Vigilant behaviour 
Vigilant behaviour - in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour43 it says: 
 
To examine time and time again, 
the situation of one’s mind and body- 
put concisely that and only that is the sign of protective vigilance. 
 
Following this, whenever the body etc. engage s in such and such an action, you come to 
understand whether or not it should  be done and behave accordingly. 
2B4A-2A2B-3  Knowing the right measure of food 
Knowing the right measure of food means to give up eating too much or too little and to eat 
only the amount that does not do damage to one’s virtuous activities. Furthermore, having 
meditated upon the drawbacks of craving for food , you should also remember what is said in 
the scriptures about eating thinking that it should  be without mental afflic tions, that it should 
be of benefit to the giver, {43} that you now bring together the micro-organisms of your body 
by means of material things and that in the fu ture you will bring them together by means of 
the Dharma, and that you will bring about th e welfare of all sentient beings. In the Letter to a 
Friend  it also says: 
 
Reasoning that foodstuffs are like medicine 
depend on them without attachment or hatred 
they are not meant for conceit nor for arrogance   
they are not meant to fatten you - just keep you going44. 
2B4A-2A2B-4 Exerting oneself in yoga without sleeping, and what to do when lying down to sleep 
A What to do when lying down to sleep 
B How to apply [all this] to the intervals between all the meditations 
2B4A-2A2B-4A What to do when lying down to sleep 
1 [The time to lie down] 
Exerting oneself not sleeping and practicing yoga , and what to do when lying down to sleep. 
In the Letter to a Friend it says: 
  
Sensible one, great being   after all the day’s sessions, 
as well as the first and last ones of the night also sleep with mindfulness in between these 
so that during sleep, too, fruit will not be absent. 
 
The essence of the sessions of both the entire d ay and the first and last part of the night as 
well as what should be done in between is be ing explained. Therefore, having walked about 
and sat down, you should completely purify yo ur mind of the five obscurations and thus 
make [whatever you do] meaningful. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 35  2 The behaviour of sleep 
As the behaviour of sleep occurs between sessions,  it should also not be wasted meaninglessly. 
In this regard, the conduct of the body consis ts in lying down, during the middle of three 
parts of the night, on your right side placing the left leg on top of the right one and sleeping 
like a lion. 
3 Mindfulness 
As for mindfulness, you should rely on the fa ct that, until you fall asleep, it pursues the 
predominant virtuous action that you have cu ltivated during the day. Therefore, you can 
sustain your spiritual practice such as meditati ve stabilisation even while asleep similarly to 
when you are not asleep. 
4 Vigilance 
Vigilance: If any mental afflictions arise whil e you cultivate mindfulness, {44} you become 
aware of them and rather than grasping them eagerly abandon them. 
5 The discrimination of getting up 
The discrimination of getting up consists in pr ojecting the thought of getting up at this and 
that hour. 
2B4A-2A2B-4B  How to apply [all this] to the intervals between all meditations 
That being so, apart from the uncommon ways of  sustaining meditation during the actual 
meditation, [these indications as to] what should  be done in preparation, during the actual 
meditation, at the end and in between sessions should be applied to all observed objects and 
aspects being sustained from here up to special insight. 
2B4A-2B The reason why [meditation] needs to be sustained by means of two modes of sustaining 
1 [The two modes of sustaining] 
2 Refutation of the misconception asserting that although there are both analytical and placement 
meditations, one single person does not practice them 
3 Refutation of the misconception asserting that all conceptions apprehend signs 
4 Refutation of the misconception asserting that if you do a lot of analytical meditation prior to the 
arising of concentration, it becomes an obstacle 
2B4A-2B1 [The two modes of sustaining] 
A The reason why both analysis and placement are necessary for meditation 
Second: In Ornament of the Sutras  it says:  
 
Here, first of all, proper mental attention arises in dependence on 
study45 and from proper mental attention, again, the exalted wisdom 
with the meaning of pure reality as its object arises. 
 
That is to say that from proper  mental attention, through wisd om arisen from reflecting the 
meaning of what has been studied, the wisdom arisen from meditation directly realizing the 
meaning of pure reality arises. In the Ornament of Direct Realization , too, it says:  
 
For the four aspects of ascertainment,  
the paths of seeing and meditation,  
repeated reflection, assessment, and certainty are the path of  meditation.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 36  That is to say there are [types of] repeated reflection, assessment, and certain understanding 
(“certainty”) that constitute the path s of meditation of Mahayana Aryas. 
In the Compendium of Trainings  it also says: 
 
Thus you should practice meditation, continuously giving away, 
guarding, purifying and increasing your bodies, possessions, and merit in all kinds of ways. 
 With regard to the meditations that should be  done according to the statement, for all four 
activities - giving away, guarding, purifying and in creasing - with respect to each of the three - 
body, possessions and roots of virtue, there are both analytical meditations sustained through
 
analysis by means of discriminating wisdom and placement meditations, which are to place 
[the mind] single-pointedly without analysis. 
B Identification of analysis and placement 
{45} Now if you ask what are th e paths of analytical meditati on and what are the paths of 
placement meditation - for meditations such as the cultivation of confidence in the spiritual 
teacher, the preciousness of the freedoms and en dowments and how difficu lt it is to find 
them, death and impermanence, karma and its effe ct, the faults of cyclic existence and the 
cultivation of bodhicitta, analytical meditation is necessary. For each of them minds of great 
strength and the ability to subdue the mind for a long time are necessary, because, if they are 
absent, their counterparts, disrespect and th e like cannot be prevented and because the 
generation of these minds depends on noth ing but the meditation analyzing them by 
investigating them individually time and again. To  illustrate, just as intense attachment arises, 
if you meditate on an object of attachment a lot, exaggerating its pleasant features, in the 
same way intense aversion arises, if you think of  many unpleasant features with regard to an 
enemy. Hence, in regard to meditating these pa ths, it is the same, whether or not the aspect 
of the object appears clearly, but the mind’s mode of apprehension has to be intense and 
long-lasting,  which is why you should do analytical me ditation. In the context of practicing 
calm abiding, which enables one to place [the mind] on whatever single object one wishes - 
since someone whose mind cannot stay on a single object will not be fit for mental quiescence 
if he analyses again and again, it is necessa ry to practice placement meditation for that. 
2B4A-2B2 Refutation of the misconception asserting that although there are both analytical and placement 
meditations, one single person does not practice them 
Although some who do not know this approach claim that, if you are a scholar, you should 
only do analytical meditation while sadhus shou ld only do placement meditation this is not 
so, for it is necessary to do the two one by on e - because the learned, too, need to achieve 
calm abiding and sadhus, too, need to achieve st rong confidence in the spiritual teacher {46} 
and the like. Therefore the understanding that re peated analysis by means of discriminating 
wisdom belongs to the context of listening and re flecting and not to the context of practice is 
inadmissible. 
2B4A-2B3 Refutation of the misconception asserting that all conceptions apprehend signs 
The understanding that all conceptions appreh end signs and therefore create obstacles to 
enlightenment has the fault of not discriminati ng between improper mental attention, the 
conception of true existence46, and proper mental attention, the conception of reality. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 37  2B4A-2B4 Refutation of the misconception asserting that if you do a lot of analytical meditation prior to the 
arising of concentration, it becomes an obstacle  
The idea “it is necessary to achieve the non-co nceptual meditative stabilization capable of 
placing the mind on a single object  in whatever way it pleases and,  if you do a lot of analytical 
meditation before, it will become an obstacle to  the arising of [that] meditative stabilization”, 
is not upheld in the present instructions. To i llustrate, similarly, when a smith burns gold or 
silver in the fire and washes it in water again and again, all the impurities are removed and it 
becomes very supple and workable, whereby it ca n subsequently be made into any jewellery 
like earrings at will. Likewise, just as at first the mental afflictions, the secondary afflictions, 
and faulty conduct emerge on the occasion of meditating on black actions and their results 
and the disadvantages of cyclic existence, by  meditating on such disadvantages again and 
again with the wisdom of individual invest igation, the mind will become completely 
tormented or disenchanted; therefore it is like burning gold in a fire. Similarly, just as the 
mind turning away from the black side and th e defilements being purified emerges on the 
occasion of [meditating on] the positive qualitie s of the spiritual friend, the great meaning of 
the freedoms and endowments, the positive qual ities of the Three Jewels, white actions and 
their results, and {47} the bene fits of the mind of enlightenm ent, by meditating on these 
positive qualities again and again with the wisd om of individual investigation, the mental 
attention of the mind becomes mo istened or sincere, whereby it  is like washing gold with 
water. Through the mind approa ching the white side and delighting in it, the mind is 
moistened by virtuous dharmas.  When it has been transforme d in that way, whatever you 
wish to achieve, calm abiding or special insight,  if you fix upon it, you will achieve it without 
difficulty. That is why such an  analytical meditation is th e best means of achieving non-
conceptual meditative stabilisation. That is how Arya Asanga also put it: 
 
By way of analogy, when a smith or his skilful apprentice burns gold or 
silver in a fire and washes it with water a couple of times in order to 
discard all impurities and slag, it becomes supple and workable for this and that ornament, whereby this is di rectly perceived. In this regard, 
through the know-how that accords with  this of the smith or his skilful 
apprentice, any manner of ornament desired is then made, with their 
smith’s tools . Likewise, when a yogi  does not turn toward impurities 
and slag such as covetousness, he thereby gets disenchanted and turns away from unhappy afflicted states of mind, and approaches manifest 
joy in the virtuous side, thereby be coming manifestly joyful. In that 
case, that yogi definitely trains hi s mind in either the side of calm 
abiding or the side of special insight,  such that it is thoroughly applied 
to this and that, rests in its natura l state, is immovable and unwavering, 
and {48} also moves for the sake of perfectly achieving whatever purpose 
he has contemplated.  
Furthermore, the main adverse conditions for th e mind staying with an object of meditation 
continuously are twofold: laxity and excitement . If you have a strong and constant awareness 
that sees the positive qualities of the Three Jewels  etc., it is quite easy to overcome laxity, for 
many valid sources say that its antidote is to upli ft the mind by looking at positive qualities. If 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 38  you have a strong and constant awareness th at sees the disadvantages of impermanence, 
suffering, and so forth, it is quite easy to over come excitement, because, since excitement is a 
distracted mind belonging to [the category of ] attachment, many texts praise disillusionment 
as its antidote.  
2B4B The stages of how to train the mind once you have relied 
1 The basis of leisure - exhortation to take its essence 
2 How to take the essence 
The second one has two points: with regard to the basis of leisure - exhortation to take its 
essence and how to take the essence. 
2B4B-1 The basis of leisure - exhortation to take its essence 
A Identification of leisure and endowments 
B Considering their great value 
C Considering the difficulty in finding them 
The first one has three points: identification of leisure and endowments, considering their 
great value and considering the difficulty in finding them. 
2B4B-1A Identification of leisure and endowments 
1 Leisure 
2 Endowments 
The first one has two points: leisure and endowments. 
2B4B-1A1 Leisure 
A Identification of leisure 
First: In the Summary47 it says: 
 
Through rules the essence of the many worlds of animals 
and eight unfree states are renounce d – thus constant leisure won. 
 
Accordingly, leisure consists in the freedom from the eight unfree states.  
B The eight unfree states: 
[Living in] a border remote country where the fo ur types of followers [of the Buddha] do not 
roam, stupidity or being dumb, being of incomp lete faculties - missing a limb, an ear etc., 
holding wrong views that regard past and future  lives, actions and their effects and the Three 
Jewels as non-existent, being without the word of a Jina, with no buddha having appeared [in 
the world] are the four unfree states of huma ns. {49} The three bad migrations and being a 
long-lived god are the non-human unfree st ates. As for the long-lived gods, the  Commentary on 
the Letter to a Friend  discusses two types: discriminationless ones and formless ones. The 
former live in one region of the fourth concentration, Great Result, as if in a solitary place far 
away from a village. The latter are ordinary  beings born in the formless realms. In Discourse on 
the Eight Unfree States  gods of the desire realm constantly di stracted by activities of desire are 
explained to be  long-lived gods. 
2B4B-1A2 Endowments 
A The five personal endowments 
The second one has two points of which the five  personal endowments are said to be “human 
nature, birth in a central region, complete faculties, no extremely perverted deeds [and] faith 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 39  in the foundation”. Here “birth in a central r e g i o n ”  i s  t o  b e  b o r n  i n  a  p l a c e  w h e r e  t h e  
fourfold followers roam. “Complete faculties” co nsist in not being stupid  or dumb and having 
complete limbs as well as minor body parts su ch as eyes and ears. “No extremely perverted 
deeds” implies not having committed or caused to commit an action of immediate 
retribution. “Faith in the foundation” is fait h in the foundation from which all the mundane 
and supramundane white dharmas are born, discip line. Here “discipline” should be applied 
to all three collections [of scriptures]. 
 As those five are brought together in one’s own mental continuum and constitute 
circumstances for the accomplishment of [the] Dharma, they are called “personal endowments”. 
B The five endowments conditioned by others 
The five endowments conditioned by others are said to be:  
 
A buddha arrived and taught the holy Dharma,  
the teachings are abiding and being followed,  
there are hearts with loving concern for others. 
  Here the “A buddha arrived or  emerged” means that, after accumulating the collections 
throughout three countless eons, he has manife stly attained perfect Buddahood. “taught the 
holy Dharma” means that the Buddha or his he arers have taught the Dharma. “The Dharma 
teachings are abiding” means that the Dharma th at is accomplished by means of actualizing 
the Dharma of the ultimate
 {50} has not degenerated. “The abiding Dharma teachings being 
followed” means that through that very realisat ion of the Dharma, beings  see that they have 
the power to directly perceive the holy Dharma  and follow the teachings in accordance with 
that realisation. “Hearts of loving concern fo r others” means that there are alms-givers and 
benefactors who grant monastic robes and the li ke. As those five are present in the mental 
continuum of others and constitute circumst ances for the accomplishment of the Dharma, 
they are called “endowments conditioned by others”. 
2B4B-1B Considering their great value 
1 Considering the inappropriateness of someone with this special base acting like an animal  
Second: If no practice of the completely pure  Dharma for the sake of lasting happiness comes 
about at all, you are like an animal despite yo ur birth in a higher realm, since animals also 
have the endeavour merely to attain happine ss and eliminate suffering until they die. 
2 How a body of leisure and endowments is best 
For the accomplishment of the Mahayana path a base like the one explained earlier is 
necessary. In the Letter to a Disciple  it says: 
 
The base of the path of those gone to  bliss, the tool for leading beings, 
that very strength of mind, a streng th that human beings have gained  
that path has not been found by gods or nagas - nor by asuras, not by garudas, vidyadhara, kinnaras or snakes. 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 40  Furthermore, although some gods of the desire realm with strong habitual tendencies from 
having previously trained on the path on a huma n basis, are suitable as  a basis for seeing the 
truths  for the first time, it is impossible to attain the arya path for the first time on an upper 
realm48 basis. However, as explained before, the desi re realm gods are said to be, for the most 
part, an unfree state and therefore not the best basis for attaining the pa th for the first time. 
Again, an inhabitant of the continent of Uttaraku ru is unsuitable as a basis for vows, which is 
why the bases of [the other] three continents is praised - and out of those [especially] the 
inhabitants of Jambudvipa. 
3 How to train in the wish to take the essence, having brought to mind those [two] objectives  
‘Consequently, why would I act in such a way th a t  a n  e x c e l l e n t  b a s e  l i k e  t h i s  o n e  I  h a v e  
gained {51} does not have a result? If I did no t make it meaningful, could there be a greater 
self-betrayal and a bigger stupidity? Having passed through many perilous places of 
unfreedom, such as the bad migrations, again and ag ain, if I were to go back to those places, 
forsaking this one-off liberation as meaningless,  it would be like turning mindless as though 
stupefied by a magic spell’. By way of thoughts like these you should meditate again and again. 
In  Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour  it says: 
 
Having found this kind of leisure, not to cultivate what is virtuous - no betrayal could be a greater, nothing more deluded than that. 
And: 
Having found this place so rare, 
hard to find and beneficial, 
if I, well aware of it, were taken to that hell again as if deluded by magic spells- 
has my mind here wasted away? - 
through what delusion I do not know either - what has become of my mind - my feelings?  
4 The inappropriateness of returning empty-handed, given that not only ultimate but also temporary 
objectives are easily accomplished 
Thus you should also consider the method that  allows you easily to attain the causes of a 
higher realm body, resources, and a retinue wh ich are not only greatly meaningful from an 
ultimate but also from a temporary point of view  by means of this basis: [practicing] giving, 
ethical discipline, patience and so on. If you do  not apply yourself day and night to the causes 
of those two by means of that greatly meaningf ul basis, it would seem like returning empty-
handed from an island of precious jewels. 
2B4B-1C Considering the difficulty in finding it 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 41  1 Illustration of the difficulty of finding it 
2 Reasons why it is difficult to find 
3 The rarity of those obtaining the causes of leisure and endowments 
4 The result of sustaining those objectives 
5 The method of meditation with four special features 
6 Differentiated, sustained mode [of practice] 
2B4B-1C1 Illustration of the difficulty in finding it 
Third: In the Basis of Scriptural Transmission it says that beings who die and migrate from 
the bad and happy realms to the bad realms are like the dust of the great earth and that the 
beings who are born from there in to the happy realms are like the dust taken up by the tip of 
a  f i n g e r  n a i l .  { 5 2 }  T h e r e f o r e ,  [ a  p r e c i o u s  h u m a n  r e b i r t h ]  i s  d i f f i c u l t  t o  f i n d  f r o m  b o t h  t h e  
happy and the bad realms. 
2B4B-1C2 Reasons why it is difficult to find 
If you ask just why they are it is so  difficult to find, it says in the Four Hundred [Verses] : 
 
For the most part people fix  
on the side that is unholy. 
Consequently common beings  mostly surely go to bad realms. 
 
Accordingly, there are many humans and other be ings who mostly fix on the side of the ten 
non-virtues and that is also why,  consequently, they go to the bad realms. Furthermore, if, for 
each moment of anger and the like towards a bo dhisattva, you have to  spend one eon in the 
[Avici] hell of incessant torment, the negativiti es accumulated over many lifetimes which have 
not come to fruition nor been overcome by an tidotes, and which are present in your own 
continuum, will doubtlessly cause you to spend many eons in bad realms.  
2B4B-1C3 The rarity of those obtaining the causes of leisure and endowments 
Although, if you thus made sure to clear aw ay and purify the causes of bad migrations 
accumulated earlier and closed the door to ne w engagement in them, happy migrations would 
not be rare, as it is, they are very rare indeed. If you fail to do so, yo u go to bad migrations, 
and, once you have gone to bad migrations, you do not create virtue, but always commit 
negativites and therefore do not even hear the na me of happy realms for many eons, as it says 
in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour . 
2B4B-1C4 The result of sustaining those objectives 
Potowa said: “In the region of Pan there was a solid fort by the name of Ma’i Chakar which 
had been seized by an enemy. For a long time  the people had become poor servants. One old 
man used to be in anguish about this fort and when, one day, he heard people saying that it 
had been won [back], he grabbed his spear and, not being able to walk, dragged himself along 
saying: ‘If only the capture of Ma’i Chakar wa s not dream’. Likewise, having won leisure and 
endowments, one must also derive  such joy from it and practice  Dharma.” {53} In accordance 
with this statement, you should meditate in order to gain this kind of attitude. 
2B4B-1C5 The method of meditation with four special features 
Thus four thoughts regarding the Dharma are ne cessary for the generation of a fully qualified 
wish to take the essence of  this basis of leisure:  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 42   1. The need to accomplish  [the Dharma] - because all sentient beings only want 
happiness and do not want suffering and attain ing happiness and eliminating suffering only 
depends on the holy Dharma. 
 2. The ability to accomplish [the Dharma] - because you have the external condition, a 
spiritual teacher, and the internal condition, leisure and endowments. 
 3. The need, also, to accomplish [the Dhar ma] in this life - because if you do not 
accomplish it within this life, it will be diffi cult to find leisure and endowments in many 
[future] rebirths.  4. The need to accomplish [the Dharma] right now - because the time of death is 
uncertain. 
The third one of those counteracts the laziness of  abandoning it, thinking “I should practice 
the Dharma in later lives” and the fourth one counteracts the laziness of not engaging in it 
thinking “it needs to be accomplished in this life, but although it was not accomplished in 
earlier years, months and days, it is enough to accomplish it much later on”. It is admissible 
to make them into three subsuming those two under “[the need to] accomplish it quickly”. 
Like that, remembering death may also be linked  in here. In any case, as this is a lengthy 
topic, it should be explained below. 
2B4B-1C6 Differentiated, sustained mode [of practice] 
A How to contemplate from various points of view 
B How to contemplate in particular 
2B4B-1C6A How to contemplate from various points of view 
As the mind is more significantly subdued, if  you contemplate from va rious points of view, 
you should contemplate as explained above. If  you cannot do that much, you should subsume 
them under [three49 headings]: what the essence of leis ure and endowments is, the manner in 
which they are greatly meaningful from a te mporary and ultimate point of view, and how 
difficult they are to find from the point of view  of cause and effect. You should study each of 
the points explained above as appropriate and meditate. 
2B4B-1C6B How to contemplate in particular 
1 The difficulty in finding [leisure and endowments] from the point of view of their cause 
First: The difficulty in finding [leisure and endo wments] from the point of  view of their cause. 
Generally speaking, {54} even for the attainment of a mere happy migration, it is necessary to 
perform one of the pure virtues such as disc ipline. In particular, for the attainment of 
complete leisure and endowments, you need a lot of  roots of virtue such as getting hold of a 
base through pure ethical conduct, reinforcin g it through giving an d the like and making 
connections by means of stainless prayers. In th at case, it becomes apparent that those who 
accomplish such causes are very  few, which is why one should think that, proportionately, the 
result, the general and specific base of happy realms is difficult to find. 
2 The difficulty of finding [leisure and endowments] from the point of view of the result 
The difficulty of finding [leisure and endowmen ts] from the point of view of the result: 
 You meditate on the fact that, from the poin t of view of the beings in bad migrations, 
d i f f e r e n t  i n  r a n k  f r o m  u s ,  e v e n  t h e  m e r e  h a p p y  r e a l m s  s e e m  h a r d  t o  a t t a i n ,  a n d  f r o m  t h e  
point of view of beings in happy migrations, of the same rank, too, distinguished leisure50 is 
extremely rare. Geshe Dolpa laid great emphasis on  this. He said that all other teachings come 
about brought on by this. As it is like  this you should strive accordingly. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 43  2B4B-2 How to take the essence: the three beings’ mode of applying the path51 
A Generating certainty with regard to the general presentation of the path 
B The actual way of taking its essence 
The second one has two points: Generating certai nty with regard to the general presentation 
of the path and the actual way of taking its essence. 
2B4B-2A Generating certainty with regard to the general presentation of the path 
1 How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the paths of the three [types of] beings 2 Giving reasons for gradual guidance from the point of view of the three [types of] beings  
The first one has two points: How all the Buddh a’s teachings are contai ned in the paths of 
the three [types of] beings and giving reasons fo r gradual guidance from the point of view of 
the three [types of] beings. 
2B4B-2A1 How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the paths of the three [types of] 
beings 
A How the meaning of all the excellent teachings [of the Buddha] is subsumed under the 
accomplishment of two objectives 
First: As everything the Buddha did, in th e beginning the generation of the mind [of 
enlightenment], in the middle the accumulati on of the collections and at the end the 
manifestation of perfect buddhahood, was done for the welfare of sentient beings only, all his 
Dharma teachings only bring abou t the welfare of sentient beings, too. That being so, the goal 
to be accomplished, the welfare of sentient be ings is twofold: temporarily high status and 
ultimately certain goodness.  
B How lesser beings attain high status  
{55} As for the undertaking to attain the former: everything that has been set forth is included 
in the actual cycle of teachings for lesser beings  or in the cycle of teachings common to lesser 
beings. Special lesser beings do not do much for the sake of this life, pursuing [instead] the 
excellence of high status in future lives [and] engaging in achieving the causes for that. In the 
Lamp on the Path52: 
 
Whoever pursues by any means, 
the happiness of samsara only, 
just for his own benefit, should be known as least of beings. 
C How intermediate beings achieve the certain goodness of liberation 
There are two kinds of certain goodness: (1) the li beration that is merely release from samsara 
and (2) omniscience. In this regard everything  that has been set forth starting from the 
vehicles of hearers and solitary realizers is included in the actual cycle of teachings for 
intermediary beings or in the cycle of teachi ngs common to intermediary beings. Intermediary 
beings develop disenchantment with existence as  a whole and having made the liberation that 
is release from existence for their own welfare th eir object of attainment, they engage in its 
method, the three trainings. In the Lamp on the Path  it says: 
 
Indifferent53 to pleasures of existence 
a master  desisting from evil deeds -  
whoever pursues only personal peace 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 44  is called an intermediate being. 
D How great beings attain omniscience 
There are two means of attaining omniscience: the great vehicles of secret mantra and [of] the 
perfections. Those two are contained in the cy cle of teachings of great beings. Since great 
beings are under the power of great compassion , they have made enlightenment their object 
of attainment in order to bring all the sufferings of sentient beings to an end and train in the 
six perfections, the two stages etc. In the Lamp on the Path  it says: 
 
He whose own mind is affected by suffering, 
who thus yearns to bring to an end, all the suffering of others - completely, {56} such a one is a superior being. 
 As for the means of those beings’ attaining enlightenment - they are set forth under two 
[headings]: perfections and mantra. 
E Elucidating the sources of the term “three [kinds of] beings” 
The term “three beings” is mentioned in many texts such as the Compendium of Ascertainments 
and the Commentary on the Treasury 54. 
F Clearing up doubt 
Although, with regard to lesser beings, there are both those who devote th emselves to this life 
and those who devote themselves to future lives,  this is about the latter. One should consider 
them as engaging in the unmi staken means to high status. 
2B4B-2A2 Giving reasons for gradual guidance from the point of view of the three [types of] 
beings 
A The purpose of guiding someone by way of the three beings’ path 
B Giving reasons for such gradual guidance 
The second one has two points: what is the pu rpose of guiding someone by way of the three 
beings’ path and giving reasons for such gradual guidance. 
2B4B-2A2A The purpose of guiding someone by means of the three beings’ path 
First: thus, although it is explained in terms of the three beings, the path of great beings 
contains within it the path of  the two other ones, which is why Master Ashvagosha says that 
these two are branches of the Mahayana path. Consequently, here, they are not guidance on 
the path of lesser beings making only the happi ness of conditioned existence their object of 
attainment, nor on the path of intermediate be ings making only liberation from samsara for 
their own benefit their object of attainment . Rather, some paths co mmon to those two are 
considered to be preparatory practices leading to the path of great beings and taken to be 
branches for training in the path of great beings.  
2B4B-2A2B Giving reasons for such gradual guidance 
1 The actual reasons 
2 The purpose 
The second one has two points: the actual reasons and the necessity. 
2B4B-2A2B-1 The actual reasons 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 45  A The entry gate to the Mahayana 
B The need to consider its benefits and allow one’s inspiration to increase before generating the mind 
of enlightenment along with the [relevant] sources 
C The benefits of striving for this mind 
D How the lesser and intermediary [paths] are necessary for laying the basis of those benefits 
E How you need the lesser and intermediate when training in the actual mind 
F How the lesser and intermediate are necessary for the ritual[s of] accumulation and purification of this 
mental attitude 
G Advice to cherish the way that the teaching cycles of lesser and intermediate beings become 
branches of that of great beings H [The order on the path] 
I Summary of all paths in the three trainings  
J For the sake of skilful classification: summary of all paths in the two collections 
K The need to enter the Mantrayana 
L How to pursue the perfection only path 
M The stages of engagement in mantra N Explanation that the intention of Lamp on the Path etc. is the engagement in both sutra and mantra 
[vehicles] 
2B4B-2A2B-1A The entry gate to the Mahayana 
First: The entry gate for entering the Mahayana  consists in forming the mind toward supreme 
enlightenment. Once it has arisen in the mind - according to Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour : 
 
When bodhicitta has arisen, at once, 
the wretched bound in the pr ison of cyclic existence 
are to be called the children of those gone to bliss.  
{57} For in accordance with this statement, an individual having obtained the name of 
“Bodhisattva” is admitted among th e adherents of the Mahayana. If it
55 deteriorates, he will 
leave the midst of Mahayana practitioners.  
2B4B-2A2B-1B  The need to consider its benefits and allow one’s delight to increase before generating 
the mind of enlightenment along with the [relevant] sources 
This being the case, those wishing to enter th e Mahayana need to exert themselves in many 
ways to arouse that mind. However, before arousing it, they need to meditate on the benefits 
of arousing that mind and allow delight with regard to those benefits to increase, do the 
seven-limbed practice, and go for refu ge - that has been set out in the Compendium of Trainings  
and in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour . 
2B4B-2A2B-1C  The benefits of striving for this mind  
If we summarise the benefits set forth in this  way, there are two: temporary and ultimate 
benefits. The former, again, are twofold: not to fall to the lower realms and to be born in the 
happy realms. Once this mind has arisen, the causes of miserable existences accumulated 
previously are purified and the continuity of those accumulated later on is interrupted. The 
causes of happy realms accumulated previous ly, due to being embraced by it, increase 
extensively, and the ones newly created, due to  being motivated by it, become inexhaustible. 
When it comes to attaining the ultimate object ives of liberation and omniscience with ease, 
through relying on this mind: if an uncontrive d wish to achieve the temporary or ultimate 
benefits is not present, one may say “since thos e benefits arise from generating that mind, I 
s h a l l  e n d e a v o u r  t o  g e n e r a t e  t h a t  m i n d ” ,  b u t  i t  w i l l  o n l y  b e  w o r d s .  T h i s  i s  v e r y  c l e a r  i f  w e  
examine it in our own mind.  
2B4B-2A2B-1D  How the lesser and intermediate [branches of the path] are necessary for laying the 
basis of those benefits 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 46  In order to develop the wish to attain those tw o benefits, high status and certain goodness, it 
is necessary to develop the thoughts commo n to lesser and intermediate beings. {58} 
2B4B-2A2B-1E  How the lesser and intermediate [branches of the path] are necessary when training in 
the actual mind 
Having thus developed the wish to achieve the two benefits, when you cultivate the beneficial 
mind it is necessary to develop the root of that  mind, love and compassion. In this regard, if 
your body hair does not shiver and quiver as you think about the way you yourself wander in 
cyclic existence, deprived of happiness and oppressed by suffering, there is no way the 
inability to bear how other sentient beings are deprived of happiness and oppressed by 
suffering can come about. In Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour  it says: 
 
In beings to whom previously, such a thought, even for their own sake, did not even appear in their dreams, how could it arise for others? 
 For that reason, having thought about how, in the context of lesser beings, the harm of the 
sufferings of bad migrations falls upon you and how, in the context of intermediate beings, 
even in [rebirths of] high status there is suffe ring and no peace nor happiness, meditating - in 
accord with your own experience - on sentient beings who have become dear to you, becomes the cause for love and compassion to arise. As the mind of enlightenment is born from them, 
training in the thoughts shar ed with lesser and intermediate [beings] is the means of 
generating the uncontrived mind of enlightenment. 
2B4B-2A2B-1F  How the lesser and intermediate [branches of the path] are also necessary for the ritual 
accumulation and purification of this mental attitude 
Efforts to purify and accumulate by many mean s, through the thoughts of going for refuge, 
actions and results, and so forth in the context of the two paths, also constitute methods for 
training the mental continuum - preliminary pr actices for the generation of the mind [of 
enlightenment]. As they become [part of] the th e seven-limbed practice along with going for 
refuge, these thoughts common to lesser and inte rmediate beings should also be understood 
as methods for the arising of the mind of enlightenment. 
2B4B-2A2B-1G  Advice to cherish the way that the teaching cycles of lesser and intermediate beings become branches of that of great beings 
Here the spiritual master indicates how the teac hing cycles of lesser and intermediate beings 
become branches for the arising of the mind of enlightenment {59} and the disciple also gains 
certainty in this regard. Through recalling th ose [points] with each practice, you should 
thoroughly cherish this training. If this is no t done, the actual path of great beings and the 
individual paths become unconnected. As you do  not gain certainty with regard to the mind 
of enlightenment until you reach th e actual path of great beings, this would be an obstacle to 
the arisal of that mind or, meanwhile, the dege neration of that great objective. Therefore you 
should exert yourself at it. 
2B4B-2A2B-1H  [The order on the path] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 47  1 The order of the two minds etc. and how to train [[in] them]  
Having trained in this manner, you should make the uncontrived mind of enlightenment 
arise in your mental continuum as much [as possibl e], then, in order to stabilize it, first go for 
uncommon refuge and then perform the ritual of the aspiring [mind of enlightenment]. 
Having taken the aspiring [mind of enlightenmen t] through the ritual, practice its trainings. 
Then, time and again develop the wish to engage in the trainings - the six perfections, the four 
ways of gathering etc. Once the wish to engage  in them has come forth, from the bottom of 
the heart take the pure vow of the engaging [mind of enlightenment]. 
2 The order of explanations 
Then even risk your life in order not to be tain ted by a root downfall. Strive not to be tainted 
by small and medium contaminations or infraction s either. If you still get tainted, purify them 
well by means of what has been expounded with  regard to restoring downfalls. Then, train in 
the six perfections in general and especially in meditative concentration,  the essence of calm 
abiding, in order to make the mind serviceable with respect to whatever virtuous object you 
wish. The statement in Lamp on the Path that you train in calm abiding in order to develop 
superknowledges is only an example. Atisha hims elf has stated on other occasions that it also 
serves to develop special insight. Therefore you should develop calm abiding for that purpose, 
too. Then, {60} in order to cut the bonds of gr asping at the two selves, decide on the meaning 
of emptiness through the view, sustain this mode  of meditation flawlessly and accomplish the 
essence of wisdom, special insight. 
2B4B-2A2B-1I  All paths are contained in the three trainings  
Accordingly, except for the acco mplishment of calm abiding and special insight, [everything] 
up to and including the trainings of the en gaging [mind of enlightenment] constitutes 
training in ethical discipline. Calm abiding is  training of the mind and special insight is 
training in wisdom. So it says in the Commentary on the Lamp on the Pat h. 
2B4B-2A2B-1J  For the sake of sk ill in classification: all paths are contained in the two collections 
Furthermore,  everything up to and including calm abid ing is method, the collection of merit, 
the paths based on conventional truths are stages  of the vast path whil e the generation of the 
three special insights constitutes special insight,  the collection of wisdom, that which is based 
on ultimate truth and stages of the profound  path. Therefore, you should generate great 
certainty with respect to their order and set nu mber as well as the fact that enlightenment 
cannot be attained by means of method and wisd om that are separate from each one anoter. 
2B4B-2A2B-1K  The need to enter the Mantrayana 
Having thus trained one’s mental continuum by  means of the common pa ths, it is certainly 
necessary to enter the Mantrayana, for, once you have entered it, you quickly complete the 
two collections. 
2B4B-2A2B-1L  How to pursue the perfection path alone 
If you cannot manage more than [the perfec tion path] or due to the small power of your 
lineage you do not want to, you should just expa nd on these very stages of the path more and 
more.  
2B4B-2A2B-1M  The stages of engagement in mantra 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 48  As for engagement in mantra, proper reliance on a spiritual teacher is generally lent great 
emphasis in all the vehicles and particularly in mantra, which is why you should make it 
[even] more pre-eminent [in this context] th an before. Then, having ripened your mental 
continuum by means of an empowerment that co mes from a pure tantra class, you should 
risk your life for, that is guard, the commitme nts and vows that you obtained at the time. {61}. 
Especially, if a root downfall occurs, even though  you may take them again, this will spoil your 
mind and it will be difficult for positive qualities to develop. Therefore, do not be tainted by 
them. Do not get tainted even by a branch do wnfall and, if you do, you should not be 
unconcerned about it, but purify them through co nfession and restraint. Then you should be 
guided as appropriate in the yoga with signs in accordance with the lower tantra classes or in 
the yoga of the generation stage in accordance with the higher tantra classes. On that basis 
you should train as appropriate in yoga withou t signs in accordance with the lower tantra 
classes or the yoga of the completion stage according to the higher tantra classes.  
2B4B-2A2B-1N  Explanation that the intention of Lamp on the Path  etc. is the engagement in both sutra 
and mantra [vehicles] 
Such is the structure of the pres entation of the path set forth in  Lamp on the Path , and the 
Lamrim also guides [students] in the same way.  
2B4B-2A2B-2  The purpose 
A The actual purpose 
B The sources 
2B4B-2A2B-2A  The actual purpose 
1 Question  
Second: If the dharma-cycles of lesser and inte rmediate beings constitute the preparatory 
practices of great beings, it should indeed be a ll right to consider them the stages of the path 
of great beings. What is the use of saying “the  stages of the path in  common with lesser and 
intermediate beings”? 
2 Answer 
There are two major purposes for classifying and guiding three kinds of beings. In this way, 
(1) the conceit of claiming ones elf to be a great being, while the mental attitudes that are 
common to lesser or intermediate beings have no t even arisen is overcome and (2) all three - 
the highest, intermediate and least mental atti tudes - have great benefits. The way in which 
they are great is that since the two more advanced beings also need to strive for high status 
and liberation, there is no fault in teaching grea t or intermediate individuals [who are] to be 
guided how to train in thoughts of those two, and positive qualities are developed. However, 
if a lesser person trains starting off from the more advanced ones, the more advanced 
thoughts will not arise and the lesser ones will  be cast away, {62} so nothing will develop. 
Moreover, through being taught the common path  and through training, those with the good 
fortune of superior capacity will soon develop positive qualities that had or had not arisen 
before whereby they can be guided to higher and higher [levels], once the lower ones have 
arisen. Their path  will not be prolonged. 
2B4B-2A2B-2B  The sources 
The need to develop mental states gradually is proclaimed in [the Sutra] Requested by the King 
Lord of Dharanis  through the analogy of a skilled jeweller cleaning precious stones gradually 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Introduction 
 
 49  which is applied to the meaning. The protector Na garjuna also taught to gradually lead in the 
path of high status and certain goodness:  
 
First the Dharma of high status, 
then that of certain goodness comes forth. Therefore, once you achieve high status, certain goodness will come by stages. 
 Arya Asanga also said:  
A l s o ,  i n  o r d e r  t h a t  t h e  s i d e  o f  v i r t u e  b e  g r a d u a l l y  a c c o m p l i s h e d  properly, the bodhisattva initially te aches those who have the wisdom of 
childish sentient beings easy Dhar ma, and causes them to follow the 
easy directions and instructions. Re alizing that they have developed 
middling wisdom, he causes them to follow intermediate Dharma teachings and intermediate directions  and instructions. Realizing that 
they have developed vast wisdom, he teaches them profound Dharma 
teachings and causes them to follow subtle directions and instructions. His beneficial activities descend on those sentient beings progressively. 
 
Aryadeva, in [his] L a m p  o f  S u m m a r i s e d  B e h a v i o u r , establishes that first the training in 
contemplations of the perfection vehicle and af ter that the mode of engagement in mantra 
{63} needs to be gradual. Summarising the meaning [of this] he says: 
 
In order for beings who act like
 beginners 
to get involved in ultimate truth 
the means the perfect Buddha expounded 
resemble the steps of a flight of stairs.  
2B4B-2B  The actual way of taking its essence 
1 Training the mind in the stages of the path common to lesser beings 
2 Training the mind in the stages of the path common to intermediate being 
3 Training the mind in the stages of the path of great beings 
The second one has three points: Training the mind in the stages of the path common to 
lesser beings, training the mind in the stages of the path common to intermediate being, and 
training the mind in the stages  of the path of great beings. 
 
 50  CHAPTER II 
SMALL SCOPE 
Explanation of the stages of the path common to lesser beings 
2B4B-2B1 The stages of the path common to lesser beings 
A The actual training in the contemplations of lesser beings 
B The gauge of those contemplations having arisen 
C Clearing up misconceptions about them  
{63} The first one has three points: the actual tr aining in the contemplations of lesser beings, 
the gauge of those contemplations having aris en, clearing up misconceptions about them. 
2B4B-2B1A The actual training in the contemplations of lesser beings  
1 Developing a mental attitude of interest in future worlds 
2 Relying on the methods for the happiness of future worlds 
The first of those has two points: developing a ment al attitude of interest in future worlds and 
relying on the methods for the happiness of future worlds. 
2B4B-2B1A-1 Developing a mental attitude of interest in future worlds 
A Being mindful of death: the thought that one is not going to in this world for long 
B What things will be like in future worlds: thinking of the happiness and suffering of the two 
kinds of migrating beings 
The first one has two points: being mindful of de ath- the thought that one is not going to stay 
in this world for long and what things will be like in future worlds- thinking of the happiness 
and suffering of the two kinds of migrating beings. 
Explanation of how to be mindful of death -  
that one will not stay in  this world for long 
2B4B-2B1A-1A Being mindful of death- the thought that one is not going to stay in this world for long  
1 The disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of death 
2 Advantages of cultivating it 
3 What kind of mind that is mindful of death is being generated 
4 How to cultivate mindfulness of death  
The first of those has four poin ts: the disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of death, 
advantages of cultivating it, what kind of mind  that is mindful of death is being generated, 
and how to cultivate mindfulness of death. 
2B4B-2B1A-1A1 The disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of death 
A Demonstration that the mind’s holding on to the idea that one is not going to die is the gateway of 
harm 
First: Although in all of us there is the thou ght that at the end of our days death will come, 
every day we think “I will not di e today”, “today I will not die ei ther“. That way, even right 
until we are about to die, the mind holds on to  the idea that we are not going to die.   
B How this prevents us from even taking an interest in future lives 
{64} If you do not take to heart an antidote to  this and you are obscured by such an idea, and 
then develop the idea that you will remain in th is life, you will keep thinking about ways of 
achieving happiness and eliminating suffering in th is life only thinking: “I need this and I
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 51  need that…” As a mind investigating meaningful  goals such as future lives, liberation, and 
omniscience does not arise, no allowanc es are made for engaging in Dharma.  
C How this results in meaningful endeavours also having little power 
Even if you engage in study for a hundred [y ears], contemplation and meditation, whatever 
virtue you do will have little power, as it is done for the sake of this life alone. As you will 
en gage in  t hem  lin ked  w it h fault y behav io ur,  n egat iv it ies , an d do w n falls , it  w ill be rare fo r 
them not to be mixed with causes of bad migrations.  
D How this results in long-term goals, too, being postponed 
Even if you aim at future worlds and allow for their attainment, you will not be able to cease 
the laziness of postponement that thinks: “I shall do it later”. A major effort at accomplishing 
it properly will not come about, as you while aw ay your time with sleepiness, pointless chatter, 
and distractions of food, drink and the like.  
E How holding to permanence induces attachment, aversion, and so forth and how they induce faulty 
behaviour 
Not only that, through putting great effort in to the excellences of this life the mental 
afflictions and faulty behaviour induced by them increase and then you turn your back on the 
nectar of Dharma. Since that leads to bad migr ations, what could be more inappropriate than 
that?  From the  Four Hundred Verses :  
 
If someone sleeps as if at ease, 
As if the ruler of three worlds, 
Lord of his death did not exist - 
What else could be more horrible?     [1] 
 
And in Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behaviour  it says: 
  
Everything has to be abandoned, 
Unaware that this is so, 
I did negativities of all sorts, 
For the sake of friend and foe.     [2]  
2B4B-2B1A-1A2 The advantages of cultivating it 
A  The great value 
Second: {65} Once a genuine awareness mindful of death has developed,  for instance if you 
are convinced you will die tomorrow, and you ha ve just a little understanding of the Dharma, 
you will see that henceforth you will be withou t the company of relatives and friends and you 
will avert craving for them. In the majority of pe ople the wish to take the essence of this life 
by means of giving things away and the like will naturally arise. In that way, seeing that all 
effort for the sake of worldly goals such as fa me and gain are futile, you will turn away from 
faulty behaviour, accumulate the good karma of  going for refuge, ethical discipline and the 
like. What could be more meaningful than ascending to sublime states oneself by those means and guiding migrating beings there, too? That is why it is also praised with many 
analogies. In the Parinirvana [Sutra] it says: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 52  Among all ploughing of fields, that  in autumn is best. Among all 
footprints, that of the elephant is  best. Among all discriminations, 
those of impermanence and death are be st: they eliminate all the desire,  
pride and ignorance of the three realms.   [3] 
 
Similarly, it is praised, among other things, as  a hammer destroying all mental afflictions and 
all faulty behaviours instantly as well as a gate  to the simultaneous accomplishment of all that 
is virtuous and excellent. 
B It is the gate to all excellence 
In brief, the time for achieving the goals of bein gs is only this time where we have gained the 
special basis. We mostly remain in bad migrations  and even if we make it to happy migrations 
just once they are predominantly places of unfr eedom, so that we do not find opportunity to 
accomplish the teachings. If we gain a basis su ited to accomplishing the teachings and still do 
not accomplish them properly, it is due to this thought of “I’m not going to die yet”. 
Therefore, this mind that holds to the position of not dying {66} is th e door to all manner of 
degeneration and mindfulness of death is the door to all excellence.  
C How it is necessary to give up misunderstandings and meditate from the bottom of one’s heart  
Therefore, you should not think: “This is a practice for those who do not have profound 
Dharma, other objects of meditation to meditate  on “ and “You should meditate on this, but 
only a bit in the beginning, it is unsuitable to practice it continually”. You should not take it 
like that, but rather you should meditate upon it, until you gain certainty from the bottom of 
your heart that it is necessary in the beginning, in the middle,   and at the end.  
2B4B-2B1A-1A3 What kind of mind that is mindful of death is generated 
Third: The fear [born] from worri es about separation from relatives etc. is the kind of fear of 
death of those who are not trained in the path. T h e r e f o r e ,  h e r e  t h i s  i s  n o t  w h a t  i s  t o  b e  
generated. Well then, what [kind of fear is to  be generated]? All bodies taken under the power 
of karma and mental afflictions do not pass be yond death, which is wh y – even though this 
may give rise to fear – it cannot be prevente d for the time being. However, without having 
blocked the causes for bad migrations and accomp lished the causes for high status and certain 
goodness, you will fear death. With regard to th at, if you think of the resulting fear this can 
be accomplished, whereby you will not be afraid on the verge of dying.  If you do not achieve 
this objective, for fear of not being liberated from the cycle of existence in general and of 
falling to bad migrations in particular, you will be tormented by remorse at the time of death.  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4 How to cultivate mindfulness of death 
A It is certain that we will die 
B It is uncertain when we will die  
C At the time of death nothing will except for the Dharma will be of benefit 
Fourth: You should meditate on this by way of  the three root thoughts , the nine reasons and 
the three resolutions. In this rega rd, the three [root thoughts] are: (1) it is certain that we will 
die, (2) it is uncertain when we will die, and (3) at  the time of death nothing except for the 
Dharma will be of benefit. 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4A It is certain that we will die 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 53  1 Actual reasons 
2 Resolution 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1 Actual reasons 
A The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no conditions for warding him off  
B One’s life span cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly 
C You die without having had time to practice Dharma while alive   
The first one has three points: (1) the Lord of  Death will certainly come and there are no 
conditions for warding him off, (2) one’s li fe span cannot be increased and diminishes 
incessantly, and (3) you die without having had time to practice Dharma while alive {67}.  
A The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no conditions for warding him off 
First: In the Udanavarga it says that whatever  body you have taken, whatever country you 
reside in, and whatever the time – you are defeated  by death. It will come to pass that way and 
cannot be turned back by fleeing swiftly away or by force, wealth, material substances, mantras 
or medicine as it says in Advice to a King [Sutra] . Kamawa said: “Now some fear of death is 
necessary. At the moment of death you must no t be apprehensive. We do it the other way 
round: no we are not afraid [but] at the mome nt of death we dig our fingernails into our 
chests.” 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1B One’s life span cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly 
Second: As it says in [the Sutra of] Entering the Womb , reaching a life span of a hundred years 
seems to be the limit of what is possible. Howeve r, even if you reach that, the years until then 
waste away with the passage of month after month,  day after day, and day and night. As they 
too waste away with the passage of morning, and so on, it seems that the general lifespan has 
[already] been wasted a lot previously and the remainder also diminishes incessantly without 
anything being added. In Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behaviour it says: 
 
This life decreases constantly, 
Day and night, without respite, 
If from nowhere there is increase, Either, how would I not die?     [4] 
 
Furthermore, you should consider this by w ay of numerous analogies such as a weaver 
weaving cloth, animals to be slaughtered approa ching the place of slaughter with each step, 
cattle being lead without any control to their pl ace by a herder, and so forth. This is also 
taught in [the Sutra of ] Extensive Display  by means of many analogies: 
 
Impermanent – autumn cloud-like: the three existences Birth and death of beings resemble a show The passage of life of a being – a flash in the sky It passes fast like a waterfall from a steep mountain. [5]  
For someone with the resolve of inner contemplat ion {68} there are no external objects that 
do not point out impermanence to him. Since this is taught, certainty aris es, if you consider it 
often and from many angles. There is no benefi t in thinking one has [considered] something 
several times, but still no certainty arose. As  Kamaba said: “You say nothing has come about 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 54  through contemplation – well, when did you co ntemplate? During the day you indulge in 
distractions, at night you sleep – don’t lie!”  
 
It is not just at the end of  our lives when death overcomes us that we proceed towards 
another world, for up until then there is not a moment where the lifespan does not diminish. 
Therefore, since we entered the womb we have  been going straight towards a future life 
without remaining still even for a mere instant. In the meantime life also wastes away without 
a moment of respite, as we go towards deat h lead by its messengers, disease and aging. 
Therefore, do not rejoice in th e view that you abide during your life without approaching 
future worlds. It is like the analogy that when  falling off a high mountain peak the time of 
falling through the sky before crashing to the ground is not worthy of joy. In the Commentary 
on the Four Hundred Verses  there is the quotation: 
  
Hero of men, in that night in the very beginning, 
Where someone comes to dwell in a womb in the world - 
Starting from that point he moves with each day Without the pause of a step towards the Lord of Death. [6] 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1C You die without having had time to practice Dharma while alive.  
Third: Even if you can live for so long, it is inappropriate to think you have time. As it is 
stated in [the Sutra on ] Entering the Womb , initially, during the first ten years of childhood it 
does not occur to you to practice the Dharma an d at the end, during the 20 years of old age 
you do not have the power to practice the Dh arma. Of the time in between sleep snatches 
away one half, illness and the like also wa ste much time and no more than a few 
opportunities remain to accomplish the Dharma.  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-2 The decision to practice Dharma  
{69} Since it is like that, at the time of deat h all the excellence of this life will only be an 
object of recollection – like the recollection of a happy experience in a dream after you have 
woken. Why would you delight in being beguiled by this life, if the enemy who is death will 
certainly come? With this thought in mind you should take the decision that you definitely 
need to practice the Dharma and reiterate this  innermost feeling many times. From the Jataka 
Stories:  
Alas, afflicted worldly beings, 
Your stay is not stable, there is no joy, 
Even this water lily’s splendour 
Will soon be but a memory.     [7] 
 2B4B-2B1A-1A4B The time of one’s death is uncertain  
1 The need for generating a mental state mindful of death every day 
[2 The actual reasons 3 The decision that from now on you need to practice the Dharma]  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4B-1 The need for generating a mental state mindful of death every day 
Second: It is certain that death will come betw een now and 100 years [from now] and it is not 
certain on which day in between it will. Therefor e, it is not definite on any day like today 
whether you will die or not. Nonetheless, the mind should side with the idea of death and 
you need to generate the awareness that thinks: “I will die today”, for if the mind sides with 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 55  the idea of not dying, thinking: “I will not di e today”, you constantly prepare for staying in 
this life and will not prepare for future lives. Due to this, if you get seized by the Lord of 
Death in the meantime, you will have to die in anguish. However, if you prepare to die every 
day, you will accomplish a lot that is meaningful for the future, so that, ev en if you do not die, 
it is good you have done it and if you die it was all the more necessary.  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4B-2 The actual reasons 
A There is no certainty with regard to a life-span in Jambudvipa which is why the time of 
death is uncertain  
B There are many conditions that lead to death and few that promote life  
C The body is extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore uncertain  
This has three points: there is no certainty with regard to a life span in Jambudvipa, which is 
why the time of death is uncertain, there are ma ny conditions that lead to death and few that 
promote life and t he body is extremely vulnerab le and the time of death therefore uncertain. 
A There is no certainty with regard to a life-span in Jambudvipa which is why the time of death is uncertain 
First, in general a lifespan of the beings of Utta rakuru is set, and for most beings of the other 
[continents] there is more certainty, even though  it may not be sure that  the full extent of the 
lifespan of each individual be reached. For the beings of Jambudvipa a life-span is extremely 
uncertain. In the beginning they reached even i mmeasurable years, {70} later ten years will be 
the maximum duration to be reckoned with an d even nowadays it does not seem certain 
whether they die in their old age, in their youth or in between.  In the Treasury  it says:  
  
Here it’s uncertain: in the end: ten years – initially: infinite.     [8] 
 
You should take to heart the fact that people like your gurus or friends have died through 
sudden internal or external conditions for deat h before reaching the end of their lives, and 
you should think over and over again: “I too have similar qualities.” 
B There are many conditions that lead to death and few that promote life 
Second: There are various harmful influences – anim ate as well as inanimate – on this life, so 
you should thoroughly consider how it is threatened by human beings and non-human 
malevolent influences, how types of animals en danger one’s body and life through manifold 
harm, and likewise how both internal illn esses and external elements cause harm. 
Furthermore, one’s body is necessarily formed from the four elements and they also harm 
each other if their domains expa nd or diminish out of balance, thereby causing illnesses and 
ravishing one’s life. Since they exist simultaneo us with oneself, even though body and life 
appear to be stable they cannot be relied on.  In the Parinirvana [Sutra]  it says:  
 
The discrimination of death is that this life, constantly surrounded by 
hostile enemies, weakens in each moment and that there is nothing t h a t  i n c r e a s e s  i t .        [ 9 ]  
 
And in the Precious Garland : 
 
We live amidst the conditions for Yama, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 56  Like a butter lamp in a gale.     [10] 
 
Besides life itself permeates the reality of death so that many conditions for life are unreliable: 
From the Precious  Garland : 
 
There are many conditions of death 
Those for living are only few Even they may well be deadly Therefore,  always practice dharma.    [11]  
C The body is extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore uncertain 
{71} The body is as vulnerable as a water bubbl e -  therefore this and that such as a thorn 
piercing it may be to blame an d occasion the destruction of li fe without the need for major 
harm. Thus it is very easily overco me by conditions of death. In the Friendly Letter  it says:  
 
If physical things – the ground, Mount Meru, and oceans – Are burnt up by the seven blazing suns And even ashes are not left behind
56 
What need to mention exceed ingly feeble humans?  [12] 
 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4B-3 The decision that it is necessary to practice Dharma from now on 
At the end of thoughts like these you should reiterate many times the innermost decision to 
practice Dharma from this very moment, for it is uncertain when the body and life will be 
overcome by the Lord of Death and it should no  be assumed that there is still time. As Shri 
Jagatamitra said:  
Earth lord as long as this borrowed body Abides in pleasure – not sick not decayed, 
At that time do take its essence 
Not fearing illness, death, decay. In times of illness, old age, and decay You may be concerned, but to what avail?  [13]  
Among the three root[ thought]s the one about th e uncertainty of the time of death is most 
important, which is why you should make an effort.  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4C At the time of death nothing is of benefit except for the Dharma  
1 The actual reasons 
2 Decision 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4C-1 The actual reasons 
A [You cannot take along friends] 
Third: Thus when you see you have  to go to another world, leaving this world, even if at that 
time you are surrounded by loving and grieving friends or relatives, yo u cannot take even one 
of them along. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 57  B [You cannot take along possessions] 
Whatever heaps of attractive riches you have obtained – you cannot take along even a small 
particle of it.  
C [You cannot take along your body] 
If yo u hav e t o  giv e up ev en  t he fles h an d bo n es  yo u were bo rn  wit h, w hat  n eed t o  t alk o f 
anything else?  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4C-2 The decision to practice nothing but Dharma  
 A The actual [decision] 
Then you think: “At that time, it will certainly co me to pass that all the ex cellences of this life 
leave me, just as I leave them, and I will proceed  to another world. It will happen today.” {72} 
You should make the decision many times to pr actice Dharma without submitting to the the 
of conditions like the body, friends and possessions.   
B The need to try hard since it is the foundation of the path  
Although this arises with difficulty, you should tr y hard, as it is the foun dation of the path. In 
the words of Potowa:  
These are my meditations on impe rmanence, appearances and [their] 
elimination. Eliminating all the phenomena of this life – close 
relationships, possessions and the like – and aware that I will go here 
and there to another life alone without anything, I think: “there is 
nothing to do other than to practi ce the Dharma”, and non-attachment 
to this life first arises. As long as  this [attitude] has not arisen in my 
mind, I will sit with the path s to all the Dharma blocked. 
 
And Dolpa said: 
 
Incidentally, if you accumulate the collections and purify obscurations, 
make request to the deities and [your] guru and contemplate insistently with perseverence, even that whic h you think will not come about 
within 100 years will come about effortlessly, for compounded phenomena do not remain static as they are.  
When someone asked Kamawa about moving on to another object [of meditation] he said: 
“repeat the previous one!” Asked about the re maining ones, he said: “There is nothing 
beyond it.” 
C How to carry out the practice of all the excellent scriptures [of the Buddha] 
Thus, if you know how to practice reliance on a spiritual teacher, leisure and endowments as 
well as impermanence in this and that co ntext of the excellent scriptures and their 
commentaries, and sustain them, you will easily find the intention of the Jina. In this way, 
you will also become aware of them in other contexts. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 58  Explanation of what will become  of you in future worlds: 
How to think about the happiness and suffering  
of the two [types of ] migrating beings 
2B4B-2B1A-1B The happiness and suffering of the two [types of] migrating beings: Thinking about 
what will become of you in future existences 
1 Thinking about what will become of you in future worlds 
[2 From among the happiness and suffering of the two migrations, considerations about the suffering] 
2B4B-2B1A-1B1 Thinking about what will become of you in future worlds 
Second: That being so, since it is certain that  you will die soon, {73} you have no time to 
spend in this life and, after death, it is no t that you become non-existent; you must take 
rebirth. Since apart from the two there is no othe r place of birth, you will be born in either 
the happy migrations or the bad migrations. In  addition, since you are not under your own 
control but under the control of other - karm a, you will be reborn according to the 
wholesome and unwholesome karma that impels you.  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2 From among the happiness and suffering of the two migrations, considerations about the 
suffering 
A The need to think about suffering 
[B How thinking about suffering is a vital point 
C How to think about suffering] 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2A The need to think about suffering 
You should think about the suffering of the bad migrations considering: What will become of 
me, if I am reborn in the ba d migrations? Nagarjuna said: 
 
Every day remember the hells  
That are fiercely hot and cold. Also remember the hungry ghosts, Emaciated by hunger and thirst. 
Look at animals and remember 
[How they’re] beset with the sufferings of dullness. Give up their causes, use causes for happiness. Once you have gained what is hard to gain, A human body in Jambudvipa, 
Endeavour to cut the cause of bad realms.   [14] 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2B How thinking about suffering is a vital point 
Meditation about the sufferings of  cyclic existence in general and in the three bad migrations 
in particular is a very vital point, for if you thus consider how you yourself fall into the ocean 
of suffering, despair will repel pride and arroganc e. Having seen that suffering is a result of 
non-virtue, you will be very careful to avoid ne gativities and downfalls. As you do not want 
suffering but happiness, once you realize that it  is the result of virtue, you will also enjoy 
accomplishing virtue. In proportion to your ow n experience compassion for others arises and 
out of aversion to cyclic existence you strive for liberation. For fear of suffering, you take 
refuge forcefully. These positive qualities of suffering comprising many important points of 
practice {74} are stated in Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behaviour in terms of suffering [already] 
arisen in one’s own continuum, however, they ar e equal[ly applicable] to suffering one is yet 
to experience.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 59  2B4B-2B1A-1B2C How to think about suffering 
1 The actual [considerations concerning the suffering in bad migrations] 
2 How it is necessary to meditate on this, until the experience is being produced  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1 The actual [considerations concerning the suffering in bad migrations] 
A Thinking about the sufferings of hell beings 
B Thinking about the sufferings of animals 
C Thinking about the sufferings of hungry ghosts 
Thus, the considerations about the suffering of the bad migrations have three points: 
thinking about the sufferings of hell beings, animals, and hungry ghosts. 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1A Thinking about the sufferings of hell beings 
1 The actual [considerations] 
2  The need for fear at the thought that you have already accumulated numerous causes for being born there 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1A1 The actual [considerations] 
A The great hells of sentient beings 
B The neighbouring hells 
C The cold hells 
D The occasional hells 
The first one has four points: the great hells of  sentient beings, the neighbouring hells, the 
cold hells, and the occasional hells.  
A The great hells of sentient beings 
First: 32,000 yojanas57 below from here there is the hell of Continual Revival and below it, 
seven more hells separated by 4,000 yojanas each. 
 In the first of those eight, the hell of Continual Revival, be ings come together and stab 
each other with various weapons emerging thro ugh the power of their karma. Whenever they 
faint and collapse on the ground a voice rings out from the sky, “You  shall come back to 
life!”. Upon that they stand up again and star t stabbing again as before, due to which they 
experience immeasurable suffering. 
 In Black Line the guardians put black line s on the [bodies of] sentient beings born 
there in [the shape of] many squares and the li ke and then the latter experience the pain of 
being cut into pieces with weapons along those lines.  
 In Crushing Hell58 the guardians pack the beings, once they have been rounded up, in 
between two goat-faced or similar iron mountain s. Then they are immediately crushed by the 
two, whereupon rivers of blood spurt out from all their orifices.  
 In the hell of howling, the sentient beings in  search of an abode en ter iron houses. {75} 
As soon as they enter, fires blaze all around and they burn.  
The hell of great howling is like the previous one, the difference being that the iron houses 
have two layers.  
 In Hot Hell, the hell guardians put the sentient beings into very hot and blazing iron 
cauldrons of several yojanas and fry them like  fish. They are impaled through their buttocks 
on blazing iron stakes that emerge at the cr own of the heads and fire blazes out of their 
mouths, their two eye sockets, nostrils, ears as we ll as all their pores. They are laid out, on 
their back or face down, on the blazing iron  foundation and pounded and tormented with 
blazing iron hammers.   In the very hot hell, an iron trident is stuc k into the buttocks so that the right and left 
prong emerge from the shoulders and the middle one from the crown of the head. Owing to that tongues of fire blaze from orifices such as  the mouth. Their bodies are wrapped in blazing 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 60  hot iron sheets and placed headlong into an ir on cauldron full of boiling liquid whereupon 
they are tossed up and down and about as they  are boiling. Then, once their skin, flesh and 
blood have been destroyed and nothing but the sk eleton is left, they are pulled out again and 
spread out on the iron foundati on. After that, when the skin, flesh and blood have developed 
again, they are put in again. Apart fr om that it is like the hot hell.  
 In Without Respite the foundation is completely ablaze for hundreds of yojanas from 
the East. As it spreads, the force of the fire increases, gradually destroying the skin, flesh, 
sinews and bones of the sentient beings to the marrow. Like the wick of a butter lamp, their 
whole bodies are pervaded by blazing tongues of fire. {76} In the other three directions it is 
similar. As the fire coming from the four direct ions mixes there, [beings] experience incessant 
sufferings and only by their pathetic howling ar e they understood to be sentient beings. In 
iron baskets they are made to jump about on bl azing iron embers. They are made to fall down 
on the iron foundation and to climb up huge iron mountains. Their tongues are pulled out 
from their mouths, spread out flat with a hu ndred pegs, and then made to be without a 
wrinkle or crease, as though pr eparing cow hides. Then again they are placed on the iron 
foundation on their backs, thei r mouths are opened with iron tongs, and blazing lumps of 
iron are inserted into their mo uths. Boiling copper is poured in to their mouths and burns the 
mouth, the throat and the entrails before issuing from the lower bod y.  Apart from that it is 
like the very hot hell.  
 How long those sufferings are experienced is as stated in the Friendly Letter :  
 
Even if, for billions of years, you experience 
completely unbearable sufferings in that way, 
as long as the non-virtue  has not been exhausted, 
equally long you will not get rid of your life.   [15] 
 
Moreover, in the Treasury and Actuality of the Stages  it is stated that 50 human years are one day 
in the [god realm of the] Four  Great Kings, thirty of those one month, and twelve of those 
one year. 500 such years is the life span of the beings of the [realm of the] Four Great Kings. 
All of that is one single day in the hell of Continual Revival, 30 of those a month, twelve of those a year and 500 of those a life span. Likewi se 100, 200, 400, 800 and 1,600 human years, 
respectively, form a day [in the other five desire  god realms ranging] from the Thirty-Three up 
to the Controlling Others’ Emanations  and the life-spans can be 1,00 0, 2,000, 4,000, {77} 
8,000 and 16,000 god years. These respectively form a day in Black Line through the Hot Hell 
and they can reach from 1,000 through 16,000 of  their own years. In th e hell of Great Heat 
one can reach half an intermediate eon and in  Without Respite, one intermediate eon.  
B The neighbouring hells 
Second: Each one of the eight hells has four side  walls and four gates. On the outside they are 
surrounded by an iron fence and th at fence also has four gates. By  each gate there are the four 
remaining hells of sentient beings: (1) the Pi t of Burning Embers, (2) the Bog of Putrid 
Corpses or the Bog of Excrement that Reeking of Corpses, (3) the Razor Road etc., and (4) 
the River Without a Ford.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 61   In the first of those there are hot embers up  to the knees and when sentient beings go 
to look for a place [to stand], as they set thei r foot down, their skin and flesh and blood are 
destroyed, and as they lift them up they regenerate. 
 Nearby, there is the second one, the bog of  excrements reeking of corpses. As they 
cross it in search for an abode, sentient beings  fall and sink in up to the head. In this bog 
there are worms called “sharp-beaks” that pierce  the skin, flesh, sinews, and bones and dig 
through them all  the way to the marrow.   
 Near the bog there is the third one, a path  fitted with razor blade teeth. As soon as 
sentient beings walk along it in search of an abode, as they put down their feet, their skin, 
flesh and their blood are cut and grow back again as they lift them.   
 Nearby there is the forest of sword-leaves. As sentient beings walk around in search of 
an abode using its shade and settling down, {78}  swords emerge from the trees and chop up 
their limbs and other body parts. When they fa int there, reddish-brown dogs come, grab them 
from the back and eat them. 
 Nearby there is the forest of Iron-Spiked trees. Sentient beings walking around there in 
search of an abode set about climbing up the tr ees. As they climb up th e tips of the thorns 
point downwards, and as they climb down, th ey point upwards chopping up the limbs and 
other body parts. Since there are birds with iron beaks in that place, they  [come and] alight on 
the shoulders or heads, peck at their eyeballs and eat them.   All these places are similar in that th ey cause weapon injuries and should be 
considered as one.   The fourth, near the forest of Iron-Spiked tr ees there is the so-ca lled river without ford 
filled with fast moving, boiling water. Sentient beings in search of an abode fall in and get cooked as they bob up and down like for instance peas thrown in a cauldron filled with water over a great fire. On either bank of the rive r there are [guardians] ho lding sticks, hooks and 
nets in their hands, not letting anyone come out. Having pulled them out with the hooks or 
nets, [the guardians] place them face upward on  a blazing great foundation and ask them what 
they want. When the say: “I don’t know anyt hing – I cannot see, however I am hungry and 
thirsty”, fiercely blazing lumps of iron are in serted into their mouths and boiling copper is 
poured in. 
 The Actuality of the Stages  explains that the life span in  the neighbouring and occasional 
hells in not certain. However, the sufferings will  be experienced as long as the potency of the 
karma for experiencing those sufferings has not been exhausted. 
C The cold hells 
The third ones – the cold hells – are directly o pposite the eight great [hot] hells of sentient 
beings each at a distance of 10 ,000 yojanas. {79} 32 ,000 yojanas below from here there is the 
hell of blisters and from there, separated by  2,000 yojanas each, another seven hells. Among 
those eight, in the one of Blisters you are hit by  strong icy wind and your body shrivels while 
everywhere blisters appear. In the hell of Bursti ng Blisters you shrivel as the blisters burst 
open. Chattering Teeth, Lamentation and th e “Brrr” are named after the sounds being 
uttered. In the Splitting Apart Like an Utpala Flower, as you are hit by strong icy wind, you 
turn blue in colour and split apart into five or  six pieces. In the Splitting Apart Like a Lotus 
you pass beyond blue and turn red, splitting apar t into ten or more pieces. In Great Splitting 
Apart Like a Lotus your skin turns deep red and you split apart into 100 or even more pieces. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 62   All this is explained in Actuality of the Stages . As for the lifespan, it is stated that if you 
were to fill a storage container up to the brim with eighty kharis of sesame from Magadha and 
take out one grain of sesame every hundred years,  the lifespan in the hell of Blisters would 
last far longer than for the sesame to be completely used up  and the life span in each hell 
below is twenty times that of the previous one. 
D The occasional hells 
The fourth ones exist in the vicini ty of the hot and cold hells. In Actuality of the Stages  it says 
that they also exist in the human places and in Basis of [Vinaya] Scriptures  it is stated that they 
exist near the shores of great lakes –  – as it appears from Expression of the Realizations of 
Sangharaksita.  
b’’ The need for fear at the thought that you have already accumulated numerous causes for being born there 
Since it is very easy, as will be explained belo w, for the causes of birth there to come about, 
each day you accumulate even many of them , and since also those that you accumulated 
before are immeasurable, it is inappropriate to sit around happily. {80} Therefore you should 
think about them and be afraid, for nothing ot her than this unsteady respiration separates 
you from them. From Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behaviour : 
 
How can you sit there, happily, 
Having created the karma for hell?     [16]  
and in the  Friendly Letter,  too it says: 
 
Evildoers separated only By the time it takes for breathing to stop, Hearing about the boundless torments of hell 
And not scared in thousand respects are like vajras. 
If seeing, hearing, remembering and reading Descriptions of hell as well as their depictions, Generates fear, no question about experience Of the unbearable fully ripened effects.   [17]  
The intense suffering is also stated in the Friendly Letter : 
 
Just as the bliss of extinguishment of craving Is supreme among all kinds of bliss, Likewise among all kinds of sufferings – those Of Avici hell are most unbearable. Here, if in one day 300 spears, Were to hit you brutally – the suffering Would be small compared to sufferings of hell, Would not even be a fraction of them.   [18] 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 63  You should come to understand that the cause giving rise to such suffering is only your own 
faulty behaviour and strive with all your migh t not to be tainted even by minor negative 
actions. From the same [text]: 
 
The seed of these non-virtuous effects 
Is faulty behaviour of body, speech, and mind. Strive with such resourcefulness that nothing – 
Not even a speck of them exists in you.   [19] 
 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1B Thinking about the sufferings of animals 
Second: The weaker animals are killed by powerf ul ones. They become the chattels of gods 
and humans and lacking freedom they are under the control of others which is why they get 
killed, beaten and harmed. It is explained in the Actuality of the Stages  that since they {81} 
accompany humans and gods, they do not have another abode. The Commentary on the 
Treasury  explains that their main abode is the gr eat ocean and that the others spread from 
there. Furthermore, they are born in darkness an d in water, age there and die. They are worn 
out by heavy burdens, put to the plough, shor n, driven, and killed miserably by means of 
many different killing methods. They are tormented by hunger, thirst, sun and wind, 
persecuted by hunters and the like in many ways and are always terrified. Therefore you 
should feel saddened and disquieted thinking of the many ways in which they suffer.  
 In the Treasury  it says that “the longest animal life span is one eon” and it is explained 
that the long-lived ones reach a mere eon wh ile the short lived ones are unspecified.  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1C Thinking about the sufferings of hungry ghosts 
Third: Those who predominantly attend to mise rliness will be born as hungry ghosts. They, 
too, are hungry and thirsty. As their skin, fles h and blood are dried up, they are like burned 
logs. Their faces are hair-covered, their mouths  are exceedingly dry and are licked by the 
tongue.  
A Those with external obstructions to food and drink 
B Those with internal obstructions to food and drink 
C Those with obstructions to food and drink itself  
There are three of these: those with external obstructions to food and drink, those with 
internal obstructions to food and drink, and th ose with obstructions to food and drink itself 
dry.  
A Those with external obstructions to food and drink  
As for the first ones, if they wander towards springs, lakes and ponds, they are hindered 
externally by sentient beings holding swords, sp ears and lances. They also see the water as pus 
and blood and do not want to drink it.  
B Those with internal obstructions to food and drink  
The second ones have mouths only like the eyes  of needles. They have goitres and big bellies 
and their mouths are on fire. Even if they end up finding food and drink without others 
creating obstructions, they themselv es are not able to eat and drink. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 64  C Those with obstructions to food and drink itself 
As for the third ones, the so-called “fire-garlande d ones” get burned as {82} everything they eat 
and drink catches fire. The so-called “filth-eater s” eat excrement and drink urine. They only 
eat and drink that which is unclean, smelly, ha rmful and despicable. Some cut their own flesh 
and eat it. They cannot make use of clean and good food or drink.  
 As explained in a Commentary on the Treasury , their abode is below the city of Rajagrha 
in this world Jambudvipa, separated by a dist ance of 500 yojanas, an d from there the other 
hungry ghosts have spread out. As for their life span, it says in the Actuality of Stages that one 
human month is a day and that they last for 500 of their years.  In the Friendly Letter  it says: 
 
Attending to suffering uninterruptedly, 
Fettered by the very solid rope Of karma of faulty behaviour, some beings with bodies Do not die for five - even ten thousand years.  [20] 
 
The commentary explains that the life span of some hungry ghosts is 5000 years and of some 
10000 years. 
 In all three bad migrations the body size is indefinite. In  Actuality of the Stages  it says 
that through the power of the non-vi rtues there are all kinds of sizes. 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-2 How it is necessary to meditate on this, until the experience is being produced 
In accordance with that, when you think about the sufferings of bad migrations you reflect: 
“If it would be difficult to sit for one day with ones hands stuck into embers, or just to stay in 
a freezing cave during a winter storm without clothes on, or to be without food and drink for 
a few days, or for my body to be bitten by some thing like a bee, how could I bear the suffering 
of hot and cold hells, hungry ghosts and animal s that devour one another alive? Relative to 
such experience you should meditate until a chan ge of mind of intense {83} fear and terror 
occurs.  As you think about it now with your good base, what has been accumulated 
previously is purified and what you will en gage in later on lessens. Through intense 
aspirational prayers you direct the virtue that  has been accumulated previously and thereby 
increase it manifold. Since this opens up many avenues for engaging in them newly, there will 
be [opportunities] every day for making the leis ures meaningful. If you do not think about it 
now, once you have fallen to bad migrations, yo u will not find a refuge  protecting you from 
those fears, even if you look for it. At that ti me you will lack the power of mind to take on 
what should be done and reject what sh ould not be done. This is mentioned in Engaging in 
[Bodhisattva] Behaviour . 
Explanation of how to rely on methods for the happiness of future worlds  
2B4B-2B1A-2 Explanation of  how to rely on methods for the happiness of future worlds 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 65  A Training to go for refuge: the holy [/sublime] gate for entering the teachings  
B  The root of all well-being: generating the confidence of firm conviction in actions and [their] 
effects 
The second one [how to rely on methods for the happiness of future worlds] has two points: 
Training to go for refuge: the holy gate for en tering the teachings, and the root of all well-
being59: generating the confidence of firm conviction in actions and [their] effects. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A Training to go for refuge: the holy gate for entering the teachings 
1 The causes that going for refuge depends on  
2 Depending on them, the objects you go to for refuge  
3 The way in which to go for refuge as much as one can 
4 The stages of training after having gone for refuge 
The first one has four points: the causes that  going for refuge depends on, depending on 
them, the objects you go to for refuge, the way in  which to go for refuge as much as one can, 
and the stages of training after having gone for refuge 
2B4B-2B1A-2A1 The causes that going for refuge depends on 
First: Although, in general, there are many causes , here it is the fact that, as explained above, 
we do not stay in this life, we die soon and af ter death we do not have control over where we 
are going to be reborn controlled by [o ur] karma. Also, karma, according to Engaging in 
[Bodhisattva] Behaviour  is: 
 
As a flash at night amidst the clouds 
Illuminates the darkness for a moment, Likewise on the road through the power of buddhas A rare understanding of merit comes forth in the worldly. Therefore, that which is virtuous is always weak While evil is extremely strong and unbearable.  [21] 
 {84} Thus, as you think about ho w you fall to bad migrations because the power of wholesome 
karma is small and that of unwholesome karma is  excessively extremely strong, the two arise:  
fear of bad migrations and the conviction  that that which is rare and precious
60 [the Jewels], 
can protect you from them. Consequently, if th ese two remain but [/mere] words, going for 
refuge will be similar. However, if they are pr esent intense and firm, going for refuge will also 
come to tame the mind. Therefore, you should strive at those two causes.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A2 Depending on that the objects you go to for refuge 
A Identifying the objects [of refuge]   
B The reasons why they are worthy of refuge 
The second one has two points: identifying the objects [of refuge] and the reasons why they 
are worthy of refuge 
2B4B-2B1A-2A2A Identifying the objects [of refuge] 
First: In the Praise in One Hundred and Fifty Verses  it says:  
 
To one in whom perpetually 
All faults are definitely absent, 
To one in whom in every manner, All good qualities abide, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 66  In case someone like that exists, 
It is fit to go for refuge, To praise him, to attend on him, 
To abide in what he teaches.     [22] 
 
Thus, if someone has the intelligence to differ entiate between what is a refuge and what is 
not, it is appropriate for him to go for refuge to the unde ceiving protector, the Buddha 
Bhagavan. This also characterizes th e Dharma Jewel and the Sangha Jewel.
 From the Seventy 
Verses on Going for Refuge :  
 
Buddha, Dharma, Sangha are The refuge of those who want liberation.   [23] 
2B4B-2B1A-2A2B The reasons why they are worthy of refuge 
1 The actual reasons  
Second: Someone who is free from all fear, skille d in means of liberating others from fear, 
steeped in great compassion toward everyone without closeness and distance and who works 
for the benefit for the welfare of all regardless of  whether they help him or not – such a one is 
worthy of refuge. As only Buddha has those [quali fications], while Ishvara and the like do not, 
he is a refuge. For that reason the Dharma taught  by him as well as the Sangha of hearers are 
also {85} worthy to be refuges. 
2 Advice to be  persistent about conviction, the principal cause  
That being so, once you have derived certainty with  regard to these [objects of refuge] set forth 
in the Compendium ,when you are able to rely on them with a single-pointed mind, it is 
impossible for you not to be protected. Theref ore you should generate certainty from the 
bottom of your heart.  Of the two causes for be ing protected, there is no incompleteness in 
the external one – our teacher [, Buddha,] has achi eved it – however, since the internal cause, 
taking hold of that  refuge trusting ly has not come about, we suffer.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3 The way in which to go for refuge as much as one can 
A Understanding their positive qualities 
B Understanding their distinctions 
C Assertion  
D Going for refuge by not advocating other ones 
The second one has four points: Going for refuge  (by) understanding their positive qualities, 
understanding their distinctions, assertion and go ing for refuge by not advocating other ones.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A Understanding their positive qualities 
1 The Buddha’s positive qualities 
2 The positive qualities of the Dharma 
3 The positive qualities of the Sangha 
First: Since it is necessary to be mindful of the positive qualities of the refuges, this has three 
points: the Buddha’s positive qualities, the posi tive qualities of the Dharma and the Sangha. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1 The Buddha’s positive qualities 
A The actual qualities 
B Supplementary points 
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A The actual qualities 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 67  1 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] body 
2 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] speech 
3 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] mind 
4 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] exalted activities  
The first one has four points: the positive qual ities of [the Buddha’s] body, speech, mind and 
exalted activities.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A1 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] body 
First: Being mindful of the [major] marks an d minor characteristics of a buddha: In the Praise 
in Analogies  it says: 
   
Your body is adorned with marks, 
 Beautiful, nectar for eyes [to look at], Like a cloudless sky in autumn Ornamented with clusters of stars.  Oh Muni, endowed with the colour of gold, Beautiful, dressed in monastic robes, Like a golden mountain top Wrapped in clouds at dusk or dawn.  Protector, the splendour of your facial orb  - 
Although unadorned by jewelry - 
Is beyond that of the moon disc Although vast and clear of clouds.  If the lotus of your mouth And a lotus in bloom in the sun  Are beheld by a bee, the bee Will have its doubts about the lotus.  Your face endowed with the colour of gold - White teeth make it [more] beautiful {86} like immaculate autumn moonbeams Filtering through among golden mounts. 
 
Venerable one, your right hand, Embellished by the mark of the wheel Gives breath to the people terrified By the cycle of existence.  Oh Muni, as you walk, your feet Draw what looks like lotuses of Glory on the earth [you tread] – With lotuses how would it be lovelier?   [24]  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 68  You should remember them  in a ccordance with this statement. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A2 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] speech 
Second: you should think about the very marvelou s way in which whatever sentient beings in 
the world realms ask different questions all at on ce and he still apprehends them with wisdom 
that possesses a single  instance of mind and answers all the questions with one utterance that 
they understand in their re spective languages In the Chapter of the Truthful One  it says:  
 
If thus all beings, in one single moment, 
ask a question in  a lot of terms  his mind comprehends them in a single moment and answers them all  with one melodious [statement].  Thus know  that the melodious Brahma voice Of him, who gives instructions rings forth in this world.  He thoroughly set in moti on the wheel of Dharma 
eradicating suffering[s] of gods and men.   [25] 
 You reflect along the lines of this statement.       
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A3 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] mind 
A The positive qualities of knowledge  
B The positive qualities of mercy 
The third one has two points: the positive qualit ies of knowledge and the positive qualities of 
mercy. 
A The positive qualities of knowledge 
First: As all knowable objects – modes and vari eties - are engaged by the Muni’s unobstructed 
knowledge like a dhatri berry61 placed on the palm of his ha nd, the diverse knowable objects 
are pervaded  by the Muni’s knowledge. Ho wever, they are not pervaded by other’s 
[knowledge], as knowable objects are vast and th eir consciousnesses are  narrow. In this regard 
it says in Praise of the Praiseworthy :  
 
Only your exalted wisdom, 
{87} Encompasses all the knowable objects For all the others apart from you Some knowable objects remain to be known.  [26] 
And: 
Bhagavan, dharmas of all times, All aspects, all places of origin, Are spheres of activity of your mind Like dhatri berries in your palm. 
 
As regards dharmas – static or mobile, Single  or various and distinct, There’s nothing to which your mind is obstructed - Like wind moving to and fro in space. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 69   
You should reflect in accordance with these statements. 
B The positive quality of mercy 
Second: Just as sentient beings  are bound by the afflictions wi thout any control, the Muni is 
bound by great compassion without control an d therefore great compassion continuously 
arises in him when he perceives suffering migrating beings. In the One Hundred and Fifty Verses  
it says: 
All of these migrating beings 
Are equally bound by the afflictions. In order to untie their afflictions 
You have long been bound by compassion. 
 Should I first prostrate to you Or to that which causes you  To stay in samsara that long, aware 
Of its faults – to great compassion?    [27] 
 
In the Chapter of the Truthful One  it also says: 
 
When he sees the many beings always Obscured by ignorance and mental darkness Imprisoned in the prison of samsara  Great compassion is born in the holy sage.   [28]  
You should become aware of it in accordance with these statements.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A4 The positive qualitie s of [the Buddha’s] exalted activities 
Fourth: By means of both spontaneous and  un interrupted exalted activities of [his] body, 
speech and mind he benefits all sentient beings. In  fact insofar as a trainee is fit for guidance, 
it is impossible for the Muni not to give that trainee what is excellent and pull him out of his 
degeneration. That is why it is stated that th ey certainly perform all the appropriate actions. 
{88}  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1B Supplementary points 
1 Gaining certainty regarding the conviction: the cause of going for refuge purely   
Potowa said this: “If you keep contemplating ag ain and again, the firmer your conviction and 
the purer your mental continuum becomes, the mo re blessings will arise. As you gain certain 
knowledge in this regard, you will go for refuge  from the bottom of your heart and then, if 
you merely train in the precepts, everything you do will become an instance of practicing the 
Buddha’s teachings.  
2 Not gaining the conviction 
We do not even value the Buddha’s exalted kn owledge as much as [we value] a keen woman 
fortune teller. If a keen fortune teller tells you “I know there will be no bad luck for you this 
year”, you walk away happy and comfortable. If  she says: “This year [there will be] great 
misfortune – do this, don’t do that!”, you will try hard to accomplish it and if you do not 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 70  manage , you will think: “ I did not accomplish what she told me [to do]” and your mind will 
be anxious. If the Buddha says: “Do this and th at. Accomplish this and that”, do you take it 
on? If you do not accomplish it, does your mind become anxious?  To say: “from the [point of 
view of] Dharma those words [may be] explained as follows: due to place and time that is 
inconvenient now. I must do this” is to igno re the Buddha’s statements and proceed on the 
basis of your own understanding. If you turn th e mind within and investigate this in detail, 
rather than being unquestioningly happy and confus ed with respect to the mere words, it will 
strike you as very true.   
3 Insistent advice to achieve certainty 
Therefore, think  about the Buddha’s positive qu alities again and again, and strive to achieve 
as much certainty as possible. If it develops , you have reached the main point of going for 
refuge, because a similar certainty will come co ncerning the Dharma that arose from him and 
the Sangha of those who have accomplished th at Dharma. Without it there is no way going 
for refuge, a tamed mind, let alone other paths,  will come either.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-2 Positive qualities of the Dharma 
Second: On account of [your] respect for the Buddha, you should be mindful  thinking: the 
fact that the Buddha has {89} limitless qualit ies arose from manifesting and meditating the 
Dharma of scriptures and realization, the truths   of cessation and the path, the epitome of the 
abandonment of faults and the achievement of po sitive qualities. That is the meaning of the 
Compendium of the Dharma [Sutra ].  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-3 Positive qualities of the sangha 
Third: This refers mainly to persons who are aryas. Recalling the positive qualities of the 
Dharma you are mindful of those who accompli sh it correctly. That is the meaning of  
Compendium of the Dharma . 
2B4B-2B1A-2A3B Understanding their distinctions 
S e c o n d :  A s  i s  a p p a r e n t   f r o m  t h e  Compendium , you go for refuge aware of the mutual 
distinctions between the three jewels.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3C Assertion 
Third: As is apparent  from the Extensive Commentary on the Vinaya , you go for refuge in terms 
of  considering the Buddha to be the one who te aches  the refuge; the Dharma to be nirvana, 
which is the actual refuge; and the Sangha, to be the companions accomplishing refuge.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3D Not advocating other ones  
Fourth: Having understood the superiority an d inferiority of Buddhist and non-Buddhist 
teachers, teachings and students, respectively, yo u consider the Three Jewels alone to be a  
refuge, and do not consider teachers and so fo rth who are incompatible with them to be a 
refuge. With respect to the difference between  the two [sets], the difference between the 
teachers is that the Buddha is without faults and has perfected positive qualities while other 
teachers are the opposite to that. In the Praise of the Particularly Exalted   [One]  it says: 
  
Having abandoned the other teachers 
Bhagavan, I take refuge in you. If you ask “For what purpose?” – Because 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 71  You have no faults but have qualities .   [28] 
and: 
The more I’ve thought about the scriptures 
Of others, tirthikas62, the more 
My confidence in you has grown, Lord. 
Those whose minds are wasted through the 
Faulty tenets of non-omniscience, 
Whose thinking is wasted do not see, {90} Faultless teachers – not even you.   [29]   
2B4B-2B1A-2A4 The stages of training after having gone for refuge  
A The actual content   
B Eliminating inaccuracies [with respect to the precepts of going for refuge] 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A The actual content   
1 Specific precepts [for the individual objects of refuge] 
2 Common precepts [for all three objects of refuge] 
The fourth one has two points: specific precepts  [for the individual objects of refuge] and 
common precepts [for all three objects of refuge]. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1 Specific precepts [for the individual objects of refuge]  
A Precepts of what is to be stopped 
B Precepts of what is to be accomplished 
The first one has two points: precepts of what is to be stopped and precepts of what is to be 
accomplished. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1A Precepts of what is to be stopped 
1 Not to go for refuge to other gods 2 To give up causing harm or difficulty  to sentient beings 
3 Not to associate with non-Buddhists [/Conni: proponents of non-Buddhist views] 
First: From the  [Sutra of Great Final ] Nirvana : 
 
Going for refuge to the three 
One is a true upasaka. One will never ever go To some other gods for refuge.  One going for refuge to the Saddharma  Is free from the mind to harm or kill. One going for refuge to the Sangha, Does not mingle with Tirthikas.    [30]  
In accordance with this statement there are thr ee  [inhibitory precepts]:: not to go for refuge 
to other gods, to give up caus ing harm or difficulty to sentie nt beings and not to associate 
with Tirthikas .  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 72  1 Not to go for refuge to other gods 
The first of these: If one does not even regard  powerful worldly gods, Rudra, Vishnu and the 
like as long-term refuge, no need to speak of nagas and local spirits belonging to the hungry 
ghosts. In this regard, while it is not appropriate to rely on them from a lack of conviction in 
the three objects of refuge, it is not inappropriat e to seek their assistance for some action of 
temporary character. By way of example, it is like seeking assistance from a donor for one’s 
livelihood or like relying on a doctor in hope for a cure.   
2 To give up causing harm or difficulty  to sentient beings 
The second one consists in giving  up causing harm or difficulty  to humans or animals, and so 
forth through thought or actions like beating, binding, ensnaring them, piercing their noses 
and loading them unbearably .  
3 Not to associate with non-Buddhists  
The third one consists in not conforming to th ose who are unconvinced by the protection of 
the three jewels, and denigrate them.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B Precepts of what  is to be accomplished    
1 How to train with respect to the representations of the Buddha 
2 How to train with respect to the representations of the Dharma 
3 How to train with respect to the representations of the sangha 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B1 How to train with respect to the representations of the Buddha 
A The actual way to train with respect to the representations of the Buddha  
{91} Second: However good or flawed painted pi ctures of the Buddha’s body may be, do not 
disparage them, do not put them on the ground  when inconvenienced. Having given up the 
irreverance of pawning them etc. and defaming them, regard them as  fields  of respect like the 
teacher [himself]. In the Letter to a Friend  it says:  
 
The way the learned honour any form 
of the Sugata – even made from wood.   [31] 
B Examples of the fully ripened effects of irreverance that have occurred in the past  
In the Scripture on Discernment  [/Conni: Unterteilung der [Vinaya-]Schriften ] it is stated that 
Manavakapila abused members of the sangha who were learners and non-learners in 18 
different ways saying things like: “You elepha nt heads! How do you know what is Dharma 
and what isn’t?”. Because of that he was born as a sea monster, a spec ies of fish  with 18 
different heads, and remained an animal from th e time of the teacher Kasyapa to that of the 
Shakya king [Shakyamuni]. 
 In Minor Precepts  [of the Vinaya ] it says that after the te acher Krakucchanda had passed 
into Nirvana, when King Carumat had a big stup a built, a hired workman twice scoffed at it 
saying: “who knows when such a huge stupa will ever get finished”. Later on when the stupa 
had been finished nicely he felt sorry, had a golden  bell made from his wage and tied it to the 
stupa. Due to that he was born as “The Well-Sounding One” with an ugly complexion and a 
small body but a very pleasant voice. Therefore,  do not talk about representations saying “this 
is like that”. It is inappropriate to disparage the establishment  of a great representation from 
good materials and to dissuade [others] from it through disruptive remarks .   
 The Great Yogi [Jangchub Rinchen] gave Atis ha a statue of Manjushri  to look at and 
asked: “What is the quality like? If it is good I’ll  take it and give the four gold coins Rongwa 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 73  Garge has given me”. {92} Atisha said: “There is  nothing that is not good about the Venerable 
One’s body. As for the sculptor – average.” Havi ng said this, he placed the statue on the 
crown of his head.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B2 Precepts associated with the Dharma [/?*Conni: How to train with respect to 
representations of the Dharma] 
A The actual [precepts]  
You abandon irreverence to as little as four  words of Dharma. You abandon pawning volumes 
of scripture, trading them, putting them on th e bare ground or in inconvenient  places, 
carrying them around together with shoes, stepping over them  and so forth. Instead you treat 
them with respect like  the Dharma jewel .  
A How the masters of former times acted 
It is said that Geshe Chengawa   used to put his palms togeth er and rise up  when he saw 
scriptures [of the Buddha’s teachings] being brou ght. Later on, when he could not get up any 
more, he used to [simply] put his palms together.  It is said when Atisha came to Ngari, one tantric practitioner  di d not listen to Dharma 
[teachings] from him. However, as one scribe  smeared residue from his teeth on a Dharma 
t e x t ,  A t i s h a  s a w  i t  a n d ,  u n a b l e  t o  b e a r  i t ,  s a i d :  “ a l a s !  t h a t ’ s  n o  g o o d ,  t h a t ’ s  n o  g o o d ! ” ,  t h e  
tantrika gained  faith and listened to the teachings .  
 Sharawa said: “We play around with the Dhar ma in all sorts of ways – irreverance for 
the Dharma and expounders of Dharma is a cause for distorted wisdom. We are already 
confused enough now. What are we goin g to do if we get more confused?”  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B3 Precepts with regard to the Sangha  
A The actual [precepts] 
You do not abuse or despise  the Sangha or  even anyone merely bearing the marks of 
ordination. Nor do you look at them as o pponents in any way having made [arbitrary] 
divisions in terms of “your group and my group”, treating them with resp ect as if they were 
the Sangha Jewel. In Exhortation to the Special Attitude   it says: 
 
Those who wish for qualities , dwelling in forests 
Should not look for faults in other [people], 
They should not produce the attitude: 
“I’m especially noble, I’m the best”.  {93} All carelessness grows
63 out of this complacence. 
Don’t let contempt for lesser monks arise – 
You won’t reach liberation for one eon - 
This is the succession64  of this teaching.   [32]  
 
B How the masters of former times acted and the benefits [of that] 
Geshe [Drom] Tonpa and the great Yogi, instead of stepping over any piece of yellow material 
on the ground, would shake it and carry it to a clean place. You should train in accordance 
with their practice, for others  will respect you as  much as you respect the [three] jewels. In the 
King of Concentration  it says:  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 74   
What kind of  actions you have done, 
that kind of effects you will obtain.    [33] 
 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2  Common precepts [for all three objects of refuge] 
A Remembering the differences  and positive qualities of the three jewels and, due to that, 
going for refuge again and again 
B Remembering their great kindness and, due to that, exerting oneself at all times to make 
offerings to  them and offer them even the first portion of one’s food and drink 
C Remembering their great compassion and, due to that, establishing other migrating beings 
in such a mode [of behaviour]  
D Whatever you do and whatever you need, worshiping the three jewels, then supplicating 
them and abandoning all other, worldly methods  
E Aware of the benefits, going for refuge three times a day and three times at night  
F Not giving up the three jewels for one’s life nor for a laugh and guarding against this 
The second one has six points: Rememberingthe differences  and positive qualities of the 
three jewels and, due to that, going for refu ge again and again, remembering their great 
kindness and, due to that, exerting oneself at a ll times to make offerings to  them and offer 
them even the first portion of one’s food an d drink, remembering their great compassion 
and, due to that, establishing other migrating beings in such a mode [of behaviour], whatever 
you do and whatever you need, worshipping th e three jewels, then supplicating them and 
abandoning all other, worldly methods, aware of  the benefits, going for refuge three times a 
day and three times at night, not giving up the three jewels for one’s life nor for a laugh and 
guarding against this. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2A Remembering the differences  and positive qualities of the three jewels and, 
due to that, going for refuge again and again 
First: As explained above, you think about th e differences between things non-Buddhist and 
Buddhist  as well as among the three jewels and [consider] the positive qualities of those.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2B Remembering their great kindne ss and, due to that, exerting oneself at all 
times to make offerings to them and offer them even the first portion of one’s food and drink 
1 Constant offerings 
Second: You should come to understand all the well-being you experience as the kindness  of 
the three jewels and worship them by acknowledging that .  
2 The peculiarity that the collections are completed with little trouble  
Since you constantly need to eat and drink, {94} you will complete a great amount of 
collections with little trouble if you keep offering65 the first portion of them each time.  
Therefore, you should offer the first portion of whatever you enjoy, including water, from the 
bottom of your heart. 
3 Impure offerings  
Moreover Sharawa said: “You don’t need to make [offerings] from the blue [mould] on 
coagulated milk and yellow leaves but from something good. [Worship] comes about each 
time through offering the first portion of tea, but not through something like cleaning out the 
dust.” 
4 The manner of respect when offering 
In a sutra it says: For instance, if at the time of planting seeds in a fertile field something  
remains unplanted, it cannot just be left. Like wise, may the field of merit be tilled with the 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 75  plough of confidence, that sublime field from wh ich all future well-being springs and that just 
needs to be  planted with the seed of well-bein g throughout all four seasons. If that which 
needs to be done does not occur, it will be an extremely heavy loss. 
5 The need to exert oneself in making offerings 
Not to have even as much regard for the best of fields as for an ordinary field is not a good 
attitude of ours. Therefore, we should strive, at all times, to make [reverential] offerings to the 
three jewels.  
6 High status, paths, etc. are attained through making offerings in that way 
If you do that, through the powe r of the roots of virtue growing in the most excellent field, 
the power of your intelligence concerning th e stages of the path increases. When your 
intelligence is very feeble such that you do  not retain the words while listening, do not 
understand the meaning while contemplating,  and nothing arises in the mind during 
meditation, the quintessential instruction is  to rely on the power of the field.  
7 How the size of offerings and so forth is a distinction to do with  the mind 
Also the offering is not confined by the thing [o ffered], it is confined by  your confidence . As 
it is stated [in the scriptures], if you have fa ith, it is enough to offer mandalas, water, and 
offerings that are not considered by anyone [t o be their property], therefore you should act 
accordingly even if you do not have any material th ings [to offer].  {95} Not to be able to give, 
even though you have something, saying: “I am  a wretched pauper without any merits, I do 
not have any other possessions to offer”66 – in the words of Potowa, that is like a blind person 
putting some cheap aromatic plant into a smel ly conch-shell container and fooling someone 
with eye-sight by calling it sa ndalwood and camphor perfume.  
8 How to train in upright[ness with regard to] offering substances, following the masters of former times  
Puchungwa said: “At first I used to offer a pung ent aromatic plant . Th en I had the means to 
offer sweet incence prepared from four [differe nt] substances. Now I offer the most exquisitely 
fragrant  aloe wood and durushka etc.” In accord ance with this statement, if you do not give 
anything out of contempt for small offerings, it will go on like that throughout your entire 
life. However, if you develop perseverance from a lesser stage, it will get better and better. Therefore you should train following his practice .  I t  i s  s a i d  t h a t  h e  o n c e  p r e p a r e d  i n c e n s e  
[worth] 22 gold coins.  
9 Refutation of the manners of speaking [to the effect] that the way Bodhisattvas make offerings, having 
gained control over material  things, is impure 
If great bodhisattvas, having gained control ov er material things, emanate many hundreds of 
thousands of bodies and for each body, again, emanate hundreds of thousands of hands etc. 
and [if they] appear in all the fields making  offerings  to the Jinas for many eons, the 
statement by those who know only  the superfic ial appearance of positive qualities that “As 
for me, I do not hope [to reach] enlightenment th at way,” – is the idle talk of [people] who 
have ver little familiarity with the Dharma.   
10 How to make offerings with other vast  things  
In the Jewel Cloud  [Sutra ] it says: “From the sutra collections you should study what are very 
vast offerings and honours and from the bottom of your heart dedicate them with the most 
excellent special  attitude  to the buddhas an d bodhisattvas.” You shou ld do it like that. 
           
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 76  2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2C Remembering their great compassion and, due to that, establishing other 
beings in such a mode [of behaviour]  
Third: Out of loving concern you establish other sentient beings in going for refuge as much 
as you can.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2D Whatever you do and whatever you need, worshiping the three jewels and 
supplicating them, abandoning all other, worldly methods 
{96} Whatever you do and whatever requirements  you see, rely on the three jewels and do 
what is in agreement with them such as making offerings to them. However, it is 
inappropriate to rely in every way on that which is not in agreement with them in every aspect 
such as Bon. Consequently, you should trust the three jewels at all times.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2E Aware of the benefits, going for refuge three times a day and three times at night 
1 It is measure  of being a Buddhist 
2 It is the basis of all vows  
3 The karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and exhausted 
4 One accumulates vast merit 
5 One will not fall into the bad migrations 
6 One will not be harmed by human and non-human obstacles 
7 One will attain everything one wishes for 
8 One will swiftly attain buddhahood 
The fifth one has eight benefits: It is the measur e  of being a Buddhist, it is the basis of all 
vows, the karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and exhausted, one 
accumulates vast merit, one will not fall into   bad migrations, one will not be harmed by 
human and non-human obstacles, one will attain  everything one wishes for, and one will 
swiftly attain the state of buddhahood. 
1 It is the measure  of being a Buddhist 
First: Although, generally speaking, there a ppear to be many ways of positing [what 
constitutes] non-Buddhists and a Buddhists, it  i s  w i d e l y  k n o w n  t h a t  J o w o  [ A t i s h a ]  a n d  
Shantipa distinguished them by [the fact of] go ing for refuge. Therefore,  Buddhists should be 
understood as those having achieved going for refuge and not having given up on it. Hence, 
as for the measure of being a Buddhist, it is ne cessary to consider the three jewels as teacher 
etc. from the bottom of one’s heart. Without that, whatever virtuous deeds you do, you are 
not included among Buddhists.  
2 It is the basis of all vows 
Second: In the Commentary on the Treasury  it says:  
 
Those who go for refuge have gained  access to taking all the vows 
c o r r e c t l y .         [ 3 4 ]  
and in Seventy Verses on Going for Refuge  it also says: 
 
Upasakas go to the three for refuge - That’s the root of the eight vows.    [35]  
the intention being that through going for re fuge the thought of passing beyond suffering
67 is 
stabilized  and that the vows spring from that.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 77  3 The The obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and exhausted 
Third: In the Compendium of Trainings  it says: 
 
Here, in the context of showing that  negativites are purified by going 
for refuge, the story of the pig should be presented as illustration. 
         [ 3 6 ]   
For instance, a son of a god who was going to be reborn as a pig, {97} through going for refuge 
was not born as one. It is stated that:  
Those gone for refuge to the Buddha, Will not go to the bad migrations. They give up their human body and obtain that of a god.     
It has been stated similarly with respect to the Dharma and Sangha.  
4 One accumulates vast merit 
Fourth: In the Summary of the Perfections  it says: 
  
If the merit of refuge took shape 
These three realms would even be small as a container. 
Great oceans, foremost of water bodies 
Could not hold  or measure it.     
 That is how [vast] it is. 
5 One will not fall into  bad migrations 
Fifth: You should understand this from the above.  
6 Not being harmed by human and non-human obstacles 
Sixth: This is easy to understand. 
7 One will attain everything one wishes for 
Seventh : Whatever Dharma activity you do, if  at the beginning you make offerings to the 
three jewels, go for refuge and supplicate them, it will easily be accomplished.  
8 One will swiftly attain buddhahood 
In [the Sutra ] Requested by Senge  it says: 
  
Through faith unfreedom is abandoned.   [37] 
 
In accordance with that you obtain distinguis hed leisure and, having encountered  refuge, 
train in the special paths, whereby you will be come a buddha without long delay. Mindful of 
these kinds of benefits you should go for refuge  three times a day and three times at night  . 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2F Not giving up the three jewels for one’s life nor for a laugh and guarding 
against this 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 78  There is no doubt that we will be separated from this life, body, and possessions. If we give up 
the three jewels for their sake, there will be co ntinuous suffering in all successive lives [to 
come], therefore we should vow not to abando n [our] refuge, come what may, and not even 
utter words about  giving up [our] refuge for a laugh. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4B Eliminating inaccuracies [with respect to the precepts of going for refuge]  
1 Refutation of that which is not  a precept  
Former masters stated a precept to the effect  th at you should train in going for refuge to the 
Tathatgata of whatever direction you go in, but I have not seen a source [for that].  
2 The sources for the specific  precepts 
Thus the six common precepts [for all the objects of refuge] are just like they appear in the 
Commentary on the Lamp on the Path . {98} The first three specific precepts are explained in the 
sutra collection, whereas the latter three appear in the Six Branches of Going for Refuge . 
3 The difference between degenerating  and relinquishing  [the precepts] 
As for the way transgression against these precepts becomes a cause of degenerating and 
relinquishing them, transgression of the rule not to give up your refuge even for the sake of 
your life actually constitutes relinquishing it. Si milarly, even if you do not give up the three 
jewels, but dualistically uphold the three – teache rs and so forth – that are incompatible with 
them, you trangress the precept of not advocating another refuge. By not having confidence 
in the refuge you also relinquish it. I think that, if these do not occur, it is a mere 
transgression of the precepts but not a cause for relinquishing them. 
4 The advice not to transgress the precepts because of how great the benefits are: being the entrance 
gate to the teachings etc. 
Thus going for refuge is the great entry gate to the Buddha’s teachings. If your going for 
refuge does not consist in mere words, you will be relying on a superior  power. Therefore you 
will not be thwarted by external or internal obstacles, and the various qualities will come 
about easily and hardly deteriorate, whereby they  will increase more and more. So it is vital 
that you uphold [your] refuge by means of bein g mindful of the fear and the positive qualities 
explained above, and that you put effort  into not transgressing its precepts.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B Generating the faith of conviction in karma and its results 
A Considering karma and its results in general 
B Considering karma and its results in particular 
C Having considered them, how to engage [in virtuous actions] and counteract  [the non-
virtuous] 
The second one – generating the faith of  conviction in karma and its results  – has three 
points: considering karma and its results in ge neral, considering karma and its results in 
particular, and having considered  them, how to engage [in virtuous actions] and counteract  
[the non-virtuous].  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1 Considering karma68 and its results in general 
A The actual way to consider karma and its results in general 
B Considering the specific divisions 
The first one has two points: the actual way to consider karma and its results in general and 
considering the specific divisions. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A The actual way to consider karma and its results in general 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 79  1 How karma is certain 
2 The great increase of karma 
3 You do not meet with karma you have not created 
4 Karma you have created does not dissipate 
The first one has four points: ho w karma is certain, the great increase of karma, you do not 
meet with karma you have not created, and karma you have created does not dissipate. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-1  How karma is certain 
1 The actual way how karma is certain 
First: All happiness having the aspect of pleasant feelings , whether in ordinary beings or aryas 
– even as little as that which is generated in a sentient being born in hell in dependence on a 
cool wind springing up - arises from virtuous karma accumulated previously. {99} There is no 
way for happiness to arise from non-virtuous karm a. All suffering having the aspect of painful 
feelings – even as little as that which is generated  in the mind of an arhat – arises from non-
virtuous karma accumulated previously. There is no way for suffering to arise from virtuous 
karma. In the Precious Garland  it says: 
  
From non-virtuous deeds: all suffering; Likewise all the bad migrations. From virtuous deeds: all happy realms – Happiness in all rebirths.     [38] 
2 Explanations [of this] as the basis of all white dharmas 
Therefore, happines and suffering do not arise without cause or from an incongruous cause 
like the primal matter, Ishvara, and the like. In general, happines and suffering arise from 
virtuous and non-virtuous karma, and the manifo ld specifics  of happiness and suffering also 
arise individually from the manifo ld specifics of the two [types of] of karma without any error. 
To gain certainty with regard to actions and thei r results being certain and infallible is said to 
be the correct view of all Buddhists and prai sed as the foundation of all white dharmas. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-2  The great increase of karma 
Second: There is nothing among external causes and effects that would resemble the increase 
of internal causes and effects, for even from  small wholesome karma the result of enormous 
happines arises while even from small unwholesome karma the result of enormous suffering 
arises. In the Udanavarga   it says: 
  
Even committing a small negativity, 
Will effectuate great fear and 
Great disaster in future worlds. 
Like poison seeping through to the core. 
 
Even committing a little merit, In future worlds will bring great happiness, Causing greatly meaningful things, Like grains that ripen to excellence.   [39] 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-3  You do not meet with karma you have not created 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 80  Third: {100} If you have not accumulated the karma that will become the cause for 
experiencing happiness or suffering, you will ne ver experience the happiness or suffering that 
is its result. Also, those who enjo y the effects of the Teacher’s accumulation of an incalculable 
collection [of merits], do not need to accumu late all its causes, however, they need to 
accumulate part of them69.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-4  Karma you have created does not dissipate 
Fourth: The virtuous and non-virtuous actions th at have been done issue forth pleasant and 
unpleasant results. In the Praise to the Particularly Noble  it says:  
 
Brahmins say they can transfer 
Virtues and negativities As though giving and taking them. You said, what is done won’t vanish What is not will not be met.     [40]  
And from the King of Concentration [Sutra]: 
 
Plus you cannot but touch your deeds, What others did you will not feel.     [41]  
And from the Foundation of [Vinaya] Scriptures : 
 
Karmas do not go to waste Even in a hundred eons When they find the collection [of conditions] and time, They will become effects for beings
70.    [42]  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B Considering the specific divisions 
1 Indication  that there are mainly ten paths of action 
2 Establishing actions and effects 
The second one has two points: indication  th at there are mainly ten paths of action and 
establishing actions and effects. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-1 Indication  that there are mainly ten paths of action  
A Explanation that there are ten in the sutras and treatises 
First: Thus you have first generated certaint y concerning the ways of actions and results 
through realizing that happiness and suffering results are certain to have their individual 
causes, that karma increases greatly, that you do  not meet with anything you have not created 
and that karma does not dissipate. Now, if you ask about what actions to adopt and which 
ones to reject [it is as follows]. In general, the gates for engaging in good conduct and faulty 
conduct are determined to be  three. Although  not all virtues and non-virtues of the three 
doors are included in the ten paths of action, the Bhagavan, summing up the essential points, 
has stated the more obvious or coarser virtue s and non-virtues, the great foundations of 
misdeeds, as the ten black paths of action. Having seen that, wh en they are given up, the most 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 81  significant points are also included in ten,{1 01} he taught them to be the white paths of 
action.  In the Treasury  it says:  
 
Subsuming the most obvious among them 
The various virtues and non-virtues Were stated as ten paths of action.    [43]  
Also, in the Scripture on Discernment   it says:  
 
Guarding one’s speech and completely restraining one’s mind Refraining from unwholesome deeds with the body, Once you have purified these three paths of action, You will attain the path that was taught by the seer[s].  [44] 
 
B Explanation of cherishing the adoption and abandonment of the ten [paths of action]  
Therefore, the meaning of the praise to ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtuous 
[paths of action] from the Sutra on the Ten Grounds , is summarily stated in Entry to the Middle 
Way:  
For high status and for certain goodness  Of ordinary beings, those born from the [Buddha’s] speech
71 
Of those with the nature of self-enlightenment72, 
The Jinas’ children73 - the cause is not other than discipline. 
         [ 4 5 ]  
C Giving up hypocrisy 
That being so, it would be quite disgraceful if  someone who does not rely on the mind of 
restraint again and again, and guard even a bit of  ethical discipline, were to say: “As for me, I 
am a Mahayanist.” In the Kshitigarbha Sutra  it says:  
 
By means of these ten virtuous paths [of actions] you become a buddha. On the other hand, if one who does not guard even a single virtuous 
path of action throughout his life and yet says: “I am a Mahayanist. I 
seek unsurpassed, perfectly complete  enlightenment”, that person is a 
thorough hypocrite and great liar, deceiving the world in front  of all the bhagavans and propounding nihilism. He will die deluded and go to the wrongly fallen.     [46]  
“Wrongly fallen” should be understood as  a synonym for the utterly bad migrations. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2  Determination of actions and effects 
A Negative actions and [their] effects 
B Positive actions and [their] effects 
C Indication of other divisions of actions 
The second one – determination of actions an d effects – has three points: {102} negative 
actions and [their] effects, positive actions and [their] effects and indication of other divisions 
of actions. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 82  2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A Negative actions and [their] effects 
1 The actual negative paths of action 
2 Differences in weight 
3 Indication of the effects 
The first one has three points: the actual negati ve paths of action, differences in weight and 
indication of the effects. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1 The actual negative paths of action 
A The actual paths of action 
B Distinction between action and path 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A The actual paths of action 
1 Killing  
2 Stealing 
3 Sexual misconduct 
4 Lying 
5 Divisive speech 
6 Harmful speech 
7 Meaningless speech 
8 Covetousness 
9 Harmful intent 
10 Wrong views 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1 Killing [Taking life] 
A Basis74 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1A Basis 
As for the first one, the basis of killing is another sentient being . 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1B Attitude 
1 Discrimination 
The attitude has three points, the first of wh ich is discrimination, which [again] has four 
points:  
 - with regard to the basis, such a sentient  being, the discrimination of it as such, 
 - the discrimination that it  is not a sentient being, 
 - the discrimination of what is not a sent ient being as not a sentient being, and  
 - the discrimination of it as a sentient being. 
 The first and third discrimination are un mistaken, the second and fourth ones are 
mistaken. That is, if you have the motivation, for instance, thinking to kill only Devadatta 
and then, when it comes to the performance, you mistakenly kill Yajnadatta there is no 
negativity to do with the actu al basis. For that  an unmistaken discrimination would be  
necessary. However, if, at the time of the pe rformance, you have the general motivation 
t h i n k i n g  t o  k i l l  w h o e v e r   i s  a t  h a n d ,  a n  u n mistaken discrimination is not necessary. You 
should be aware of this rule with regard to the remaining nine, too, as appropriate.    
2 Mental affliction 
The [decisive] mental affliction is any of the three poisons.  
3 Motiviation 
The motivation consists in the wish to kill. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1C Performance 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 83  1 The performer  
It is the same whether you yourself do the pe rformance or whether you cause someone else to 
do it.  
2 The essence of the performance 
The essence of the performance is to do it by means of a weapon, poison, mantra, or whatever 
it is.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1D Completion 
The completion consists in the death [of the other being] due to condition of the 
performance, at that time or at anot her time before you yourself die.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2 Stealing 
A Basis 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2A Basis 
The basis of stealing is anything that someone else has obtained.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2B Attitude 
As for the attitude, among the three, discrimi nation and mental affliction, are as above75.  
 {103} The motivation consists in the wish  to take it away from the other [person] 
without being given it. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2C Performance 
1 The performer  
As regards the performance, the perf ormer is as [explained] above.  
2 The essence of the performance 
As for the essence of the performance, it is th e same whether you take  something by force or 
whether you steal something sneakingly . In additi on, being deceitful with respect to a debt or 
a trust or and using other fraudulent  methods also constitutes stealing. And whether it is 
done for one’s own or someone else’s purpose or  to harm someone else etc., it is stealing 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2D Completion 
The completion consists in the arising of the th ought that one has obtain ed it. Or, if you have 
caused someone else to rob or steal, it is enough [for that thought] to arise in him. This is like 
when someone kills someone else due to one’s order and, even without his knowledge, when 
the latter dies, the negativity of the actual [pat h of action] befalls  the one having given the 
order. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3 Sexual misconduct 
A Basis 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3A Basis 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 84  1 Persons you should not have intercourse with  
Among the four bases of sexual misconduct, the first is those you should not have intercourse 
with, your mother etc.76, women under the care of their mothers etc.77, all men78, eunochs and 
ordained women.  
2 Inappropriate body parts 
Inappropriate body parts are [all] those other th an the entrance to the womb  such as the 
mouth.  
3 Inappropriate places 
Inappropriate places are the vicinity of gu rus, places with stupas and the like.  
4 Inappropriate times 
Inappropriate times are pregnancy, when you abide in one-day vows, etc.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3B  Attitude 
1 Three positions of scholars on discrimination 
Among the three [aspects] of attitude , with respect to discrimination:  
 - the Compendium  states that “a discrimination of th at as that” – a non-mistaken one is 
 necessary 
 - the vinaya states that with regard to a de feat of impure conduct , it is  the same 
whether the discrimination is mistaken or non-mistaken 
 - the Commentary on the Treasury  explains that if you approach someone else’s wife79 
discriminating her to be yours, this will not cons titute the path of action [under discussion], 
and that there are  two ways in which getting involved with  someone else’s wife, perceiving 
her to be that of someone else yet, m ay or may not [constitute such a path].  
2 Mental affliction 
{104} The mental affliction is any of the three poisons.  
3 Motivation 
The motivation is the wish for intercourse in  a manner that constitutes impure conduct.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3C Performance 
The performance consists in ende avouring for the sake of that. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3D Completion 
The completion consists in the tw o coming together by the two.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4 Lying 
A Basis 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4A Basis 
1 Basis of expression 
Among the two bases of lying, th e basis of expression is the four: that which one has seen, 
heard, distinguished or become fully aware of as well as their four opposites.  
2 Object of comprehension 
The object of comprehension is for the ot her person to understand the meaning.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 85  2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4B Attitude 
Among the three [aspects] belonging to the atti tude, the discrimination consists in making 
something one has seen into something one has no t seen etc. The mental affliction is any of 
the three poisons. The motivation consists in  the wish to say something, changing the 
discrimination [someone has of something]. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C Performance 
1 The actual performance 
2 Clearing up doubts 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C1 The actual performance 
The performance consists in indi cating something by saying it, by making sure not to say 
anything, or through body language. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C2 Clearing up doubts 
A Clearing up the doubt that it depends on the purpose [B Three approaches concerning the distinction between the path of action being complete or not if you 
enjoin  someone else to lie]  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C2A Clearing up the doubt that it depends on the purpose 
Moreover, [in the scriptures] it says that it is  the same whether you say it for your own or 
someone else’s purposes. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C2B Three approaches concerning the distinction between the actual path of action 
being incomplete if you enjoin  someone else to do it 
1 The approach of the Treatise on the Grounds 
Here it is stated that with respect to lying,  divisive speech, and ha rsh words, even through 
enjoining [someone else], these three will come about.  
2 Vasubandhu’s approach 
In the Treasury , the root text and its Commentary, it is explained that all four associated with 
speech become paths of action through enjo ining [someone else to perform them].  
3 The approach of of the vinaya is to join them to the downfalls 
In the vinaya it is stated that in order to produce a complete downfall, you yourself must 
speak.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4D Completion 
1 The actual completion 
The completion consists in the other person understanding [what has been said].  
2 Clearing up doubts  
The Commentary on the Treasury  explains that, if it is not understood, it becomes merely idle  
talk. This is the same with di visive speech and harsh words.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-5 Divisive speech 
A Basis 
The basis of divisive speech are sentient beings  who are in agreement or in disagreement with 
each other.  
B Attitude 
Among the three [aspects] belonging to the attitu de, the discrimination and affliction are as  
above.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 86   {105} The motivation consists in  the wish to divide sentient beings in agreement and 
the wish that those in disagr eement not to be reconciled. 
C Performance 
The performance consists in expressing either pleasant or unpleasant subject matter with 
either true or untrue words and to say them  for either one’s own or others’ purpose.  
D Completion 
The completion consists in the divisive wo rds [thus] expressed to be understood.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-6 Harsh words 
A Basis 
The basis of harsh words is a sentient being who has become the basis for the arising of a 
hostile attitude.  
B Attitude 
With respect to the attitude, discrimination and a ffliction are as  above. The motivation is the 
wish  to speak with harsh speech.  
C Performance  
The performance consists in speaking unpleasantly, either truthfully or falsely, about [the 
person’s] faults of extraction, body, ethical discipline or behaviour.  
D Completion 
The completion consists in the one to whom  it was said understanding the meaning.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-7 Idle talk 
A Basis 
The basis of idle talk is a meaningless topic.  
B Attitude 
Although with regard to discrimination, [one] of  the three [aspects] belo nging to the attitude, 
nothing has been stated other than “[it] is the discri mination of that as that”, here it is to talk 
having discriminated the very topic one wishes to express as that, because for this  there is no 
need for someone’s understanding. The mental  affliction is any of the poisons. The 
motivation is the wish to talk  disconnectedly and randomly.  
C Performance 
The performance consists in sett ing about uttering  idle talk. 
D Completion 
The completion is to finish uttering the idle talk.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-8 Covetousness 
A Basis 
The basis of covetousness is a possessi on or provision  of someone else.  
B Attitude 
Among the three [aspects] belonging to the a ttitude, the discrimination consists in the 
discrimination of  that basis as  that. The affliction is any of the three poisons. The motivation 
is the wish to make it one’s own.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 87  C Performance 
The performance consists in making and e ffort for the object of that thought.  
D Completion 
The completion is the thought: “M ay this possession etc. be mine!” 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-9 Harmful intent 
A / B  Basis and attitude 
The basis, discrimination and affliction of harm ful intent are the same as with harsh words. 
The motivation is the wish to hit etc. and {106 } the thought “how nice it would be if [this 
person] was killed or bound or if [his] resour ces declined by themselves or through someone 
else” and the like.  
C Performance 
The performance consists in applyi ng oneself to this thought.  
D Completion 
The completion consists in the decision to hit and the like.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10 Wrong views 
A Basis 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10A Basis 
The basis of wrong views is the meaning of an object that exists.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10B Attitude 
1 Discrimination  
Among the three [aspects] belonging to the  attitu de, discrimination consists in discriminating 
the object of denial  as true.  
2 Affliction 
The affliction is any of the three poisons.  
3 Motivation 
The motivation consists in the wish to deny [those objects].  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10C Performance 
1 The actual performance 
[2 Divisions ] 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10C1 The actual performance 
The performance consists in setting about applying oneself to  such thought.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10C2 Divisions  
In this regard there are four [divisions]:  
A Denying causes 
Denying causes consists in [the view]: “Excelle nt conduct and faulty co nduct do not exist.”  
B Denying effects 
Denying effects consists in [the view]: “Fully  ripened effects of those two do not exist”.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 88  C Denying activities 
Denying activities has three points:  
 1. Denying the activity of plantings seeds cons ists in [the view]: “There is no planting 
 of a seed by the father and no retaining of a seed by the mother80“.  
 2. Denying the activity of coming and going co nsists in [the view]: “There is no coming 
 from a former existence to this one and no  going from this one to a future one”.  
 3. Denying the activity of being born consists  in [the view]: “There is no intermediate 
 state of miraculous birth of beings“.  
D Denying existing  things 
Denying existing  things consists in [the view]: “Arhats and the like do not exist.”  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10D Completion 
The completion is certainty with respect to one’s denial .  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1B Distinction between actions and paths of action  
Among them, the intentions in the mind are actions, but no paths of action. The seven 
actions of body and speech are actions, yet they ar e also paths of action, since they are also the 
basis for the intentions proceeding. The three, covetousness and so on are paths of actions, 
but they are no actions81.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2 Differences in weight 
A The weight of the ten paths of action 
B Incidentally : Summary indication of the gates of strong karma  
The second one – differences in weight  – ha s two points: the weight of the ten paths of 
action and incidentally : {107} summary indi cation of the gates of strong karma.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2A The weight of the ten paths of action  
First: In Actual Basis of the Levels  six ways of being weighty are stated.  
1 Strong compounding  
Strong compounding is the motivation of action s by the strong presence or absence of the 
three poisons.  
2 Habituation 
Habituation is have resorted to virtuous and no n-virtuous actions for a long time and to have 
familiarised with them out many times.  
3 Essence [of the action] 
As for their essence, with the seven action s of body and speech each preceding one is 
weightier than the subsequent one, whereas with  the three actions of mind, a subsequent one 
is weightier than the preceding one. 
4 Basis 
The basis is benefiting or harming the Bu ddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, gurus etc. 
5 One-sided  fixation on  the discordant  side  
A one-sided  fixation on  the discordant  side consists in spending one’s whole life adopting 
non-virtuous actions with one-sided determinat ion and not even doing one single virtue.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 89  6 Elimination of the discordant  side 
T o  e l i m i n a t e  t h e  d i s c o r d a n t   s i d e  i s  t o  g i v e  u p  t h e  s i d e  o f  n o n - v i r t u e ,  t o  b e c o m e  f r e e  o f  
attachment, and train in virtuous actions. In the Letter to a Friend  it also says: 
 
Persistence, strong adherence, no counter-agent,  
A basis with foremost qualities – actions that spring from [Them] are the five great type s of non-virtue and virtue. 
From them endeavour to practice virtuous behaviour! [47] 
 
Moreover there are five because of the division  [of the basis] into tw o: (1) a basis endowed 
with good qualities, such as the three jewels , and a basis of help, such as one’s parents. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B Incidentally : Summary indication of the gates of strong karma 
1 Great strength by way of the field 
2 Great strength by way of the support 
3 Great strength by way of the thing 
4 Great strength by way of the attitude 
The second one has four points: great strength by way of the field, great strength by way of the 
support, great strength by way of the thing, and great strength by way of the attitude 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-1 Great strength by way of the field 
A The field of the three jewels  
First: the three jewels, the guru, someone like th e guru, parents, and so forth : [are gates of 
strong karma] because with these, even if the thoughts for them are not intense and the 
benefit or harm done [to them] are small, th e merit {108} and misdeed are great. In this 
regard it says in Establishment of Mindfulness  that the karma of stealing even  a little thing from 
the three jewels is purified - in the case of the Buddha and the Dharma - if it  is returned. 
B The Field of the Sangha 
However, However, in the case of  the Sangha it does not get pu rified until the feeling [of the 
effect] is experienced – in the case of someth ing belonging to the Sang ha. Furthermore it is 
stated that, if it was  a means of providing for the mouths of the Sangha , one is born in the 
great hell and otherwise one is born in the great darkness surrounding Without Respite.  
C The field of bodhisattvas 
Bodhisattvas are an extremely powerful  field of virtue and non-virtue. In the Sutra of the Seal 
of Engagement in the Generation  of the Power of Confidence  it says that compared to someone 
who, in anger , puts all the sent ient beings of the ten directions into a dark prison, if someone 
[else], in anger , turns his back on a bodhisattv a, saying “I shall not look upon this horrible 
person [again]”, he generates incalculably grea ter negativity. Also compared to someone who 
has destroyed and burnt down stupas as numerous  as sand [grains] of the river Ganges, if 
someone [else] generates anger and harmful inte nt towards a bodhisattva and says unpleasant 
things [the relationship] is like before. In the Sutra of the Seal of Entering Certainty and 
Uncertainty   it says that compared to someone who with a mind of love makes eyes develop 
again in the sentient beings of the ten directio ns whose eyes have been plucked out,  and who 
after releasing the previous sentient beings from  prison, establishes them in the happiness of a 
universal monarch82 or Brahma, if someone [else] with cl ear faith looks at and with clear faith 
wishes to look at a bodhisattva with devotion  to the Mahayana and proc laims  his praise, he 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 90  generates incalculably more merit. Also, in the Sutra of the Magic of th e Complete Certainty of 
Total Peace  it says that compared to killing all the se ntient beings of Jambudvipa or seizing all 
their possessions, obstructing even as little as th e virtue of a bodhisattva giving a handful of 
food to an animal, generates incalculably grea ter negativity. {109} so you should be very 
careful with respect to this point.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-2 Great strength by way of the support 
A The difference between the skilful  and the unskilful  
Second: Even a small lump of iron sinks to th e bottom, but a container made from it floats 
on the surface. It has been set out that, simila rly, the negativites committed by the skilful and 
unskilful are heavy or light. In fact, it is said  that with for the skilful who regret previous 
negativites, restrain future ones, do not keep them secret, and apply their virtuous antidotes, 
they are light whereas for those who arrogantly a ssume they are skilful and do not do this, but 
out of contempt deliberately enga ge in them, they are heavy.  
B The actual strength of the support 
In the Jewel Heap Sutra  it also says: if all the sentient be ings of the billion universes having 
entered the Mahayana, were to possess the kingdo m of universal monarchs  and each of them 
offered butter lamps in vessels the size of an oc ean and with wicks the size of Mount Meru to 
a stupa of the Buddha, this would not matc h even the hundredth part of the merit a 
bodhisattva who has left his home  and who hold s up a little bit of wick smeared with butter 
in front of a stupa.  This make s clear the streng th of the support83 even if there is no 
difference in the attitude and the field and even if  the object [offered] is very different.  This 
reasoning also makes clear that depending on wh ether or not the support has vows and, if so, 
whether it has one, two or three, the cultivatio n of the path will be the more effective the 
more it has.  There is a great difference in th e strength of the roots of virtue whether, for 
instance, a householder, at the time of handin g  out donations etc., acts on the basis of 
keeping vows like for instance one-day vows, or whether he acts without any vows.  
C The faults of discipline being  adulterated   
In the Sutra of Annihilating Adulterations of Discipline  it says that {110} compared to a human 
being possessing the ten non-virtues who, for a hundred years, continuously and 
uninterruptedly accumulates negativity, a fully- ordained monk who has [completely] broken 
his [vows of] discipline  and  who, for one day, dressed in the victory banner of sages84, enjoys 
that which has been offered to him with faith  [accumulates] far more negativity. Again, by 
way of the support negativity has greater strength. In the Scripture on Discernment  it also says: 
It is better to eat lumps 
Of iron blazing with tongues of fire Than unrestrained, undisciplined  To eat the alms-food of the area.    [48] 
 
This has been stated with regard to both adulte rated discipline  and slackness in training. The 
Teacher’s  statements that co mpared to negativities associ ated with  the Dharma, the 
negativities of the ten non-virtues are small, appear to be true.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-3 Great strength by way of the thing 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 91  Third: With regard to giving gifts to sentient beings, giving Dharma [i s far more excellent] and 
with regard to making offerings to the budhha s, offering one’s realizations is far more 
excellent than gifts and offerings of material things. From that example  you should also 
understand the [differing stre ngth of] other[ thing]s.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-4 Great strength by way of the attitude  
A Greatness by way of the intentisity of the attitude, its  duration etc.  
Fourth: In the Heap of Jewels Sutra  it says that compared to each one of the sentient beings of 
the billion universes creating a buddha stupa as massive as Mount Meru and and all those 
who are objects of respect paying respect to  them for ten million eons, a bodhisattva 
undivorced from the mind of omniscience wh o throws one single flower [generates] more 
merit. That being so  you should understand th is in terms of the diffe rences in attitude – 
whether what you want to attain  is superi or or inferior, whether you observe your own 
benefit or that of others and so forth - as well as the effect of intensity and duration . When it 
comes to  faulty conduct a strong mentally affl icted attitude  {111} and long duration also 
have more strength.  
B How anger is particularly strong 
Among [mental afflictions], again,  anger is particulary strong. In Engaging in [Bodhisattva ] 
Behaviour  it says:  
 
Whatever good conduct was amassed 
In thousand eons by giving and worship To the sugatas and the like All is destroyed by one [flash of] anger.   [49] 
 In this regard anger towards those whose conduc t accords with purity  weighs very heavily, 
[and] anger towards the jinas’ children more heavily still. In the King of Concentration  [Sutra ] it 
says:   
If one has harboured harmful intent for another, Discipline and study cannot save  one, 
Nor can concentration or a retreat place, 
Nor can gifts, nor worship of the Buddha.   [50] 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A3 Indication of their effects 
A The fully ripened effect  
B The effect in conformity  with the cause  
C T he conditioning or empowering  effect   
The third one – the effects of these [actions] – has three points: the fully ripened effect, the 
effect in conformity  with the cause and the conditioning  or empowering effect.  
A The fully ripened effect 
F i r s t :  A s  e a c h  o f  t h e  t e n  u n wholesome paths of action depe nds on the basis, the three 
poisons, and whether it is great, intermediate , or small, the fully ripened effect is also 
threefold. In Actual Basis of the Levels   i t  s a y s  t h a t  t h r o u g h  e a c h  of the ten, a great [act of] 
killing and so on, you are reborn as a hell bein g, through each of the ten intermediate ones 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 92  you are reborn as a hungry ghost and through each  of the ten small ones you are reborn as an 
animal. In the Sutra on the Ten Levels  the effects of small and interm ediate ones are said to be  
the other way around.  
B The effect in conformity  with the cause 
Second: The effects in conformity  with the caus e are that even having left the bad migrations 
and taken rebirth as a human being, respectively, your life will be short, you will be lacking in 
possessions, you will not keep your  partner, there will be a lot of slander, you will be separated 
from loved ones, you will hear unpleasant soun ds, others will not listen to your words, and 
the three [poisons], attachment, hatred , and delusion will predominate.  
C The conditioning effect 
Third: The conditioning effect: 
 - of killing is that in future worlds , f ood and drink, medicine, harvests and the like 
have little power; that of stealing great drou ghts and rains and {112} poor harvests, etc.;  
 - that of sexual misconduct swamps, much  filth, unpleasant experiences, etc.;  
 - that of lying, that field work and work  to do with boats will not succeed etc.;  
 - that of divisive speech that the location [where you live] will be bumpy and uneven, 
and it will be difficult to travel, and so on; 
 - that of harsh words that the location [w here you live] will be full of logs, brambles, 
rocks, pebbles, potsherds, etc.; 
 - that of idle talk that fruit trees do no t bear fruit or only out of season, etc.;  
 - that of covetousness that everything ex cellent deteriorates year by year, month by 
month, and day by day, etc.;  - that of harmful intent a lot of epidemic s, injuries, infections, disputes, wars with 
enemy troops, etc. and  
 - that of wrong views that in the world [you li ve in] the best resources will decline, etc.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2B White actions and their effects 
1 White actions 
2 Their effects 
The second one has two points: the actions and the effects.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2B1 White actions 
A Brief indication by means of  scripture 
First: They are the bodily actions of corectly abstaining  from killing, stealing, and sexual 
misconduct due to possessing a wholesome mind  having thought about their disadvantages, 
and of carrying this abstention to its conclusion. Similarly, this is to be applied to the four 
verbal ones and the three mental ones, the diffe rence being that they are called “actions of 
speech” and “actions of mind”. This is how it is stated in Actual Basis of the Levels .  
B Extensive explanation 
This should therefore be related to the basi s, attitude, performance and completion as 
appropriate. When applied to the path of action  of abandoning killing, the basis is another 
sentient being. The attitude is the wish to gi ve it up having seen its disadvantages. The 
performance is to put effort into completely ab staining from killing. {113} The completion is 
the physical action of correct  abstention having  been completed. The other[ path]s [of action] 
should also be understood in this manner.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 93  2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2B2  The effects 
Second: From among the three [effe cts of virtuous paths of action] the fully ripened effect is 
to be born as a human, a desire realm god, an d a god of the two upper realms though a small, 
intermediate and great virtuous action.  As for the effect in conformity  with the cause and 
the conditioning effect the opposites of the [r espective effects from] non-virtuous actions  
apply.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C Indication of other classifications of actions  85  
1 The classification of throwing and completing ones   
2 The classification of what will definitely be experienced and what will not  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C1 The classification of throwing and completing ones  
1 [Presentation of the first classification] 86 
The third one has two points the first of wh ich is the classification of throwing and 
completing [actions].  
 Throwing  actions for [rebirth in] the ha ppy migrations are virtuous [actions] and 
throwing actions for [rebirth in] the bad migrations are non-virtuous [actions].  
 The completing ones are uncertain, ho wever, even in the happy migrations, 
incomplete limbs, minor body parts or sense po wers, hideous looks, a short life-span, many 
illnesses, poverty, and so forth  are caused by  non-virtue. Also for animals and hungry ghosts, 
perfect prosperity is caused by virtue.  
2 The four possible combinations of virtuous and non-virtuous throwing and completing actions  
There are thus four alternatives:  - projected by a virtuous throwing [actio n] and completed by a virtuous or a non-
virtuous completing [action], 
 - projected by a non-virtuous throwing [a ction] and completed by non-virtuous or a 
virtuous completing [action].  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C2 The classification of what w ill definitely be experienced and what will not  
3 [Presentation of the second classification] 
With respect to what will definite ly be experienced and what will  not, what will definitely be 
experienced is what has been done intentionall y and accumulated. What will not definitely be 
experienced is what has [not] been do ne intentionally but not accumulated. 
4 Classification of what has been done and [what has been] accumulated 
The difference between what has been done an d what has been accumulated [is as follows]. 
What has been done is what has been intended  or what has manifested through the body or 
speech after having been intended. What has b een accumulated are actions apart from the ten 
[exceptions] like those done in a dream. What has not been a ccumulated are the ten 
[exceptions] such as those done in a dream87.  
5 [Further classification of that which will definitely be experienced] 
{114} What will definitely be experienced has th ree [categories] in terms of the time when the 
result is experienced:  
 1. That which will be experienced as a visibl e phenomenon is an action  whose effect 
will be experienced in this life. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 94   2. That which will be experienced after taking re birth is [an action] whose effect will be 
experienced in the following88 life.  
 3. That which will be experienced at another time is what will be experienced from the 
next but one life onwards. 
 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2 Specific considerations on karma  
A The way in which it is necessary to achieve a fully qualified basis 
[B Divisions] 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2A The way in which it is necessary to achieve a fully qualified basis  
Second: Through abandoning the ten non-virtue s you do  indeed obtain a good basis. 
However, if you achieve a fully qualified basis for accomplishing omniscience, it will be quite 
unlike others [with respect to] covering ground   in meditations on the path. Therefore, you 
should attain that basis.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B [Classification [/Division]] 
1 The fully ripened positive qualities and their function 
2 The cause of the fully ripened [effects] 
This one has two points: the fully ripened positi ve qualities and their function and the cause 
of the fully ripened [effects].  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-1  The fully ripened positive qualities and their function 
A Excellent life span 
B Excellent complexion 
C Excellent extraction 
D Excellent power 
E Respectable words 
F Renown as being very powerful  
G Being male 
H Possessing Strength 
The first one has eight points: excellent life span, excellent complexion, excellent extraction89, 
excellent power, respectable words, renown as being very powerful , being male, and having 
strength.  
A Excellent life span 
The first one means that due to an earlier throwi ng [action], a long life has been thrown and 
one lives accordingly. Due to this, you undert ake actions for the purpose of yourself and 
others accumulating a lot of virtue over a long period of time.  
B Excellent complexion 
The second one refers to good complexion an d shape, complete sense powers and balanced 
proportions. Due to this, disciples having been delighted at one’s very sight, are gathered and 
listen to one’s words.  
C Excellent extraction 
The third one is to be born into an exalted  and well-known family respected by the world.  
Due to this, one’s commands will be accomplished and not transgressed.  
D Excellent power  
The fourth one consists in massive resources, friends and followers. Due to this, one gathers a 
lot of sentient beings and ripens them. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 95  E Respectable words 
Fifth: As you do not deceive others through bo dy or speech, sentient beings uphold your 
words. Due to this, you gather sentient beings wi th the four [ways of] ga thering[ disciple]s, and 
ripen them.  
F Renown as being very powerful 
Sixth: Due to possessing positive qualities such as diligence in generosity and so forth, you 
become an object of veneration of great bein gs. {115} Due to this, they help you with all 
activities, whereby they acknowledge your deeds and quickly heed your commands.  
G Being male 
The seventh one is to possess a male organ. Thereby you become a vessel90 for all qualities 
and, through aspiration and effort, a vessel fo r expanding wisdom. You are not afraid  among 
people, and nobody will prevent you from going with  all sentient beings or living in seclusion. 
H Possessing strength 
Eighth: By the power of previous actions, there naturally being only few harms and no 
diseases, one will have great  enthusiasm that aris es from the conditions of this life.  Due to 
that,  you will not get discouraged by what ever goals you or others may have, and in 
dependence on intense enthusiasm you attain the power of individual investigation  
whereupon supernormal cognitive powers  will be quick [to develop].  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2  The causes of the fully ripened [effects] 
A Division of the causes in eight 
B Threefold division 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2A  Division of the causes in eight 
The second one has eight points the first of which is not to ca use harm to any being and to 
cultivate an attitude of no n-harm. Furthermore it says: 
 
Through freeing those caught in  places of slaughter 
And likewise helping through [giving] life, Through reversing harming creatures You will gain longevity. From a doctor’s respect for the ill, From the administration of medicine From not harming creatures with sticks Or lumps of earth, you will be without illness.   
 The second one consists in offering light, su ch as butter lamps and new clothing. Apart from 
that:  
From the absence of anger as basis And offering jewelry – a good physique. From lack of envy [you will gain] Good fortune as fruit, it is explained     
 The third one is to overcome one’s pride and re spect gurus etc. and others like a servant. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 96    The fourth one is giving food and clothi ng, and so forth to those who ask and also 
benefit [others] without being asked, giving away [freely] to the suffering and to those who are 
fields of good qualities but lack necessities.  
 {116} The fifth one is the habit of aban doning the four non-virtues of speech.  
 The sixth one is to make aspirational pr ayers to accomplish all kinds of positive 
qualities  in the future and make offerings  to the three jewels, one’s parents, shravakas, 
pratyekabuddhas, abbots, masters, and gurus. 
 The seventh one is to rejoice in the good qu alities of men and, with regard to women, 
to look at their disadvantages without rejoicing,  to oppose the inclinat ions of those who wish 
for a female body, and to liberate those whose male organs are going to be cut. 
 The eighth one is to carry out yourself what others cannot do at all, to help them with 
what they can do together with you an d to give food and drink to others.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B Threefold division  
1 The first cause: a perfectly pure mind 
[2 The second cause: pure performance 
3 The third cause: a pure field] 
If those eight causes are conjoint  with three [m ore] causes, their fully ripened effects will be 
outstanding. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B1 The first cause: a perfectly pure mind 
A Aspects relating to oneself 
B Aspects relating to others 
As for the three causes, [the first one,] a perf ectly pure mind has two aspects relating to 
oneself. 
A Aspects relating to oneself 
They are: 
 1. to dedicate the virtues of accomplishin g those causes to unsurpassed enlightenment 
without hoping for a fully ripened effect, and 
 2. to accomplish the causes intens ely from the bottom of one’s heart.  
B Aspects relating to others 
The two aspects relating to others are: 
 1. to give up envy, competitiveness and scor n at the sight of the highest, intermediate 
and least [practitioners] in agreements with the Dharma and  
 2. to rejoice, even if you do not manage  [completely] to examine many times a day 
what to do. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B2 The second cause: pure performance 
A Relating to oneself 
Pure performance with regard to oneself implies long duration, continuity and intensity. 
B Relating to others 
With regard to others it consists in causing someone who has not correcty taken [the rules of 
ethical discipline] to do so, praising those who have, so that they gene rate delight, to make 
them do so continuously, and to  make them not abandon them. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B2C The third cause: a pure field 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 97  Since the very two - attitude and performance - pr oduce plenty  of good fruit, they resemble a 
field. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3 After these considerations how to engage [in virtuous actions] and oppose [the 
non-virtuous] 
A General presentation 
B Specifically how to purify by means of the four powers 
{117} The third one - after these considerations how to engage [i n virtuous actions] and oppose [the non-
virtuous]  – has two points: general presentation and sp ecifically how to puri fy by means of the 
four powers. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3A General presentation 
1 How to bring forth a mind cultivating this perpetually, every day and night  
First: In Engaging in [Bodhisattva ] Behaviour it says:  
 
Suffering springs from what is non-virtuous. 
‘How to reach certain freedom from it?’ It is appropriate, day and night, Always to think about nothing but this.   [51] 
And: 
The root of everything that’s virtuous Is aspiration, the Muni said. Again, the root of that is always To meditate on fully ripened effects.  
In accordance with this statement you should come to understand positive and negative actions with their effects and then meditate on  this over and over again, for [the karmic 
process] is a very hidden phenomenon which is wh y  it is extremely difficult to gain certainty 
about it.  
2 The vital importance of gaining conviction concerning the Buddha’s statements about how actions 
[bring about] effects 
In this regard the King of Concentration  [Sutra ] says:  
 
Even if the moon and stars fell  down, 
The earth collapsed with mountains and with towns, 
And if the heaven’s aspect was transformed  - Still no word you say would be untrue.   [52]  
You should thus develop convic tion in the words of the Tath agata and sustain it. Unless you 
have gained uncontrived certainty about them, yo u will not gain the certainty with regard to 
any Dharma that gladdens  the Jina.  
3 Meditation on emptiness becoming helpful for gaining certainty with respect to actions and their 
results  
Some profess to have gained certainty about em ptiness and do not have certainty with respect 
to actions and their results nor care about it. They have arrived at a mistaken understanding 
of emptiness for if you understand emptiness, ha ving seen it to be the meaning of dependent 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 98  relation, it becomes helpful for gaining certaint y with respect to actions and their results. 
From the same sutra:  
 
Like an illusion, a bubble, a mirage or lightning, 
All phenomena are like the moon in water. Although human beings who after death Pass to other worlds do not perceive this,  
{118} Actions once they are done do not disappear, 
White or black they cause like effects to ripen. The logical approach is good, but the subtle, 
And hard to see is the Jina’s object of thought.  [53] 
4 The uselessness of mere knowledge, if you do not think about the karmic process 
Therefore you should generate certainty about th e two [types of] karma, the causes along with 
their effects, and constantly, day and night,  cu t [yourself off from] rebirths in bad migrations 
by means of examining the three gates. Not to be  proficient at first in the distinctions of  
cause and effect and to know a bit but still to ac t carefree  with regard to the three gates is 
nothing but opening the gate to bad migrations. In the Sutra Requested by  [the Naga king ] 
Sagara  it says:   
 
Lord of Nagas, one Dharma of bodh isattvas cuts right through falling 
back down and being born in bad migrations. What is that one 
Dharma? It is  this: the individual investigation regarding virtuous phenomena thinking: ‘How am I [doing]? Am I straying away [from them] or abiding [in them] night and day?’   [54] 
5 How to turn away from faulty conduct having thought about it in this manner  
As for how toturn away from faulty conduct having  thought about it in this manner, it says in 
the Chapter of the Truthful One :  
 
O king, do not commit the act of killing, For every being life is a great loss  Therefore, we all wish to keep it long. Even deep down  you should not consider killing.  [55] 
 
Like this, you should get used to relying on  the mind of restraint a lot without your 
motivation even moving towards  mi sdeeds such as the ten non-virtues. 
6 The principle of action  in accordance with statements of the former Kadampas  
Said Khamlungpa to Puchungwa: “Geshe [Dromd on]pa taught only actions and their results 
are of vital importance, however, nowadays explaini ng this, listening to it or meditating on it 
are made out to be  worthless. I wonder, is this  just because it is difficult to practice?” and 
Puchungwa said: {119} “Just so.” 
 Dromtonpa said: “Followers of Jowo, audacity  is totally inappropriate – dependent 
origination is subtle.” Puchungwa said: “In my old age I am [at last] getting on  with the Sutra 
of the Wise and the Foolish91.”  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 99   And Sharawa said: “The Buddha  taught that  whatever errors and faults come about, 
they should not be blamed on  a bad direction or a bricklayer’s work; it is simply that ‘this 
action having been done this is produced’.” 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B Specifically how to purify [non-virtues] by means of the four powers 
1 How negativites and downfalls need to be purified by various means in accordance with statements of 
the Teacher Buddha 
[2 How to redress downfalls 
3 How to redress negative actions 
4 How the four powers are complete with all the antidotes  
5 The manner of purification  6 How it is necessary to strive not to be tainted by faulty conduct from the start] 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-1 How negativites and downfalls need to be purified by various means in accordance with 
statements of the Teacher Buddha 
Second: If despite your effort not to be tainted by such fault conduct, some fault occurs under 
the influence of non-conscientiousness or a mu ltitude of mental afflictions etc., it is 
inappropriate to let the matter rest, without givi ng it any consideration. It is, therefore, 
n e c e s s a r y  t o  m a k e  a n  e f f o r t  a t  t h e  m e a n s  f o r redressing it taught by the compassionate 
teacher.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-2 How to redress downfalls  
More specifically, as regards redressing downfalls , this should be done as explained according 
to  the three individual [types of] vows. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3 How to redress negativities  
A The power of remorse  
B The power of thorough application of antidotes 
C The power of preventing  faults in future 
D The power of the support 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3A The power of remorse 
Redressing  negativites should be done by mean s of the four powers. The first of those is the 
power of remorse,  which is much regret ab out the non-virtuous deeds one has done since 
beginningless times. For it to arise it is nece ssary to meditate on how the three [types of] 
effects such as the fully ripened ones, are prod uced. When applying this  [power], you should 
do it through the confession in  the Sacred Golden Light Sutra  and the confession by means of 
the 35 buddhas. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B The power of thorough application of antidotes  
1 Based on the profound sets of sutras 
2 Aspiration for  emptiness 
3 Based on recitation 4 Based on images 
5 Based on making offerings 
6 Based on names 
The second one, the power of thorough applicat ion of antidotes, has six points: based on the 
profound sets of sutras, aspiration for emptine ss, based on recitation, based on images, based 
on making offerings, and based on names.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B1 Based on the profound sets of sutras 
The first one is to absorb the words of sets of  sutras like the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, 
retain them, read them, and so forth.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B2 Aspiration for  emptiness 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 100  The second one consists in to engage in the real ity that is selflessness and clear light {120} and 
to be convinced with respect to primordial purity.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B3 Based on recitation 
A The need to make an effort at recitation until signs appear that tne negativites have been purified  
The third one is recitation of special dharanis  like the 100 syllable one according to [the 
respective] ritual. In [the Sutra ] Requested by Subahu  it says: 
 
As the flames of forest fires in spring, 
Uncontained burn all the underbrush Discipline’s wind fans fires of recitation Burning evil with flames of great joyous effort.  
  
As the sun strikes snow with rays of light Which, overwhelmed, does not withstand his brilliance, When discipline’s sun rays, recitation, strikes The snow of negativities, it is exhausted. 
 
As bringing out a butter lamp in darkness, Dispels the darkness so there’s nothing left The darkness of evil collected in thousand lives Is quickly dispelled by the lamp of recitation.  [56]  
In fact  [you should continue this recitation practice] until you see signs of the negativities 
being purified.  
B The signs 
In the Dharani of Exhortation  the signs are said to be drea ming of vomiting bad food, of 
drinking and vomiting things like yoghurt or mi lk, of seeing the sun and moon, travelling in 
the sky , fire burning, withstanding buffaloes and black people , seeing a sangha of fully-
ordained monks and nuns, climbing a tree from which milk emerges, an elephant or a chief 
bull, a mountain, a lion throne or a fine house,  and of hearing the Dharma in your dreams.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B4 Based on imgages 
The fourth one is to create images of the Buddha, having gained confidence in him. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B5 Based on making offerings 
The fifth one is make various types of offerings to the Buddha and his stupas. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B6 Based on names 
The sixth one is to listen to and retain th e names of buddhas and sons of the jinas.  
 
These are the ones {121} that ar e explicitly mentioned in the Compendium of Instructions . There 
are many others.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3C The power of turning away from  faults in the future 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 101  1 The actual [power] and its benefits  
The third one - the power of turning away from  faul ts in the future – is to completely restrain 
yourself from the ten non-virtues. In the Sun Essence  [Sutra ] it says that thereby actions of the 
three doors [committed] by means of killing and so  on, as well as the afflictive obscurations 
and obscurations to the Dharma92,  whatever you have done, caus ed others to do, or rejoiced 
in before, are destroyed. 
2 The importance of sincere restraint 
The Extensive Commentary  [on Vinaya ]  explains that the intention of the question “[Is there] 
restraint henceforth?” being asked in the [basic ] text is that a confession without sincere 
restraint is nothing but words. Therefore the mind  of restraint of not doing it henceforth is 
important. Its development also depends on the first power. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3D The power of the support 
The fourth one – the power of the support – is to go for refuge and cultivate the mind of 
enlightenment.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-4 How all the antidotes to negativities are complete within the four powers  
The Jina said that in general th ere is a diversity of ways for be ginners to purify negativities, 
however, the altogether perfect antidote is the four powers in their entirety. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-5 The manner of purification 
A How the karma  is not absolutely certain [depending on] the antidotes being complete or incomplete 
etc. in the one doing the purification etc.   
The manner in which negativities are purified is  as follows. Whether causes for the arising of 
great suffering in the bad realms become causes  for the arising of minor suffering, or whether 
despite one’s rebirth in the bad realms their sufferings are not experienced or purified in 
one’s present form as a mere headache, and likewise whether something that would need to 
be experienced for a long time becomes somethin g short or does not have to be experienced 
at all, is not absolutely certain, because it is  also depends on the power of the one doing the 
purification being great or small, as well as the antidote - the four powers - being complete or 
incomplete, intense or not [intense], the du ration being long or short and so on.  
B How even karma that is certain [to be experienced] is purified from the root   
As for the statement in sutra and vinaya “Actions  are not lost even in a hundred eons”, {122} 
it implies without cultivating the antidote of  the four powers. However, in the commentary 
on the [ Sutra of the Perfection of Wisdom in ] Eight Thousand  [Verses ] it says that through the 
antidote of the four powers, if purified in ac cordance with the explanations,even karma that 
is certain to be experienced is purified.  
C Even if the one doing the purification does not completely purify karma of little strength, its effect will 
not come forth due to the  full ripening having been weakened 
In Blaze of Reasoning  it says that once you have thus weak ened the potential to bring forth fully 
ripened effects by means of confession, [the reso lve to exercise] restraint and the like, the fully 
ripened effects will not come about even if other conditions are met . Likewise, the 
destruction of roots of virtue through wr ong views and anger is also similar.   
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-6 How it is necessary to make an effort from the start not to be tainted by faults 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 102  Through confession and [the resolve to exercise] restraint you may be able to  purify [karma] 
so that nothing at all remains, however, there is [still] a big difference between the purity of 
not being tainted by faults from the beginning and the purity after confession. For example in 
the Bodhisattva Levels  it says that in case a root downfall has occurred, it can be restored by 
taking the bodhisattva vow [again ], however, it will be impossibl e to reach the first ground in 
this life. In the Sutra Gathering All the Threads , too, it says that once the negativity of 
abandoning the Dharma, which is explained in that  sutra, has occurred, it will be purified, if 
one confesses it three times every day over seven year s, but still it will take ten eons even at the 
quickest  to attain [the level of] tolerance [on the path of preparation]. Therefore purification 
without remainder means that the production of unpleasant effects is purified without 
remainder . However, since the arising of realizations  of the path and so forth will be much 
delayed, you should endeavour not to be tainted from the beginning. Again, for that reason it 
says that aryas do not knowingly engage even in  subtle negativities or downfalls not even for 
the sake of their lives, because [otherwise], if  there was no difference between purifying them 
through confession and their not arising from th e beginning  there would be no need to act 
like that. In the world, {123} too, if a wounded arm,  leg etc. heals again, it still will not be as if 
it had never been wounded from the start.  
2B4B-2B1B The measure of the attitude [of lesser beings] having developed  
Second: the measure of those thoughts [of lesser beings] having developed.  Previously you had an 
uncontrived interest  in this world only, and yo ur interest in future existences was just a 
[vague] understanding fascinated  with the words . When thos e two have been exchanged, 
future worlds have become the main interest, and this world nothing but a by-product, [the 
attitude of lesser beings] has developed.  As it nevertheless needs to be made stable, you 
should strive, that is train, in it even after it have arisen.  
2B4B-2B1C  Eliminating misunderstandings about [the attitude of lesser beings] 
1 Setting out the assertion 
[2 Its refutation] 
2B4B-2B1C-1 Setting out the assertion 
In the scriptures it says that it is necessary to turn the mind away from  all the excellence of 
cyclic existence, which has been a cause of conf usion: Some [people] think it is inappropiate 
to develop interest in the high status of an excellent body, possessions, and so forth because 
they are [part of] cy clic existence.   
2B4B-2B1C-2 Its refutation 
A How a continuous succession of excellent bodies is necessary 
With respect to that which is to be striven for,  there are both temporary and ultimate goals to 
strive for. Even those who strive for liberation from the excellences of a body and so forth of 
cyclic existence need to temporar ily strive for them  since definite goodness is to be gained in 
the end from a continuous succession of such supports.  
B Refutation looking at  ultimately high status  
Not all that is the high status of an excellen t body, possessions, and retinue are included in 
cyclic existence, for the culmination of an excellent body etc. is the form body [of a buddha], 
the wealth of its field and its retinue.  [It is] with this intention that the Ornament of the Sutras  
says that the first four perfections accompli s h  t h e  h i g h  s t a t u s  o f  a n  e x c e l l e n t  b o d y ,  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Small Scope 
 
 103  possessions, retinue, and undertakings, {124} beca use many [other] scriptures state that they 
accomplish the form body. 
 
That concludes the explanation of mental trai nings on the stages of  the path common to 
lesser beings. 
 
  
 104  CHAPTER III 
INTERMEDIATE SCOPE 
Explanation of the stages of the path common to  
intermediate beings 
2B4B-2B2 Explanation of the stages of the path common to intermediate beings 
A Transition 
[B The actual training] 
2B4B-2B2A Transition 
Thus, having become mindful of death and re flected on the way you fall into the bad 
migrations after death, you have turned your mi nd away from this world and a striving for the 
happy migrations has developed. Then, throug h the common going for refuge and certainty 
regarding positive and negative karma and its effect, you will give up negativities, and by 
putting effort into accomplishing virtue you will indeed attain the state of the happy 
migrations. However, that is not held to be  sufficient here. Rather, once the attitude  
common to lesser beings has  developed, you develop the attitude common to intermediate 
beings, which counteracts attachment to cyclic existence as a whole, an d then, based on that, 
you develop the mind of enlightenment so that yo u will be led into the [path of] great beings. 
Therefore, you need to to tr ain in the attitude common to intermediate beings, because  even 
though you attain the state of a god or human be ing in this manner, you will not have passed 
beyond compounding suffering. Therefore, holdin g to that as happy by nature is mistaken 
since in reality they are devoid of happiness and in the end they are bad because you are 
certain to fall into the bad migrations again. 
2B4B-2B2B The actual [training] 
1 The actual training in that attitude 
2 The measure  of its development 
3 Elimination of misconceptions about it 
4 Determining the nature of the path leading to liberation 
Therefore, the training of the mind on the stag es of the path common to  intermediate beings 
has four points: the actual training in that  attitude, the measure  of its development, 
elimination of misconceptions about it, and de termining the nature of the path leading to 
liberation.  
Explanation of how to develop the mind striving for liberation  
2B4B-2B2B-1  The actual training in that attitude 
A Identification of the mind striving for liberation 
B The methods for generating  [the mind striving for liberation] 
The first one has two points: identification of  the mind striving for liberation and the 
methods for generating  [the mi nd striving for liberation].  
2B4B-2B2B-1A Identification of the mind striving for liberation
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 105   1 Identification of liberation 
First: “Liberation” is freedom  from bondage. Specifically there are two things binding one in 
cyclic existence, karma and the afflictions. Through  the power of these two, the very 
aggregates join.  From the point of view of re alms, [they do so] in the three realms, those of 
desire etc., when divided by way of  migrating beings, as five or six93 [types], gods etc. and in 
terms of birthplaces, in a womb and so on. This  is the essence of bondage, therefore freedom 
from them is liberation. 
2 The mind striving for [liberation] 
The desire  to attain that [liberation]  is the mind striving for liberation. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B The method[s]  for generating  [the mind striving for liberation] 
1 Transition 
2 The actual method[s] 
2B4B-2B2B-1B1 Transition 
Second: The development of the desire to obtain the pacification of the suffering of thirst, for 
instance, depends on seeing the torment due to thirst as undesirable. Likewise the 
development of the desire to attain the liberati on that is the thorough pacification of the 
suffering of the appropriated aggregates also depends on seeing the shortcomings of the 
appropriated aggregates, i.e. that they have the nature of suffering. Ther efore, if you meditate 
on the shortcomings of cyclic existence and the mind that desi res to reject them does not 
arise, the desire to attain the pacification of suffering will not emerge either, because  in the 
Four Hundred Verses  it says:  
 
Who is not disenchanted here, 
How could he have respect for peace?    [57] 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2 The actual method[s]  
A Thinking about the shortcomings of cycl ic existence, the truth of suffering 
B Thinking about the stages of involvment in  cyclic existence, the origins 
This being so there are two points with respec t to that: thinking about the shortcomings of 
cyclic existence, the truth of suffering, and thinki ng about the stages of involvment in   cyclic 
existence, the origins. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A Thinking about the shortcomings of cyclic existence, the truth of suffering 
1 Indicating the intention  of stating the truth of suffering as the first of the four truths  
2 The actual meditation on suffering 
The first one has two points: indicating the intent ion  of stating the truth of suffering as the 
first of the four truths and the actual meditation on suffering. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1  Indicating the intention  of stating the truth of suffering as the first of the 
four truths  
A Setting out a doubt 
B Reply 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1A  Setting out a doubt 
First: You may wonder: “If origins are earlier an d suffering later since the origins are causes 
and the {126} truth of suffering their effect, why is that the Bhagav an, contrary to this 
sequence, taught: ‘Monks, this is the noble truth of suffering. This is the noble truth of the 
origin.’?” 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 106  2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B   Reply 
1 Summary indication in reply 
2 Extensive explanation 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B1 Summary indication in reply 
There is no fault in that, since the fact that ou r teacher stated cause and effect in reverse order 
has great significance for practice. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B2 Extensive explanation 
A The need to teach the truth of suffering, origins, cessation and path one after the other in accordance 
with the scriptures   
If you go on to ask: How so? It is like this: If the unerring  wish for liberation from cyclic 
existence has not initially arisen in the disciple himself, how should he be guided to liberation 
while lacking its root? In fact, initially, discip les are shrouded by the darkness of ignorance 
and deceived  by the misconception that appr ehends the suffering excellences  of cyclic 
existence as happiness. In the Four Hundred  [Verses ] it says:  
 
If the ocean of this suffering 
Has no limits in any respect, 
Child, you who are sinking in it, Why are you not gripped with fear ?    [58] 
 
Thus, many aspects of suffering having been taug ht saying: “This, in reality, is not happiness 
but rather suffering,” it is necessary to deve lop disenchantment, which is why the truth of 
suffering was stated first. Then, having seen th at you yourself have fallen into the ocean of 
suffering, if you want to be liberated from it, you see  the need to ward off suffering. Having 
come to understand that unless you ward off its cause, you will not avert it, thinking “What is 
the cause?” you come to understand the truth of  the origins.  That is  why the truth of the 
origins was stated next. Then, once an understa nding of the truth of the origins has arisen - 
the fact that the suffering of cyclic existence is  produced by contaminated actions, that they 
are produced  by mental afflictions, and that th e root of those is the apprehension of a self – 
{127} and you see that the apprehension of a se lf can be opposed, you vow to actualise the 
cessation that puts a stop to suffering. Theref ore, the truth of cessation was taught next. 
B Giving up objections to a presentation [of the truths] in this order 
You may wonder: “Well then, as the wish for libe ration arises when the truth of suffering is 
presented, it would make sense to present the tr uth of cessation after the truth of suffering”. 
[However,] There is no fault, for, even though, at that point, the wish for liberation thinking 
“If only I achieved the cessation that pacifies  suffering” is be present, since you have not 
identified the cause of suffering and do not s ee that the cause can be averted, you do not 
apprehend  liberation as something to be attain ed thinking “I should actualise cessation”. In 
that manner, once you apprehend liberation, thin king “I should actualise cessation”, you will 
engage in the truth of the path, thinking “Wha t is the path leading th ere?” That is why the 
truth of the path was stated at the end. 
C Establishing by means of logic that such an order is necessary 
The four truths are taught many times in  this manner, throughout the Mahayana and 
Hinayana. Since the Sugata condensed [in them ] the crucial points of entry into cyclic 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 107  existence and its reversal  they are extremel y important for achieving complete liberation. 
 Since it is a major switch94 for their practical application, disciples need to be guided in 
this order.  If your attachment to cyclic existence is not reversed  and put to rest  at all by way 
of reflection on the truth of suffering, the wish to achieve liberation will become mere words, 
because whatever you do will become an  origin  [of new suffering]. If you do not come to a 
good understanding of the root of cyclic existe nce - karma and the afflic tions - by reflecting  
on origins, you will be like someone who does  not see the target, shooting an arrow, for you 
will be missing  the crucial points of the path . You  will hold what it is not the path to 
freedom from existence to be that, whereupon an d your hardships will be fruitless. And, if 
you do not know what should be abandoned, su ffering [along with its] origin, you will not 
even identify the liberation that is their th orough pacification, whereby and therefore your 
striving for liberation {128} will also end up  as  nothing but an [arrogant] presumption. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2  The actual meditation on suffering  
A Considering the suffering of cyclic existence in general 
B Considering the suffering of individual[ realm]s  
The second one has two points: considering the suffering of cyclic existence in general and 
considering the suffering of individual[ realm]s .  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2 A Considering the suffering of cyclic existence in general  
1 Considering the eight [types of] suffering 2 Considering the six [types of] suffering 
The first one has two points: considering the eight [types of] suffering and considering the six 
[types of] suffering. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2 A1 Considering the eight [types of] suffering 
A How to meditate by the level of the faculty 
[B How it is necessary to be  free from laxity and excitement 
C How all the  qualities of the three vehicles are accomplished through such meditation 
D The eight types of suffering 
E Advice to cherish  [this] manner of meditating on the essence 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1A How to meditate by the level of the faculty 
First: With regard to sustaining the entire  round of meditations common to intermediate 
beings, here you should also take up common po ints explained in the context of lesser beings. 
With regard to sustaining those  that are no t common [to both], if you have the mental 
strength, you should sustain them [in meditation] as explained [here], if your mental strength 
is small, you should discard the scriptural cita tions and sustain only the essential  meaning of 
whatever falls in this context. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1B How it is necessary to be  free from laxity and excitement 
Although these are analytical meditations, yo u should cease all excitement and so forth, 
focusing the mind on the objects of meditation  without allowing it to go to virtuous, non-
virtuous, or unspecified objects other than th em. Not allowing [the mind] to fall under the 
influence of sleepy drowsiness or laxity, you sh ould meditate continuously  from a state of 
extreme clarity and lucidity, for it was taught that  the results of all spiritual  practice in which 
the mind is distracted to other things are small.  In Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] Conduct  it says:  
 
Reciting, austerities and things, 
Even though engaged in long, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 108  If done with one’s mind distracted elsewhere 
Are meaningless, the seer taught.    [59]  
And in the Sutra on the Development of Confidence in the Mahayana : 
 
Son of the lineage, from this enumer ation it should be understood that, 
in this manner, confidence in the Mahayana of bodhisattvas and 
anything that springs from the Mahayana springs  from having correctly thought about the meaning and the Dhar ma with a mind that is utterly 
u n d i s t r a c t e d .        [ 6 0 ]   
In this regard {129} “a mind that is utterly undistracted” is a mind that does not stray away 
from the virtuous observed object to something else; “the meaning and the Dharma ” refers to 
the meaning and the words; and “ correctly thought”  is to think having analysed with an 
awareness of individual investigation. That sh ows that  for all  accomplishment  of the 
Dharma of good qualities  both [non-distraction and in vestigation] are necessary. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1C How all the  positive qualities of the three vehicles are accomplished through such 
meditation 
This being so it was taught that for all  accomp lishment of the positive qualities of the three 
vehicles two [things] are necessary: actual calm abiding – a single-pointed mind that stays on a 
virtuous observed object without being distracted  – or a facsimile of that, and actual special 
insight which individually analyses a virtuous ob ject and differentiates modes and varieties, or 
a facsimile of that. In accordance with that it also says in the [ Sutra ] Unraveling the Intention :  
 
Maitreya, you should understand that  all virtuous qualities, whether 
mundane or supramundane, of hearers,  bodhisattvas, or tathagatas are 
the result of calm abiding and special insight.  [61] 
 If calm abiding and special insight were not divi ded in the two - the actual a facsimile to it - 
there would be no certainty  that all positive qualities of the three vehicles come [forth] as 
effects of actual calm abiding and special insight. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D The eight types of suffering 
1 The suffering of birth 
2 The suffering of aging 
3 The suffering of illness 
4 The suffering of death 
5 The suffering of meeting with the unpleasant 
6 The suffering of separation from what is pleasant 
7 The suffering of seeking what you desire and not getting it 
8 “In brief: the five appropriated  aggregates are suffering” 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-1 The suffering of birth 
Here the considerations on the suffering of birth,  the first of eight types of suffering, have five 
points: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 109  A [Suffering] 
Birth is suffering, because it is associated with  suffering. When the four  - hell sentient beings, 
perpetually suffering hungry ghost, beings born from wombs, and beings born, they are born 
with a lot of violent sensations of pain.  
B [Connection with taking on bad states] 
Birth is associated with taking on  bad states. Due to connecting with the seed for the arising, 
abidance and increase of mental afflictions, {130 } [a rebirth] is unsuited to either being used 
for actions employing virtue or to being controlled at will.  
C [Basis of suffering] 
Birth is the basis  of suffering. In dependence on having taken birth in the three realms, the 
suffering of aging, illness, death etc. increases.  
D [Basis of mental afflictions]  
Birth is the basis  of mental afflictions. Once you have been born in cyclic existence the three poisons of attachment, hatred, an d ignorance arise with regard to  objects. Again, due to that, 
body and mind being thoroughly unpacified, th ey suffer and consequently do not abide in 
happiness. Thus, body and mind are tormented in  various ways by the mental afflictions. 
E [Involuntary separation] 
Birth is suffering because it is in the very natu re of involuntary separation. Death which is the 
end of everything born has not been  transcended and is undesirable.  It also only makes you experience suffering.  
 
You [should] think about these [points] again and again. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-2 The suffering of aging   
A Extensive explanation 
B Summary of the essence  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-2A  Extensive explanation 
Second: The considerations on the suffe ring of aging have five points:  
1 [Deterioration of the body] 
The complete deterioration of your fine body is such that your spine becomes curved like a 
bow, your head becomes  white like moss flower s, your forehead becomes covered in wrinkles 
like a cutting board and so on whereby the sple ndour of youth deteriorates and you turn ugly. 
2 [Deterioration of power and strength] 
The deterioration of power and strength is such  that when you sit down you resemble a sack 
of soil  cut off its rope, when you get up yo u resemble tree roots being pulled up. When you 
speak you babble  unintelligibly, when you walk you are completely bent over  and so on. 
3 [Deterioration of the senses] 
The deterioration of the senses is such that yo ur eyes and so forth do  not clearly perceive 
forms and so forth any more and your mindfu lness and so forth diminishes as you grow 
forgetful and so forth.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 110  4 [Decline in sense pleasures] 
The enjoyment of [sense] objects declines such th at food and drink become difficult to digest 
and you can no longer enjoy other pleasures {131}.  
5 [Complete deterioration of the lifespan] 
The suffering of the lifespan having deteriorated completely is that, due to the lifespan having 
been largely spent, you face death.  
 You [should] think about these [points] again and again. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-2B Summary of the essence  
C h e n g a [ w a ]  s a i d :  “ T h e  s u f f e r i n g  o f  d e a t h  i s  b a d ,  but brief. This aging [process] is vicious.” 
Kamapa  said: “It’s good that old age comes gradually – if it came in a single moment, it would be unbearable”. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-3  The suffering of  illness 
Third: The considerations on the suffe ring of illness have five points:  
A [Bodily changes] 
The nature of the body change s in that the flesh becomes loose, the skin dries up, etc. 
B [Suffering and mental unhappiness increase] 
Suffering and mental unhappiness increase and you predominantly abide in them. The bodily 
constituents, water and so forth, become disturbe d in strength as they lose their proportional 
balance, producing pain in the body. That in turn causes mental unhappiness you have to 
surmount day and night.  
C [Restriction of enjoyments] 
You lack desire to enjoy pleasant things. Having  been told that pleasant things are harmful 
when you are ill, you do not have the power to  indulge as you wish or, likewise, you cannot 
do whatever you want.  
D [Need for unpleasant measures] 
You need to undergo the unpleasant against yo ur will. You have to employ  unpleasant 
medicine, food, drink and the so on. Likewise, you need to rely on rough [means of] examination such as being burnt with fire  and pierced with sharp instruments.  
E [Separation from life] 
You will be separated from your life. Having s een that the illness is incurable, you suffer. 
 You [should] consider these points in detail. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-4  The suffering of death 
A Separation from possessions 
B Separation from relatives C Separation from one’s circle [of friends] 
D Separation from one’s body 
E Pain and intense sorrow at the time of death 
Fourth: {132} The considerations on the suffering  of death have five points: You are separated 
from your excellent possessions, relatives, companions and your dear body95, and at the time 
of death you experience suffering and intense mental unhappiness. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 111   As long as you have not become distressed at these [types of suffering] you [should] 
think them over again and again. 
 The way the first four become suffering is that having seen that you will be separated 
from those four, you suffer. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-5 The suffering of meeting with the unpleasant 
Fifth: The suffering of meeting with the unpleasant has five points:   - As soon as you meet, for instance, an en emy, suffering and mental unhappiness arise.  
 - Due to that you are beset by fear of being punished, 
 - fear of bad talk,  - and fear of dying dreadfully, and  - you suspect and fear going to bad migratio ns after death because of transgressing the 
Dharma.   You [should] think about these [types of suffering]. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-6 The suffering of separation from what is pleasant 
S i x t h :  T h e  s u f f e r i n g  o f  s e p a r a t i o n  f r o m  w h a t  i s  p l e a s a n t  h a s  f i v e  p o i n t s :  W h e n  y o u  a r e  
separated say  from close ones  that are dear to you:  
 - sorrow arises in your mind, 
 - lamentation comes out in your speech, 
 - harm is caused in your body,  - through remembering the good qualities of the object and longing for it, there is mental torment, 
 - you miss the pleasure of it.  
 You [should] think about these [types of suffering]. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-7 The suffering of seeking what you desire and not getting it 
Seventh: The suffering of seeking what you desire  and not getting it has five points that are 
similar to [those associated with] se paration from what is pleasant.  
 Seeking what you desire and not getting it is the depressing suffering of not getting 
what you have been hoping for despite your effo rt in seeking it, such as doing farm work but 
not reaping a harvest and  doing business but not accruing a profit. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-8 “In brief, the five appropriated  aggregates are suffering” 
A Brief presentation 
B Extensive explanation  
A Brief presentation  
Eighth: Thinking  about the meaning of the st atement: “In brief, the five appropriated  
aggregates are suffering” has five points:  
 - they are a vessel of suffering that will become manifest, 
 - they are a vessel of suffering based on what has [already] become manifest, 
 - they are a vessel for the suffering of suffering  - they are a vessel for the suffering of change, and  - they are in the nature of compounding suffering.  You [should] think about these [points] again and again. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 112  B Extensive explanation 
{133} Here the first [point] is that, in dependen ce on taking these appropriated aggregates, the 
sufferings of the next rebirth onward are induced.  
 The second one: the aggregates that have [already] been established become the basis 
for illness, aging, etc. that depend on them.  
 The third and fourth ones: [the aggregates] give rise to these two types of suffering due to their connection with the negative tendencies
96 of the two.  
 The fifth one: due to the mere establishment of the appropriated aggregates they arise 
in the nature of compounding suffering, for all compounded phenomena are under to the 
control of other - previous karma and mental  afflictions - are compounding suffering.  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1E Advice to cherish  [this] manner of meditating on the essence 
If no genuine disenchantment develops towards cy clic existence, which is  of the nature of the 
appropriated  aggregates, there is no way a ge nuine awareness striving for liberation will 
develop and great compassion with the sentient  beings roaming about in cyclic existence 
cannot develop either. Therefore these consid erations are extremely important whichever 
vehicle you enter, the Mahayana or Hinayana. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2 Considering the six [types of] suffering 
A Summarised presentation of the six [types of] suffering 
B Presentation of them condensed in three groups   
C How there is nothing in contaminated feelings that is of the essence of happiness  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2A Summarised presentation of the six [types of] suffering 
Second – Considering the six [types of] suffering -: The Letter to a Friend  sets out the faults [of 
cyclic existence]: 
 - lack of certainty, 
 - insatiability,  - discarding  one’s body again and again,  - being reborn  again and again,  - changing from high to low [states] again and again, and  - lacking companions. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2B Presentation of them in three groups  
1 There is nothing reliable 
2 No satisfaction 
3 Beginninglessness 
 Summing them up in three [groups]:  
 - in cyclic existence there is nothing reliable,  - no matter how much of its happiness on e enjoys, there is no final point of 
satisfaction, and 
- one has been in it since beginningless times. 
 
The first one has four points: 
 - the inappropriateness of relying on the bo dy you have attained - you will discard your 
body again and again; 
 - the inappropriateness of relying on bene fit and harm [done to you] - there is no 
certainty as to whether your father will be your son, your mother your wife, an enemy 
someone very close to you, and the like;  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 113   - the inappropriateness of relying on the ex cellences you have achieved - {134} you fall 
from high places to low ones; and  
 - the inappropriateness of relying on compan ions - you have to go on without them [in 
the end]. 
 The third one is that you are reborn  again and again, so that an end to the continuity 
of births is not in evident.  You should reflect in this manner again and again. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2C How there is nothing in contaminated feelings that is of the essence of happiness 
at present most of the happy feelings that increase our attachment are minds of happiness 
that arise with respect to a remedy of sufferi ng. Yet, there is no happiness by way of an 
essence that is unrelated to suffering. For inst ance, if you suffer because you have walked a 
lot, the mind of happiness that arises due to si tting down appears to be happiness that arises 
gradually while the previous great suffering grad ually ceases. However, it is not happiness by 
way of its essence, for if you sit too much, again,  that will produce suffering as before. If they 
were causes of happiness by way of their essence,  walking, sitting, lying, eating and drinking, 
as well as sun and shade etc. should result in happiness growing to the same extent as you have spent time indulging in them – just like suffering growing to the same extent as you are 
subject to the causes of suffering. However, it a ppears that after too long only [more] suffering 
is produced.  
 These points are also set out  in [the Sutra of Nanda’s ] Entry into the Womb  and the root 
text of the Four Hundred  [Verses ] and its commentary.   
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B Considering the suffering of the individual [realms]  
1 The suffering of the three bad migrations 
2 The suffering of humans 
3 The suffering of demigods 
4 The suffering of gods 
The second one has four points: The suffering of the three bad migrations, the suffering of 
humans, the suffering of demigods, and the suffering of gods. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B1 The suffering of the three bad migrations 
The first has already been explained. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B2 The suffering of humans 
The second one [consists in] the suffering of hu nger and thirst, the un pleasant contact with 
heat and cold, frantic activity, and fatigue. In addition, you should come to understand  the 
seven [types of suffering], birth, aging, illness, death and so forth97 by means of the previous 
explanations. Furthermore, in the Discourses of the Collections   it says:  
 
All the sufferings of bad migrations 
Also appear to exist for humans. {135} Troubled by suffering like beings in hell, Subjects of Yama by  poverty, They also have the suffering of animals: Powerful ones oppress the weak By force, inflicting harm on them. It is like a river [engulfing you]     [62] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 114   
And in Four Hundred Verses : 
 
Higher ones have mental suffering, 
Lower ones get physical pain. These two types of suffering [truly]  Overwhelm the world each day.    [63]  
You should reflect in accordance with these statements. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B3 The suffering of demigods 
Third: It is said that the demigods are ment ally tormented by envy that cannot bear the 
wealth of the gods. When base d on that they figh t with the gods, they experience many 
sufferings of having their bodies chopped up, sp lit, etc. Although they possess intelligence, 
they have fully-ripened obscurations and conseq uently cannot see the truth on that basis.  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4 The suffering of gods 
A The suffering of desire [realm] gods  
B The suffering of gods of the uppermost realms 
The fourth one has two points: th e suffering of desire [realm] go ds and the suffering of gods 
of the uppermost realms. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4A The suffering of desire [realm] gods 
1 The suffering of dying, transmigrating  and falling  2 The suffering of despair  
3 The suffering of being chopped up, split, killed or banished 
The first one has three points: the suffering of dy ing, transmigrating  and falling, the suffering 
of despair  and the suffering of being chopped up, split, killed or banished. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4A-1 The suffering of dying, transmigrating  and falling 
A The suffering of dying and passing  
B The suffering of falling to a lower place 
The first one has two points: the suffering of dy ing and transmigrating , and the suffering of 
falling to a lower place.  
A The suffering of dying and transmigrating  
First: At the time of dying and transmigrating, wh en a god has seen the five signs of death, the 
suffering that springs from this is far greater th an the happiness that used to spring previously 
from indulging in the desirable objects of the go ds. The five signs of death are: (1) a hideous 
bodily complexion , (2) a dislike for one’s seat , (3) the wilting of one’s flower garlands, (4) 
one’s clothes becoming smelly, and (5) sweat, wh ich did not exist before, appearing on one’s 
body. 
B The suffering of falling 
The second one is just like it says in Letter to a Friend :  
 
As they transmigrate from the world of the gods 
In case there is no remainder of anything virtuous  {136} They change without control into situations  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 115  Of animals, hungry ghosts and beings of hell.  [64] 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4A-2  The suffering of despair ] 
Second: For the gods with very extensive heaps  of merit the most exquisite sense pleasures 
arise. When the sons of the gods   with small merit see that, th ey despair and experience great 
suffering and mental unhappiness on that basis.  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4A-3 The suffering of being chopped up, split, killed or banished  
Third: When the gods fight with the demigods, they experience the suffering of having their 
limbs and minor  body parts chopped off, their bo dies split and being killed. If their heads are 
chopped off they die, but limbs and minor body parts that are chopped off or split grow back 
and they survive. As for banishment, when there is conflict, the more powerful gods drive the 
weaker sons of the gods out of their abodes. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4B   The suffering of gods in the uppermost realms 
1 [Lack of power to avoid future suffering] 
Although gods in the two uppermost realms do not have the suffering of suffering, in 
possessing mental afflictions and obscuratio ns, they lack control over their death, 
transmigration  and [next] state  which is why they suffer through taking on bad states. 
2 How they have the suffering of falling to bad migrations again  
Furthermore it says in Discourses of the Collections  :  
 
Someone in form or formless realms 
Having transcended the suffering of suffering, 
Possessed of the pleasure of samdhi Who dwells immovable  for eons Is still not certain of freedom  at all; 
He will still fall from there again. 
If he has emerged somewhere Beyond the whirlpool of pain of bad realms, Even with effort he won’t last long there . Like a bird in flight up high, 
Like an arrow shot by a child, 
That one also ends up falling - 
Like butterlamps that blaze for long 
{137} While [actually] perishing moment by moment He is completely oppressed by the suffering Called ‘compounding, thoroughly changing’.  [65] 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B  Considering the stages of entering cyclic existence - origins 
1 How the mental afflictions arise 
2 How karma is thereby accumulated 
3 How you die, transmigrate  and take rebirth 
The second one has three points: how the ment al afflictions arise, how karma is thereby 
accumulated and how you die, transmigrate  and take rebirth.  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1  How the mental afflictions arise 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 116  A How the mental afflictions are chief  
B Identification of the mental afflictions  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1A  How the mental afflictions are chief  
Although both karma and mental afflictions ar e necessary as causes that establish cyclic 
existence, the mental afflictions are chief . This is because if th ere are no mental afflictions, 
even though there is karma beyond calculation  accumulated previously, since the cooperative 
conditions for karma are absent, the sprout of su ffering is not established – just like a [real] 
sprout is not established from a seed lacking humi dity, soil, and so forth. It is also because if 
there are mental afflictions, even though ther e may be no karma accumulated previously, it 
will immediately be accumulated anew  and future aggregates will be taken.That is also how it 
is set out in the Commentary  [on Valid Cognition ]: 
 
The karma of those who have fully transcended 
The thirst for existence cannot project other ones 
For what cooperates has been exhausted. 
 
And about craving: 
 For if it’s present, it’ll happen again.    [66]  
Therefore it is of great importance to rely on   the antidotes to mental afflictions and that 
again depends on knowing the mental afflictions,  which is why you should become skilled in 
them.  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B  Identification of the mental afflictions 
1 [The actual] Identification of the mental afflictions 
2 The stages by which [the mental afflictions] arise 
3 The faults of the mental afflictions 
Second: This has three points: [The actual] identi fication of the mental afflictions, the stages 
by which [the mental afflictions] arise, and the faults of the mental afflictions. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1 [The actual] identification of the mental afflictions 
A Desirous attachment 
B Anger C Pride 
D Ignorance 
E Doubt F The view of the transitory collection 
G Views holding on to an extreme [position] 
H Holding on to a view as best   
I Holding on to an ethical discipline and ascetic practice as best J Wrong views  
A Desirous attachment 
The first on has ten points. The first of those,  desirous attachment, observes an attractive, 
pleasant, external or internal object and is subseq uently attached to it. To illustrate: just as oil 
that has penetrated into cloth is hard to remo ve, desirous attachment, too, clinging to its 
object and pervading it only separate s from that object with difficulty. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 117  B Anger 
Anger is {138} a hostile attitude upon observing a basis of suffering such as sentient beings, 
suffering, weapons, thorns, and so forth, a ro ugh mind intending to inflict harm on those 
objects. 
C Pride 
Based on the view of the transitory collection, pride is a puffed up mind upon observing one’s 
external or internal level or qualities. It engages them with an aspect of superiority. 
D Ignorance 
Ignorance is afflicted  not-knowin g due to a mind that is unclear with regard to the nature of 
the four truths, actions and their results, and the three jewels.  
E Doubt 
Upon observing th[os]e three [obj ects], the four truths etc., do ubt is the thought: “Do they 
exist or do they not exist. Ar e they ... or are they not?”  
F The view of the transitory collection 
The view of the transitory collection: an afflic ted intelligence that, observing the appropriated 
aggregates, views them as a self or of the self  and thinking ‘I’ or ‘m ine’. Here ‘transitory’ 
implies impermanence and ‘collection’ many, so the base that it views is a mere impermanent 
and manifold phenomenon. In order to indicate “There is no permanent, unitary person,” it 
has been given the name  ‘view of the transitory collection’. 
G View holding to an extreme  
View holding to an extreme: an afflicted inte lligence which, observing that self apprehended 
by the view of the transitory collection, views it to be permanent and eternal or views is to 
cease without transmigration from th is [existence] to a future one. 
H [The view] holding to a [bad] view as best  
[The view] holding to a [bad] view as best is an afflicted intelligence that observes and holds to 
be best any of the three – the view of the transi tory collection, the view holding to an extreme, 
or a wrong view – and the aggregates of the pers on holding the view that arises in dependence 
on them. 
I [The view] holding to [a bad] ethical discipline and ascetic practice as best 
[The view] holding to [a bad] ethical discipline  and ascetic practice as best is an afflicted 
intelligence that observes an ethical discipline of  giving up immorality, an ascetic practice that 
sets a dress code , manners, and bodily and verbal behaviour as definite and the {139} 
aggregates in dependence on which they arise. It views them as something purifying negativity, 
as liberating from mental afflictions, and definitely releasing from cyclic existence. 
J Wrong view 
A wrong view is an afflicted intelligence that de precates saying that past and future lives, 
actions and their results and the like do not exis t, or superimposes the concept of Ishvara, a 
primal substance, etc. as the cause of migrating beings. 
 This is how the mental afflictions are identifi ed  from the common perspective of the higher 
and lower tenet systems. The Prasangika Madh yamika system will be explained [below].  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 118  2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1  The stages by which [the mental afflictions] arise 
A The system of the Treatise on the Levels  asserting that the view of the transitory collection and 
ignorance are in opposition to each other 
Second: If the view of the transitory collectio n and ignorance are held to be distinct [the 
stages of how the mental afflictions arise must  be understood in the following manner]. For 
instance with regard to a coiled  rope, once da rkness has fallen to some extent, if the mode of 
subsistence of the rope is not clear, a mind apprehending a snake arises. Likewise, through 
the darkness of ignorance obscuring the clear  mode of subsistence of the aggregates, the 
deception regarding the aggregates as a self aris es and from that the other mental afflictions 
arise. 
B The system of Madhyamika and Dharmakirti asserting that the view of the transitory collection itself is 
ignorance  
If those two are asserted to be the same, the view  of the transitory collect ion itself is the root 
of mental afflictions. 
C How the remaining root mental afflictions arise according to the two systems  
Furthermore, whenever the view of the transitory collection apprehends a self, an arbitrary 
distinction is made between self and other. On ce that is made, attachment towards one’s own 
side and hatred towards the other side arise. Also  conceit arises upon observing that self; that 
very self is held to be permanent or annihilate d and is viewed as the self etc., and the bad  
activities connected with it are held to be the best. Likewise wrong views that think “The 
teacher who taught selflessness, the actions and results he taught, the four truths, the three 
jewels, etc. do not exist” are ge nerated{140} or, alternatively, the doubt that thinks “Do they 
exist or not? Are they … or are th ey not…?” is generated. In the Commentary  [on Valid 
Cognition ] it says:  
 
If there is self there’s awareness of other 
Dividing between them brings grasping and anger. Closely connected with those [two] - All the faults will come about.     [67] 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B3 The faults of the mental afflictions 
A How to see the mental afflictions as enemies because of their great shortcomings  
Third: In Ornament of the Sutras  it says:  
 
The mental afflictions destroy ones elf, destroy sentient beings, and 
destroy ethical discipline. Once that is debased, you become inferior in gain and guardians and teachers revile you. There will be nasty disputes, you take  rebirth elsewhere in unfree states. 
Through the debasement of what you’ ve attained or not [yet] attained 
there is great mental suffering.     [68]  
And in Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] Behaviour : 
 
Enemies such as hatred and craving, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 119  Do not have arms or legs nor other [limbs], 
They have no valour either, so why is it 
That they have reduced me to servitude? 
 
While residing in my mind they keep Inflicting harm on me who lets them be. But the patience that’s not angry at them 
Is unsuitable patience – the object  of blame. 
 Even if the gods and demigods 
Were all to rise as enemies [against me], 
They would not be able to lead or put me Into the fires of the Incessant Hell.  
However, the mental afflictions, these powerful foes, 
Within a single moment they throw me in there, Where whatever meets with it, even Mount Meru, [Is burnt so that] nothing is left - not even ashes.  Compared to those foes of mine, the mental afflictions, Which have been with me without beginning nor end 
None of all the other enemies Would be able to last for such a long time .  If everyone benefits you and makes you happy, If you had acted with reverence and in agreement – In case you have attended to mental afflictions, They inflict suffering and harm on you in return.  
You should reflect on the shortcomings stated here. {141} 
B Relating the cultivation of antidotes to the words of former master saints  
Gonpapo said: “In order to abandon  the mental  afflictions it is necessary to know their 
shortcomings, their characteristic s, their antidotes, and the caus es for their arising. Once you 
have understood their shortcomings, you should  see them as drawbacks, apprehend them as 
enemies. If you do not understand their shor tcomings, you will not understand them to be 
enemies. Therefore you [should] consider th em along the lines of  statements from Ornament 
of the Sutras  and Engaging in [Bodhisattva ] Behaviour .” And: “In order to know the 
characteristics  of the mental afflictions, yo u should also study abhidharma, at least the 
Differentiation of the Five Aggregates . Once you have got acquainted with the root and secondary 
afflictions, you will identify attachment, hatred, and so forth, whatever it  is, as soon as they 
arise in your continuum thinking “This is that. Oh no! It has arisen, ” and you will fight the 
mental afflictions.” That kind of understanding is necessary.  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2  How karma is accumulated by [the mental afflictions] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 120  A Identifying the karma that is  accumulated  
B How [karma] is accumulated 
The second one has two points: identifying the karma that is  accumulated, and how it is 
accumulated. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A Identifying the karma that is  accumulated 
1 Intending action 
2 Intended action 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A1 Intending action 
First: Intending action - the mental factor that  makes its concomitant mind move and urges it 
towards objects - is action of mind. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A2  Intended action  
A The actions that have actually been intended 
B Its essence 
C Identifying three kinds of karma 
A The actions that have actually been intended 
First: The actions of body and speech th at are motivated by that intention… 
B Their essence 
… are divided into the revelatory and non-revela tory and posited as only having form by the 
Vaibhashikas. Master Vasubandhu refutes that an d maintains that they ar e the intentions that 
operate together with  the revelatory physical  and verbal actions whereby he explains both 
actions to be intentions.98  
C Identifying three kinds of action  
In this regard non-virtuous actions are non- meritorious actions. Meritorious actions are 
virtuous actions included in the level of th e desire realm. {142} Immovable  actions are 
contaminated virtuous actions included in the levels of the form and formless realms. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2B How [karma]  is accumulated  
1 Explaining who accumulates the karma to be thro wn [into a rebirth] within cyclic existence  
2 How [karma] is accumulated by that [person] 1 Explaining who accumulates the karma to be th rown [into a rebirth] within cyclic existence 
Second: Once you have directly realized selflessne ss, you can still be reborn in cyclic existence 
under the power of karma and mental affliction s, however, you do not newly accumulate any 
throwing karma. Therefore, those who accumula te the karma to be thrown [into a rebirth] 
within cyclic existence are all ordinary beings  up to and including those [dwelling] on the 
great [level of]  highest [mundane] qualitie s on the Mahayana  pa th of preparation. 
2 How [karma] is accumulated by that [person] 
If, with that basis, you create non-virtuous ac tions by means of the three doors, for instance 
killing, you will accumulate non-meritorious karma. If you create virtuous actions, such as 
giving gifts and guarding ethical discipline, yo u will accumulate meritorious karma. If you 
cultivate the calm abiding and so  forth included in the levels of the concentrations and the 
formless realm you will accumulate immovable karma. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3  How you die, transmigrate , and take rebirth  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 121  A Conditions for death  
B The mind of death 
C From where the heat withdraws 
D How the intermediate state  is accomplished  after death 
E How you take rebirth in a birth-existence 
 
The third one has five points: conditions for de ath, the mind of death,  from where the heat 
withdraws, how the intermediate state  is accomp lished  after death, and how you take rebirth 
in a birth-existence 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3A Conditions for death 
A Death following the exhaustion of one’s life span 
To die due to the exhaustion of one’s life span  is to die when the time has come in which 
one’s entire life span projected  by  previous karma has been exhausted. 
B Death following the exhaustion of one’s merit 
To die following the exhaustion of one’s merit i s  t h e  s a m e  a s  t o  d i e  f r o m  a  l a c k  o f  b a s i c  
requirements .  
C Death due to dangers not being avoided  
To die due to dangers not being avoided is the same as the nine causes and conditions of 
death, such as due to overeating, set out in the sutras.  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B The mind of death 
1 The mind of death 
2 Its appearances  3 For all three minds of death there is jjoining due to craving 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B1 The mind of death 
A [Virtuous] 
B [Non-virtuous] C [Unspecified] 
 Both virtuous minds, such as confidence, and non-virtuous minds, such as attachment, {143} 
arise in the mind, in dependence on one’s own ac tions or being made to recall them by others 
– as long as gross compositional factors operate.  To die with an unspecified mind implies that 
one did not recall virtuous or non-virtuous minds by oneself nor was one reminded of them 
by others. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2 Their appearances  
A [The appearance due to a virtuous mind]  
B [The appearance due to a non-virtuous mind] 
C [The appearance due to an unspecified mind] 
 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2A [The appearance due to a virtuous mind] 
For those who have created non-virt ue,  it is like going from li ght into thick darkness. At the 
time of death, various dreamlike repulsive fo rms appear to them, intense suffering feeling 
arises, and the interruption of life is very severe. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2B  [The appearance due to a non-virtuous mind] 
1 The actual [appearance]] 
For those who have created non-virt ue,  it is like going from li ght into thick darkness. At the 
time of death, various dreamlike repulsive fo rms appear to them, intense suffering feeling 
arises, and the interruption of life is very severe . 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 122  2 Clearing up doubts concerning the interruption of life 
The interruption of life exists for all birt h-places excluding the gods and hell beings. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2C [The appearance due to an unspecified mind] 
1 The actual [appearance] 
In those who have an unspecified mind, the tw o, happiness and suffering, that were explained 
above do not arise. 
2 What mind becomes manifest at death  
At the time of death, whichever mind, virtuous  or non-virtuous, is most familiar becomes 
manifest, whereas other minds do not subsequently  operate. If they are equally familiar, that 
which is recalled first will become manifest, whereas others do no subsequently operate. 
3 All the subtle minds of death  are unspecified 
At the time when the mind moves into its subtle  part,  virtuous and non-virtuous minds come 
to a stop   and become an unspecified mind. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B3 For all three minds of death there is joining due to craving  
 For all, at the time of death, as long as [t he state of] unclear discrimination has not been 
reached, there arises attachment to a self whic h has long been familiarised with. {144} After 
that, under the influence of attachment to a se lf thinking “I am becoming non-existent”, 
delight in a body arises. It is the cause for the intermediate state  to come about. While 
attachment to self also arises in stream-enter ers and once-returners, they investigate it with 
wisdom and abandon it  rather than acquiescing in   it; just like, for in stance, a strong person 
beating someone weak. In non-returners that  attachment to self does not arise. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3C From where the heat withdraws 
Third: In those who have create d non-virtue the heat first with draws from the upper part of 
the corpse and dissipates down to the heart. In  those who have created virtue the heat first 
withdraws from the lower part of the corpse and dissipates up  to the heart. [In both cases] the 
consciousness transmigrates from the heart. That   which the consciousness first entered into 
in the middle of the [mixture of] semen and [men strual] blood transforms  into the heart, and 
where it eventually transmigrates  from is  that very place it first enters into. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3D How the intermediate state  is reached  after death 
1 From where the bardo  is accomplished 
Fourth: From the place where the consciousness transmigrates  as explained above, death and 
the bardo are accomplished without a break, just  like the swing on the armature of a scale. 
2 The shape of the intermediate state being etc. 
The intermediate state being moreover has comple te sense faculties  such as the eyes, and has 
the aspect of the body of whatever migrating being it will be born as. As long as it does not 
take rebirth, its eye is unobstructed like the divine eye99 and its body, too, is unobstructed as 
though possessed of magical powers. It is seen by  intermediate state beings of similar type and 
by the flawless divine eye arisen from mediation. While it is set out in the Treasury    that once 
the intermediate state of any migrating being ha s been accomplished, there is no diverting it 
into some other rebirth, the Compendium of All  [the Abhidharma ] also explains reversals. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 123  3 How the appearance of the intermediate existence appears to those who have created virtue and non-
virtue 
The intermediate existence of those who have cr eated non-virtue appears like black cloth or 
like a dark night, and the interm ediate existence of those who ha ve created virtue appears like 
a white  blanket {145} or a moonlit night. 
4 How it sees 
It sees intermediate state beings of similar ty pe, as well as their and its own birthplaces. 
5 The colour 
In [the Sutra ] Entry into the Womb  it says that the intermediate state of hell beings is like [the 
colour of] a burnt log, that of animals like smoke, that of hungry ghosts like  water, that of 
desire realm gods and humans like gold, and th e intermediate state of form realm gods is 
white100. 
6 Distinction whether there is or is not an intermediate state 
If you are [re]born from the formless realm into the two lower realms, there is an intermediate 
state. [However,] If you are born from those tw o [realms] into the formless one, the aggregates 
of the formless [realm] are accomplished wherever you die, and there is no intermediate state  
7 How it travels 
It is taught that the intermediate state of gods  travels upward, that of humans travels straight 
ahead, and that of those who have done faul ty actions, with eyes [cast] down, travels 
downward. For the three bad migrations the same meaning is intended. 
8 The lifespan 
If it does not find the conditions for rebirth, it  abides for as many as seven days. If its finds 
them, [the number of days] is uncertain. Yet if it does not find them, it exchanges bodies and 
abides up to seven times seven days. However, it does not abide any longer than that since it 
will definitely find the conditions for rebirth by then. 
9 The manner of changing into another intermediate state  
Having died and transmigrated  after seven d ays in the intermediate state of a god, for 
example, the intermediate state of a god, or alternatively the intermediate state of a human 
being etc., is accomplished because through the ch anging activity of othe r karma, the seed of 
the intermediate state is changed. It is the same for other [intermediate states]. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3E How you take rebirth in a birth-existence  
1 How you transmigrate  into an intermediate existence through a mind of attachment and so forth 
Fifth: In Many Levels  it is taught that, when you are bo rn in a womb, a mistaken perception 
arises with regard to the semen and blood of yo ur father and mother: in that moment, like an 
illusion, you see your parents to be having in tercourse  even though they are not  and you 
develop attachment to th em. {146} However, the Commentary  on the Treasury  explains that you 
see your parents [actually] having intercourse. Furthermore, if you are born as a female you 
want to be rid of the woman, be come attached to the man, and want to lie with him. If you 
are born as a male you want to be rid of the man, become attached to  the woman, and want 
to lie with her. Once this kind of desire has arisen, the closer you approach, other body parts 
of that man and woman no longer appear  and you only see the male and female 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 124  characteristics  of your parents. Getting angry at that, the intermediate existence being dies, 
transmigrates, and is reborn101. 
2 What object the consciousness connects with and how  
Furthermore, when there is a situation of inte nse attachment between father and mother, at 
the very end thick fluid emerges. After that, two drops of semen and blood doubtlessly 
emerge from  the two. Once the two have mixe d in the birth-place of the mother, they turn 
into [something] like for instance boiled milk that has cooled down and congealed. At the 
same time that the intermediate existence term inates, by the power of the consciousness that 
transmigrates, the subtle parts of the great el ements of the sense powe rs, which are different 
from [that congealed mass] and the combination of semen and blood that accord with that 
mixture arise as other along with the sense powers102. The consciousness that enters at this 
moment is posited as the basis-of-all  by thos e who accept a mind basi s-of-all. Those who do 
not accept a basis-of-all assert that it is the mental consciousness that transmigrates. 
3 You are not born in bad birth-places unless the bardo being wishes to go there  
If there is no desire to go to a birth-source, [t he bardo being] will not go there and if it has not 
gone there it will not be born there. Theref ore, the bardo being of someone possessing non-
vows103 who created and accumulated an action for rebirth in hell, such as killing sheep or 
trading in poultry or pigs and the like, sees, as if in a dream, sheep and the like at his  birth-
place and rushes there with the delight of previous familiarity.   {147} Then he becomes angry 
at the form  of his birth-place, the intermedia te existence ends, and he is born in the birth-
existence. Likwise, rebirth as a hell being, a hu ngry ghost with goitre, etc. is similar to this. 
4 How you are reborn somewhere bad, as an animal etc. 
In the Actual Basis of the Levels  it says that if you are born as  an animal, hungry ghost, human 
being, or as a god revelling  in the desire and form [realms], you will see delightful beings of 
similar type to yourself at your birth-place. Then, having generated delight in and desire for 
that, you go there. As you get an gry at your birth-place, the intermediate existence ceases and 
you are born in the birth-existence. The w ay in which someone who has non-vows who does 
not trade in poultry and pigs etc. is born in hell should be understood similarly  to this. 
5 From among the four birth-places, how you are born from heat and moisture and miraculously born 
In the Treasury  “Others long for smells and a place” is  mentioned saying with the explanation  
that  if you are born from heat and moisture, you are born through desiring smells, and if you 
are born miraculously, you are born through desiring a place. Moreover, the commentary 
explains that if you are born in the hot hells,  you go to the intermediate existence desiring 
heat, whereas if you are born in the cold hells,  you go to the intermediate existence desiring 
cooling.  The Commentary on the Treasury  explains rebirth from an egg to be similar to birth 
from a womb. 
2B4B-2B2B-2  The measure  that those thoughts [common to intermediate beings] have 
arisen 
A Indicating the measure  of their having arisen purely 
Second: If you have come to understand the char acteristics of cyclic ex istence in detail from 
the point of view of the two, sufferings and thei r origins, and the desire to abandon them and 
the desire to attain their complete pacification ha ve arisen, that alone is indeed the attitude of 
renunciation, however, that alone is not sufficien t. Thererfore, you should generate that mind 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 125  to the extent of being like the mind that does not want to be [stuck] in a house ablaze with 
fire or stay [locked up] in prison and [to the ex tent] that it desires liberation from them, and 
then it is still necessary to increase it. 
B The development of nothing but an appearance of striving for liberation if nothing but mediocre 
renunciation has developed  
{148} If this attitude is noth ing more than mediocre, like fl our thrown into sour milk as 
Sharawa put it, also the view that does not want  the causes of cyclic existence - the origins - 
will not become more than that . Accordingly, one’s striving fo r liberation, the cessation that 
is the ceasing of sufferings and origins, will be the same. Because of that, the desire to 
accomplish the path of liberati on will be mere words, and there will be no basis for the 
compassion that cannot bear the suffering of other beings who roam in cyclic either. The 
uncontrived mind of unsurpassed enlightenment th at has the power to spur the mind on  will 
not arise, so that you become a member of th e Mahayana  only in your understanding that 
follows upon words. For that reason you should  cultivate [these thoughts] again and again. 
2B4B-2B2B-3  Eliminating misconceptions about this 
A The manner of misconceptions  
B Their elimination 
2B4B-2B2B-3A  The manner of misconceptions  
Third: You may think: “If you cultivate extr eme revulsion and disenchantment for cyclic 
existence, you will fall into th e extreme of peace like shravaka s, because of your dislike for 
[re]entering cyclic existence. Therefore, it  is becoming for Hinayanists to cultivate 
disenchantment, but it is inappropriate for bodhis attvas. That is how it is explained in [the 
Sutra of the ] Unfathonable Secret .”  
2B4B-2B2B-3B  Their elimination 
A The meaning of [statements in] sciptures that bodhisattvas are not terrified by cyclic existence 
The meaning of the statement “Thus a bodhisattva should not be terrified by cyclic existence” 
is not to point out that he should not be repulsed  at the suffering of birth, aging, illness, 
death and so on of roaming in existence under the power of karma and the mental afflictions. 
Rather, it is that, due to his  mind of enlighte nment, he should not be afraid to take rebirth 
in existence for the benefit of sentient beings  under the power of the aspirational prayers. 
B How it is necessary to enjoy being reborn in cyclic existence due to compassion but to be terrified of 
rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and the afflictions 
In fact, if roaming in existence under the power of karma and the mental afflictions, we are 
oppressed by many sufferings and unable to enac t even our own welfare, what need is there to 
mention enacting others’ welfare? {149} Since it  is the door to all degeneration there is a need 
to block it, having developed extreme disenchan tment, more than the Hinayanists, while it is 
necessary to enjoy taking rebirth in existence under the power of aspirational prayers and 
compassion. In accordance with that it also says in the same sutra: 
 
Bodhisattva s, having taken care  of ripening sentient beings, view cyclic existence to be beneficial – unli ke the great passage [to peace].  
         [ 6 9 ]  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 126  C For those with vows of engagement [in bodhisattva behaviour] who express themselves in this manner 
not differentiating between rebirths due to karma and me ntal afflictions and rebirths due to aspirational 
prayers etc. infractions occur 
In the Bodhisattva Levels  it is set out that if someone who expresses himself in the above 
manner without differentiating [between them] has bodhisattva vows, he commits an afflictive  
infraction.  
D Cherishing the way of conduct without falling into the extreme of peace despite great revulsion for  cyclic existence 
Having developed revulsion for cyclic existence, to  see those  sentient beings as one’s relatives 
and thus generate the mind of enlightenmen t for their sake, is the intention of the Four 
Hundred Verses  and is clearly set out by the great  ma ster Chandrakirti in  his commentary on 
that [text]. 
 
Explanation of how the nature  of the path leading to li beration  is established  
2B4B-2B2B-4  Establishment of the nature of the path leading to liberation   
A Transition 
[B The actual establishment of the nature of the path] 
2B4B-2B2B-4A Transition 
Fourth: Since meditation on the shortcomings of existence has ge nerated an intense desire to 
definitely emerge from cyclic existence to arise as  explained earlier,  there is a need to reverse 
cyclic existence. 
2B4B-2B2B-4B The actual establishment [of the nature of the path] 
1 By what kind of basis is cyclic existence averted 
2 By cultivating what kind of path it is averted [/What should the cultivated paths be like to 
reverse it] 
Therefore two points [are being made] in this rega rd: by what kind of basis is cyclic existence 
averted and by cultivating what kind of path it is averted. 
2B4B-2B2B-4B1 By what kind of basis is cyclic existence averted 
A The need to avert it at this time when you have obtained a basis of leisure and endowments 
From the Letter to a Friend : 
 
Having obtained a birth of leisure that’s free 
From the so-called defective eight unfree states 
{150} Make an effort to avert rebirths.   [70] 
 
As is set out [here], you need to avert them at this time when you have the leisures and 
endowments, for it has already been explaine d that in the unfree [states] there is no 
opportunity to avert it. 
B The need to make an effort now 
The great yogi [Jangchup Rinchen] said: “Now is the time to distinguish ourselves from 
cattle.” Potowa also said: “Since it did not stop by itself when we were roaming about so long 
previously, it will also not stop by itself now. Therefore we must avert it. Yet the time to avert 
it is this time when we have obta ined the leisures and endowments.” 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 127  C How on that basis it is good to take ordination 
Even more than that, lay people have many ob stacles to the accompli shment of the Dharma 
and have the drawback of numerous faults. Si nce those who are ordained turn away  from 
them, the ordained has the best basis for averting cyclic existence. That is why the discerning  
should develop a strong liking for ordination. In [the Sutra ] Requested by Ugra  it says that lay 
bodhisattvas should aspire for ordination. This ma inly refers to aspiring for full ordination. In 
Ornament of the Sutras  it also says: 
 
Those on the side of the ordained  
Have limitless good qualities Thus those exerting themselves in vows Excel over householder bodhisattvas.    [71] 
D How it is necessary to respect the vows of indivi dual liberation since ordination is also praised by 
both sutra and tantra  for the accomplishment of omniscience 
Thus ordination is not only praised for the attainment of the complete release that is 
liberation from cyclic existence, but also pres ented  as the best basis for the accomplishment 
of omniscience by the perfecti ons and tantra [vehicles]. The vows of ordination, among the 
three vows, are those of individual liberation. That is why you should respect [the vows of] 
individual liberation, the root of the teachings. 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2 By cultivating what kind of path is cyclic existence averted 
A Identification of the path and transition 
B Indication that the other trainings  will be exlained further on  
C In particular how to train in ethical discipline 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2A Identification of the path and transition 
{151} Second: In the Letter to a Friend  it says: 
 
Even if your head or clothes caught fire 
Give up preventing it; simply make an effort To destroy [the occurrence] of [future] rebirths There is nothing else that would be better.  Through pure discipline, wisdom and concentration Attain the immaculate  state of peace and taming - Nirvana - that’s ageless, deathless and limitless, Free of earth, water, fire, wind, the sun and the moon. [72]  
You need to practice the three types of precio us trainings of the path as set out in this 
statement. 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2B  Indi cation that the other trainings  will be exlained further on  
If I were commenting on the path of intermedia te beings for my own enjoyment, an extensive 
commentary on the three trainings would be necessa ry here. However, as this is not the case, 
the training in wisdom, special insight, and the training of the mind, the way to generate calm 
abiding will be explained in the context of great beings. Therefore, here I will only briefly state 
the way to train in ethical discipline. 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C How to train in ethical discipline 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 128  1 The benefits  of guarding [ethical discipline]  
2 The shortcomings of not guarding it  
3 How the benefits of generating ethical discipline are great nowadays  
4 The manner of training 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-1 The benefits  of guarding [ethical discipline] 
In this regard you should initially consider the benefits of ethical discipline again and again, 
and increase your heartfelt enthusiasm for it. In the Letter to a Friend  it says: 
 
Rules are the base and foundation of all good qualities 
So it says - like the earth fo r what moves and what doesn’t. 
         [ 7 3 ]   
And in the Tantra Requested by Subahu : 
 
Just as crops grow faultlessly in dependence On the ground, depending on ethical discipline Moistened by the water of compassion 
The most superior wholesome qualities grow.  [74] 
 
You should think about it according to these statements. 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-2 The shortcoming of not guarding it 
Just as guarding  the ethical discipline you have assumed brings enormous benefits, likewise 
there are great shortcomings to not to guarding  it. You should consider the shortcomings of 
not guarding it again and again as ta ught in the scriptures. {152} In the Sutra on Cherishing 
Monks  it says: 
 
Discipline is happiness for some; 
For others, discipline is suffering. 
For those who have it, happiness, For those who breach it, suffering.”    [75] 
 
In the Manjushri Root Tantra  it says: 
 
If discipline decays in those who recite, 
There will be no highest attainments, 
Nor will there be middling attainments, 
Even the least ones will remain absent. The Kind of Sages did not teach  Mantra
104 attainments for the immoral 
Nor do they approach the place 
That goes to the city of nirvana. 
How could there be in such bad children  
Any attainments of mantra [at all]? For those disregarding ethical discipline 
How could there be happy realms? 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 129  If they do not become higher beings, 
Nor beings bound for  highest bliss, What need to mention their attaining 
The mantras that the Jina taught?    [76] 
 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-3 How the benefits of generating ethical discipline are great nowadays  
In the King of Concentration  [Sutra ] it says: 
 
The trainings that I taught to those Who wear the laity’s grey clothes Even monks who are fully ordained Won’t have those trainings at that time.    [77]  
At that time when, according to the statement,  the completely perfect guarding of the five 
bases  of training taught to lay vow-holders is not present even in fully-ordained monks, 
striving in the trainings is special and has more  effect. Therefore you should make an effort. 
 From the same sutra:  
Those who at the time wh en the Dharma decays 
And the Sugata’s teachings come to an end, Practice a single training day and night Their merit will extraordinarily exceed, That of one who for eons like Ganges’ sand grains And with a mind of faith honours billions of Buddhas With food, drink, parasols, banners and garlands of light. [78] 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-4  The manner of training 
A Instructions on the four antidotes for abandoning downfalls 
As an antidote to not knowing, the first of four  causes for the occurrence of downfalls, is to 
study the trainings and know them. 
 The antidote to non-conscientiousness is the mindfulness that does not forget the 
objects and aspects of what to adopt and what  to abandon, the introspection individually 
investigates the three doors at every  moment an d brings to mind the good or faulty [actions] 
being engaged in, the shame that shuns faulty behaviour from the perspective of oneself or 
the Dharma, the embarrassment that shuns faulty behaviour thinking that others will criticize 
you, and the intimidation that fears the fully ripened effects of faulty conduct. You should 
train in these and others. 
 As an antidote  to lack of respect you sh ould be respectful towards the Teacher, his 
formulated rules,  and those who perfectly observe them.  As an antidote to many mental afflictions you should examine your continuum and endeavour to apply the antidote to what ever  mental affliction predominates. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 130  B Relating [this] to past events: how it is inappropriate to be careless with respect even to small 
formulated [rules]  
If without putting effort into this you commit even minor tran sgressions and think: “It is a 
small mistake” this engagement in carelessness with respect to the formulated rules will only 
obtain suffering for you because it says in the Classification of  [Vinaya ] Scriptures : 
 
Those who are unconcerned with  regard to the teachings 
Of the compassionate Teacher and slightly transgress them 
Will hence come under the influence of suffering, 
Like mango groves that are spoiled through clearing bamboos. 
Though some here transgress th e royal decrees of the king 
And, if it’s not often, do not get punished [at all] If they transgressed the Muni’s words improperly 
They would migrate to the beasts like the naga Elapatra. [79] 
C How there is a need for quick confession if you are stained by faults and downfalls  
{154} Therefore, you should put effort into not being stained by faults and downfalls, but if 
you do become stained by them, you should not leave it at that indifferently, but put effort 
into undoing the transgression or negativity as has been taught. 
D The need not just for ordained mantric practitioners but also for lay  practitioners of mantra to guard 
the majority of vows 
If such guarding of morality is for those who ho ld the vows of individual liberation, it is also 
similar in the case of mant ra because it says in the Tantra Requested by Subahu : 
 
Of all pure ethical disciplines of pratimoksha 
That I, the Jina, taught, practitioners 
Of mantra who are householders  should abandon 
The rituals and signs while practicing the rest.  [80]  
If it is necessary for lay practitioners of mantra  to behave as set out in the vinaya, except for 
that which pertains to the signs of ordination , the ritual actions, and some parts of the 
prescribed formulated rules, what need is ther e to mention ordained practitioners of mantra? 
E It is the position of holy former masters to make ethical discipline and all other practices to mutually 
supportive of each other 
Khamlungpa also said: “If a famine breaks out, everything depends on barley. Likewise 
everything hinges on  discipline, therefore, earnestly apply yourself to it. Pure ethical 
discipline, again, does not come about in some one who has not reflected on actions and their 
effects. Therefore, it is an essential instructio n to reflect on that.” And Sharawa: “Generally, 
whatever excellent and faulty happens, depends on the Dharma. Out of that, if you even rely 
on what is suggested in the vinaya, you need not change anything. You will become sincere, 
withstand examination, enjoy practice, and have a good end.” And Geshe [Drom]Tonpa: 
“Many people rely on vinaya and miss out mant ra or rely on mantra  and miss out vinaya. 
{155} Only in my teacher’s traditions does the vinaya become the companion of mantra and 
mantra the companion of vinaya.” 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Intermediate Scope 
 
 131  F How the great beings in the land of aryas put into the practice the requirement that all activities 
accord with the three scriptural collections 
Jowo [Atisha] said: “With  us in India, whenev er an important matter or temporary  activity 
arose, those who upheld the scriptural collec tions convened and established whether it was 
not rejected by the three scriptural collections105 or in contradiction to them and upon that it 
was decided. We from Vikramashila then had the task [to examine] whether it was rejected by 
bodhisattva behaviour or in contradiction to it , and the decision was upheld by the entire 
ordained community[?]. 
 That concludes the explanation of training th e mind on the stages of the path common to 
intermediate beings. 
 
 132  CHAPTER IV 
GREAT SCOPE UP TO CALM ABIDING 
How to train the mind on the stages  of the path of great beings  
2B4B-2B3  Training the mind on the path of great beings 
A The transition 
B The actual path 
2B4B-2B3A The transition 
1 Even for the achievement of one’s own entire welfare it is inappropriate to disregard the welfare of 
others, therefore it is necessary to enter the Mahayana from the start 
Through meditating in this manner upon the disa dvantages of cyclic existence from different 
perspectives  over a long time, you will see all existence as a pit of blazing fire, and your mind 
will be thoroughly overcome by  the wish to attain the libera tion that completely pacifies 
suffering. If, due to that, you train in the three tr ainings, you will attain liberation from cyclic 
existence and, moreover, will not turn back ag ain even to see the glory of high status. 
Nonetheless, since extinguishing [one’s own] fa ults and achieving good qualities is limited, 
one’s own welfare is not complete. For that very  reason, others’ welfare is also temporarily 
neglected and in the end, having been urged to do so by the buddhas, you will have to enter 
the Mahayana. Therefore it is appropriate for th e intelligent to enter the Mahayana from the 
start. {156} In the Summary of the Perfections it says: 
 
Having abandoned forever those two yanas  
Which are without power to bring about all the world’s aims, Those whose nature is of on e taste with helping others 
Enter the Jina’s vehicle taught with compassion.  [1] 
2 Accomplishing the welfare of others, because it is worthy of  great beings to accomplish it 
It is the happiness and magnificence of beings, a be ing is capable of it: it is appropriate to take 
responsibility for the welfare of others because to observe only one’s own welfare is something 
we also share  with animals. Therefore, th e natural disposition of great beings is to 
categorically strive for  the bene fit and happiness of others. In the Letter to a Student  it says: 
 
When cattle see a mouthful of grass that is easy to get they eat it themselves; 
When they are greatly tormented by thir st and find some water they drink it 
wish relish.- Here, the effort they make to bring about the welfare of other beings, That is their magnificence and th e noble potential of happy beings. 
 Travelling, riding across the sky, the powerful sun illuminates all; Regardless of the burden the earth supports the world with everything in it. Those without the least self-interes t, equal in nature to the great 
Totally strive for that singular taste of benefit and of joy for the world. 
         [ 2 ]  
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 133  3 It is worthy of beings and the wise to toil and strive for the goal of protecting others from suffering 
and to strive accordingly 
In accordance with that, those who see how mi grating beings everywhe re are tormented by 
suffering and who toil for their welfare are called  “a being” (Skt., purusha) or “wise”. In the 
same text it says: 
 
Those who have seen the beings, confused by dense grey clouds of worldly ignorance,  As they fall without control into  the blazing fire of suffering  
And who think and strive for them as if fire was spreading overhead  Those ones, indeed, are beings; moreover those ones are the discerning.          [ 3 ]  
4 Having generated delight that there exists an entrance to the path that accomplishes all your own and 
others’ welfare, you need to enter it 
{157} There exists an entry to the Mahayana  - the source of all your own and others’ 
excellence, medicine removing all problems, the great path traveled by all wise beings that 
nurtures and nourishes all beings through seeing , hearing, remembering, and touching – that 
possesses the great skilful means that by workin g for the benefit of others, by the way, you 
accomplish your own welfare without any in completeness. Thinking: “Oh, I have found 
exactly what I was looking for!” you should engage in the best of vehicles with whatever ability 
of a being you have. 
2B4B-2B3B The actual path 
1 Demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway to the 
Mahayana 
2 How to generate thismind 
3 Having generated the mind of enlightenment how to train in the conduct 
Now, there are three [headings] co ncerning the training of the mi nd on the states of the path 
of great beings: demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway 
to the Mahayana, how to generate this mind and having generated the mind of 
enlightenment how to train in the conduct. 
 
Demonstrating that generating  the mind of enlightenment 
is the only gateway to the Mahayana, incl uding an explanation of its benefits 
2B4B-2B3B-1 Demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway to the 
Mahayana 
A Ascertaining the Mahayana as the two - the sutra and mantra vehicles and [the fact that] generating 
the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway to it 
First: Therefore, as it is necessary to enter th e Mahayana, you come to think how it is to be 
entered.  There is no Great Vehicle apart from the two - the Perfection and Tantra Vehicles - 
taught by the Jina. Whichever of the two one may enter, the only gateway is the mind of 
enlightenment. 
B Being posited as a follower  of the Mahayana also only depends on this mind 
Whenever it has arisen in the continuum, even though nothing el se has arisen, one  is posited 
as a Mahayana practitioner, whereas whenever one is separated from it, whatever good 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 134  qualities one has  such as the realisat ion of emptiness and so forth, {158}  one will fall down to 
the level  of hearer and the like and fall away from the Mahayana. This is taught in numerous 
texts of the Mahayana and is also established by reasonings. Therefore, whether one is a 
Mahayana practitioner is determined by  whether or not one has this mind. 
C Only those who have generated the mind become a son of the jinas and outshine the hearers and 
solitary realizers  
Thus, in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour  it says that as soon as  this mind has arisen, you 
become a son of the jinas. Likewise, in the Biography  of Maitreya  it says: 
 
Son of the lineage, it is like this. For example, a diamond, even broken, 
outshines all gold jewelry, however refined; it does not lose its name of 
‘diamond’ and averts all poverty. Son of the lineage, likewise the 
diamond that is the generated in the omniscient, even free from effort, 
outshines all the golden jewellery that is the good qualities of  the 
hearers and solitary realizers; it do es not lose the name ‘bodhisattva’ 
and it averts all the misfortune s of cyclic existence.  [4] 
 
If that mind exists even in someone untrained in conduct, he will be said to be a bodhisattva. 
D It is not sufficient for the Dharma being engaged in  to be Mahayana; it is necessary to generate the 
mind that is more than mere words  
Therefore, it is not sufficient for the Dharma to be Mahayana Dharma, rather it is important 
that the person has entered the Mahayana. Whet her you become a follower  of the Mahayana 
depends on the mind of enlightenment itself . If that mind is only and intellectual 
understanding, you will be a facsimile of a Ma hayana practitioner. One the other hand, if you 
have a fully qualified mind [of enlightenment] , you will also become a completely pure 
Mahayana practitioner. That is why you should strive in it. 
E [The mind of enlightenment] is like a seed since it only gives birth to a buddha 
With respect to this it says in the Gandavyuha :  
 
Son of the lineage[/Son of noble line age], the mind of enlightenment is 
like the seed of all Dharma of the Buddha.   [5] 
 
{159} Since certainty regarding this mu st be gained, it will be explained . 
F The way in which generating the mind [of enlightenment] is even more fundamental than the view of  
emptiness etc. for giving birth to a Buddha alone 
Since water, manure, heat, soil etc. act as a caus e for a rice sprout when combined with a rice 
grain, and act as causes for sprouts of wheat, pulses, and so forth when combined with their 
respective seeds, they are common causes. Since a barley seed, even though the conditions are 
gathered together, is not suitable as a cause of a rice sprout and so forth, it is the un-common 
cause of a barley sprout, while th e water, manure, and so forth th at cooperate with it are [the 
common cause] of the barley sprout. Similarly, among the causes for a buddha sprout, the 
mind of unsurpassed enlightenment, lie the seed, is the un-common cause, whereas the 
wisdom realizing emptiness, like the water, ma nure and so forth, is the common cause of the 
three enlightenments. That is  why the statement in the  Supreme Continuum : 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 135   
Dedication to the supreme vehicle [is] the seed; wisdom [is] the mother 
that gives birth to the Dh arma of the Buddha.  [6] 
 
says that dedication to the supr eme vehicle is like the father’s seed and the wisdom realizing 
selflessness is like the mother. For instance, si nce a Tibetan father cannot beget  a son who is 
Indian or Mongolian, the father  is the cause that determines the lineage. On the other hand, 
a Tibetan mother is like the common cause since she can give birth to different sons. 
G The Great and Lesser Vehicles are also distinguished in terms of conduct, generation of the mind and 
the like, and are not distinguished in terms of the view 
In his Praise to the Perfection of Wisdom , Nagarjuna also [points out] that hearers and solitary 
realizers equally rely on it: 
 
Buddhas, pratyekabuddhas, and hearers 
Definitely rely on you, Singular path to liberation, It’s true to say there is no other.    [7] 
 
That is why the perfection of wisd om is also said to be “the moth er”. Since it is the mother of 
the sons of both the Great and the Lesser Vehicl es, it is not the wisdom realizing emptiness 
that distinguishes the Great and Lesser Vehicles. {160} Rather it is the mind of enlightenment 
and the vast conduct that distinguishes them. In the Precious Garland they are also taught to be 
differentiated  not by the view but by the conduct: 
 
The Hearers’ Vehicle does not explain The bodhisattavas’ aspiration Nor their conduct of full dedication. How should bodhisattvas emerge from it?   [8] 
H The inappropriateness of not familiarizing oneself mainly with the mind of enlightenment, but rather 
familiarizing oneself with other, secondary factors 
Therefore, if even the wisdom realizing emptiness is not an uncommon path of the 
Mahayana, what need is there to mention other pa ths? For that reason it is necessary to train 
in the mind of enlightenment, having made  instructions on it one’s main concern. 
The explanation of how to genera te the mind of enlightenment 
2B4B-2B3B-2 How to generate this mind 
A The stages of training the mind of enlightenment 
B The measure  of its development 
C The way to take it through a ritual 
The second one has three [points]: the stages of training the mind of enlightenment, the 
measure  of its development  and the way to take  it through a ritual.  
2B4B-2B3B-2A The stages of training the mind of enlightenment 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 136  1 The sevenfold instruction on cause and effect  transmitted  from the great Jowo Atisha 
2 The training based on that which occurs in the texts by Shantideva, son of the jinas 
The first one is subdivided in  two [points]: the sevenfold instruction on cause and effect 
transmitted  from the great Jowo Atisha and th e training based on that which occurs in the 
texts by Shantideva, son of the jinas. 
 
Explanation of how to trai n the mind by means of  
the sevenfold instruction on cause and effect 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1 The sevenfold instruction on caus e and effect transmitted from the great Jowo 
Atisha 
A Short  presentation 
B Extensive explanation 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1A Short  presentation 
The sevenfold cause and effect is the seven: a perfect buddha is born   from the mind of 
enlightenment;  this mind from  the extraordinary attitude this attitude from compassion; 
compassion from love; love  from the wish to repay the kindness; the wish to repay the 
kindness from remembering the kindness; and remembering the past kindness from viewing 
[beings] as one’s mother. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B Extensive  explanation 
1 Generating certainty concerning the stages  
2 The actual gradual training 
There are two [points]: Generating certainty co ncerning the stages  and {161} the actual 
gradual training  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1 Generating certainty concerning the stages  
A Demonstrating that compassion is the root of the Mahayana 
B The way in which the other causes and effects become causes and effects of that 
[compassion]  
The first one has two [points]: demonstrating th at compassion is the root of the Mahayana 
and the way in which the other causes and effect s become causes and effects of compassion .  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A Demonstrating that co mpassion is the root of the Mahayana 
1 The importance [of compassion] at the beginning 
2 The importance [of compassion] in the middle 
3 The importance [of compassion] at the end 
The first one has three [points]: the import ance [of compassion] at the beginning, the 
importance [of compassion] in the middle and the importance [of compassion] at the end. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A1 The importance [of compassion] at the beginning 
A The responsibility for liberating migrating beings depends upon [compassion] 
First: When the mind is moved by great compa ssion one will certainly resolve to get all the 
sentient beings out of cyclic ex istence. However, if one’s compassion is inferior, deeds that 
accord with that will not come about. Therefore,  whether you take responsibility for liberating 
all beings without exception depends on that, and,  if you do not take that responsibility, you 
will not enter the Mahayana. That is why compassion is important at the beginning. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 137  B [Compassion] is the preliminary of all the paths of the Mahayana 
In the Akshayamati Nirdesa Sutra  [it says]: 
 
Venerable son of Sharadvati, moreov er the great compassion of the 
bodhisattvas is inexhaustible. Why is that? It is because it is a 
preliminary. Venerable son of Sharadvati, it is like this. By way of 
analogy, just as the inward and outward flow  of the breath is a preliminary for  the  human life force faculty, likewise the great 
compassion of the bodhisattvas is a preliminary for perfectly accomplishing the Mahayana.     [9] 
C It causes the conduct of the bodhisattva 
In the Gavagori [Sutra ]:  
 
‘Manjushri, what is the beginning of  the conduct of bodhisattvas? What 
is its domain?’ Manjushri said: ‘Son  of the gods, the beginning of the 
conduct of bodhisattvas is great co mpassion. Its domain  is sentient 
b e i n g s . ’         [ 1 0 ]  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A2 The importance [of compassion] in the middle 
A If you do not cultivate  compassion again and again, you fall into the Hinayana  
Second: Although you enter [the Mahayana] once a mind like this has arisen, if you become 
discouraged upon seeing in view of the great number of beings and th eir bad actions, {162} 
the great difficulty of the trainings, the need to  do them boundlessness and also limitless time 
scale, you will fall into the Hinayana.  
B One does not despair with respect to others’ welfare and easily completes the collections 
Due to having familiarized yourself increasingly  with great compassion rather than generating 
it just once, you will not look at your own happiness and suffering and will not despair with 
respect to the welfare of others. That way you easily complete all the collections. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3 The importance [of compassion] at the end 
A The actual importance at the end 
B In particular, the advice to make the mind of enlightenment the focus of the instructions 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3A The actual importance at the end 
1 [Difference between buddhas and hearers]  
Third: The fact that, even when the buddhas have achieved their result, they do not abide  in 
peace like the Hinayanists but bring about the we lfare of however many sentient beings there 
throughout space, is also due to the power of  their compassion, for, without it, they would 
become like hearers. 
2 All three [parts] of the external analogy symbolize compassion only  
Glorious Chandrakirti said: “For  the harvest, what is importan t in the beginning is the seed, 
in the middle the water and in the end the maturation. Likewise, for the harvest of 
buddhahood, what is important in the beginning, the end, and in the middle is compassion.”  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3B In particular, the advice to make the mind of enlightenment the focus of instructions 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 138  1 The need to make it the essence of one’s practice 
Shang Nachung Tonpa said: “Although I asked Jo wo [Atisha] for [personal] instructions, 
nothing came out of it except for: ‘Aband on worldly thought, cultivate the mind of 
enlightenment!’ Geshe Tonpa derided him  and sa id: “You got the central point  of Jowo’s 
oral instructions! He knew the key po int of the teaching, the Dharma”.  
2 Since it is difficult to gain certainty [about this] it is necessary to rely on accumulation, purification, 
and the scriptures 
Since it is also difficult to gain certainty [abo ut this], you must accumulate and purify again 
and again, study the scriptures such as the Ga ndavyuha as well as their commentaries, and 
seek firm  certainty. It is as Glorious Ashvagosha says [referring to the Buddha]: 
 
Your precious mind, heroic one,  
The seed of perfect enlightenment - Only you know it to be the essence, 
{163} Other beings do no t guess that.   [11] 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B  The way in which the other causes and effects become causes and 
effects of compassion  
1 The way in which the understanding as mothers through love are causes 
2 The way in which the extraordinary attitude and generation of the mind [of enlightenment] 
are effects 
With respect to the second one there are two [p oints]: the way in which the understanding as 
mothers through love are caus es, and the way in which the extraordinary attitude  and 
generation of the mind [of enlightenment] are effects. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B1 The way in which the understanding as mothers through love are causes 
A How to develop the intensive wish for all beings to be free from suffering  
First: If you think again and again about the sufferi ng of a living being, this will generally give 
rise to the mere wish that it be free from suffe ring. However, for this mind to arise easily and 
for it to arise as very with strong and stable, to  start with, it must be a sentient being who has 
the aspect of being attractive and valuable. For, when someone close to us meets with 
suffering, we cannot bear it; when our enemies meet with suffering, we enjoy it; and when 
someone who is neither a friend nor an enemy meets with suffering mainly an equanimity 
that neglects him arises.  
B The difference of development or non-development of attraction towards friends, enemies, and the in 
between 
In this regard, since the former is attractive to our mind, the more we cherish him, the more 
his suffering will be unbearable to us, and th e more compassion will arise for him. If we 
cherish him little or middling, our inability to be ar [his suffering] will also be small. On the 
other hand, if we cherish someone very much, we  cannot bear it at all when he meets with 
only slight suffering. When we see our enemy suffe r, not only does the wi sh that he be free 
from it fail to arise, but rather the thought oc curs to us “May [his suffering] increase and may 
he not be free from it”. That is our reaction to someone we find unattractive. Moreover, our 
joy at his suffering will also be greater or smal ler, depending on how unattractive he is. With 
respect to the suffering of someone who is neither a friend nor an enemy, it is neither that we 
cannot bear it nor that we enjoy it. That is ou r reaction, when something is neither attractive 
nor unattractive.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 139  C How to generate great love and great compassion, by establishing them as greatly attractive by 
means of the three recognizing them as our mothers, remembering their kindness, and wishing to repay it   
If this is done, meditating on sentient beings as our relatives {164} is for the sake of making 
them attractive to us. However, and since the pe rson we are most closely related to is our  
mother, the three – meditating  on them as having been our mother, remembering their 
kindness, and wishing to repay this kindness – establishes them as dear and attractive. The 
l o v e  t h a t  h o l d s  l i v i n g  b e i n g s  a s  d e l i g h t f u l  a s  a n  o n l y  c h i l d  i s  t h e  e f f e c t  o f  t h e s e  t h r e e .  I t  
produces compassion. 
D With respect to mere love and compassion it is not certain which is the cause and which is the effect 
With respect to the love that wishes them to meet with happi ness and compassion, there does 
not seem to be any certainty as to which one is the cause and which one is the effect.  
E Whose system these instructions are 
These meditations on sentient beings as our relatives as the cause producing the mind [of 
enlightenment] has been explained by Acarya Chandrakirti, Venerable Chandra, and Acarya 
Kamalshila. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2 The manner in which the extraordinary attitude  and the generation of 
the mind [of enlight enment] are effects 
A Doubt 
B Response 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2A  Doubt 
Second: It should really be sufficient, if, co mpassion having arisen due to such a gradual 
training of the mind, the wish arises to attain  enlightenment for the welfare of all sentient 
beings. Why is the extraordinary attitude inserted between them? 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2B  Response 
1 Although there is immeasurable compassion, there may not be the extraordinary attitude that takes responsibility 
Although Hearers and Solitary Realizers also ha ve the immeasurable compassion and the love 
that think, “If only sentient beings were to meet with happiness and if only they were free 
from suffering!,” still, those who are not Maha yanists do not take the responsibility to 
accomplish happiness for all sentient beings an d to eliminate their suffering. Therefore it is 
necessary to generate the extraordinary attitude, an attitude of those with courageous  hearts. 
You come to understand this  from a quotation of the Sagaramatipariphriccha Sutra   i n  t h e  
commentary on the Uttaratantra.  
2 How the extraordinary attitude induces the generation of the mind [of enlightenment] 
Once the mind of freeing living beings has ar isen  in this manner, owing to your current 
situation you could not complete even the welfar e of one sentient being. Not only that, even 
if you were to attain the state of the two [kin ds of] arhats, {165} you would only [be able to 
complete the welfare of] very few beings and their welfare would be to merely accomplish 
liberation. Since they cannot establish them in  omniscience, who could perfect the temporary 
and final  welfare of limitless beings? If you reflect in this vein, you will come to understand 
that only a Buddha is able to do this, and you will generate the wish to attain buddhahood for 
the welfare of sentient beings. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2 The actual gradual training 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 140  A Training of the mind to strive for the welfare of others 
B Training the mind to strive for enlightenment 
C The result of the training: Identifying the generation of the mind [of enlightenment] 
The second one - the actual traini ng - has three [points]: training of the mind to strive for the 
welfare of others, training the mind to strive for enlightenment and the result of the training: 
identifying the generation of the mind [of enlightenment]. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A  Training of the mind to strive for the welfare of others 
1 Laying the foundation for generating this mind 
2 Actual generation of that mind  
Concerning the first [unit] there are two [state ments:] Laying the foundation for generating 
this mind and actual generation of that mind.  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1 Laying the foundation for generating this mind 
A Producing an equanimous mind towards sentient beings  
B Establishing them all as having an attractive aspect 
The first [of those] has two [phrases]: Producin g an equanimous mind towards sentient beings 
and establishing them all as having an attractive aspect. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A Producing an equanim ous mind towards sentient beings 
1 The preparatory steps 
2 How to meditate on equanimity 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A-1 The preparatory steps 
First: The preparatory steps etc. as explained b e f o r e  i n  t h e  c o n t e x t  o f  b e i n g s  o f  l e s s e r  a n d  
intermediate beings  should be adopted and sustained here as well. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A-2 How to meditate on equanimity 
A The need for an equanimous mind where attachment and hatred have been stopped  
To start with, if you do not accomplish an equanimous mind, having stopped the bias of 
attachment towards some sentient beings and ha tred towards, any love and compassion that 
arise will arise with partiality. As this does no t occur  if you observe them without impartiality, 
you should cultivate equanimity. 
B What kind of equanimity needs to be meditated 
Among the two types of equanimous mind that ha ve been taught, one  that has the aspect of 
establishing living beings as lacking mental a fflictions, such as attachment, hatred, and so 
forth, and one in which oneself is free from a ttachment and hatred towards sentient beings, 
here it is the latter. 
C  The order of meditation 
Since this is the order of meditation by which it  will easily arise, initially, you should take a 
person who has neither done you harm nor bene fit as your object of meditation, {166} and 
through eliminating attachment and anger a ccomplish an equanimous mind. When an 
equanimous mind toward that person has been accomplished, you then need to accomplish 
an equanimous mind with respect to friends an d relatives. A non-equanimous mind towards  
them is to be biased due to attachment and ha tred or not to be equanimous due to lesser or 
greater attachment. When you are equanimous to wards that [person], you should cultivate an 
equanimous mind towards your enemies. The la ck of equanimity towards them is due to 
hatred that derives from seeing them as totally  incompatible [with yourself]. Having become 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 141  equanimous toward them, you should cultivat e an equanimous mind toward all sentient 
beings.  
D By meditating on what attachment and aversion are stopped. 
Moreover, the following two thoughts are taught in [Kamalashila’s] Middling Stages of 
Mediation (Bhavanakrama) :  “ S i n c e  f r o m  t h e i r  s i d e  a l l  l i v i n g  beings are the same in wanting 
happiness and not wanting suffering, it would be inappropriate for me to benefit some whom 
I consider close and harm or fail to benefit ot hers whom I consider di stant.” “Since, from my 
own side there is no [single] being who in beginningless cyclic existence has not been my 
relative hundreds of times, wh o should I have attachment for and who should I have hatred 
for?” Also with regard to atta chment to our relatives, the Sutra Requested by the Noble Daughter 
Chandr [ottam ]a says: 
 
In former times I killed the lot[/each one] of you; 
I was also formerly chopped up by you, We all have been foes and murderers unto each other How can a mind of attachment arise in you?   [12]  
As was explained above in the context of the fa ult of uncertainty, you should think about the 
way in which friends and enemies change. Due to this, avert both anger and attachmet.  
E Ceasing attachment and hatred, although the mind of friend and enemy has not been ceased  
{167} We need to differentiate between friend s and enemies having apprehended them to be 
the basis of respective features. Therefore, what is  to be ceased is the mind that is biased due 
to attachment and hatred, taking as a reason th at someone is  a friend or enemy, whereas the 
mind of friend and enemy does not need to be averted.  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B Establishing them all as having an attractive aspect 
1 Meditating on them as one’s mother 
2 Remembering their kindness 
3 Meditating on repaying [their] kindness 
The second one has three [points]: meditating on them as [one’s] mother, remembering their 
kindness, and meditating on repaying [their] kindness. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-1 Meditating on them as [one’s] mother 
A The thought that they have been [our] mothers in the past 
First: In the sutras it is taught that, since cycl ic existence is beginningless, our births are also 
beginningless. Therefore we have been born and we have died incessant ly, so that there no 
body in  cyclic existence that we have not taken, no place in which we have not been born, 
and also noone who has not been a relati ve such as our mother and so forth. 
B The thought that they are still [our] mothers 
Moreover, this is not only true of the past, they will again be in the future . Therefore 
reflecting in that way, you should try to gain un shakable  certainty that all living beings have 
been your mother, for, once that certainty  arises , it will be  easy to remember their kindness 
a n d  s o  f o r t h .  O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d ,  i f  i t  d o e s  n o t  a r i s e ,  t h e r e  w i l l  b e  n o  f o u n d a t i o n  f o r  remembering  their kindness and so forth. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-2 Remembering their kindness 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 142  A  The thought that it is skilfull and so forth  to start with one’s mother of this life etc. 
Second: [Geshe] Potowa maintained that [the thought remembering their kindness] will arise 
quickly if, after meditating on all sentient beings  as [your] mothers, you initially meditate on 
your mother of this life.  That is how you shou ld meditate. You visualize your mother in front 
of you in a clear aspect and repeatedly reflect:  “She has been my mother not only now, but 
times past counting since beginningless cyclic ex istence. That way, wh en she was my mother, 
she protected me from all harm and acco mplished all happiness and benefit for me. 
B The way in which she also protected one in this life 
In particular, even in this life, she initially carried you in her womb for a long time. Then, 
when she had given birth to you, she pressed your  yellow tousled hair against the heat of her 
body, she swung you on her fingertips, nursed yo u with her milk, fed you as an infant from 
her mouth, {168} wiped away your saliva  with he r mouth, cleaned your filth  with her hands, 
caring for you untiringly in many different ways. In addition, when you were hungry or 
thirsty, she gave you food and drink. When you were cold, sh e gave you clothing. When you 
were in need, she gave you her possessions that  she herself had hardly used. When even the 
most basic necessities  where hard to come by, she bore great hardship and spared herself no 
negativity, suffering or bad talk  to get it and give them to you. 
C A mother cherishes her child more than herself 
Whenever her child suffers from a disease and so  forth, she wishes fr om the depths of her 
heart  to die, rather than for her child to die, to  be ill rather than for her child to be ill, and 
so forth. With effort, she does whatever  she can to eliminate [his suffering]. 
D How to meditate about the essential points separately 
To summarize, by whatever level of knowledge and whatever level of ability she had, she 
thought single-pointedly about the way in whic h to accomplish your happiness and benefit, 
and to remove any harm and suffering [for] [you].  
E How to meditate progressing gradually 
If, mediating in this way, a mind remembering he r kindness, that is not just words has arisen, 
you should meditate on recognizing other friends and relatives, your father and so forth, as 
also having been [your] mothers. Then, you should also meditate on recognizing neutral 
[persons] as having been your mothers. Once a similar mind arises towards them as that 
towards your friends and relatives, you should also meditate on recognizing your enemies as 
having been your mothers. Once a similar mind  arises towards them as that towards your 
mother has developed, you should proceed from the recognition of all beings as having been your mothers, and meditate, gradually extending it more and more. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-3 The wish to repay [their] kindness 
A Even though you do not recognize them due to birth, death, and transmigration, it would be 
shameless to neglect them. 
Third: There is nothing less sham eful than carelessly neglecting your suffering, protectorless, 
kind mothers, just because you do not recogn ize them anymore due to birth, death, and 
transmigration, and being preoccupied with freei n g  y o u r s e l f  f r o m  c y c l i c  e x i s t e n c e .  I n  t h e  
Letter to a Student  it says: 
 
My relatives have got immersed in  the ocean of cyclic existence  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 143  {169} And seem to have fallen into an abyss; if I neglected them, 
Unrecognised due to birth and death and transmigration And sought liberation alone, there would be nothing more shameless. 
         [ 1 3 ]  
B  To neglect those who have been kind does not accord with the well-mannered   
Thus, thinking “If neglecting such kind beings is unacceptable even to the ill-mannered, how 
can I reconcile it with my own ways?” you should  take the responsibility to reciprocate their 
kindness. 
C As it would be inappropriate to repay the benefit with something contaminated, one should liberate 
them from ignorance 
If someone asks: “Well then, how should I repay the benefit?” Whatever happiness and 
wealth of cyclic existence your  mothers obtain, they are deceiv e d  b y  a l l  o f  t h e m .  T h u s ,  w e  
should repay the benefit thinking “I, in the past, by the power of conceit of the mental 
afflictions once again produced various suffering in those who were already suffering by 
nature, like putting salt and so forth on the in jured who were already severely wounded. I will 
establish all those who have benefited me out of  love in the happiness of liberation, nirvana.” 
D  How to meditate [on the essential points] separately 
In brief , if even your own kind mother who, restless and insane, blind and without anyone to 
guide her, is stumbling with each step and appr oaching a fearsome abyss , getting close  with 
each step, cannot put her hope in her child, who can she count on? If it is not for her child to 
free its mother from fear, who else should do it ? Likewise the sentient beings who have been 
our mothers, their minds in a state of confusion due to the evil spirits of the mental 
afflictions, insane and without control over thei r minds  by the fever of mental afflictions, 
without eyes to see the path to high status and certain goodness, without a blind person’s 
guide of perfect knowledge, in each instant {1 70} stumble due to being distracted by faulty 
behaviour, and wander toward the abyss of cycl ic existence in general and the bad migrations 
in particular. Seeing them, consider how thes e mothers necessarily put their hopes in their 
child, and that it is [also] for the  child to get his  mother ou t of there, you will repay their 
kindness by definitely getting them out of cyclic existence. In the  Compendium of Instructions  
(Shiksasamuccaya)  [it says]: 
 
Insane with afflictions, blinded by ignorance On a path with many abysses Stumbling with every step, myself and others are always the basis of sorrow. Migrators are the same in suffering.    [14]  
In view of this, although it is indeed said that it is inappropriate to l ook for faults in others 
and when seeing the slightest good quality to hold it amazement, here it is reasonable to relate 
these statements to misery. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2 Actual generation of the mind striving for the welfare of others 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 144  A Meditating on love 
B Meditating on compassion  
C Meditiating on the extraordinary attitude 
The second one has three [points]: meditating on love, meditating on compassion, and 
meditating on the extraordinary attitude. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2A Generation of loving kindness 
1 The observed object 
First: The observed object of love is se ntient beings who do not have  happiness. 
2 The aspect [of love] 
 Its aspect is the thought : “How wonderful it would be if they met wi th  happiness. May they 
meet with  happiness!” And: “I will ma ke them  meet with  happiness!”  
3 The merit is even greater than constantly making offerings to the buddhas 
As regards the benefit, it says in the King of Meditative Stabilization Sutra :  
 
Many kinds of immeasurable offerings 
In myriads of neighbouring pure fields Constantly offered to the most excellent beings, Fall short of a fraction of the mind of love.     [15] 
 This is to say that the merit is much greater th an that of constantly ma king offerings  to the 
field that is the final object with very vast things. 
 4 If you cultivate love in this field,  [the merit] will exceed even the former 
Also, in Arraying the Buddha Field of Manjushri  it is explained: 
In the world sphere called “Thousan d Ornaments” of the great king 
Buddheshvara, at the northeastern bo rder, {171} sentient beings possess 
a happiness similar to that of monk s who have entered cessation. If a 
mind  of love towards all sentient be ings, generated in this field for as 
little as the duration of a finger snap produces far more merit than practicing pure conduct there for hundred thousand millions of years, 
what need is there to mention that  of abiding in [that mind] day and 
night? [However,] if compared to the pure conduct there [sustained] 
over hundred thousands of millions of years, the mind of loving kindness towards all beings, generated in  this  realm for as little as the 
time of snapping produces far more merit than the former....”  
And 
5 Achievement of the eight benefits such as being loves by gods and human beings  
in the [Nagarjuna’s] Ratnavali we also find: 
 
Three hundred small pots of food one offers 
Three times every day fall short 
Of the merit of love sustained For the duration of just one moment. 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 145  You are loved by gods and humans, 
They protect you as well and you have Mental happiness and much happiness 
Poisons and weapons can do no more harm, 
 
You achieve your goals without effort 
And will be born in the world of Brahma. 
Even if you do not reach liberation, 
You will win the eight qualities of love.   [16] 
 
If you have love, you are loved by of gods an d men and they naturally gather around you. 
Since even the jinas defeat the hosts of Mara by the force of love, it becomes the best of 
protections and so forth.  
6 The stages of meditation on love 
The stages of meditation on love are to respecti vely meditate initially [on love] for your friends 
and relatives, then for neutral persons, then for your enemies, and then towards all sentient 
beings. 
7 The way in which to meditate [on love] 
The way in which to meditate [on love is as follows]. Just as compassion arises when you 
reflect again and again on how sentient beings have the suffering of suffering, likewise you 
should reflect again and again on the fact th at sentient beings lack contaminated and 
uncontaminated happiness and on the manners in  which they are devoid of happiness. Once 
you have familiarized yourself with this, the wish for them to find happiness will arise 
naturally. In addition, directing your mind to the various kinds of happiness, you will then 
{172} provide sentient beings with them. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2B Meditating on compassion 
1 The observed object [of compassion] 
Second: The observed object of compassion is se ntient beings who are su ffering due to any of 
the three kinds of suffering. 
2 The aspect [of compassion] 
The  aspect is the thought: “If only they were  free from these sufferings”, “May they be free 
from them,” and “I will free them from them”. 
3 The sequence of the meditation [on compassion] 
The sequence of meditation is to meditate [on compassion] first for your friends and relatives, 
then for neutrals persons, then for your enemie s, and then for all sentient beings of the ten 
directions. 
4 The main point of meditating in that sequence  
This gradual meditation on equanimity, love, and compassion where you divide the objects 
into specific categories was developed by Acharya Kamalashila following  the Abhidharma 
Sutra . This is a very important point, because if, from the start, you train in observing 
[sentient beings] in general without diving them in to specific categories, it will seem as though 
[these attitudes] have arisen , but when you then think about them individually, it will appear 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 146  that it does not arise for any of them. Howeve r, if you experience a change in your mind 
towards the individual [persons] as explained abov e, and then extend it to many, when at the 
end you observe them in general and sustain [that attitude], it will arise purely regardless of 
who is observed, whether a group or an individual.  
5 The way to meditate 
The way to meditate is in term s of  the sufferings that were explained when considering how 
the sentient beings who have b een our mothers have fallen into  existence and are experience 
the general and specific sufferings. 
6 The measure  for the development of compassion 
The measure  for the development of  compassion is taught in the First Stages of Meditation  
(Bhavanakrama)  [by Kamalashila]:  
 
At the point where the compassion th at has the aspect of the desire 
c o n s t a n t l y  t o  r e m o v e  t h e  s u f f e r i n g  o f  a l l  b e i n g s  -  j u s t  a s  i f  y o u r  o w n  
beloved child was unhappy – operates  naturally in you spontaneously 
and operates in accordance with your own nature, it is complete. Thereby, it obtains the name ”great co mpassion”, as it is then complete. 
         [ 1 7 ]   
{173} [Thus] if compassion towards all sentient beings naturally arises to the extent it arises in a mother when the child she loves with all her heart suffers, it is said to be a fully-qualified 
great compassion. By that token, the same is true  for  the measure  of the generation of great 
love. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2C Meditating on the extraordinary attitude 
1 The actual way to meditate [on the extraordinary attitude]  
Third: Having meditated on love and compassi on in this manner, finally, you will think: 
“Alas! If these sentient beings who are pleasant  and attractive to me are thus deprived of 
happiness and tormented by suffering, how shal l I make them meet with happiness and how 
shall I free them from suffering?” In taking up on yourself, at least in mere words,  the 
responsibility to liberate them, your mind is trained. 
2 Clearing up doubt 
Although this point has already been made briefl y in the context of repaying the kindness, it 
is shown here that the love and compassion th at think: “If only they were to meet with 
happiness” and “If only they were free from sufferi ng” are not sufficient. Th is is because it was 
taught it is necessary to generate the love and compassion that are able to induce the thought: 
“I myself will accomplish the happiness and benefit of sentient beings.” This is not to be done 
just during meditation sessions, but is to be sustained continuously, remembering it during all 
b e h a v i o u r s  a f t e r  t h e  s e s s i o n  a n d  s o  f o r t h ,  a s  i s  t a u g h t  i n  t h e  (Middle Stages of Meditation)  
Bhavanakrama . 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2B Training in the mind striving for enlightenment 
Second: When, inspired by the steps explained so fa r, you see  that it is necessary to become a 
buddha for the welfare of others, you will also develop the wish to attain it. Nonetheless, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 147  since that in itself is not sufficient, at the beginning you should increase your faith through 
thinking about the good qualities of the ex alted body, exalted speech, exalted mind, and 
enlightened activities as they were explained ea rlier in the context of going for refuge. Then, 
since that faith is said to act as the basis for aspiration, you will genera te the wish to attain 
those qualities from the bottom of your heart. That will induce certainty that the achievement 
of an exalted knower of all aspects is indispensable also for your own welfare. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2C The result of the training: Identifying the mind generatio 
1 The general definition 
Third: The general definiti on is as taught in the Ornament for Clear Realizations (Abhisamaya-
alamkara ): 
The mind generation is the desire for perfectly complete enlightenment 
for the welfare of others.     [18] 
2 Divisions 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour , following the Gandavyuha [Sutra ], teaches the two - the 
aspiring and engaging [mind generations] saying:  
 
The wish to go and actually going - 
The way that difference is understood Is how the discerning should understand  The difference between those two in turn.   [19] 
 
If there appear to be a lot of inconsistencies in this respect, there is al so the statement in the 
First Stages of Meditation  that the mind that thinks: “May I become a Buddha for the welfare of 
sentient beings” is the aspiring mind and that, after the vow has been taken, that mind is the 
engaging  mind. 
 
Explanation of how to train the mind 
through equalizing and exchanging oneself and others 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2 The training based on the texts by Shantideva 
A Thinking about the advantages of exchanging and the disadvantages of not exchanging 
oneself with others 
B Demonstrating that you can generate this mind if you familiarize yourself with it C The stages of meditating on how to exchange oneself and others 
The second one - the training based on the text s by Shantideva - has three [points]: Thinking 
about the advantages and disadvantages of ex changing and not exchanging oneself with 
others respectively, demonstrating that you can ge nerate this mind if you familiarize yourself 
with it and the stages of meditating on  how to exchange yourself and others. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2A Thinking about the advantages of exchanging and the disadvantages of not 
exchanging oneself with others 
1  To quickly accomplish the two welfares, it is appropriate to exchange oneself with others  
First: In Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour  it says: 
 
Whoever wishes to protect  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 148  Himself and others rapidly 
Should practice the secret instructions [which Consist in] exchanging oneself and others.   [21] 
2 The advantages of exchanging and the disadvantages of not exchanging oneself with others 
All happiness that exists in the world Arises from wanting others’ happiness. All suffering that exists in the world 
Arises from wanting one’s own happiness. 
  What need is there to say any more: The childish work for their own welfare 
{175} The Munis for the welfare of others. 
Look at the difference between the two! 
3 Therefore buddhahood etc. are therefore difficult to attain if one does not exchange oneself with 
others.  
One’s happiness and the suffering of others - 
If one fails to exchange them correctly, One will not reach buddhahood, 
Samsara will be without happiness too.”   [22]  
 
Just as it is expressed here, yo u should think of cherishing ones elf as the door to all problems 
and cherishing  others as the basis of all excellences. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2B Demonstrating that you can generate this mind if you familiarize yourself with it 
1 The actual [topic] 
Second: In the same way that fear used to ar ise in us even upon hearing our enemy’s name 
but later on, having come to an agreement, we  befriended him and got very sad if he was 
absent, likewise due to the mind following habi ts, we can get used to seeing oneself like 
someone else and others like onesel f. In the same text [it says]: 
 
Do not avoid things because they are difficult By the strength of familiarisation 
One whose name was frightful to hear 
Will make you sad, if he is away.    [23] 
And: 
It is not all that difficult To posit my body as that of others.    [24] 
2 Clearing up doubt 
If you think: “As someone else’s body is not my own body, how could it be appropriate to 
generate the same attitude towards it [as to] to my own one?’ - This body was also created from 
the semen and blood of our parents and even th ough it was created from parts of others’ 
bodies, we hold it to be “I” by the power of previous familiarisation; likewise if we familiarize ourselves with cherishing others’ bodies as if they were our own, [this mind] will arise. The 
same text says: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 149   
Therefore, with re gard to the drops 
Of someone else’s semen and blood, 
You hold them to be “I” – like that 
Get used to it with regard to others!   [25]  
Through thorough reflection on the advantages and disadvantages along these lines, a strong 
{176} enthusiasm for this meditation will develo p from the depths of the heart. Having seen 
that, if you familiarize yourself with it, you ca n generate [this attitude], you should meditate 
on it. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C The stages of meditation on how to exchange yourself and others 
1 Removing obstacles 
2 The actual way to meditate 
The third one has two [points]: Removing ob stacles and the actual way to meditate. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1 Removing obstacles 
A Identifying the mind of exchanging oneself and others 
B Removing obstacles to it  
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1A Identifying the mind of exchanging oneself and others 
First: To say “exchanging oneself and others”,  “making oneself into the other and making 
others into oneself” does not mean to train in  the mind that thinks: “That other [peson] is 
me” and “His eyes and so forth are my eyes and so  forth.” Rather it is to exchange the rank of 
the two: (1) the mind that cherishes oneself an d (2) the mind that neglects others, and to 
generate the mind that cherishes others like we do ourselves and neglects ourselves like we do 
others. That is also why it is taught  that on e’s own happiness and others’ suffering should be 
exchanged. Having perceived se lf-cherishing as our enemy, we will stop considering our own 
happiness to be a priority.  Having perceived cherishing others as a quality and stopped 
neglecting the suffering of others, it will become a priority to eliminate it. In short, we will act 
for the sake of eliminating the suffering of others without concern for our own happiness. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B Removing obstacles to it  
When training in  this mind, there two obstacles. 
 1 Removing the obstacle of considering oneself and others as distinct individuals 
2 [Removing the obstacle of thinking: ‘As the suffering of others does not harm me, I need not make an 
effort to remove it’] 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B1 Removing the obstacle of considering oneself and others as distinct individuals 
A The actual [topic] 
Separating the two, oneself and others – th e basis of one’s own and others’ happiness and 
suffering – into distinct entities, like blue and yellow, you hold them to be established [in this 
way]. Then, with respect to the happiness and suffering based on th em, you think: “Since it is 
mine, it should be accomplished  or removed. Sinc e it is someone else’s, it is to be neglected”. 
Therefore, as an antidote to this [think]: “Myself and others are not inherently distinct. 
Rather, as we look at one anot her the mind “other” arises in me, whereas the mind “I” arises 
in the other [person] like with “this mountain ” and “that mountain over  there”. For instance, 
although from this perspective the mind “the mo untain over there” aris es with respect to the 
mountain over there, when  yo u go to the mountain over th ere, the mind “this mountain 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 150  here“ arises. Therefore this {177} is not the same as [with] the colour blue: a mind of blueness 
will arise in whoever looks at it, whereas a mind of another colour will not.  
B The scriptural sources 
In this manner, the Compendium of All Trainings (Shiksasamuccaya )  also teaches that [self and 
other] are not established by their own nature, but merely posited in dependence on the point 
of view: 
Through familiarity with the equality 
 Of other and self bodhicitta grows stable. ‘Self’ and ‘other’ are related; As fictitious as ‘that side’ and ‘this side’.   That mountain is not ‘that side’ by itself. Depending on where it becomes ‘this side’, The ‘self’ in itself is not established. Depending on who it becomes ‘other’.   [26] 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B2 [Removing the obstacle of thinking: “As the suffering of others does not harm me, I 
need not make an effort to remove it”] 
Removing the obstacle of thinki ng: “As the suffering of others does not harm me, I need not 
make an effort to remove it”.  
A Refutation in terms of the actions of a youth and an elderly person  
If this were the case, there would be no n eed to accumulate wealth when young out of 
concern for the sufferings of old age, as the sufferings of the elderly person would not harm 
the youth. 
B Refutation in terms of different parts of the body and different times 
It is said: “Likewise, the hand would not remo ve the sufferings of the foot, because they are 
other.” This is a mere illustration and should also be applied to [the sufferings of] the 
morning and [those of] the evening, and so forth. 
C Abandoning the doubt that these [analogies] are not the same as ‘self’ and ‘other’ since they deal with  
the same continuum or collection 
If you think: “The tw o, self and other, are not the same since the elderly [person] and the 
youth are the same continuum, while  the ha nd and the foot are the same collection.” 
‘Continuum’ and ‘collection’ are designated on  many instants and a combination of many 
parts; they lack  an autonomous  essence. Since your own self and others’ self must be posited 
on that continuum or collection,  they are not established by way of an own essence, that 
would not just be self and other posited in relation. 
D Since this is so by the power of familiarization, [the mind] cherishing others can also develop 
{178} Yet your own suffering is unbearable due to the power of familiarization, from 
beginningless time, with self-cherishing. Therefore,  if you familiarize yourself with cherishing 
others, their suffering will also become unbearable. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2 The actual way to meditate 
A Thinking about the disadvantages of cherishing oneself and the advantages of cherishing others 
Second: By the power of attachment to the self, this self-cherishing has produced much that is 
undesirable from beginningless time up to now. Despite the fact that you wanted to create 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 151  excellence  for yourself, you engaged in  un suitable means, considering you own welfare 
paramount. Due to this, neither your own we lfare nor that of others was accomplished 
although an incalculably great number of eons  passed. Not only did you not accomplish that, 
you were tormented only by suffering. If I ha d shifted the concern for your own welfare to 
that of others, you would have become a bu ddha a long time ago and both your own and 
others’s welfare would have, without doubt become  excellent. But, as you did not do that, the 
time has been spent with meaningless exertion.  
B The need to put an end to self-cherishing by regarding it as the enemy 
Think: “With this understanding, I shall rely on the mindfulness and introspection that my 
self-cherishing is my worst enemy, and make much  effort so that [the self-cherishing that] has 
not arisen does not arise and th at which has arisen does not la st long.” Having made this 
certainty stable, you should familiarize yourself with it many times. 
C Generating the mind cherishing others 
Thinking about the advantages of cherishing others again and again in this way, you will 
generate strong enthusiasm [to do so] from the bottom of your heart. Then, you will not 
generate the mind neglecting others that has not [yet] arisen, and that which has arisen will 
not last long. By means of the [thought] that othe rs are dear, pleasant, and attractive, as far as 
it has arisen, you should generate the mind cher ishing others, just as you previously cherished 
yourself.  
D How to meditate remembering the teachings of earlier holy beings 
{179} Jowo [Atisha] said: “The Tibetans know bodhisattvas who do not know how to train in 
love and compassion. Well then, how do you do it? You should do it having trained 
sequentially from the beginning.” 
 Langri Thangpa said: “Shawopa and I ha ve eighteen human methods and one horse 
method, nineteen altogether. The method of humans is, having generated the mind of 
supreme enlightenment, to train in doing what ever one does for the welfare of sentient 
beings. The method of horses is the self-c herishing that does not allow the mind of 
enlightenment that has not arisen to arise and that which has arisen to remain and increase. 
Therefore, you train in whatever harms it, [this] having been taught in passing. As for sentient 
beings, you train in whatever benefits them, [t his] having been taught as the fundamental 
point.” 
 Khamlungpa said: “Since we act deviously towards our brethren sentient beings, they 
will do the same towards us.” 
E The appropriateness of putting effort by many approaches into the methods for generating the mind of 
enlightenment 
I t  i s  g o o d  i f  a  h a b i t  d e v e l o p s  t h a t  c o n s t a n t l y  c h e c k s   t o  w h a t  e x t e n t  t h i s  m i n d  h a s  b e e n  
generated, since everything stems from  it: wh ether or not the root of the Mahayana has been 
planted and whether or not one is included amon g Mahayanists. Even if it does not develop, 
do not leave it at that but rely on a virtuous  spiritual friends who teaches it and always be 
accompanied by the companion that is mind tr aining. this and thereby make the companion 
of mind training your steady friend. Read the scriptures of the Teacher and their 
commentaries. As its cause, accumulate the colle ctions and purify obscurations. Since it is 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 152  certain that if you train your mind in this way, the seed will be fully planted, the[se] actions 
are of no little importance and a reason for joy. It is as the great Jowo [Atisha] said: 
 
For those who wish to enter the gate of  
Mahayana Dharma it’s worth an eon Of effort for bodhicitta to grow Which like the sun and moon eliminate 
Darkness and pacify scorching heat.    [27] 
2B4B-2B3B-2B The measure of that mind having arisen  
The second: {180} that should be understood  from what was already explained above. 
Explanation of how to a ssume the mind generation  by means of a ritual 
2B4B-2B3B-2C The way in which to assume it by means of a ritual 
1 Receiving that which has not yet been received 
2 Guarding that which has been received without degenerating it  
3 The method for restoring it if it has been degenerated 
The third one has three [points]: receiving that which has not yet been received, guarding that 
which has been received without degenerating it, and the method for restoring it if it has been 
degenerated. 
 2B4B-2B3B-2C1 Receiving that which has not yet been received 
A From whom: the object from whom it is taken 
B By whom: the basis that takes it 
C How: the ritual by which it is taken 
The first has three [points]: From whom: the ob j e c t  f r o m  w h o m  i t  i s  t a k e n ;  b y  w h o m :  t h e  
basis that takes it; how: the ritual by which it is taken. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1A From whom: the object from whom it is taken 
First: The assertions of the earlier masters accord with Master Jetari  that it is not enough [for 
the person from whom the vow is taken] to posse ss the aspiring mind and to be abiding in the 
trainings, rather he must possess the engaging vows . 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1B By whom: the basis that takes it 
Second: All gods, nagas, and so forth who are phys ically and mentally suitable to generate the 
aspiring mind are also a suitable ba sis for this. The  commentary on the Lamp on the Path  says:   
 
Repulsed by cyclic existence, mindful of death, 
With wisdom and great compassion”.  
Thus, it should be someone who has gained a li ttle experience of transforming his mind into 
the mind of enlightenment due to having traine d the mind in the stag es of the  path as 
explained previously. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C How: the ritual by which it is taken 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 153  1 The preparatory ritual 
2 The actual ritual 
3 The concluding ritual  
The third one has three [points]: the preparatory ritual, the actual ritual, and the concluding 
ritual.  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1 The preparatory ritual 
A Special going for refuge  
B Accumulating the collection 
C Training the mind 
The first one has three [points]: the special goin g for refuge, accumulating the collection, and 
training the mind. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A Special going for refuge 
1 Decorating the place, displaying representations, and setting up offering substances 
2 Making a request and going for refuge 
3 Stating the trainings of  having gone for refuge 
The first one is divided into three [points]: Deco rating the place, displaying representations, 
and setting up offering substances; making a request and going for refuge; and stating the 
trainings of  having gone for refuge. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A1 Decorating the place, displaying representations, and setting up offering 
substances 
A General indications  concerning the place, the representations, offerings, etc. 
First:  Clean an isolated place, smear it with the five cow substances106, sprinkle  it with superb 
fragrant  water such as sandalwood, and scatter fragrant flowers. Set out {181} representations 
of the three jewels – metal status and so forth, te xts and so forth, and imag es  of bodhisattvas - 
on a throne, table, or a raised platform. Do th e preparatory ritual with as valuable offering 
items such as canopies, flowers, and so forth as  possible, as well as music and food and so 
forth. Arrange a throne for the virtuous spirit ual friend also adorn it with flowers. You 
accumulate the collections [of merit] by paying respect to the former masters, the sangha, and 
giving a torma  to the elemental spirits. 
B Clearing up doubts about this 
If you do not have any offering s at all, as described in the Sutra of the Good Eon , it can be 
a c c o m p l i s h e d  e v e n  w i t h  c l o t h  f r i n g e s .  I f  y o u  d o  h a v e  o f f e r i n g s ,  t h e y  s h o u l d  h a v e  b e e n  
obtained through great effort without deceit, an d should be arrayed in such a way that your 
friends cannot help marvelling. When Jowo [A tisha] was requested by Tibetan teachers in 
Mangyul and Samye for the mind generation, he re portedly said that it did not arise through 
inferior offerings. He said that also as repres entation a consecrated statue of the main master 
of the teachings was imperative, and also as a text the Abbreviated Perfection of Wisdom  on 
upward should be used  as the text. 
C The steps to be performed by the lama and student  
Then, the assembly of aryas is invoked. The di sciple, washed and well dressed, with his hands 
joined, is encouraged by the lama to generate clear faith in the good qualities of the merit 
field from the bottom of his heart. He should  then slowly make the seven-limb prayer, 
imagining that he is in front of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2 Making a request and going for refuge 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 154  A Making a request 
B The special going for refuge  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2A Making a request 
Second:  Then [the student], having generated the disc rimination  of his  lama as the Teacher, 
prostrates to him and makes offerings, includin g a mandala, to him. With his right knee on 
the floor, palms joined, he makes a request for the purpose of the mind of enlightenment: 
 
Just as the previous tathagatas, arhats, {182} perfectly complete 
buddhas, as well as the great bodhisattvas abiding on the great  
grounds, first generated the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly complete 
enlightenment, likewise I, whose name is..., request the master to 
generate the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment. 
 
Repeat this three times. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2B The special going for refuge  
1 The attitude together with  the objects 
Then, [the student] goes for refuge, with the be haviour explained earlier, to the objects - the 
Buddha, the Dharma (the true paths that mainly   bring about the cessations), and the Sangha 
(the irreversible arya bodhisattvas) -  with th e general attitude thinking: “From now until I 
achieve enlightenment, in order to protect all se ntient beings, [I go for refuge] to the Buddha, 
the teacher of refuge; [I go for refuge] to the Dharma, the actual refuge; [I go for refuge] to the 
Sangha, those who “I ask for help to achieve refu ge”; and with the special attitude of making 
the strong aspiration: “I will never turn away from this attitude at any time.” 
2 The words of the ritual 
Repeat this three times. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2B The special going for refuge  
1 The attitude together with  the objects 
Then, [the student] goes for refuge, with the be haviour explained earlier, to the objects - the 
Buddha, the Dharma (the true paths that mainly   bring about the cessations), and the Sangha 
(the irreversible arya bodhisattvas) -  with th e general attitude thinking: “From now until I 
achieve enlightenment, in order to protect all se ntient beings, [I go for refuge] to the Buddha, 
the teacher of refuge; [I go for refuge] to the Dharma, the actual refuge; [I go for refuge] to the Sangha, those who “I ask for help to achieve refu ge”; and with the special attitude of making 
the strong aspiration: “I will never turn away from this attitude at any time.” 
2 The words of the ritual 
Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now 
until I reach the essence of enlightenm ent, go for refuge to the best of 
men, the Buddha Bhagavans.  
Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now until I reach the essence of enlightenm ent, go for refuge to the best of 
Dharma, the Dharma that is peace, free from attachment. Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now until I reach the essence of enlightenm ent, go for refuge to the best of 
assemblies, {183} the Sangha of irreversible arya bodhisattvas.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 155   
Repeat this three times. The request for attentio n when going for refuge to each of the Jewels 
and the unusual words of going for refuge to the Dharma accord with  the ritual composed by 
Jowo [Atisha]. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A3 Stating the trainings of  having taken refuge 
Third: Here too the master shou ld express the trainings that were explained before in the 
context of lesser beings. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1B  Accumulation of the collection [of merit] 
Second: As before the seven-limb prayer should be done in the presence of  the direct and 
lineage  gurus and the merit field explained previously. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1C  Training in the attitude 
Third: As explained previously, the observed objects and aspects of  loving kindness and 
compassion should be visualised.  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-2 The actual ritual  
A The behaviour 
Second: In front of the master, [the student] should kneel down on his right knee; 
alternatively sitting in a crouchin g position is also appropriate.  With palms joined, he should 
generate the mind [of enlightenment]. 
B The distinction of the mind generation 
[The mind generation here] is not the mere mi nd generation that thinks “I will attain 
buddhahood for others’ welfare.” Rather, it is the promise that, observing the mind that has 
been generated, thinks, “I shall not give it up as long as I have not attained enlightenment.” 
This is why  that attitude should be  generated in dependence on a ritual. 
C Its peculiarities 
If you unable to train in the trainings of the aspiring mind, you should not [make this 
promise]. On the other hand, if the mere thou ght “I will become a buddha for the welfare of 
all sentient beings” is generated by means of a ritual, everyone can do it, regardless of whether 
or not they are able or not to train in the trainings of the mind generation. 
D It is inappropriate to posit two systems of guarding and not guarding the trainings with respect to the 
engaging  mind [of enlighentment] 
With respect to the aspiring mind, these two [systems] may be appropriate, however, with 
respect to taking the engaging mind by means of a ritual, it is inappropriate to take it without 
training in the trainings. Therefore, it is inad missible to assert that th ere is a difference with 
respect to it being appropriate and inappropriat e in the many rituals for the vow transmitted 
from Nagarjuna and Asanga. {184} 
E Although it is appropriate for someone not training in the trainings to generate the aspiring mind, the 
engagement vow is inappropriate 
The Advice to King Prasenajit  says that if one cannot train in the trainings of generosity, etc., a 
great amount of merit is accomplished from me rely generating the mind [of enlightenment]. 
Taking this as its source, the First Stages of Meditation  says: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 156  Whoever cannot train in the perfection s fully in all their aspects should 
also generate the mind of enligh tenment thoroughly conjoined with 
method because the results will be great.   [28] 
 
Thus, it is clear that it is appropriate for so meone incapable of training in the trainings of 
generosity and so forth to generate the mind of  enlightenment, but inappropriate to hold the 
vow. 
F The ritual for assuming the mind generation  
The ritual for assuming the mind generation is: 
 
All buddhas and bodhisattvas residing in the ten directions, please 
grant me your attention. Master, please grant me your attention. I, 
whose name is (…), by means of the roots of virtue of the nature of 
generosity, the nature of morality, an d the nature of meditation that I 
have created, caused to be created, and rejoiced in the creation of in 
this life and in previous lives, just as the previous  tathagatas, arhats, perfectly complete buddhas and grea t bodhisattvas thoroughly abiding 
on the great grounds , generated the mind of unsurpassed perfectly complete enlightenment, in the same  way also I, whose name is (…), 
from now until I reach the essenc e of enlightenment, {185} will 
generate the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly complete, great  enlightenment, I will liberate the be ings that are not liberated, free 
those who are not free, give breath to those unable to breathe, and 
cause those who have not comple tely passed beyond sorrow to 
completely pass beyond sorrow.  
Say this three times. Even though it is not cl early mentioned in the refuge [ceremony] and in 
this ritual, it is necessary so repeat [these words] after the master. 
G The method for taking [the mind generation] by oneself in a ritual  
This is the manner [of taking th e mind generation] in the presence of a master. From Jowo 
[Atisha]’s Mind Generation Ritual  what to do if we cannot find a master is taught:  
 
The ritual for generating the mind  of enlightenment oneself in the 
absence of a master is as follows. Ha ving brought to mind  Tathatgata 
Shakyamuni and all the tathagatas of the ten directions, prostrate  to 
them and do the rite of offerings an d so forth. Then, according to the 
previous order, make the request, go for while leaving out the word 
“Master,” and so forth. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-3 The concluding ritual 
Third: The master should ment ion the trainings in the aspiring mind to the student. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2 Guarding that which has been obtained without degeneration   
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 157  A Training in the cause that assures the mind generation will not degenerate in this life  
B Training in the cause that assures one will not be separated from  [the mind generation] 
again in future  lives 
The second one has two [points]: Training in th e cause that assures the mind generation will 
not degenerate in this life and training in the cause that assures one will not be separated 
from [the mind generation] again in future  lives. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A Training in the cause that assures the mind generation will not degenerate in 
this life 
1 Training in remembering the advantages, so that the strength of one’s delight in the mind 
generation increases 
2 Training in generating it six times, so that the actual mind generation  increases 
3 Training in not mentally abandoning  any sentient being for whose welfare the mind has 
been generated 
4 Training in accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom 
The first one has four [points]: Training in re membering the advantages, so that the strength 
of one’s delight in the mind gene ration increases, training in ge nerating it six times, so that 
the actual mind generation increases, training in not mentally abandoning any sentient being 
for whose welfare the mind has been generated, and training in accumulating the collections 
of merit and wisdom. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1 Training in remembering the advantages, so that the strength of one’s delight 
in the mind generation increases 
A The way [the advantages] are explained in the scriptures 
B The way [the mind of enlightenment] is praised in the writings of the holy beings  
C The instruction to exert oneself as it is this very [mind] that the Buddhas and their children have seen 
to be the exalted  method  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A The way [the advantages] are explained in the scriptures 
1 The uncommon cause 
2 Showing the advantages 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A1 The uncommon cause 
{186} First: You consider the advantages of the mind of enlightenment  studying the sutras or 
hearing them from the  guru. Since they have been taught extensively in the Gandhavyuha 
[Sutra] , they should be studied there. As the quotatio n above from it says: “It is the seed of all 
Buddha qualities and all the conduct and aspi rational prayers of the bodhisattvas are 
summarized in it, it is said to be like a brief presentation.  Although the extensive explanation 
of the branches is boundless, since the brief presentation contains everything, the brief 
presentation, like a synthesis of them, teaches a synthesis that summarises the essential points 
of all the paths of bodhisattvas.   
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2 Showing the advantages 
A The transition 
B The actual [advantages] 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2A The transition 
As the advantages taught in [Asanga’s] Bodhisattva Levels  concern the aspiring mind [of 
enlightenment], from among them the two advantag es of generating a stable mind generation 
are mentioned first. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B The actual [advantages] 
1 You become a holy field 
2 You thoroughly hold the merit of non-harm 
You become a holy field and thorou ghly hold the merit of non-harm. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 158  2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B-1 You become a holy field 
A [Object of veneration] 
First: Like it says in the scriptures: “The worl d with its gods and men will prostrate [to you]”, 
as soon as you generate this mind, you become an  object of veneration for all sentient beings.  
B [One becomes an exalted being] 
As it says [in the scriptures], you outshine  th e arhat great beings by way of your lineage as 
soon as this mental attitude arises. Yo u become a guru or an exalted being.  
C [One becomes a field of merit] 
You become a field of merit due to yielding limitless results even through doing minor 
meritorious actions.  
D [One becomes a support for the whole world] 
As it says: “Due to supporting the whole world,  you are like the earth”; you become like a 
father of the nine beings.  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B-2 You thoroughly hold the merit of non-harm 
A The way you are guarded by protectors 
Second: {187} Since you are guarded by twice as  many protectors as protect a wheel-turning 
king, yakshas and non-human primordial [local  guardians] cannot harm you even when you 
are asleep, intoxicated or non-conscientious.  
B Mantras and the like will succeed more easily 
You easily pacify calamities, harm and infectious  diseases with the words of secret mantra and 
knowledge mantra. If even things that cannot be accomplished in the hands of sentient 
beings, will be accomplished when they come in to your hands, what need is there to mention 
that [other things] will be accomplished? Due to this, the collection of ac tivities, pacification 
and so forth, are shown to be easily accompli shed in dependence on the mind generation. 
Therefore, if that exists, the common atta inments will also quickly be accomplished. 
C Famines and the like will not occur  
Fear, famine, and harm from non-human beings will not occur in those places in which they 
have not occurred, and after you die and transfer , you will have little damage, will be without 
illness, and so forth.  
D One is without anger and patient  
Due to being endowed with patience and a gentle disposition, you will bear harm that is done 
to you and will not return the harm, and so forth. 
E It will be difficult for one to be reborn in the bad migrations  and one will quickly be freed 
Also it will be difficult for you to be reborn in the bad migratio ns and, if it happens, you will 
quickly be freed. While there you will have littl e suffering and thereby, as a result, become 
extremely disenchanted with cyclic existence. Also compassion for those living beings will 
arise. 
F  How the advantages are immeasurable 
If the merit of the mind of enlightenment  were  to become form, it could not be contained in 
space itself. Making offerings of material things  to the buddhas does not compare to it even 
partially. In [the Sutra ] Requested by Viradatta  it says:  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 159   
If the merit of bodhicitta Had a form [that was physical], 
All the realm of space would be filled - 
It would be surpassed by it.  Buddha fields as numerous as  The sand grains of the river Ganges, 
{188} Offered by someone, filled with jewels,  
To the protector of the world –  If someone joins his palms and bows 
To bodhicitta that is distinctly 
Superior to that offering made. As for that, it has no limit.     [29] 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1B  The way [the mind of enlightenment] is praised in the teachings of the holy beings 
When the great Jowo [Atisha] circumambulated the Vajra Seat and thought about what to do 
to attain complete enlightenment quickly, th e smaller statues got up and asked the bigger 
ones: “What should those who want to quickl y reach buddhahood train in?” whereupon the 
latter replied: “They should train in the mind of  enlightenment.” When, in the celestial realm  
above the Gandhola statue, a young woman questioned an older woman, the reply was like the previous. It is said that due to hearing this , his mind became very certain with respect to 
the mind of enlightenment. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1C  The instruction to exert oneself as it is this very [mental attitude] that the buddhas and 
their children have seen to be the supreme method  
In that way, you should understand that the mind of enlightenment is the condensed 
essential point of all the Mahayana instructions , the great treasure of all spiritual attainments, 
the special feature  distinguishing the Mahaya na from the Hinayana, the exalted basis that 
exhorts one to the vast conduct of the Jinas’ children. You shou ld increase the strength of 
your delight in meditating on it and act like  someone thirsty hearing of water, because the 
buddhas and their children, having made it more and more subtle by means of their 
marvellous exalted knowledge over many eons, when analysing the path s saw it to be the 
supreme method for attaining buddhahood. Thus, it also says in Engaging in Bodhisattva 
Behaviour :  
 
Having reflected thoroughly for many eons 
the buddhas see this above all as beneficial.  [30] 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-2 Training in generating it six times so that the actual mind generation  increases  
A Training in not giving up the aspiring mind generation 
B Training in increasing the aspiring mind generation 
The second one has two [points]: training in no t {189} giving up and increasing the aspiring 
mind generation. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-2A  Training in not giving up the aspiring mind generation 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 160  1 Giving it up is heavier  than a defeat of the [vows] individual liberation and [as a consequence], one 
must wander in the bad migrations for a long time 
First: In the Abbreviated [Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ]  it was taught that if you take the buddhas, 
bodhisattvas, and your spiritual fr iend as your witnesses and, in their presence, vow to liberate 
the sentient beings that are not liberated and so  forth, [but] then lay down  the burden of 
mind generation as a result of discourageme nt due to seeing the enormous number of 
sentient beings and their bad actions, the long time for which you need to exert yourself over 
many eons, that it is necessary to train in the li mitless two collections and difficult practices, it 
will be a greater negativity than a defeat of individual liberation. In the Bodhicaryavatara  it says 
that if you give up the promised mind, you will  have to wander in the bad migrations for a 
long time. 
2 Not giving it up, due to delight like that of finding a jewel in a rubbish heap 
Also that same [text] says: 
 
As a blind man finds a jewel 
In a heap of dust, like that, 
Effortlessly bodhicitta Has arisen within me.       [31] 
 
You should think “What I found is just as amaz ing” and “I shall not give it up under any 
circumstances.” Observing this, reinforce the decisi on  not to give it up even for an instant. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-2B Training increasing the aspiring mind generation 
1 It is not enough to merely not give it up, it must be reinforced 
Second: Since it is not enough to merely not ab andon it, you should reinforce it three times a 
day and three times at night with  great effort. 
2 How the ritual is performed at the six times 
If the extensive ritual explained above can be accomplished, do it according to that. If it 
cannot be accomplished, you should train in love  and compassion, having visualized the merit 
field and made offerings. You should do this six times a day. The ritual for that is to say the 
following three times: 
 
I go for refuge until I am enlightened to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Supreme Assembly. 
{190} Through the practice of genero sity and the other [perfections], 
May I attain buddhahood in order to benefit migratingbeings. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-3 Training in not mentally abandoning  any sentient being, for whose welfare the 
mental attitude has been generated 
Third: The measure of mentally  abandoning a sentient being is the occurrence  of the 
thought: “I will not work for hi s welfare now or ever after” in dependence on the condition of 
unreasonable behaviour  and so forth. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-4 Training in accumulating the two collections 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 161  Fourth: Having assumed  the aspiring mind by a ritual, you should strive to accumulate the 
collections through daily offerings to the jewels, etc., as the cause for increasing the mind of 
enlightenment. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B Training in the cause of not being separated from  [the aspiring mind] in other  
lives 
1 Training in abandoning the four black dharmas that cause it to degenerate 
2 Training in adopting the four white dharmas that do not allow it to degenerate 
The second one has two [points]: training in ab andoning the four black dharmas that cause it 
to degenerate and training in adopting the four white dharmas that do not allow it to 
degenerate. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1 Training in abandoning the four black dharmas that cause it to degenerate 
A [Deceiving one’s abbot, master, guru, or those worthy of offerings] 
B [Causing others to regret the virtuous deeds they do not regret] 
C [Saying something infamous  about a person who has entered the Mahayana] 
D [Actions committed with the intention to deceive or dissimulate, but without the extraordinary attitude] 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1A [Deceiving the abbot, master, guru, or those worthy of offerings 
1 Object and action 
First: Among the four black dharmas, with resp ect to that of deceiving one’s abbot, master, 
guru, or those worthy of offerings, the object s that are one’s abbot and master are easy to 
understand. The guru is someone who wishes to  benefit you, and those worthy of offerings 
are endowed with good qualities,  even though  they do not belong to the previous two. 
If youwonder about what deed becomes a black dharma with respect to them, to knowingly 
cheat them by any means is a black dharma. 
2 Clearing up doubts 
However, as the deceit and dissimulation that ar e not lies are indicated below, it has to be 
cheating through lying. This  is because in [Asanga’s] Compendium of Manifest Dharma  it is 
taught that abandoning a black dharma constitu tes a white dharma, and that the antidote of 
this [black dharma] is the firs t of the four white dharmas. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1B [Causing others to regret virtues that they do not regret] 
1 Object and Action 
With respect to causing others to regret [virtu es] they do not regret, the object is another 
person without regrets about a virtue that he has done. What one does towards him is {191} 
that, with the intention to make him regret, on e generates regret for that which is not an 
object of regret. 
2 Clearing up doubts 
As regards  these two, it is th e same  whether or not [the person] is deceived and whether or 
not [the person] has regrets.  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1C [Saying that which is not praise and so forth  about a sentient being who has entered 
the Mahayana] 
1 Object and Action 
With respect to saying that which is not praise  and so forth about  a sentient being who has 
entered the Mahayana, the object is someone who has generated the mind of enlightenment 
and now possesses it. What one does towards hi m is to say something unpleasant motivated 
by hatred. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 162  2 The measure 
The object to whom it was sa id understands the meaning. 
3 How this needs to be abandoned since it easily occurs and is a great fault 
It is easy for this to occur and it is also a very great disadvantage. That has already been 
mentioned previously in brief. Fu rthermore, it is taught in the Sutra of the Miracle of Complete 
Certainty of Perfect Peace  that if a bodhisattva generates a mind of contempt towards a 
bodhisattva, he must remain in hell for that many eons and that apart from deprecating a 
bodhisattva nothing can make a bodhis attva fall into the bad migrations. 
4 How takes you further away  from enlightenment 
In the Abbreviated [Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ] it also says that if a bodhisattva, who has not yet 
obtained a prediction argues out of anger with  a bodhisattva who has obtained a prediction, 
for however long a mind of anger arose he will have to spend that many eons longer on the 
path. 
5 The need to exert oneself in confession and restraint 
Because of that, it is also taught in the same [tex t] that it is necessary to put an end to anger in 
all its aspects and to put effort into confe ssing it and restraining from it immediately 
whenever it arises. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1D [An activity done out of deceit and dissimulation but without the extraordinary attitude] 
1  Object and action 
With respect to an activity done out of  deceit and dissimulation but without the 
extraordinary attitude the object is any other se ntient being. What one does towards him is to 
engage in deceit and dissimulation. 
2 Explanation  of the meaning of the word 
{192} In this regard, deceit and dissimulation ar e explained in terms of  deceiving with respect 
to measures and weights and so forth and the li ke of what Gyelwa Yechung did: in order to 
send someone off to Ragma, he caused him to be  sent to Tolung first so afterwards he would 
accept Ragma. According to the Compendium of All Trainings  deceit is to display qualities that 
actually do not exist, and dissimulation is to  take measures for defaults  not to become 
evident.  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2 Adopting the four white dharmas that do not allow it to degenerate 
A [Abandoning lying knowingly] 
B [Sustaining the extraordinary attitude without deceit  or dissimulation] 
C [Generating the discrimination that bodhisat tvas are like the Teacher and praising them] 
D [Ripening sentient beings] 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2A [Abandoning lying knowingly] 
Second: The object of the first white dharma is all sentient beings. The action is to abandon 
lying to them knowingly even for the sake of one’s life or for as little as a joke. If you act in 
this way, you will be sure  not to cheat special objects such as your abbot, master, etc. through 
lies. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2B [Abiding with the extraordinary attitude without deceit or dissimulation] 
The object of the second white dharma is all se ntient beings. The action  is to abide with the 
extraordinary attitude towards them without deceit  or dissimulation, that is, to abide with an 
honest attitude. It is the antido te to the fourth black dharma. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 163  2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2C [Generating the discrimination that bodhisattvas are like the Teacher and praising them] 
1 Object and action 
The object of the third white dharma is all bodhisattvas. The action is to generate the 
discrimination of them as if they were the Teacher and to pr oclaim truthful praise about 
them in the four directions.  
2 How [there is] a need to guard against this 
Sharawa said: Although we are constantly busy sc raping together  something like virtue, there 
is no sign of its increase and many signs of its exhaustion. Virtue is exhausted by hatred 
towards bodhisattvas and our companions, di sdain  towards them and through insulting 
them. Therefore, if we are able to abandon insu lting them and bodhisattvas, we will no longer 
experience what is referred to in the Compendium of All Trainings  as “harm dependent on 
persons”. Since we do not know in whom the mi nd of enlightenment exists, we act from the 
perspective of training in pure appearances ge nerating the discrimination of  all sentient 
beings as the Teacher in accordance with the Sutra Requested by Kashyapa . 
3 The way to express the qualities 
{193} If there is an opportunity to express their good qualities and an audience, do so. 
However, if you do not go to all four direct ions and proclaim them, this is not a fault. 
This [white dharma] is the anti dote to the third black dharma. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2D [Ripening sentient beings] 
1 The actual [fourth white dharma]: object and action  
2 The statement in  other scriptures as well 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2D1 The actual [fourth white dharma]: object and action 
The object of the fourth white dharma is the se ntient beings who are ripened by oneself. The 
action is to make them hold to perfect enlightenment without wishing for a temporary 
vehicle. Moreover, while from your side you sh ould cause the  disciple to make a connection 
with it, if that thought does no t arise in the  disciple, it does not become a mistake, because 
you were unable to accomplish that. 
 By means of this [white dharma] you aban don the second black dharma, for, if you 
wish, from the bottom of your heart, to place  others in the final of all happinesses, you do 
not practice it in order to connect them to th e generation of mental unhappiness for the sake 
of generating mere regret whic h is [still] mental unhappiness. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2D2 The explanation in three scriptures, the  Compendium of all trainings  and so forth   
A  The advantage of establishing others in the mind generation  
In the [ Sutra ] Requested by Simha : 
 
‘By means of what is bodhicitta Not given up in all one’s lives If not even in one’s dreams, Much less while one is not asleep?’ He spoke:  ‘In cities or in villages In the countries where you live, Guide [others] correctly to enlightenment. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 164  By that, bodhicitta will not be abandoned.’   [32] 
B The statement that by abandonin g pride and the like th e mind generation will not to be abandoned 
Furthermore, in Arraying the Buddha Field of Manjushri  it is taught that the aspiring mind107 is 
not abandoned if one possesses four [qualities]:  having abandoned pride, having abandoned 
jealousy, having abandoned miserliness, and bein g mentally joyful when seeing others’ wealth. 
C  If all actions and conduct are done conjoined with the mind generation, one will not be separated 
from the mind of enlightenment in all lives 
This is clearly taught by the Jewel Cloud Sutra (R atnamegha Sutra) {194} and the like [the causes 
for sustaining the mind of enlightenment] are expressed clearly: 
 
If you train in the mind of enli ghtenment in all behaviours and 
generate the mind of enlightenment before starting any virtuous 
activity, you will not be separated from  this precious mind in other lives 
either. If you do not investigate time and time again how... 
         [ 3 3 ]  
2B4B-2B3B-2C3 The means of restoring [the vow], if it has degenerated 
Third: If you transgress the trainings, excludin g the two of giving up the aspiring mind and 
mentally giving up sentient beings, as long as  you do not have bodhisattva vows there is no 
downfall from the point of view of a bodhis attva. However, since it does transgress the 
trainings of the promise of intermediate virt ue, it becomes faulty conduct and therefore 
should be confessed by means of  the four powers. 
 
Explanation of how to train in the conduct 
having generated the mind [of enlightenment] 
2B4B-2B3B-3 Having generated the mind of enlightenment how to train in the conduct 
A The reason why it is necessary to train in the trainings, having generated the mind [of 
enlightenment] 
B Demonstration that buddhahood is not achieved  by training in method or wisdom alone 
C Explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings  
The third one has three [points]: The reason why it is necessary to train in the trainings, 
having generated the mind [of enlightenmen t]; demonstration that buddhahood is not 
achieved by training in method or wisdom al one; and explanation of the actual stages of 
training in the trainings  
2B4B-2B3B-3A The reason why it is necessary to train in the trainings, having generated the mind [of 
enlightenment] 
1  Buddhahood is not achieved by not  accomplishing [the trainings]. 
First: Although, having thus ge nerated the mind [of enlightenment], you do not train in the 
trainings of generosity and so forth, it will still be of great benefit, as [expressed] in the above 
quotation from the Biographiy of Maitreya . However, if you do not make the bodhisattva 
trainings your essential practice, it will be impossible to become a Buddha.  Therefore you 
should train in the conduct. In the King of Concentration  it says: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 165  One should make it the essenctial pr actice. Why? Because, oh youthful 
one, for one who has made it his essential practice it will not be 
difficult to obtain unsurpassed perfectly complete enlightenment.
         [ 3 4 ]  
2 First of all taming oneself, since others will not be tamed without taming oneself 
Also  [Kamalashila says] in the First Stages of Meditation : 
 
{195} A bodhisattva who has generate d the mind, understands that he 
cannot tame others without taming himself, and thoroughly applies 
himself to the practice of genero sity and so forth. Without them 
enlightenment is not achieved.    [35] 
3 What is to  be accomplished 
What is to  be accomplished once the vow has been taken is to train in those very trainings 
associated with it. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B Demonstration that buddhahood is not  achieved by training in method or wisdom 
alone 
1 How to train in the unmistaken and complete method 
2 Refutation of wrong conceptions about this 3 Refutation of the answers to objections about  this 
2B4B-2B3B-3B1 How to train in the unmistaken and complete method 
A The need to be unmistaken concerning the complete path  
Second: In the Middle Stages of Meditation  [Kamalashila] says: One who engages in  the method 
for accomplishing buddhahood needs an unmist aken method, for, however hard you try, a 
mistaken path will not lead to the [desired] result, just as pulling [a cow] by its horn, if you 
want milk. If, although faultless, it is incomplete, the result will not come about despite your 
effort, just as a sprout will not grow if eith er the seed, water, earth, and the like are 
incomplete. 
B Identifying the complete path 
Well then, what are the complete and un mistaken causes and conditions? In Vairocana’s 
Manifest Enlightenment (Vairocana’s Abhisambodhi)  it says: 
 
Oh, Lord of the Secret, the exalted wisdom of omnisicence arises from 
the root that is compassion. It arises  from the cause that is the mind of 
enlightenment. It is consummated by method.   
In this regard “compassion” has already been ex plained. “The mind of enlightenment” is the 
two: the conventional and ultimate mind of enlightenment. “Method” is fully perfected 
generosity and so forth. This was explai ned by the great trailblazer Kamalashila. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2 Refutation of wrong conceptions about this 
A Wrong modes of conception 
B Their refutation 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2A Wrong modes of conception 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 166  1 Wrong modes of apprehension 
One such mistaken conception regarding the pa th is held up by the Chinese Hashang and 
others who say: “As long as they are discursive thoughts – no need to talk about it if they are 
bad conceptions, but even if they are good concep tions – they will bind us in cyclic existence. 
Therefore, their results cannot tr anscend cyclic existence, just as one can be bound  with 
fetters of gold or ropes, {196} and just as bo th white and black clouds obscure the sky, and 
just as pain is produced regardless of whether one is bitten by a white or a black dog. That is 
why just equipoise without conceptions ab out anything is the path to buddhahood. 
Generosity, ethical discipline, and the like were o n l y  t a u g h t  f o r  t h e  w e l f a r e  o f  d u l l   b e i n g s  
incapable of meditating on this definitive me aning. Therefore, having found the definitive 
meaning, to engage in those conducts is like  a king becoming a commoner or like, having 
found the elephant, looking for its footprints.” 
2 Wrong indication explanation of their sources  
The Hashang substantiate [their position] by quoting eighty passages from sutra that praise 
non-conceptuality. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B Their refutation 
1 How scholars refute the worst of wrong views 
2 How some unfortunate beings adhere to it despite those refutations 
3 How non-abiding nirvana has to be accomplished by a path of both wisdom and method 
4 How the emptiness possessing the highest of all aspects is necessary for the attainment of buddhahood 
5 How the position that only accepts wisdom is refuted in the treatises 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-1 How scholars refute the worst of wrong  views 
The statement by them that “All the fact ors of method are not a genuine path to 
buddhahood” is a grave deprecation, and, by re futing the application of the essence of the 
Jina’s teachings – selflessness – by means of th e wisdom of individual investigation, they 
abandon the mode of the highest meaning [erri ng] far away from it. Although Kamalashila 
has refuted them well with stainless scriptural  passages and reasonings, and although he has 
presented in detail the good path that pleases  the jinas… 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-2 How some unfortunate beings adhere to it despite those refutations 
…there are still some who scorn the side of co nduct, such as guarding and restrainting, and 
who discard it while cultivating the paths, acting  as has been described above. It appears that 
some, apart from deprecating the factor of method, discard the way of understanding the 
view, while others discard the search for the view of suchness by means of the wisdom of 
individual investigation, and then skilfully asse rt the meditation of the Chinese [sect] of not 
thinking about anything. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-3 How non-abiding nirvana has to be accomplished by a path of both wisdom and method 
A That there is no need for method and wisdom to be complete contradicts all scriptures as well as 
logic. 
This {197} does not even seem to be in the ca tegory of meditation on emptiness. However, 
even if it were permitted to be meditation on  emptiness, the statement “Those who meditate 
well on the meaning of emptiness should medita te on emptiness alone and need not cultivate 
conciousnesses of conventionalities, the side of conduct” contradicts all the scriptures [of the 
B u d d h a ] ,  a n d  s i m p l y  s e e m s  t o  h a v e  g o n e   b e y o n d  t h e  p a t h  o f  r e a s o n i n g .  T h e  o b j e c t  t o  b e  
achieved by Mahayanists is non-abiding nirvana.  With respect to that, non-abiding in cyclic 
existence is achieved through what is called “the  wisdom realizing suchness”, “the stages of the 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 167  path relying on the ultimate”, “the path of th e profound”, and what is called “the collection 
of exalted wisdom” and “the factor of wisdom”,  whereas non-abiding in nirvana or peace is 
necessarily achieved through what is called “the wisdom cognizing varieties”, “the stages of the 
path relying on conventional trut h”, “the path of the vast”, “t he collection of method”, and 
“the factor of merit”. 
B Establishing by way of scriptural passages how wisdom and method refute the two extremes 
The following words are taken from the Sutra of Inconceivable Perfect Secret : 
 
The collection of exalted wisdom is what abandons all mental 
afflictions. The collection of merit is what fully nurtures all sentient 
beings. As this is so, Bhagavan, th e bodhisattva mahasattvas strive in 
the collection of merit and exalted wisdom.   [36] 
C Establishing by way of scriptural passages how we are bound to the extremes of existence and peace 
as long as method and wisdom are not complete 
Also, in the Sutra Taught at the Request of Vimalakirti  it says:  
 
In response to the questions “What is the bondage of bodhisattvas?” 
and “What is liberation?”: 
 Wisdom not conjoined with method is bondage. Wisdom conjoined with method is liberation. Method not conjoined with wisdom is bondage. {198} Method conjoined with wisdom is liberation.. [37] 
D The achievement of buddhahood depends on both wisdom and method 
And in  the Gayagori Sutra : 
 
The bodhisattva path, in brief, is ma de up of two. What are the two? 
They are the following: method and wisdom.  [38] 
 
Their significance is also taught clearly in the Lamp on the Path : 
 
Through wisdom divorced from perfection practice 
The obscurations will not be exhausted Therefore, in order to abandon All obscurations – afflictive and cognitive, Yoga of the perfection of wisdom  Should always be practiced combined with method. That is why method divorced from wisdom 
As well as wisdom divorced from method 
Are referred to as “bondage”, therefore You should not abandon either.  
And: 
Ommitting the perfection of wisdom, The perfections of generosity 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 168  And so forth - all collections of virtue,  
Are explained by the jinas as method.  Great beings who train in the wisdom aspect, 
Through familiarity with the methods, 
Will thereby quickly achieve enlightenment; Not by meditating on just selflessness. The understanding of natural emptiness 
Realizing that aggregates, realms,  
And sources are without production Is thoroughly explained as “wisdom”.    [39] 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-4 How the emptiness possessing the best of all aspects is necessary for the attainment of 
buddhahood 
In the Crown Jewel Sutra   it is taught that it is necessary  to meditate on the emptiness that 
possesses the best of all aspects which is comp lete in all the factor s of method, such as 
generosity and so forth.  
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-5 How the position that only accepts wisdom is refuted in the treatises 
In the [ Sutra ] Gathering All the Threads   it says: 
 
Foolish people intend to repudiate the bodhisattvas’ practice of the six 
perfections for the sake of enlightenment saying: “You should train in the perfection of wisdom alone. {199} What is the use of training in the 
r e m a i n i n g ? ”        [ 4 0 ]  
And: 
Foolish people also say: “One be comes enlightened through only one 
approach, that is, through the approa ch of emptiness.” However, they 
do not have completely pure conduct. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3 Refutation of the answers to objections about  this  
A Refutation of the objection that asserts  that method is unnecessary if emptiness has been realized 
B Refutation of the objection that asserts that method is unnecessary because in the view of emptiness 
the six perfections are complete 
C Demonstration of contradictions in others’ assertions 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3A Refutation of the objection that asserts  that method is unnecessary if emptiness has 
been realized 
1 Stating the assertion 
2 Its refutation 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3A-1 Stating the assertion 
 
One may think: “Training in the conduct of genero sity and so forth is [necessary] if one does 
not have a stable realization of emptiness,  but if one has that, it is sufficient.” 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3A-2 Its refutation 
A Refutation because it is in contradiction to the definitive meaning sutras 
[The refutation is:] If this were so, the jinas’  children who have attained the first ground and 
so forth, and especially the jinas’ children on the eighth ground who have achieved power 
over non-conceptual wisdom, would not need the conduct. However, this is inappropriate, for 
in the Sutra of the Ten Grounds  it is taught: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 169  On each of the ten grounds, one, such as generosity, also becomes 
paramount. However, it is not that the remaining ones are not 
practiced.” Therefore, on each of th e grounds all six or all ten are said 
t o  b e  p r a c t i c e d .        [ 4 1 ]  
B How even with the highest realization of emptiness, method and wisdom are necessary 
In particular on the occasion of the eighth ground, when [the bodhisattva] abides in the 
ultimate where all elaborations  are pacified  owing to the exhaustion of all the mental 
afflictions, the buddhas exort [him saying:] “Buddhahood cannot be achieved through this 
mere realization of emptiness; this [realization ] is also achieved by shravakas and solitary 
realizers.” 
C How it is therefore inappropriate [to think] that there is no need for wisdom and method  right from the 
beginning. 
“My bodies, my exalted wisdom, my [buddha] fi elds and so on are immeasurable. Look at 
them! Nor do you have my powers ant the like. Therefore, start to exert yourselves! Think of 
the unpacified sentient beings agitated by vari ous mental afflictions! {200} Do not give up 
patience either!”  
 If [the buddhas] are so emph atic in explaining [to eighth ground bodhisattvas] the need 
to train in the bodhisattva conduct, this obviously applies even more to others.  
D How even on the high paths of mantra, the way to generate the mind and train in the six perfections is 
the same by and large 
Although in the context of th e high paths of the unsurpa ssed mantra there are indeed 
differences in this regard, it has already been explained that, in general, the two – the mantra 
and perfection [vehicles] – are the same by and large in sharing the same overall structure of 
the path of training in genera ting the two minds of enlighte nment and the six perfections. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3B Refutation of the objection stating that method is unnecessary because in the view of emptiness  all six perfections are complete 
1 The objection thinking: “Since the six perfections are complete when you do not think about anything, 
this is sufficient”  
2 Its refutation  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-1 The objection thinking: “Since the six perfections are complete when you do not think of 
anything at all, this is sufficient”:  - how they are complete according to that way of reckoning  
[The objection is:] “We do not assert that ge nerosity and so forth are unnecessary, but they 
are complete when you do not think about anything, because by not adhering to the 
recipient, the act of giving nor the substance gi ven, non-observing  generosity is complete, and 
likewise the remaining [perfections] are complete . Also, because it says in sutra that the six 
perfections are contained in each one of them.” 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-2 Refutation of this with a digression  
A The absurd   consequences   [that would ensue] if this were so 
If [all the perfections] were complete simply thro ugh this, they  would also be complete in the 
calm abiding of a tirthika’s single-pointed mind  when it is placed in meditative equipoise, 
since he does not adhere to them.  In particular, as it says in the Sutra of the Ten Grounds , 
shravakas and pratyekabuddhas wh o have a non-conceptual exal ted wisdom with respect to 
reality, when meditatively equipoised on it, would become Mahayanists since the entire 
bodhisattva conduct would be complete. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 170  B If it were sufficient that in each one all  six are complete, it would follow that a mandala would be 
offered with one single [substance]  
If you assert that this alone is sufficient, because it is taught that in each [perfection] all six are 
included, then, while offering a mandala with [the verse] “Giving cow dung together with 
water ...” it would  also be appropriate to do ju st that since it is said that {201} all six are 
present. 
C How wisdom and method, undivided,  influence each other 
The [following] analogy [is given] in order to illustrate conduct conjoined with the view and 
wisdom conjoined with method: When a mother tormented  by sorrow  at the death of her 
beloved child engages in something like talkin g with other people, due to the power of her 
sorrow it is not given up, no matter what mi nds arise. Yet not all her minds are minds of 
sorrow. Similarly, if the wisdom realizing empt iness is very powerful, the minds that observe 
the giving of gifts, prostrations, circumambulation s, and so forth as they are being carried out, 
are not  realizing emptiness, but that does no t contradict their being performed possessing its 
power. If you start off with  the intense power of  the mind of enlightenment, as you do at the 
beginning of a  meditation session, although the mind of enlightenment is not manifest 
during the meditative stabilisation of emptiness,  that does not contradict its being influenced 
by it. The way in which wisdom and meth od are inseparable is also like that. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C Demonstration of contradictions in others’ assertions 
1 It is incorrect that the causes for high status and certain goodness are contradictory 2 One’s words will be contradictory like the speech of madmen 
3 Its reason for the lack of objects  and its inconsistencies 
4 [Contradiction to bringing about any certainty] 
5 Contradictions with the sutras teaching th e absence of an object  - has four units 
6 [Clarification of the position that applies equally to sutra and tantra] 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-1 It is incorrect that the causes for high status and certain goodness are contradictory 
You should not be misled with regard to the statement that the result s of the collection of 
merit are your [present] body, resources, long life, and so forth of cyclic existence. If method is 
divorced from wisdom, this is indeed the case. However, if it is conjoined with it, it is 
altogether suitable to be the cause of liberation  and omniscience. There are infinite scriptural 
passages for this, like in [Nagarjuna’s] Precious Garland (Ratnavali) : 
 
The form body, in brief, Your Highness,  
Is born from the collection of merit.    [43] 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-2 One’s words will be contradictory like the speech of madmen 
Furthermore, sometimes you seem to say that faulty conduct and all the mental afflictions 
that become the causes of the bad migrations  can also become causes for buddhahood, and 
sometimes that virtues like generosity, ethical di scipline, and so on that  become the causes of 
high status are causes of cyclic existence, rath er than the causes of enlightenment. {202} You 
should set your mind at ease before talking! 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-3 The reason for its lack of observed objects  and its contradictions 
A The presentation in the sutras 
It also says in the sutras: 
Strong adherence to the six, generosity an d so forth, is the action of Mara.”  
In the [ Sutra of the ] Three Heaps  it also explains: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 171   
Giving gifts falling into observing, guarding one’s ethics considering it 
supreme ethics and so forth; these should be confessed individually.
       [ 4 4 ]  
 
Also from [the  Sutra ] Requested by Brahma : 
       
However much conduct exists, all of  it is conceptual. Thorough non-
conceptuality is enlightenment.    [45]  
You should not be mistaken with respect to these statements. 
B The contradiction to the way in which the first passage is explained  
The meaning of the first one is that generosity  motivated by mistaken adherence to the two 
[types of] self is explained as an action of Mara  since it is impure. However, generosity and so 
forth are not presented as the actions of Mara. 
C The contradiction to grasping the words of the second passage since, because it actually says: 
“falling into observing”  
Otherwise you would have to say “Giving should be confessed in general” without the need to 
fall into observing saying “Bestowing gifts havi ng fallen into observing.” Therefore it follows  
that this has not been taught like that. In [Kamalashila’s] Last Stages of Meditation  it becomes a 
very crucial point [for Ka malashila] to give this kind of an swer, for if this is misunderstood, 
one will hold to signs  of a self of persons or phenomena and assert the entire side of conduct 
to be with signs.  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4 [Contradiction to bringing about any certainty] 
A It contradicts the teachings that one should rely on abandoning negativities and so forth 
B The mistake that this [view] contradicts any ki nd of logic and makes it impossible to establish  
anything with certainty 
C [Understanding the statements in the context of the two truths] 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4A It contradicts the teachings that one should rely on abandoning negativities and so forth 
If the mind of giving that thinks  “I will gi ve away this substance” and the mind of restraint 
that thinks “I will restrain myself from this faulty conduct” and all such virtuous conceptions 
were conceptions of a self of phenomena appr ehending the three spheres, it would make 
sense for those who have found the view of self lessness of phenomena {203} to cease them in 
every way just like hatred, pride, etc. and it wo uld be inappropriate to rely on them for that 
purpose.  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4B The fault that this [assertion] contr adicts all reasonings and makes it impossible to gain 
certainty with respect to anything 
If any conception that thinks “This is this” were  considered to be a conception of a self of 
phenomena that conceives the three spheres, th en thinking about the good qualities of a 
spiritual teacher, the great significance of the leisures and endowments, etc., remembering 
death, thinking about the sufferings of the bad migrations, going for refuge, and 
contemplating that from this action arises that  result, training in love, compassion, and the 
mind of enlightenment, and training in the tr ainings of the engaging mind of enlightenment 
would be thoughts thinking “This is this”, “Fro m this that arises”, “This has these qualities 
and those disadvantages”. Since th at would necessarily just indu ce certainty, the conception 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 172  of a self of phenomena would increase more and more as certainty with respect to those 
[above-mentioned topics] increases. Moreover, th e certainty with respect to those paths would 
decrease, as certainty with respect to the se lflessness of phenomena is nurtured more and 
more. Thereby, the side of conduct and the side of view having come to contradict each other 
like hot and cold, a strong ascertaining consciou sness with respect to both them could not be 
generated for long. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4C [Understanding the statements in the context of the two truths] 
1 Method and wisdom are not contradictory like hot and cold 
At the time of the result [both] the truth body is posited as the object to be obtained and the 
form body is considered as the object to be obtained. In accordance with the two not being 
contradictory, the following two at the time of the path must also not be contradictory: an 
ascertaining consciousness that is induced with respect to the freedom from all elaborations - 
even from their merest traces - of an observed object that is apprehended as having signs of 
the two [types of] self, and an ascertaining co nsciousness that is induced with respect to 
“From this, that arises” and “Thi s has that fault or quality.”  
2 How the two valid cognitions that posit the two truths assist one another 
How the two valid cognitions that posit the two truths assist one another 
This again depends on how {204} the view of th e basis, the two truths, is settled. The valid 
cognition thoroughly posits the ultimate, settl ing the mode of subsistence or the manner of 
being of all the phenomena of cyclic existenc e and nirvana as without the merest trace of 
inherent existence. The valid cognition of design ations thoroughly posits causes and results, 
individually ascertaining phenomena that are caus es or results without the slightest confusion. 
Once you gain certainty, by way of scriptures and reasoning, that these two do not harm each 
other in the least but rather assist each other,  then you will realize the meaning of the two 
truths and you will come to count yourself am ong “those who have found  the intention of 
the Jina.” 
3 [Clarification of the misconception expressed in the third quotation] 
The meaning of the third quotation is explained in the Last Stages of Meditation . Since the 
context of this sutra is the cont ext of an analysis of production  and so forth, with respect to 
the teaching that generosity and so forth are not really produced, they are taught to be merely 
imputed by conception saying “They are conceive d”, however they are not taught to be objects 
to be discarded and not relied upon. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-5 It contradicts the many sutras and so forth that teach the lack of observed object 
A [It contradicts the Compendium of All Sutras ] 
As regards [the statement] that a one-sided path is not enough, it is also clearly said in the 
Compendium of All the Sutras :  
 
Bodhisattvas who are separated from  skill in means should not make 
strong  efforts in  the profound dharma.   [46] 
 
B It contradicts the sutras since omniscience does not arise when there is no observed object 
In the [ Sutra of ] Inconceivable Secrets  it says: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 173   
Son of the lineage, it is like this . For instance, a fire burns due to a 
cause; if the cause is absent it will subside. Likewise, a mind blazes due 
to an observed object; if the observed object is absent, it will subside. 
C How it is necessary to individually [investigate] the meaning of the presence or absence of observed 
objects 
Therefore, the bodhisattva skilled in means knows how to completely 
extinguish observed objects by means of the thoroughly pure perfection 
of wisdom, {205} but he does not completely extinguish observed 
objects with respect to  the roots of virtue. He does not allow the 
observed objects with respect to th e mental afflictions to arise, but 
settles  on the observed objects of th e perfections. He also individually 
investigates the observed object that is emptiness, but looks upon the 
observed object - all sentient beings - with great compassion.  [47] 
 
The individual statements regarding the way in which there is an observed object and the way 
in which there is no observed object need to be differentiated. 
D Although the bonds of the mental afflictions and apprehending signs have been loosened, it is 
inappropriate to grow lax in guarding and restraining 
Likewise, the bonds of the mental afflictions and apprehending signs need to be loosened, 
whereas the ropes of the trainings need to be tightened. The two misdeeds need to be 
destroyed, whereas virtuous actions do not need to be destroyed. Theref ore, being restrained 
by the trainings and being bound by the appr ehension of signs are not the same, nor are 
loosened guarding and restraining and loosened bonds of the conception of a self the same. 
Therefore the meaning of destruction and self-l iberation etc. need to be examined well. 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-6 [Clarification of the position that applies equally to sutra and tantra] 
A [The object of rejection by Kamalashila] 
The way in which Master Kamalashila refuted me ntal inattention does not refute meditation 
where [the mind] is placed into  the view that has settled the meaning of the manner of being 
and placed single-pointedly on that without mentally attending to anything else. However, it 
does refute that the mere plac ement that places the mind in not conceiving anything without 
placing it on the meaning settled by the view, the manner of being, cons titutes meditation on 
emptiness. 
B Pointing out that it will be expl ained that althoug h the trainings in thorough ly complete method and 
wisdom are the same in both sutra and mantra, when individually investigated and so forth there are 
differences 
This is the same for the mantra  and the perfection [vehicles]. However, I  will explain the way 
in which there are similarities and differences in the two systems regarding sustaining 
[meditation] through analyzing by means of wisdom of individual investigation.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C Explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings  
1 How to train in the Mahayana in general 
2 In particular how to train in the vajra vehicle 
The third one {206} has two [p oints]: How to train in the Mahayana in general and in 
particular how to train in the vajra vehicle. 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 174  Explanation how to train in the conduc t of the jinas’ children in general 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1 How to train in the Mahayana in general 
A Developing the wish to train in the trainings of bodhisattvas  
B Having developed the wish, taking the vows of the jinas’ children 
C Having taken them, the way in which to train in them 
The first one has three [points]: Developing  the wish to train in the trainings of bodhisattvas; 
having developed the wish, taking  the vows of the jinas’ childr en; and having taken them the 
way in which to train in them. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1A Developing the wish to train in the trainings of bodhisattvas  
First: With respect to vinaya and tantra  it is inappropriate to listen to the trainings without 
taking the respective vows, but this is different  from them. First you come to understand the 
trainings, so that the continuum is purified. Then, if you feel enthusiasm for holding them, 
the vows are imparted [on you]. If you take th e vows after having understood the trainings, 
taken them to mind as an object, and developed a heartfelt wish to train in them, they will be 
very stable. That is why this is a good method. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1B Having developed the wish, taking the vows of the jinas’ children 
Second: In the  commentary on the Ethics Chapter  [of Asanga’s treatise on the Bodhisattva 
Levels ] I already extensively settled how to first ta ke [the vows] and, following that, how to 
guard against the root downfalls and downfalls th at are infractions, an d how to restore [the 
vows] if they have been degene rated. Therefore, the vows defini tely need to be looked into 
before they are taken, so you should come to understand it there. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C How to train having taken them 
1 What the foundation of the trainings is 
2 How the trainings are contained in it 
3 The stages by which to train in them 
The third one has three [points] : what the foundation of the trainings is, how the trainings 
are contained in it, and the stages by which to train in them. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-1 What the foundation of the trainings consists in  
First: Although there are infinite clear divisi ons, when grouped toge ther by type, all the 
trainings of bodhisattvas are contained in the six perfections. Therefore, the six perfections 
constitute the great synopsis that condenses all the essential points of the bodhisattva path.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2 How the trainings are contained in it 
A The actual meaning: the definite number [of the perfections] 
B In addition to tha t, their definite order 
The second one has two [points]: The actual  meaning: the definite number [of the 
perfections] and, in addition to that, their definite order. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A The actual meaning: the definite number [of the perfections] 
1 The transition 
2 The actual [topic] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A1 The transition 
First: {207} The Bhagavan made a mere synops is of the six perfections, whereas the holy 
regent of the jinas, [Maitreya,] elucidated, as they had been intended, the essential points of 
the reasons for it having been made in that way and produced certainty. The way in which 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 175  their number is definite is those very poin ts. Therefore, when you find certainty which 
captivates the mind with respect to this, hold th e instructions regarding the practice of the six 
perfections as supreme. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2 The actual [topic] 
A The number is definite from the point of view of high status  
B The number is definite from the point of view of the accomplishment of the two welfares  
C The number is definite from the point of view of the complete accomplishment of the welfare 
of others in all aspects 
D The number is definite from the point of view of comprising the entire Mahayana 
E The number is definite from the point of view of [how the perfections] influence all aspects 
of the path or method 
F The number is definite from the point of view of the three trainings 
With regard to the perfections, the number is de finite as six from the point of view of high 
status, the accomplishment of the two welfares , the complete accompli shment of the welfare 
of others in all aspects, comprising the entire  Mahayana, how they influence all aspects of the 
path or method, and the three trainings. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2A The number is definite from the point of view of high status  
1 How the support has to be excellent in all its parts 
First: In order to bring the vast conduct of  a bodhisattva to completion, you need many 
consecutive lives and, in order to progress along the path in each of th em, you need a support 
that is complete in all its features. Without it , even though you practice with something that 
merely has all the parts like our current support , there will be no progress whatsoever. Thus, a 
support that is excellent in all its parts is necessary. 
2 Having identified the excellent support, how the corresponding causes  are achieved 
Furthermore, you need [a support] that is endowe d with the four excellences: (1) resources at 
your disposal, (2) a body with which to practi ce, (3) companions with whom to practice, (4) 
the ends of actions that are to be undertaken . However, due merely to their being excellent, 
many become conditions for the mental afflicti o n s .  T h u s  i t  i s  a l s o  n e c e s s a r y  n o t  t o  c o m e  
under the power of the mental afflictions. But th at too is not enough, yo u need to distinguish 
well the observed objects that are to be unmi stakenly engaged in and turned away from with 
respect to the essential point of what is to be  adopted and what is to be discarded, because 
otherwise {208} the excellences will destroy th emselves, just like bamboo and plantain trees 
are destroyed by bearing fruit and like a mule is  destroyed by pregnancy. If you  have wisdom, 
you will understand that [the excellences] are th e results of previous good actions and you will 
strive in the causes again so that they will increase. If you do not have wisdom, you will use 
the results you previously accumulated and th ereby exhaust them. Si nce you do not newly 
i n c r e a s e  t h e m ,  t h e y  w i l l  b e c o m e  t h e  b e g i n n i n g   o f  s u f f e r i n g  i n  f u t u r e  l i v e s .  H e n c e ,   t h e  
emergence of those six [perfections] in other  lives does not come about without a cause nor 
from a cause that does not correspond  with them  and the perfections are definite as six like 
their corresponding sequential causes. 
3 Relating what has been said above with the scriptures and distinguishing high status of the time of 
the path and the result in detail 
The resources and so forth on the occasion of the path are temporary high status. Consumate 
high status – an excellent body and so forth - exist on the buddha ground. It is also stated like 
that in  Ornament for the Sutras (Sutralamkara) : 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 176  Excellent body and resources and excellent 
Retinue and undertakings are high status, And never to be controlled by mental afflictions, 
And being unmistaken regarding activities.
108  [48] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2B The number is definite from the point of view of the accomplishment of 
the two welfares  
1 The transition 
2 The actual [topic] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2B-1 The transition 
Second: When you train in bodhisattva conduc t with such a support, the activities of 
bodhisattvas are exhausted in the two: those th at accomplish one’s own welfare and those that 
accomplish others’ welfare. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2B-2 The actual [topic] 
A How the first three of the six perfections bring about the welfare of others 
Specifically, in order to  accomplish the welfare of others it is necessary, first of all, to benefit 
them by means of material gift s. Since generosity accompanied by harm to sentient beings 
does not lead to anything, it is itself of great profit to others to excellently turn away from 
actions that harm others together  with their bases. Therefore, ethics is necessary. [However,] 
given that pure ethics cannot come about if you retaliate once or twice due to being unable to 
bear being harmed, {209} the patience that in th e face of harm thinks “It does not matter” is 
necessary to consummate [ethics]. Since you do  not retaliate out of [patience], others are 
prevented from accumulating  a lot of negativiti es and, inspired by that, apply themselves to 
virtue, whereby it is of great benefit to others. 
B What brings about one’s own welfare 
If your own welfare is to attain the happiness of complete liberation through the power of 
wisdom, you should furthermore place you mind  in equipoise by means of concentration 
through not allowing you mind to become distracted. Thus, is necessary to achieve a 
serviceability of body that abides on th e observed object as long as you wish.  
C How joyous effort  becomes the foundation  of both welfares 
Since this does not arise in the lazy, you need to  undertake it with the joyous effort that does 
not relent day and night. Therefore, this is their foundation. 
D A scriptural passage to that effect 
Therefore, in order to  bring about the two welf ares, the perfections are definite in being six. 
[In the Ornament of the Sutras (Sutra-alamkara )] it says: 
 
Great effort for the welfare of beings 
Is made by giving, not harming, and patience. Abiding and freeing with their foundation Enact your own welfare in all aspects.    [49] 
E One does not establish others in complete liberation in dependence on wisdom  
This does not comprise others’ welfare in all aspects  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 177  F Identifying the respective  sequence of the last two [perfections] 
In the statement “abiding  and freeing,” the mind abiding on the observed object is said to be 
the work of meditative concentration and liberati on from cyclic existenc e to be the work of 
wisdom. When these two are distinguished, calm abiding will not be mistaken to be special 
insight.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2C The number is definite from the point of view of the complete 
accomplishment of the welfare of others in all aspects 
Third: At the outset eliminate the poverty of  sentient beings through material things. 
Following that, do not harm any sentient bein g whatsoever. Not only that, be patient when 
harmed. Due to being his companion, act  with undaunted  joyous effort. Rely on 
concentration and, with magical emanations and so forth, prov ide whatever he wishes for. 
W h e n  h e  h a s  b e c o m e  a  s u i t a b l e  v e s s e l ,  g i v e  h i m  g o o d  e x p l a n a t i o n s  i n  d e p e n d e n c e  o n  
wisdom, so that by severing his doubt, {210} you liberate him.  Because of this, the perfections 
are definite as six. 
 
Without poverty and without harming at all 
Patient with harm, unthwarted by what’s to be done Being joyful, and speaking well - for these reasons The welfare of others is one’s own welfare.   [50] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2D The number is definite from the point of view of comprising the entire 
Mahayana 
Fourth: Thus, you will not be attached to reso urces you have acquired and you will not view 
resources that you have not acquired with intere st. When that is present, you will be able to 
guard the trainings, so that you will take up et hical discipline and respect it. Due to patience 
towards sufferings that arise in dependence on sentient beings and non-sentient phenomena, 
you will not be discouraged. Due to applying yourself to and deligh ting in any kind of 
virtuous activities, you will not be discouraged by them. You will cultivate the non-conceptual 
yoga of calm abiding and spec ial insight. These six encomp asses the entire Mahayana of 
migrating beings. They are sequentially realized  through the six perfec tions and nothing more 
is necessary. Therefore: 
 
No joy in resources, highest respect Not being discouraged regarding the two, And the non-conceptual yoga; In this all Mahayana is exhausted.    [51] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2E  The number is definite from the point of view of [how the perfections] 
influence all aspects of the path or  of method:  how the six perfections become the method for 
accomplishing any of the individual aspects 
1 The way in which generosity is contained in the path 
Fifth: The path or the method  of non-attachment to resources that are objects you have 
already acquired is  generosity because by fa miliarizing yourself with giving them away you 
become free from attachment to them. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 178  2 The way in which ethical discipline acts as a method 
The method for restraining the distraction of exer ting oneself for the sake of acquiring objects 
hat have not yet been acquired is  ethical disc ipline because in one with the vows of a fully 
ordained monk all the distractions of ends of actions do not arise. 
3 The way in which patience acts as a method 
The method for not giving up sentient beings is  patience because one is not depressed by all 
the sufferings of being harmed.   
4 How joyous effort is a method and what for 
{211} The method for increasing virtue is joyo us effort because through undertaking [virtue] 
with joyous effort it increases. 
5 The way in which the last two [perfections] acts as method 
The method for completely purifying the obscurat ions is the last two perfections because the 
afflictions are completely purified by concen tration and the obscurations to objects of 
knowledge are completely purified by wisdom.  
That is why the perfection s are definite as six. 
 
The path of non-attachment to objects 
Is gained and that of restraining distractions. 
Not giving up sentient beings, increasing, and  
Purging obscurations are further paths.   [52] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2F The number is definite from the point of view of the three trainings 
1 How [the perfections] are contained in the three higher trainings 
Sixth: The essence of training in ethical discipli ne is ethical discipline. Moreover, since it is 
adopted when there is the genero sity that is indifferent to resources, [generosity] is the 
collection of ethical discipline. Also [when ethi cal discipline] is adopted, it is protected by 
patience that does not return  abuse for abuse, so [patience] is in its sphere. Concentration is 
training of the mind whereas wisdom is training in wisdom. Joyous effort is included in all three trainings. Therefore, the pe rfections are definite as six. 
 
From the perspective of the three trainings, The Jina perfectly explained  The six perfections: first the three Two are aspects of the last two, And one is included in all three.    [53] 
2 Hence the importance of understanding that the number is definite 
Hence the importance of understanding that the number is definite 
Thus, by means of whatever excellent support one thoroughly completes whatever welfare, 
one’s own or others’, through however many ty pes of methods one possesses after abiding in 
whichever vehicle - that which thoroughly completes and synthesizes the support that 
accomplishes any of the trainings, the welfar e, the Mahayana, the me thod, and the trainings 
should be understood to be those very six perf ections. {212}You should think about this until 
you reach certainty  that they are the sum of al l the essential points of  bodhisattva practices. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 179  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2B In addition to that, their order is definite 
The second one three [points]: the order in which they arise, the order in  terms of the inferior 
and superior, and the order in terms of  coarser and subtler. 
1 The order in which they arise 
First: If there is  generosity that is indifferent  to and unattached to resources, you will adopt  
ethical discipline. If you possess ethical discipline that refrains from faulty behaviour, you will 
be patient with regard to harm. If you have pa tience that does not despair with respect to 
hardships, you will be able to act with joyous effort, since adverse circumstances will be few. 
As you act with joyous effort day and night, th e concentration that is able to establish the 
mind in virtue will arise. When the mind is in meditative equipoise, you will have the 
realisation of reality just as it is.  
2 The order in terms of inferior and superior 
Second: The previous ones are inferior , and the latter ones are superior.  
3 The order in terms of coarser and subtler 
Third: Since the previous ones are easier to en gage in and do  than the latter ones, they are 
coarser. Since the latter ones are more difficult to engage in and do than the previous, they 
are more subtle. In Ornament of the Sutras  is says: 
 The later grow due to the previous ones Since they abide as inferior and superior Since they are coarser and more subtle They were taught in stages [like that].    [54] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3 The stages by which one trains in them 
A How to train in the conduct in general 
B How to train in the last two perfections in particular 
The third one  has two [points]: How to train in the co nduct in general and how to train in 
the last two perfections in particular. The first has two [points]. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A  How to train in the conduct in general 
1 Extensive explanation of how to train in the conduct in general 
2 Summarized meaning 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1 Extensive explanation of how to train in the conduct in general 
A Training in the perfections that ripen one’s own buddha qualities 
B Training in the four ways of gathering that ripen others’ mental continua  
The first one has two [points]: Training in the perfections that ri pen one’s own buddha 
qualities and training in the four ways of ga thering that ripen others’ mental continua.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A Training in the perfections that ripen one’s own buddha qualities 
1 How to train in generosity 
2 How to train in ethical discipline 
3 How to train in patience 
4 How to train in joyous effort 
5 How to train in concentration 
6 How to train in wisdom 
The first one has six [points]: how you train in generosity, ethical discipline, patience, joyous 
effort, concentration, and wisdom. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 180  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1 How to train in generosity 
A The essence of generosity 
B Subdivisions 
C How to generate [generosity] in one’s mental continuum 
The first one has three points: the essence of generosity, the divisions and how to generate 
[generosity] in one’s mental continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1A  The essence of generosity 
1 Essence 
First: [The essence of generosity] is a virtuous  intention to give and the actions of body and 
mind motivated by it. {213} It is the intentio n at the time the body and speech engage in 
generosity. 
2 The measure of  its perfection  
The completion of the perfection  of generosity does not depend on having eliminated the 
poverty of migrating beings by giving away to ot hers substance to be given. Rather it becomes 
the perfection of generosity through destroying  the grasping of miserliness and thoroughly 
completing familiarisation with the mind of giving  to others, along with the results of giving.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1B  Subdivisions 
1 Subdivisions from the point of view of individual support 
2 Subdivisions of the ess ence of generosity itself 
The second one has two [points]: Subdivisions from  the point of view  of individual supports, 
and subdivisions of the essence  of generosity itself. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1B1 Subdivisions from th e point of view  of individual supports 
A Explanation of the individual generosities for the individual supports  
In the Bodhisattva Pratimoksha  it is taught that generosity of material things is generally 
practiced by lay bodhisattvas, whereas ordained bo dhisattvas should practice the generosity of 
the Dharma rather than gene rosity of material gifts. 
B The acquisition and giving of material things that interrupts the studies and so forth of the ordained is 
prohibited, whereas if they are obtained without harm [to their studies] they should given 
Moreover, in the Compendium of Trainings , intending that which interrupts studies and so 
forth, it says that the giving of gifts by the ordained having worked for the sake of material 
things is prohibited. However, if they obtain them in plenty  through the power of previous 
merit without harm to their virtuous activities, they should give material things. Sharawa also 
said: “To you I will not talk about the advant ages  of giving, but I will talk about the 
disadvantages of grasping.” This is the talk of  one who was not pleased that the ordained were 
giving away gifts, having toiled to obtain and accumulate wealth and often damaged their 
ethical discipline.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1B2 Subdivisions of the essence of generosity itself 
A  The generosity of the Dharma 
 Second: The generosity of the Dharma is to unmistakenly teach the holy  Dharma, to teach 
properly, without misdeeds, the worldly aims of ac tions such as crafts an d so forth,  and to 
make [others] engage in upholding  the basis of the trainings. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 181  B The generosity of fearlessness 
The generosity of fearlessness is {214} to thorou ghly protect [others] from the fear of humans 
such as  kings, bandits, and so forth, from the fear of non-humans such as  lions, tigers, and 
so forth, and fear of the elements such as water, fire, and so forth. 
C The generosity of material things 
The generosity of material things is to give away material things to others. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C How to generate [generosity] in one’s mental continuum. 
1 How in order to complete the perfection of generosity the mind giving away all one’s possessions 
rather than the mere destruction of miserliness is necessary 2 Thinking about the advantages of giving and the disadvantages of not giving  
3 The actual method for engaging in [generosity] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C1 How in order to complete the perfection of generosity the mind giving away all 
one’s possessions rather than the mere destruction of miserliness is necessary 
Third: By merely destroying all miserlines s without exception regarding one’s body and 
possessions, it does not become the perfection of generosity because, since miserliness is 
included in the factor of attachment, the two [types of] arhats of the Hinayana have also 
abandoned it without exception along with all it s seeds. Hence it is necessary not only to 
eliminate the obstacle to  giving, the holding on  to all [things] that is miserliness, but to 
generate the thought, from th e bottom of one’s heart, to give away all one’s possessions to 
others. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C2 Thinking about the advantages of giving and the disadvantages of not giving  
For that,  it is necessary to meditate both on  the disadvantages of thoroughly holding on [to 
things] and on the advantages of giving. The former are as taught in the Moon Lamp [Sutra ]: 
 
Since the body is not pure, and the life force fluctuates  like water 
gushing down a steep mountain, an d both body and life force are 
controlled by karma thus lacking an independent self, you should see 
them to be false, like a dream or  a mirage, and cease attachment to 
them. If you do not reverse it, yo u will come under the control of 
attachment, accumulate great faul ty conduct and go to the bad 
migrations.  
The second [, the advantages of giving,] are as taught in the Compendium of Trainings : 
 In this way my body and mind 
Pass away in every instant. 
If I attain, with th is body that is  
Tainted and impermanent, Permanent, untainted enlightenment, Is it not obtained for free?     [55] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3  The actual method for engaging in  [generosity] 
A [How to actually generate generosity] 
B [Importance of the inner attitude] 
C Generosity through mere thought 
D How to make [generosity] into [a practice] with  [the] six perfections 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3A [How to actually generate generosity] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 182  1 The actual [topic] 
{215} Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour  [describes] how [generosity] should actually be 
generated: 
 
My body as well as my resources, 
All my virtues of the three times, I give away without sense of loss to Accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings.  [56]  
Like that, taking the three - body, resources, an d roots of virtue – as the observed object, you 
should familiarize yourself again and again wi th the thought of givi ng them away to all 
sentient beings. 
2 How beginners should act 
Since presently this wish is immature and of li ttle strength, you should not actually give away 
your flesh and so forth, even though you have  already given away your body in thought to 
sentient beings. Nonetheless, since the Compendium of Trainings  says that if we do not train in 
the thought to give away our body and life, due to  lack of familiarity with it we will not be 
able to do so in the future either, it is necessary to train in the thought from now on. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3B [Importance of the inner attitude] 
1 The disadvantages of forgetting about the welfare of others 
Thus, if you use food, clothing, etc. that you have  given away  to sentient beings with a sincere 
thought, if, having forgotten th e thought “I will use these fo r the welfare of others,” you 
instead use them out of craving for your own welf are, it is an afflicted downfall. If, without 
this craving, you forget the discrimination that observes all sentient beings or have attachment 
for the sake of another sentient being, it is a non-afflicted downfall. If you use for your own 
sake those [things] dedicated  to others, having discriminated them to be others’ substance, it 
becomes taking what has not been given (stealing)  and, if it is something valuable, it becomes 
a defeat  of the pratimoksha [vow]. [On the othe r hand,] if you use them thinking: “I will use 
the resources of  this sentient being for his own welfare,” there is no fault. This is mentioned  
in the Compendium of Trainings . 
2 Clearing up doubt concerning a defeat 
 The intention is as follows. Th e way in which it becomes a defeat is that, having dedicated 
something with a sincere thought to a migrat ing being who is a human being and when he 
too, having cognized it, holds it to be his,  you take it for your own welfare with the 
discrimination that it belongs to someone else, if it is of some value, th en the factors for it to 
become a defeat  are present.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3C  Generosity that is mere thought 
{216} Apart from that, the Bodhisattva Levels  teaches that the training in the aspiration to 
emanate immeasurable varieties of phenomena, ob jects to be offered, and to give them to 
sentient beings with clear faith from the botto m of one’s heart increases immeasurable merit 
with little effort and is the genero sity of the wise bodhisattva.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3D  How to make [generosity] possess  the six perfections 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 183  If at the time of training in the perfection of generosity, it is made to possess the  six 
perfections the training that occurs will be ve ry powerful. The six are made complete in that, 
in addition, at that time there is: the ethical di scipline that restrains the mental attention of 
shravakas and solitary realizers; the aspiration fo r and patience with respect to the qualities of 
a knower of all aspects and patience when abused  by others; the joyous effort that generates 
the aspiration for the sake of increasing them  more and more; the concentration that is a 
single-pointed mind not mixed with the Hinayan a that dedicates that virtue to complete 
enlightenment; and the wisdom that understa nds the object given, the giving, and the 
recipient to be like illusions. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2 Training in ethical discipline 
A The essence of ethical discipline 
B Its subdivisions 
C How to generate [ethical discipline] in one’s mental continuum 
The second one has three [points]: The essence of  ethical discipline, its subdivisions, and how 
to generate  [ethical discipli ne] in one’s mental continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2A The essence of ethical discipline 
1 The essence of ethical discipline 
F i r s t :  E t h i c a l  d i s c i p l i n e  i s   t h e  m i n d   o f  abandonment that is a mind turned away from 
harming others, together with its base. This is mainly from the point of view of the ethical 
discipline of restraint. 
2 The essence of the perfection 
Through thoroughly completing the familiarity with this mind  more and more, it becomes 
the perfection of ethical discipline becomes a perf ection. It is not that you externally establish 
all sentient beings in freedom from  all harm without exception. In Engaging in Bodhisattva 
Behaviour  it says: 
 
Achieving the mind of abandonment 
Is taught as perfection of ethical discipline.   [56] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2B The subdivisions 
1 The ethical discipline of restraint 
2 [The ethical discipline of accumulating virtuous qualities] 
3 [The ethical discipline of working for the welfare of beings] 
The second one has three points.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2B1 The ethical discipline of restraint 
A General presentation 
The ethical discipline restraint,  {217} from the point of view of being together with the  
motivations, is the ten abandonments that ab andon the ten non-virtue s. From the point of 
view of its essence  it is the seven abandonm ents of body and speech that abandon the seven 
non-virtues.  
B Precise features 
The intention of the Bodhisattva Levels  in stating that the ethical di scipline of restraint in the 
mental continuum of a bodhisattva is the seven ty pes of [vows of] individual liberation is [as 
follows]. When those possessing the vows of in dividual liberation possess the bodhisattva 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 184  vows, the ethical discipline of restraint is the ac tual vows of individual liberation of the class 
of the laity or the ordained and the abandonm ents and vows that are common to them in 
their continua. When those who are unsuitable  as a support for the vows of individual 
liberation possess bodhisattva vows, the ethical discipline of restraint is the abandonments 
and restraints of abandoning either the natu ral misdeeds or formulated misdeeds that are 
common to individual liberation. Although the vows of individual liberation in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva are vows of ethical di scipline in the continuum of a bodhisattva, 
they are not the actual bodhisattva vows, wh ereas the rest have a common basis with the 
bodhisattva vows. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2B2 [The ethical discipline of gathering virtuous qualities] 
 
The ethical discipline of gathering virtuous qual ities  is to observe virtues such as the six 
perfections and to generate th at which has not yet been gene rated in one’s own continuum, 
to not degenerate that which has been ar isen, and to increase it more and more. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2B3 [The ethical discipline of bringing about the welfare of sentient 
beings] 
The ethical discipline of bringing  about the welfare of sentient beings is to  accomplish the 
welfare of sentient beings in this and future  lives through ethical di scipline without  any 
misdeeds as appropriate.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2C How to generate [ethical discipline] in one’s mental continuum 
1 [Preconditions and advantages of ethical discipline] 
2 [The essence of ethical discipline] 3 [Making [ethical discipline] into [a prac tice] [combined] with the six perfections] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2C1 [Preconditions and advantages of ethical discipline] 
A What is the cause of pure ethical discipline and what it depends on 
Third: Pure ethical discipline depends on putting into practice  what should be engaged in 
and what should be avoided according to the fo rmulated [rules of the Buddha]. Furthermore, 
it follows the strong and firm wish to guard [e thical discipline]. For it to arise, you must 
meditate for a long time meditating on the disadvantages of not guarding it and the 
advantages of guarding it. {218} This was ex plained above in the context of intermediate 
beings.  
B Considering  advantages and disadvantages of upholding and not upholding [ethical discipline]. 
and in the Summary of Perfections  it also says: 
 
You cannot [attain] your own with degenerate discipline, So where would you get the power for others’ welfare? Therefore, it is inappropriate, if you strive well For others’ welfare, to loosen  your respect for it.  [57] 
And: 
This ethical discipline, special path of attainment, Accomplish it like the naturally compassionate It is of the excellent nature of pure wisdom Free from errors, it’s called “the best of ornaments”. Pleasant fragrance guarded in all three realms, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 185  It is a balm not at odds with ordination 
Those who get ethically discip lined, though conforming 
Outwardly, will become nobles among men.   [58] 
 
This says that in dependence on [ethical disc ipline], one’s mental continuum improves more 
and more; one becomes similar in training to  the great beings fi lled who are naturall 
compassionate; one attains the pure wisdom that has abandoned all the seeds of faulty 
conduct; although other ornaments do not beauti fy the very young or very old, the ornament 
of ethical discipline is the supreme ornament  for whoever possesses it, whether young, old or 
in between, since it pleases everyone; although other fine fragrances only spread in the 
direction of the wind carries them and do not spread in other directions whereby they are 
one-sided, the scent  of ethical discipline’s fa me spreads in all in all directions; although 
ointments such as sandalwood, which cool the torment of heat , contradict ordination, the 
ointment that protects from th e torment of the heat of the a fflictions is not add odds with 
ordination but rather accords with it; and even though you only seem to have  the signs of 
ordination, to be endowed with the jewel of ethi cal discipline is more excellent than anything 
else.  
 Again from the same text:  
Without expressing a word, without much effort, Resources and services needed for practice gather. {219} The world bows low without intimidation; Power and wealth are gained without effort and work. Although his lineage may be unworthy of mention, Although he did not help or benefit them All beings, including the ones he never knew Bow to a being possessed of ethical discipline.  Even the dust made auspicious by his feet, Is raised to the head for its sanctity. Gods and humans prostrate so it touches their heads, take and carry it everywhere.          [ 5 9 ]   
Thus, one should think about [the advantages] as expressed [here].  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2C2 [The essence of ethical discipline] 
A Instruction on the importance of how  you train in ethical discipline 
Although there are three [kinds] of ethical disc ipline, the ethical discipline of restraint – 
practicing the engagements and avoidances for th e formulated rules of individual liberation 
or what is common to them - is itself importan t for bodhisattvas in the beginning. If it is 
guarded, the others will also be guarded, wher eas if they are not guarded, the others will not 
be guarded either. Therefore the Compendium s ays that if the ethical discipline of vows 
degenerates, all the vows are degenerated. Wh oever thinks that the vows of individual 
liberation are for hearers  and rejects their formulated rules of engagement and avoidance 
saying: “I must train in the other bodhisattva trainings” has thus not grasped the essential 
point of the training in ethical discipline of bo dhisattvas, for it is taught many times that the 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 186  ethical discipline of restraint is the basis and source  of the two subsequent ethical 
discinplines. 
B The main ethical discipline of restraint: how the of restraining from natural misdeeds should be 
[generated] again and again 
The main ethical discipline of restraint is to  abandon the natural misdeeds. The synthesized 
essential points of the great disadvantages of the natural [misdeeds] is to abandon the ten 
non-virtues. Therefore, the mind of restrain t that does not even move toward  their 
motivations  should be [generated ] again and again. {220} From the Summary of Perfections : 
 
The path to the bliss of high status and liberation. 
Is not to degenerate from the ten paths of action 
Abiding in them you will have the special result, 
The thought that thinks to benefit migrating beings.  “Completely restraining one’s sp eech, one’s body, one’s mind, 
In brief, is ethical discipline” said the Jina. They are the basis comprising all ethical discipline, Without exception, so thorou ghly train in them.  [60] 
C Summarised presentation 
In brief, to take this as the basis and train agai n and again in the mind of restraint that trains 
in the trainings of whatever ethical discipline  one has promised is the practice of ethical 
discipline.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2C Making [ethical discipline] possess the six perfections 
Ethical discipline is made to possess the six perf ections like this. Abiding in ethical discipline 
oneself and establishing others in it is genero sity. The remaining [perfections] are as before. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3 Training in patience 
A The essence of patience 
B Its subdivisions 
C How to generate [patience] in one’s continuum  
The third one has three [points]: the essence of patience, its subdivision, and how to generate 
[patience] in one’s continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3A The essence of patience 
1 [Explanation of] the essence of patience 
First: The essence of patience is the mind abid ing at ease without being overwhelmed by harm 
and the occurrence of suffering and very abiding dedication to  the Dharma. Its opposite are 
hatred, disheartenment, lack of ap preciation, and lack of desire. 
2 The completion of the perfection of patience 
The completion of the perfection of patience is the mere complete familiarity of the mind 
with ceasing one’s own belligerence and so forth; it does not depend on freeing [other] 
sentient beings from their unruliness.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3B Its subdivisions 
Second: There is the patience of not paying heed  to harm by others, the patience of accepting 
the suffering that arises in one’s own contin uum, and the patience of a mind certain with 
respect to the Dharma.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 187  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C How to generate [patience] in one’s continuum 
1 Meditating on the advantages of patience and the disadvantages of impatience 
2 The actual way of cultivating  patience 
It is necessary to meditate on the advantages of patience and the disadvantages of impatience. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1 Meditating on the advantages of patience and the disadvantages of impatience 
A The advantages of patience 
B The disadvantages of impatience 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1A The advantages of patience 
First: You think about the fact that later on you will have {221} few enemies, you will not be 
separated from close ones, you will experience much happiness and mental happiness, you 
will die without regret, and you will be reborn among the gods after this body has perished. 
The Summary of Perfections  says:  
 
For those with the mind that ne glects the welfare of others 
It was taught “The best of ways is patience.” 
That which is good and excellent in the world 
Patience protects it from the faults of anger. 
It is the best of or naments of the strong, 
Peak of power for those embracing austerities, Torrent of water for prairie fires of malice, All harm is removed by patience in this life and others, Against the armour of patience of excellent beings 
The arrows of words of unruly beings are wrecked. 
Thereby they turn into excellent flowers of praise And become attractive garlands of fame.   [61] 
And: 
Patience is also the workshop where forms are accomplished With beautiful qualities and adorned with the signs.. [62]  
You should meditate on the advantages as taug ht until a strong and stable  certainty is 
reached with regard to them. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B The disadvantages of impatience 
1 Invisible disadvantages  
2 Visible disadvantages along with supplementary remarks 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1 Invisible disadvantages  
A How anger destroys the roots of virtue 
B How they are destroyed even if the object of anger is an ordained person who is not a bodhisattva C Clearing up doubts concerning their destruction 
D Details regarding the way in which they are destroyed 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1A How anger destroys the roots of virtue 
1 The actual [topic] 
Second: In Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour  it says: 
 
What has been gathered in thousand eons 
Like giving and offerings to the sugatas All those good deeds, whatever there is, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 188  An instant of anger destroys it all.    [63] 
 
This appears to be set forth in accordance with Aryasura’s work [ Summary of Perfections ]. The 
Sutra of the Displays of Manjushri  says that it destroys the virtue accumulated over a hundred 
eons. 
2 Differences in the object [of anger] 
With respect to the object, some explain that it must be a bodhis attva, whereas some assert it 
to be a general object. The former accords with the [Madhyamaka]avatara : 
 
Therefore, through anger to ward a child of the jinas 
The virtue from giving and discipline one has {222} amassed 
Over a hundred eons is crushed in an instant.  [64] 
3 The support 
As regards the support of the one in whom anger arises, since even if a bodhisattva gets angry 
it destroys his roots of virtue, there is no need to mention that this is the case for  one who is 
not a bodhisattva who gets an gry at a bodhisattva. The  Commentary on the Guide [to the Middle 
Way] says that whether it is certain that the ob ject is a bodhisattva or not and whether the 
reasons for the anger, seeing faults, are true o r  n o t ,  t h e  d e s t r u c t i o n  o f  v i r t u e  l i k e  t h a t  
explained above is similar.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1B How they are destroyed even if the object of anger is an ordained person 
who is not a bodhisattva 
In general, anger does not need to be directed at a bodhisattva in order for it to destroy roots 
of virtue. A passage quoted from the Sarvastivadin scriptures in the Compendium of Trainings  
says: 
 
If a monk prostrates to a stupa of ha ir and nail [relics] with extended  
limbs and a pure mind, he will come to enjoy as many kingdoms of 
wheel-turning monarchs  as there ar e particles of dust in the ground 
covered up to the golden foundation.”  And: “Even those roots of virtue 
will be exhausted if he injures or disparages one of pure conduct. 
Therefore, if one should not even be   angry at a charred log, how much 
less so at a body endowed with consciousness!  [65] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C Clearing up doubts concerning this destruction 
1 Doubts raised by  scholars 
2 Their refutation 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C1 Doubts raised by  scholars 
Some scholars say that the meaning of ”the destru ction of roots of virtue” is that the potential 
of earlier virtue to bring about its effect quickl y is destroyed and the emergence of their effect 
is delayed, so that the effects of  hatred and so forth emerge firs t. However, if they meet with 
[suitable] conditions afterward, it is not that th eir respective effects do not emerge, for if there 
is no mundane path whatsoever that can elimin ate the seeds of the objects of abandonment, 
it is impossible for seeds to be elim inated by the mental afflictions.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C2 Their refutation 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 189  A The seed is uncertain  
B How ‘destruction’ does not just mean postponement  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C2A The seed is uncertain  
1 How the result does not arise due to conditions, even though the  seed is present 
The reason that it is not certai n is because even though ordinary  beings purify  non-virtues by 
means of the four opponent powers, their seeds are not abandoned, but still, although the  
conditions are met later on, {223} it is impossi ble for the fully ripened effects to emerge.  
2 Even if the seed is not removed, its effect does not emerge once tolerance is  achieved 
Once the peak  and tolerance [lev els] of the path of preparation have been attained, although 
wrong views and the seeds of non- virtues that become the causes  of the bad migrations have 
not been abandoned, wrong views and rebirths in the bad migrations are impossible even if 
[these seeds] meet with their  conditions. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C2B How ‘‘destruction’’ does not just mean postponement  
1 The absurd consequence 
According to the statement “What’ s heaviest in cyclic existence with karma...”, a virtuous or 
non-virtuous karma, by ripening sooner, ca n temporarily block the occasion for another 
karma to ripen. However, it cannot be posited nor has it been taught that virtuous or non-virtuous karma is destroyed by merely that. Th e temporary postponement of its ripening is 
not suitable to be the meaning of the destruction of roots of virtue, as otherwise it would have 
been necessary to teach that all strong non-virtues destroy the roots of virtue.  
2 Analogy for how the effect does not emerge although the seed has not been abandoned 
That is why master Bhavaviveka said with respect to this:  
“As explained above, neither non-virtues that ha ve been purified by the four powers  nor 
roots of virtue that have been destroyed by wrong views or harmful intent  can bring about 
their effects even if later on they meet with the conditions; just like a seed that has been 
damaged  does not give rise to a sprout  even though the conditions are met. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1D Details regarding the way in which they are destroyed 
1 How the fully ripened effect and the effect corresponding to the cause may or may not be destroyed 
Moreover, even though negativities that have been accumulated are cleared away by purifying 
them with the four powers as described above, th is does not contradict th e fact that they delay 
the arising  of higher paths. Th us, in some [people] the results of giving gifts and guarding 
ethical discipline, such as the arising of ex cellent resources and bodies are destroyed. 
However, due to [the result] corresponding to the cause, familiarisatio n with giving and the 
mind of abandonment, the roots of virtue of generosity and ethical discipline arise again 
easily and cannot be destroyed . In others the ar ising of [the result] corresponding to the cause 
as a continuum of similar type, inner ethical di scipline and so forth, is destroyed, but the 
arising of an  excellent body, resources, and so  forth {224} is not destroyed. Again others, as 
described previously, will have some realizations of the path  that enab le them to completely 
traverse it within one eon, unless they allo w anger to arise towards a bodhisattva who has 
obtained his prophecy. If one thought of anger arises, their traversal of the path within one 
eon will be delayed, although th e path that exists in their co ntinua is not relinquished. In 
brief, what I am mean is that, with respect to  purifying non-virtues, not all its efficacy is 
necessarily purified and likewise, with respect to the destruction of virtue, not all its efficacy is 
necessarily destroyed.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 190  2 How that depends exclusively on the scriptures 
Nonetheless, this is an important point and since it seems necessary to analyze it in 
dependence on  the Buddha’s scriptures and th e reasonings based on them, you should look 
at the Buddha’s excellent teachings and analyze it.  
3 How the two great actions operate  
Thus, the invisible disadvantages [of anger] are th at it projects very unpleasant fully ripened 
results  and prevents the emergence of other very pleasant fully ripened results. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-2  Visible disadvantages along with  supplementary remarks 
A How peace of mind and so forth are not experienced 
The visible disadvantages [of anger] are taught in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour : you do not 
experience mental peace and certainty, previous  joy and happiness are ruined and later on are 
not achieved, sleep does not come and the mind does not abide at ease, if your hatred is 
strong, even those you nurtured with kindness forget about the  kindness and kill you, even 
friends and relatives abandon you out of irritati on,  and even those you gather with gifts do 
not stay, and so forth.  
B How to gain certainty regarding the faults 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour  says: 
 
There’s no negativity equal to hatred 
There’s no austerity equal to patience. Therefore patience should be practiced Earnestly, in various ways.     [66]  
Thus we should consider the advantages and disadvantages and make an effort to develop 
patience in many ways. 
C Supplementary remarks 
It is to be understood from the Compendium of Trainings  that hatred is  not ascertained to be 
the only faulty conduct that collects both grav e fully-ripened results and the destruction of 
roots of virtue. {225} There is the wrong view that  deprecates [the law of cause and effect], the 
abandonment of the holy Dharma, contempt, ge neration of pride, and so forth towards 
bodhisattvas, gurus, and so forth. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C2 The actual way of cultivating  patience 
A How to cultivate the patience that is unconcerned with respect to harm 
B How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering 
C How to cultivate the patience devoted to a mind of certainty regarding the Dharma 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C2A How to cultivate the patience that is unconcerned with respect to harm 
How to cultivate the patience that is  unconcerned with respect to harm. 
1 [The offender’s lack of freedom]  
If you investigate whether or not someone who harmed you was free not to harm you, [you 
will find that] he did not harm you while be ing autonomous, for he generated the wish to 
harm you out of causes and conditions such as the seeds of mental afflictions from previous 
familiarity and improper mental attention, and due to them, he engage d in activities that 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 191  inflicted harm and thereby produced suffering in  others. Thus, under the power of other, the 
mental afflictions, he had become as if their slave.  
2 The inappropriateness of anger given that [the harmer] has no freedom 
Even if someone, driven by something else  without freedom, has harmed you, anger is 
inappropriate. For instance, if someone, having been possessed by an evil spirit, were to come 
under its power and wish to harm you who wo uld benefit him by freeing him from it and 
strike you, you would not get even the slightes t bit angry at him but instead think: “He is 
acting like this now because the evil spirit has deprived him of his freedom.” You would put 
effort into doing whatever you could to free him from the evil spirit. A bodhisattva should 
also act like that. 
3 The scriptural source for this 
From the Four Hundred Verses : 
 
Just as a doctor who is not upset 
By one who is gripped by a spirit and angry The Muni sees the mental afflictions not the person afflicted by them.    [67]  
Master Chandrakirti also says: 
“This is no fault of sentient beings It is a fault of the mental afflictions.” The wise who have analysed this in detail Are not upset by sentient beings.    [68] 
4 How anger is inappropriate if  you think of your own karma 
Moreover, the experience of suffering produced by the harmer {226} is the experience of the 
result of a negative action accumulated by onesel f in the past and, in dependence on that, the 
action will be exhausted. If you cultivate pati ence with respect to it,  you will not newly 
accumulate causes for experiencing suffering late r on, whereas, if you get angry, you will have 
to experience suffering that is even greater that that.  
5 Consequently, the appropriateness of being patient as if it were a medical examination 
It is therefore quite appropriate to be patient with minor suffering in order to avert greater 
suffering, such as being patient with bloodletti ng, burning, and so forth as a method for 
curing a grave illness. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C2B How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering 
How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering. 
1 Countering the categorical aversion for suffering that arises 
If the suffering that has arisen is curable, aversi on is unnecessary. If it is not suitable to be 
cured, again, dislike for it is of no benefit,  therefore useless and even disadvantageous, for 
even tiny suffering becomes extremely hard to bear if one is very in tolerant, whereas even 
great suffering is bearable if one is less intolerant.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 192  2 Considering the good qualities of suffering itself 
The way to mentally take the side of suffering is to train the mind again and again thinking 
“If there was no such suffering, the wish to defi nitely emerge from cyclic existence would not 
arise, therefore it has the good quality of exho rting the mind to liberation; it has the good 
quality of eliminating my arrogance since, wh en I am beset with suffering, my conceited 
superiority is destroyed; it has the good qual ity of [making] me shun negativities, because 
when I experience an intense  feeling of suffering , since it arises from non-virtue, if I do not 
want this result, I must turn away from its ca use; it has the good qu ality of [making] me 
delight in accomplishing virtue since, due to being tormented by suffering, I want happiness 
and for that purpose I must accomplish virtue; and, having understood that compassion is 
generated for the beings of cyclic existence as  I think “In proportion to my own experience, 
others also suffer”, this suffering is the abode of what I want.”  
3 It is not difficult if you fam iliarize yourself in small steps 
Here again [it says]:  
 
Something that does not {227} get easier 
If you get used to it, does not exist. 
Therefore endure even major harm  By getting used to minor harm.     [-]  
Thus, if you put on the armour of the intention to accept suffering and increase suffering in small steps, your strength to accept suffering will grow. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C2C How to cultivate the patience that is devoted to a mind of certainty regarding the 
Dharma 
The way to cultivate the patience that is devote d to a mind of certainty regarding the Dharma 
is to train in devotion to the following with out bias: the objects of clear faith, the Three 
Jewels; the objects to be actualized,  the two [t ypes of] selflessness; th e object of desire, the 
great power of the buddhas and bodhisattvas; th e objects to be adopted and discarded, the 
causes that are excellent conduct and faulty co nduct as well as their results; the object of 
meditation, enlightenment, the meaning to be achieved; the method for attaining that, the 
path of the bodhisattva training s; the objects of hearing and th inking, the holy Dharma of the 
twelve scriptural branches, and so forth. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4 Training in joyous effort 
A The essence of joyous effort 
B Its subdivisions 
C How to generate [joyous effort] in one’s continuum 
The fourth one has three [points]: the essence of  joyous effort, its subdivision, and how to 
generate it in one’s continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4A The essence of joyous effort 
First: In the Bodhisattva Levels  [joyous effort] is explained as a mind that delights strongly for 
the sake of gathering virtue and working for th e welfare of sentient beings, as well as the 
actions of the three doors motivated by it. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4B Its subdivisions 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 193  1 Armour-like joyous effort 
Second: From the three, the firs t is armour-like joyous effort. When bodhisattvas undertake 
joyous effort, prior to applying themselves, they  put on the armour of the thought that first 
delights the mind. That is, they delight, even if they are to attain buddhahood after abiding 
only in hell for 100,000 times 10 million roun ds of three immeasurable eons in order to 
eliminate the suffering of one single being. Al so with respect to making effort to attain 
complete enlightenment, they wear the armour of  the throught “If I will not give up engaging 
in joyous effort for that length of time, what need is there to mention [that I will not give it 
up] if the time is less than that  and if the suffering is less?” 
2 [The] joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharmas 
[The] joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharma s is to apply oneself to them for the sake of 
accomplishing the six perfections. 
3 The joyous effort of working for the welfare of sentient beings 
The joyous effort of working for the welfare of sentient beings {228} is similar to the above. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C How to generate [joyous effort] in one’s continuum 
1 Advantages to undertaking  joyous effort 
2 The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort 
3 How to actually generate joyous effort 
4 How joyous effort is made to possess the six perfections 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C1 Advantages to undertaking  joyous effort 
Third: how to generate [joyous effort] in on e’s continuum: the advantages to undertaking  
joyous effort. 
A You will not be overcome by distraction and so forth and will achieve the two attainments 
From the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras  : 
 
Joyous effort is best among virtue’s collection. 
Thus, relying on it, one attains that which follows. Through joyous effort, immediatel y, best source of happiness, 
Including mundane and supramundane attainments. Through joyous effort, one gains worldly wealth one desires. Through joyous effort, on e becomes totally pure. 
Through joyous effort, one is liberated  Passing beyond the transitory collection. Through joyous effort, you become a buddha, [As you reach] supreme enlightenment.   [69] 
B How those endowed with joyous effort not only develop these qualities but also non-human like them 
In the Summary of Perfections  it also says: 
 
For him who has great joyous effort and does not dismay, 
there’s nothing that can’t be attained, that can’t be accomplished.            [ 7 0 ]  
And: 
Also all non-humans like to benefit him. He achieves all manners of samadhi. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 194  He passes days and nights having results. 
He won’t decline because of his mass of good qualities, Through aims more noble than concerns of man 
He flourishes like an utpala flower.    [71] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C2 The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort 
The disadvantages of not undertaking jo yous effort are described in the [ Sutra ] Requested by 
Sagaramati : 
 
For the lazy, enlightenment is very far and far in all ways. In the lazy, 
generosity through wisdom do not ex ist. For the lazy, the welfare of 
others does not exist.      [72] 
 
And the  Close Placement of Mindfulness  also says: 
 
The one foundation of mental afflictions Is lazyness, no matter in whom. He who has that one, laziness, Does not have qualities whatsoever.   [73]  
You should think like this. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3 How to actually generate joyous effort  
A Adverse conditions for joyous effort 
B Relying on favourable conditions  for joyous effort 
C How body and mind become serviceable that way  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A Adverse conditions for joyous effort 
1 Seeing that one is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas but not engaging in them 
2 The discouragement that thinks: “How could I ever accomplish anything like that?” 
There are two adverse circumstances for joyous e ffort: seeing that one is able to accomplish 
virtuous dharmas but not engaging in them an d the discouragement that thinks: “How could 
I ever accomplish anything like that?” 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A-1 Seeing that one is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas but not engaging in them 
{229} The first has two [points]: 
A The actual [topic] 
One postpones things till  later thinking “The re is still  time”, and if not that, one is 
overcome by attachment to bad activities. 
B The antidotes 
The antidote to the first, [the laziness of procra stination,] is to meditate  on  the three: this 
body that you have obtained quickly disinteg rates, after death you will fall into the bad 
migrations, and it will be difficult to find su ch a good support once again. This was already 
taught before. 
[The following considerations are] the  antidote  to attachment [to bad activities]: the holy 
Dharma is the cause for the arising of boundless joy in this and future lives, meaningless idle 
chatter and the distractions of excitement and so  forth degenerate the great aim in this life, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 195  and seeing it to be the source that generates ma nifold suffering in future lives, it should be 
stopped. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A-2 The second adverse condition: the discouragement thinking: “How 
could I ever accomplish anything like that?” 
A The actual [topic] 
B The antidotes 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A-2A The actual [topic] 
Discouragement is also of three [types]: 
 - The discouragement that thinks: “Since th e objects to be attained, the good qualities 
of a buddha, are limitless, I cannot attain them.”  
 - The discouragement that thinks: “Since the method, giving away my arms, legs, and 
the like is immensely difficult, I cannot accomplish it.”  - The discouragement that thinks: “[As for]  the place, since it is necessary to take 
infinite rebirths in cyclic existence, at that time I will be harmed by the sufferings of cyclic 
existence.” 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A-2B The antidotes 
[Accordingly,] there are also three antidotes. 
1 The antidote to the discouragement with respect to the object  to be attained 
The antidote to the first one  is the though t : “Even the buddhas did not already attain 
elevated paths right from the star t. Rather they were like me and became buddhas by treading 
increasingly higher paths. Si nce the Bhagavan also said th at even those who are greatly 
inferior to me will attain buddhahood, why shou ld I not attain it too unless I do not make 
the effort?” 
2 The antidote to discouragement with respect to the method 
The antidote to the second is to think: “As long as the discriminati on arises that it is difficult 
to give away my body and so forth, I will not give  them away. However, when it is time to give 
them away, it will not be difficult but will  be like giving away cooked vegetables.” 
3 The antidote to discouragement with respect the place of accomplishment  
The antidote to the third {230} is to st op discouragement, thinking: “Due to the 
abandonment of negativities by a bodhisattva, th eir results, suffering feelings, do not arise. 
Due to his stable realization that cyclic existe nce lacks inherent existence, like an illusion, 
there is no suffering in his mind. If he thrives due to physical and mental happiness even if he remains in cyclic existence, despair is senseless.” 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3 Relying on favourable conditions  for joyous effort 
Relying on favourable conditions  fo r joyous effort has four [types]: 
1 The power of devotion 
The power of devotion is to medi tates on causes and effects, so  as to aspire to discard and 
adopt. 
2 The power of stability 
The power of stability is not to engage in anyt hing haphazardly without investigating it, and, 
having investigated it and engaged in it, to consummate it. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 196  3 The power of joy  
The power of joy makes one’s undertaking of joyo us effort uninterrupted and insatiable, like 
a child engaged in play. 
4 The power of suspension 
The power of suspension is to  rest, when yo ur body and mind are worn out due to your 
joyous effort.  As soon as you have recovered, you start again. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3C How the body and mind become serviceable through [joyous effort]  
I n  t h i s  w a y ,  i n  d e p e n d e n c e  o n  s t o p p i n g  a d verse conditions and relying on favourable 
conditions, you should undertake joyous effort until body and mind become light, like a piece 
of cotton carried by the wind. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C4 How joyous effort is made to possess the six perfections 
When you train in joyous effort, you should do it with the six perfections. Abiding in joyous 
effort yourself and establishing others in it is  the generosity of joyous effort. The remaining 
are as before. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-5 Training in concentration 
A The essence of concentration 
B Its subdivisions   
C How to generate [concentration]  in one’s continuum 
The fifth one has three [points]: the essence of concentration, its subdivisions  and how to 
develop it  in one’s continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-5A The essence of concentration 
First: The essence of concentrat ion is a mind that abides single-pointedly on any suitable 
virtues object. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-5B Its subdivisions  
By way of essence, there are the two: mundane and supramundane. By way of class, there are 
the three: the class of calm abiding, the class of special insight, and the class that is a union of 
the two. When it is divided by way of function , there is the concentrat ion that causes one to 
abide in physical and mental happiness in th is life, the concentration that manifestly 
accomplishes good qualities, and the concentratio n that brings about the welfare of sentient  
beings. 
1 Meditative concentration that causes you to abi de in physical and mental happiness in this life 
The first of these is {2 31} the concentration that generates ph ysical and mental pliancy, if one 
places the mind in meditative equipoise. 
2 The concentration that manifestly accomplishes good qualities 
The second one is a concentration that accomp lishes the good qualities shared with the 
shravakas, such as the clairvoyances, co mplete liberations, totalities, masteries109. 
3 Concentration that brings about the welfare of sentient beings 
The third one is the concentration that accomplish es the welfares in eleven ways by means of 
concentration. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-5C How to generate [concentration]  in one’s continuum 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 197  The thoughts regarding the advantages of cu ltivating meditative concentration and the 
disadvantages of not cultivating it will be explained in the chapter on calm abiding. 
 The generosity of training in concentration possessing the six perfections is to abide in 
concentration oneself and establish others  in it. The remaining are as before. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6 Training in wisdom 
A The essence of wisdom 
B Its subdivisions  
C How to generate [wisdom] in one’s continuum 
The sixth one has three [points]: the essence of wisdom, its subdivisions, and how to generate 
[wisdom] in one’s continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6A The essence of wisdom 
First: In general wisdom is that which very th oroughly distinguishes th e qualities in the thing 
that is being investigated. Here it is the wisdom th at is skilled in the five sciences and so forth. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6B  Its divisions  
Second: There are three: the wisdom real izing the ultimate, the wisdom realizing 
conventionalities,  and the wisdom real izing the welfare of sentient beings.  
1 Wisdom realizing the ultimate 
The first one is [the wisdom] comprehending  th e suchness that is selflessness by means of  a 
meaning generality  and [the wisdom] compre hending the suchness that is selflessness by 
means of direct perceiver. 
2 Wisdom realizing conventionalities  
The second one is the wisdom that is skilled in  the five sciences. 
3 Wisdom realizing the welfare of sentient beings 
The third one consists in knowing how to a ccomplish, without misdeeds, the welfare of 
sentient beings in this and future lives.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C How to generate [wisdom] in one’s continuum 
1 The advantages of generating wisdom 
2 The disadvantages of not generating wisdom 
The third one is to think about the advantages of generating wisdom and the disadvantages of 
not generating it. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C1 The advantages of generating wisdom 
A It is the root of all good qualities 
First: In the Hundred Verses on Wisdom  it says: 
 
The root of all good qualities, 
The seen and the unseen, is wisdom. Thus, for the sake of accomplishing both, Wisdom should be fully embraced.   [74] 
B The fact that a bodhisattva is not perturbed by good or bad conditions and that he is skilled in 
methods such as generosity and so forth depends on wisdom 
Although a bodhisattva gives his own flesh to so meone who asks him for it, {232} like taking 
[a leaf] from a medicinal plant it is not do ne with the conceptualizations of pride, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 198  discouragement, and so forth, but it is done fr om a direct perception of suchness by means of 
wisdom. By means of the wisdom seeing the pr oblems of existence and peace, he practices 
ethical discipline for the welfare of others, th ereby purifying ethical discipline. By means of 
the wisdom realizing the faults of impatience and the good qualities of patience, his mind is 
subdued, due to which he is not captivated  by  heretical practices and suffering. By means of 
wisdom, he understands the excellent basis that  is undertaking joyous effort and exerts 
himself in that, whereby there is great progress on the path. By means of the wisdom relying 
on a process of reasoning, he achieves the supreme joy and happiness of the concentration 
abiding on  the meaning of such ness. In this way, the comple te purity of the first five 
perfections, generosity, and so forth, depends on wisdom. 
C One possessing  wisdom can accomplish without contradiction even those actions that appear 
contradictory to common beings 
Those endowed with wisdom can accomplish two qualities that appear to be opposed without 
any contradiction. If a bodhisattva were to become a wheel-turning monarch  with power  
over the four continents, that he  does not come under the power of desirable objects is due to 
the force of the minister of wisdom. Likewise, al though his love that s ees sentient beings as 
attractive is very strong, it is not even slig htly mixed with attachment. Although his intense 
compassion cannot bear the suffering of sentient beings lasts for a long time, he is without the 
laziness that is oppressed by sorrow and does not delight in virtue. Although he possesses 
immeasurable joy, he is without the restlessne ss that distracts the mind from the observed 
object. Although he possesses great and contin uous equanimity, he does not neglect the 
welfare of migrating beings even for an instant.  All this is done out of wisdom because the 
obstacles to accomplishing them with corresp onding strength are ceased by wisdom.  
D That the two truths are considered non-contradictory is also due to wisdom 
The Praise of the Praiseworthy  says: 
  
Without discarding reality, 
{233} It also accords with conventionalities.  [75] 
  
Thus, there is no need to discard reality, the gr eat certainty having been gained that not even 
a mere atom of the reference object whose signs are being apprehended is established. That is 
non-contradictory and compatible with the fact that conventionalities are found through deep 
certainty that individual results arise from their individual inner and outer causes and 
conditions. Although they are extremely co ntradictory for those without the power of 
awareness, for those possessing wisdom they are non-contradictory and compatible.  
E That permissions and prohibitions are not contradictory also depends on wisdom 
In the same text it also says: 
 
Regarding permissions and prohibitions 
Some of your words are definite as one. 
Whereas others are not as definite, Still there is no contradiction between them.  [76]  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 199  Thus, there are many different prohibitions and permissions in the higher and lower vehicles 
and in sutra and tantra. For those seeking the in tention of the infinite scriptures regarding 
the two being practiced by a single person, to those who do not have the strength of 
intelligence they are contradict ory, whereas to the skilled they  are not. This too is due to 
wisdom.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2 The disadvantages of not generating wisdom 
A The faults of being separated from wisdom 
B Causes of wisdom and so forth 
C How [wisdom] comes to po ssess the six perfections 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2A The faults of being separated from wisdom: the fault that, if wisdom is lacking, 
generosity and so forth will not become completely pure 
If they are separated from wisdom, the five - gene rosity and so forth - and the view will not be  
pure. In the Summary of the Perfections  it says: 
 
In those who strive for result s in the absence of  wisdom, 
The nature of giving  is not completely pure. 
To give others welfare is taught as “the best of gifts”. The rest are applications for increasing wealth.  [77] 
And: 
If wisdom’s light does not dispel the darkness, One will not come to possess pure ethical discipline. Mostly, that discipline, due to the absence of wisdom, Will be disturbed by afflictions through flawed understanding.           [ 7 8 ]  
And: 
Good qualities of patience won’t stay in one’s mind 
If it’s disturbed by faults of distorted wisdom. 
Nor will fame in a king without good qualities, Who hates to examine the excellent and the faulty. [79] 
And: 
{234} It is extolled as sublime for the discerning. There is nothing more su btle and deep than it. 
Completely unobscured by the fault of attachment, The mind won’t take the straight path without wisdom. [80] 
And: 
Those holding that wisdom’s way does not involve effort, 
Their view will not become completely pure.   [81]  
Fame in a king implies that for a king who la cks good qualities fame may occur one time, but 
it will degenerate and pass.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2B Causes of wisdom 
1 The importance of hearing as a cause of wisdom 
Therefore, it is necessary to generate wisdom, and its cause, listening to the completely pure 
scriptures in accordance with one’s mental capacity, is [set out] in the Summary of Perfections : 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 200  Having heard little, blind, unable to meditate; 
What understanding would some one without that reflect? 
Therefore, make effort in hearing.  From that cause there’s thinking, 
While through meditation spacious wisdom arises.  [82] 
2 The wisdom that abandons the two obscurations also depends on hearing 
Venerable Maitreya also wrote [in his Uttaratantra ]: 
 
Conceptualisation of the three spheres 
We posit as knowledge obscurations [/obstructions to knowledge]  
Conceptualisation like miserliness 
As afflictive obscurations. 
Apart from wisdom there’s no cause 
For abandoning them; therefore Wisdom is supreme, so, likewise Hearing  for its sake is supreme.    [83] 
 
And in the  Compendium of Trainings  it says: 
 
You should be patient. You should seek hearing. 
Then you should dwell in a forest.  
Make effort at equipoise meditation   [84] 
3 The imprints of training in the instructions 
The holy beings of the past also said: First yo u should gather together the Dharma of hearing 
that exists in your mind. Then again and agai n you should think about it, appraise it, and 
investigate it.  It does not help  to make oneself forget the Dhar ma and train in simply holding 
the mind once. However much one meditates, to the same extent one’s knowledge of the 
Dharma should grow. {235} Once  this certainty has grown firm  through such considerations, 
you will not listen to the words of negative  companions who say: “All virtuous and non-
virtuous thoughts are to be abandoned because they are conception.” Rather, you will think: 
“The Dharma does not teach anything like that and my virtuous spiritual friend also does not 
assert that”, and you will not listen to him. La cking that, someone who has a little bit of faith 
but no wisdom will burst into tears when he sees a crying face and will burst into laughter 
when he sees someone who is laughing. Considerin g true whatever people say, like a river he 
will go wherever he is lead. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2C How [wisdom] is made to possess the six perfections 
When you train in wisdom, you should do it with  the six perfections. Abiding in [the state of] 
wisdom oneself and establishishing others in it  is the generosity of wisdom. The remaining 
ones  are as above. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1B Training in the four means of gathering [disciples] that ripen others’ 
continua  
1  The essence of the four means of gathering [disciples]  
Second:  Generosity is the same as explained in  the context of the perf ection [of generosity]. 
 Pleasant speech is to teach the six perfections to one’s trainees. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 201   [To cause] Meaningful conduct is to make the disciples engage in the meanings that 
were taught or to make them engage in assumi ng them correctly. To act in accordance with 
the meaning is to abide in accordance with wh atever meaning one has applied others to and 
train in accordance with it. 
 In Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras it says: 
 
By that same giving, teaching it, making others 
Assume it, and by oneself engaging in it, There is asserted to be pleasant speech, Meaningful conduct, and accord with the meaning. [85] 
2 The reason for the presentation of four means of gathering 
Why have the means of gathering [disciples] defini te as four? In order to gather a retinue for 
the purpose of applying them to virtue, they firs t need to be joyful. In this regard give them 
gifts of material things and attend to their bodi es. Once they are joyful in that way, in order 
for them to engage in the path they first need  to know how to do th at. For that, moreover, 
explain the Dharma to them by speaking plea santly, so that they give up unknowing and 
entertaining doubts, and make them engage in apprehending the meaning unmistakenly. 
When they understandt that, you make them engage in accomplishing virtue through 
meaningful conduct. {236} Furthermore if you do  not accomplish that yourself but explain to 
others “You should engage like this. You should  avoid like that”, they will say “Why do you 
tell others to accomplish it, if you do not a ccomplish it yourself? You too still need to be 
corrected by others” and they will not listen to what is to be accomplished. However, if you accomplish that yourself, they wi ll also think: “Since he himself abides in the virtue in which 
he guides me, If I accomplish it, there will definitely be benefit and happiness for me” and 
they will newly engage [in the path]. Also, th ose who have already engaged [in the path] will 
not turn  away from it and will grow firm. Ther efor, you should act  in accordance with the 
meaning. 
3 The need to rely on the four means of gathering disciples 
Since the buddhas taught that they accomplish al l the welfare of all disciples and that they  
are a good method, those who gather a retinue should rely on them. [ Ornament of the Great 
Vehicle Sutras , XVI, 77] says:  
 
Those who gather a retinue  Should perfectly rely in this way Accomplishing all the welfare of everyone 
They are extolled as a good method.    [86] 
 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A2 Their summarised meaning 
The great Jowo [Atisha] taught how to accomp lish them during meditative equipoise and 
subsequent attainment:  
 
As for bodhisattva conduct 
It is the vast six perfections and so forth. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 202  The yogi arising from meditative equipoise 
Steadfastly achieves the path of accumulation.  [87]  
In this way, the beginner bodhisattva, who ha s taken the vows of the jina’s children and 
abides on the path of accumulation never pa sses beyond  the six perfections, whether in 
meditative equipoise or subsequent attainment . Therefore, some of the six perfections are 
sustained  in meditative equipoise and some in  subsequent attainment. Some of the essence 
of concentration, calm abiding, and the essence of the perfection of wi sdom, special insight, 
are cultivated in meditative equipoise. The first three perfections and  some parts of 
concentration and wisdom are sustained  in  su bsequent attainment. Joyous effort comes in 
both meditative equipoise and subsequent atta inment. One class of patience – some minds 
ascertaining the profound Dharma - also occu r during meditative equipoise. The great Jowo 
[Atisha] said: 
 
Whenever you rise from meditative equipoise {237} familiarize yourself with the view of all phenomena As equal to the eight illustrations of illusions. Subsequently, purify conceptions and give Priority to the training in method. At the time of meditative equipoise, Balance calm abiding wi th special insight; 
Familiarize yourself with this continuously.   [88] 
 If you hear about such wonderful conduct, so ha rd to do due to the mind being untrained, it 
produces anguish in the mind. Although even bo dhisattvas are unable to practice it  right 
from the start, if you come to understand it and acquaint yourself with it down to it being an 
object to be aspired for, later on you will come to naturally engage in it without depending on effort. That is why familiarization is important,  for, if you see it as impossible to actually 
engage in them and discard even familiarizing yourself with training in them, you will be 
extremely far from the completely pure paths. In Praise of [the Buddha’s ] Boundless Qualities  it 
says:  
What causes harm in worldly bein gs if they only hear about it, 
What even you have never practiced over an extended time, Those practices will become natural through familiarization over time. Henceforth it is hard without familiar ization to increase good qualities. 
         [ 8 9 ]   
Therefore, it is inevitable for those who have  taken bodhisattva vows to  train in the conduct 
and also those who have not taken  the vow by  means of a ritual should put effort into 
developing the wish to train in it. Then, if they take the vows ha ving increased the strength of 
their delight in the training, [the vows] will be very stable. Therefore, they should put effort 
into this.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Great Scope up to Calm Abiding 
 
 203  This concludes the explanation of training in th e aspiring mind through the stages of the path 
of great beings and the stages of the path of tr aining in the conduct of the jina’s children in 
general. 
 
 
 204   
 
CHAPTER V 
CALM ABIDING AND SPECIAL INSIGHT 
Explanation of how to train in the last two perfections in particular 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B Explanation how to train in the last two perfections in particular 
1 Transition 
2 The actual explanation 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B1 Transition 
The training in the last two pe rfections {238} consists in meth ods for cultivating calm abiding 
and special insight, as the pe rfections of concentration and wisdom comprise those two in 
order. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2 The actual explanation 
A The benefits of cultivating calm abiding and special insight 
B Demonstration that these two comprise all the meditative stabilisations 
C The entities of calm abiding and special insight 
D The reason why both need to be cultivated 
E How their order is definite 
F How to train in each of them 
This has six points: the benefits of deve loping calm abiding and special insight, 
demonstration that these two contain all meditative  stabilisations, the entities of calm abiding 
and special insight, the reason why both need to  be cultivated, how their order is definite, and 
how to train in each of them. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2A The benefits of cultivating calm abiding and special insight 
1 Demonstration that all the positive qualities of the Mahayana and Hinayana are results of calm 
abiding and special insight  
The first point from among five regarding the first one: In [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought  it 
is set out that all the mundane and supramun dane positive qualities of the Mahayana and 
Hinayana are results of calm abiding and special insight. 
2 Setting out a doubt about that 
“Aren’t calm abiding and special in sight positive qualities of mind110 that are gained from 
meditation? How can all those positive qualities be admissible as results of those two?” 
3 The response to it 
Actual calm abiding and special insight are ind eed positive qualities of mind gained from 
meditation, as explained [below]. Therefore, no t all the positive qualit ies of the Mahayana and 
Hinayana are results of the two. Nevertheless, [all ] the meditative stabilisations starting from 
the single-pointed [placement of the] mind on a virtuous object are included in the category 
of calm abiding, and [all] the virtuous wisdom minds individually analyzing the meaning of 
the mode or multiplicity are included in the ca tegory of special insigh t. It is with that 
intended meaning that all the positive qualities of  the three vehicles are said to be results of 
calm abiding and special insight. He nce, there is no contradiction.  
4 How the benefits of abandoning what is to be abandoned are tied to a scriptural passage from [the 
Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought   
In [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought  it also says: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding and Special Insight - Introduction 
 
 205   
Having familiarized themselves 
With calm abiding and special insight 
Beings will gain complete liberation 
From the bondage of bad states111 and signs.   [1] 
 
This is what is meant: “Bad states” are latencie s left in the mind, capable of generating more 
and more wrong consciousnesses; and “signs” [are  that which] reviv[es] the latencies for the 
adherence to wrong objects that arises time and again. {239} The Instructions on the Perfection of 
Wisdom  explain that the former is abandoned th rough special insight and the latter through 
calm abiding. Those are the benefits of what is designated as calm abiding and special insight. 
5    The [benefits] pointed out in this manner should also be understand as the benefits of something 
else 
However, even if they are not designated as ca lm abiding and special insight, the meaning is 
the same. Statements on the benefits of concen tration and wisdom should be understood as 
the benefits of these two.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2B Demonstration that these two comprise all the meditative stabilisations 
Second: In [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought  it says that all the limitless meditative 
stabilisations proclaimed in the Mahayana  and the Hinayana are nevertheless subsumed 
under calm abiding and special insight. Theref ore, since those who strive for meditative 
stabilisation cannot explore all their limitless manifest divisions, th ey should thoroughly 
explore how to sustain calm abiding and sp ecial insight, the common bond of all the 
meditative stabilisations.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2C The entity of calm abiding and special insight 
1 The entity of calm abiding 
2 Explaining the entity special insight 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2C-1 The entity of calm abiding 
A Stating a source 
Third: With respect to the entity of calm abiding it says in [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought :  
 
Dwelling alone in solitude, he places [the mind] inwards and attends to 
the same phenomena, just as he ha s thoroughly reflected on them.He 
attends to them by means of the mi nd that attends [directed] inwards 
continuously and attentively.  The [sta tes] he thus enters and abides in 
where physical and mental pliancy arise are called calm abiding.        [ 2 ]  
B The meaning of this [statement] 
The meaning of this is that if the mind, ha ving attended to it continuously without 
distraction, stays on the object of meditation by itself  so that the bliss of physical and 
mental pliancy arises, that meditative stabilis ation has become calm abiding. This will arise 
from merely keeping the mind inwards undistracted and it does not depend on internalizing the suchness of things.  
 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2C-2 Explaining the entity of special insight 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding and Special Insight - Introduction 
 
 206  1 Stating a source 
With respect to the entity of special insight it says in the same sutra: 
Having achieved that physical and that mental pliancy, he abides in 
them, gives up the aspects of the mind and {240} devotes himself to the 
individual investigation of the images  within, the objects of meditative 
stabilisation, the same phenomena he  likewise reflected on. Thus, with 
regard to the images that are the objects of meditative stabilisation, any 
thorough differentiation of the mean ing of those objects of knowledge, 
[any] exceedingly thorough discrimination, full investigation, full analysis, tolerance, acceptance, classification, viewing, and 
conceptualization is called special insi ght. In that way the bodhisattva is 
skilled in special insight.”.   [3] 
2 Elucidating the meaning of the sutra [passage] 
Here, “thorough differentiatio n” is a differentiation of the varieties and “exceedingly 
thorough differentiation” is a differentiation  of the mode. “Investigation” is a coarse 
investigation and “analysis” is a subtle analysis.  
3 How statements from other sutras and commentaries accord with [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought   
 The Jewel Cloud [Sutra] says: 
Calm abiding is one-pointed mind, Special insight is investigation
112.    [4] 
 
Venerable Maitreya also says: 
 
Restraint to the concepts of  dharmas should also be 
Known as path of calm abiding, 
Full analysis of their meanings 
 As the path of specia l insight.     [5] 
And: 
Depending on a perfect abiding, 
What [serves] to place the mind on mind and 
What [serves to] differentiate dharmas Are calm abiding and special insight.    [6]  
In dependence on thorough meditative stabilisatio n, placement of the mind is said to be calm 
abiding and the wisdom differentiating dharmas ex ceedingly thoroughly [is said to be] special 
insight. In the Bodhisattva Levels  it is set out just like that and in the middle part of Stages of 
Meditation  it also says: 
  
The abidance within the mind itself
113 in which distraction towards 
external objects has calmed down and [the mind] continuously engages 
in its internal object with joy and pliancy, is called ‘calm abiding’. That 
which thoroughly analyses suchness at the time of abiding in that very 
[state of] calm abiding is special insight.    [7] 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding and Special Insight - Introduction 
 
 207  The Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  explain this in the same way. 
4 Therefore, calm abiding and special insight are not distinguished by way of the observed object  
{241} So, according to the Bodhisattva Levels  and the Instructions on the Pe rfection of Wisdom , 
each of them, calm abiding and special insight,  can have both the mode  and the varieties as 
their objects of observation. Therefore, calm abiding and special insight are not differentiated 
by way of their objects. There is calm abidin g realizing emptiness and there is also special 
insight that does not realize emptiness. In fact, it is because the rush to external objects has 
calmed down and the mind is abiding on inte rnal objects that something is called calm 
abiding, and it is because of a special, that is distinctive, insight that something is called 
special insight.  
5 How it is inappropriate to distinguish calm abiding and special insight based on whether or not the 
clarity of the consciousness is intense  
The assertion by some that the mind abidin g nonconceptually without an intense clarity 
factor is calm abiding whereas with an inte nse clarity factor it is special insight is 
inappropriate because it contradicts everything explained earlier and because this distinction 
is merely a distinction between meditative stabil isation with or without laxity. This is also 
because, to be sure, every meditative stabilisatio n of calm abiding also needs to be purified of 
laxity, and in every meditative stabilisation that is free from laxity the clarity factor of the 
mind will surely come on.  
6 The need to differentiate between the realization of emptiness and blissful, lucid non-conceptuality 
 For that reason, it is necessary to identify whether or not [a mind] is a meditative stabilisation 
that observes emptiness, a wisd om [consciousness], on the basis of whether or not that mind 
realizes either of the two selflessnesses. In fa ct, there are countless nonconceptual meditative 
stabilisations of bliss and clarity where the mind is not directed at the suchness114 of an object. 
Since direct perception establishes that the mi nd can thus be held in a nonconceptual state 
even though the view realizing the mode of be ing has not been found, there is nothing to 
contradict even in the slightest the generation of nonconceptual meditative stabilisations that 
do not understand emptiness. If the mind is he ld this way for a long time, through the power 
of the mind being held, a workability of vital energies will arise. {242} Since it is natural for joy 
and bliss to arise in body and mind when that has arisen, it is not contradictory for bliss to 
arise. Once that has arisen, through the power of one’s vivid sensation of joy and bliss, the 
factor of clarity is gained115. Therefore, you cannot posit that every blissful, clear, 
nonconceptual meditative stabilisations realize suchness. Consequently, since bliss, clarity and 
nonconceptuality are also gained in meditative  stabilisations realizing emptiness, and since 
there are also many meditative stabilisations wh ere the mind is not dire cted at emptiness and 
where bliss, clarity and nonconceptuality occur, it  is necessary to distinguish between the two.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2D The reason for developing both [calm abiding and special insight] 
1 Illustration 
Fourth: Why is it not enough to develop either  calm abiding or special insight? Why is it 
necessary to cultivate both?   To illustrate this: when you light a butter la mp at night in order to look at murals, if 
the butter lamp is both very bright and unmoved by wind, you will see the painted figures very 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding and Special Insight - Introduction 
 
 208  clearly. However, if the butter lamp is not bright or if – even though bright – it is stirred by 
the wind, you will not see the forms clearly.  
2 Explaining the meaning  
Likewise, with respect to viewing the profou nd meaning, if you have both the wisdom 
unmistakenly ascertaining the meaning of such ness and the imperturbability of a mind that 
stays on its object at will, you will see suchness clearly. However, if you do not have the 
wisdom realizing the mode of being, despite yo ur non-conceptual meditative stabilisation in 
which your mind remains unscattered, you will not be able to realize the mode of being, 
however much you familiarize yourself with medi tative stabilisation. On the other hand, if 
you have the view that understands selflessness but lack the firm meditative stabilisation in 
which the mind remains one-pointed, you will no t be able to clearly realize the meaning of 
the mode of being. Therefore, both calm  abiding and special insight are necessary. 
3 Relating this to scriptural passages 
In the middle part of Stages of Meditation  it says:  
 
Due to special insight alone, divorced  from calm abiding, a yogi’s mind 
is distracted to [other] objects, and {243} like a butter lamp in the wind, 
it will not become stable. This being so, the light of wisdom will not 
shine forth very bright, which is why you should rely on both alike.
        [ 8 ]  
And: 
Through the power of calm abiding, the mind will not be moved by the 
winds of conceptualization – like a butter lamp placed [somewhere 
where] there is no wind. Through special insight, you abandon the 
snares of all inferior views so that others do not affect you [anymore]. It 
is like it has been set forth in the Moon Lamp Sutra :  
‘Through the power of calm abiding you’ll be immovable, 
By means of special insight you become like a mountain.’ [9]  
If you investigate with wisdom that is thus conjoined with th e meditative equipoise of calm 
abiding, without unevenness through laxity an d excitement of the mind, you will know the 
meaning of reality. With that  intention it says in the Complete Summary of Teachings : 
 
When the mind is in meditative equipoi se, you will know reality as it is.
         [ 1 0 ]  
From the first part of  Stages of Meditation : 
 
Since the mind is mobile like wate r, there is no abiding without the 
basis of calm abiding. With a mind that is not in meditative equipoise, reality cannot be known as it is. The Bhagavat also spoke: ‘Reality is 
fully known as it is by a mind in meditative equipoise.’  [11]  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding and Special Insight - Introduction 
 
 209  4 How the power to do anything wholesome is great once calm abiding has been accomplished 
When you attain calm abiding, not only ha ve you stopped the fault of your wisdom 
[consciousness] wandering off while correctly inve stigating selflessness. The fault of distraction 
to [other] objects is averted fo r all analytical meditations that  you do with the wisdom of 
individual investigation - on impermanence, ac tions and their effects, the disadvantages of 
cyclic existence, love, compassion, training in bodhicitta, and so forth. Then, since you engage 
in each individual object, whatever it may be , without being distracted to something else, 
anything virtuous you do is ve ry powerful. As long as you ha ve not obtained calm abiding, 
through predominant distraction to other objects, {244} any virtuous  practice is weak. It is as 
it says in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour :  
 
A person whose mind is being distracted 
Is in the fangs of mental afflictions.    [12] 
And: 
The seer taught that recitation, 
Ascetic practices, and so forth - 
Even if engaged in long - are Pointless with a distracted mind.    [13]  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E How to determine their order 
1 The actual [order] 
2 Explanations on how calm abiding is a precondition for special insight 3 Presentation of an objection and the response to it 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-1 The actual [order] 
Fifth: In Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] Behaviour  it says: 
 
Having understood that special insight 
Conjoined with calm abiding destroys the afflictions, 
First seek calm abiding […]     [14]  
Thus you first accomplish calm abiding and th en cultivate special insight based on it.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-2 [Explanations on how calm abiding is a precondition for special insight] 
A Setting out an objection 
B The response to it 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-2A  Setting out an objection:  
If you meditate observing emptiness from the beginning, since you have reality as the observed object of calm 
abiding, calm abiding and special insight will arise simultaneously so that the two do not need to be sequential  
With regard to that you may wonder: In Stages of Meditation , part one, “its object of 
observation is not specified” there is said to  be no specification concerning the observed 
object of calm abiding, and as explained prev iously, there is calm abiding with either a 
phenomenon or reality as its object. Therefore, it  should indeed be all right to understand the 
meaning of selflessness and then generate simu ltaneously both calm abiding, a meditation 
observing that [understanding] whereby the mind  does not get distracted, and special insight 
observing emptiness. Why first seek calm ab iding and then cultivate special insight? 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-2B  The response to it 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding and Special Insight - Introduction 
 
 210  1 For an understanding of emptiness and a mere experience of mental transformation to arise, prior 
calm abiding is not necessary  
Now, this is the manner in which calm abiding precedes special insight: For an understanding 
of the view realizing selflessness to arise, prio r calm abiding is not necessary, because the view 
is also seen arising in the absence of ca l m  a b i d i n g .  F o r  a n  e x p e r i e n c e  o f  m e n t a l  
transformation concerning that view to arise,  prior calm abiding is not necessary either, 
because even without calm abiding, there is noth ing contradictory in an experience of mental 
transformation arising through familiarization wi th repeated analysis by means of individual 
investigation. {245} F o r ,  i f  i t  w e r e  c o n t r a d i c t o r y ,  i t  w o u l d  a b s u r d l y  f o l l o w  f r o m  t h e  s a m e  
reason that the experience of mental transfor mation arising with respect to impermanence, 
the faults of cyclic existence, and training in the mind of enlightenment also depends on calm 
abiding.  
2 The manner in which calm abiding needs to precede special insight 
The manner in which calm abiding needs to prec ede special insight: Well then, what is the 
manner in which it precedes special insight? He re the context for the generation of special 
insight is that of ordinary beings without a pr evious realization arisen from meditation who 
are newly generating it. In this regard, there is  a method of meditating on selflessness with a 
special consciousness realizing emptiness, whic h will be explained below. [However,] apart 
from that, in the context of the Paramitayana an d the three lower classes of tantra, analytical 
meditation is necessary because special insight which is a realization born from meditation 
does not arise unless you have examined the me aning of selflessness by means of individual 
investigation, and then engaged in analytical  meditation sustaining it. If you seek an 
understanding of selflessness and repeatedly an alyse its meaning before accomplishing calm 
abiding, it will be impossible to accomplish calm abiding in dependence on that, because 
calm abiding has not been accomplished. If you perform non-analytical placement 
meditation, even though you accomplish calm abid ing in dependence on it, this will only be a 
method of sustaining calm abiding and you wi ll not have a method of sustaining special 
insight. That is why you must seek special insight afterwards, and therefore, you do not 
deviate from the order of seeking calm abiding first and then cultivating special insight in 
depen den c e o n  it .  So , if t his  s ys t em  did no t understand the method of generating special 
insight as the generation of pliancy through anal ytical meditation of in dividual investigation, 
there would be no proper reason for seeking calm abiding [first] and then meditating on 
special insight in dependence on it116.  
3 How it contradicts the writings of the great trailblazers to assert an order other than this  
It would indeed be completely inadmissible not to  meditate in accordance with that order. As 
[mentioned] earlier it says in [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought  that you cultivate special 
insight in dependence on the attainment of calm abiding. {246} This is because the order of 
the concentration and wisdom [forming part] of  the six perfections - “in dependence on the 
former the latter arises” - and the order of the hi gher training in meditative stabilisation in 
dependence upon which the higher training in wisdom arises are orders in which you first 
cultivate calm abiding before special insight is cultivated.  In the Bodhisattva Levels  and the 
Shravaka Levels  it also says that special insight is cu ltivated in dependence on calm abiding. 
The Essence of the Middle Way , Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] Behaviour  and the three [volume] Stages 
of Meditation as well as Jnanakirti and Shantipa  set forth that you seek calm abiding and then 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding and Special Insight - Introduction 
 
 211  cultivate special insight. Therefore, the a ssertion of some Indian masters whereby you 
generate special insight from th e beginning out of an analysis with the wisdom of individual 
investigation - without seeking calm abiding separa tely - is in contradiction to the texts of the 
great trailblazers. Therefore, it is inapprop riate for the intelligent to rely on them.  
 The order of calm abiding and special insi ght is like that when you newly generate 
them. Later on the sequence is not specified, fo r having cultivated special insight, you still 
cultivate calm abiding. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-3 [Setting out and reponding to an objection]  
A The objection that there is a contradiction to scripture in this 
But then, how can it be that the Compendium of All  [Manifest Knowledge ] says:  
 
Some have attained special insight, but not calm abiding. They strive 
for calm abiding in dependence on special insight.  [15] 
B The response that abandons the fault [pointing out] the need to distinguish between the actual level 
and the calm abiding included in the preparatory level 
Those are not the ones who have  not attained the calm abiding included in the preparatory 
level of the first concentration, but rather the ones who have no t attained calm abiding of the 
actual level of the first concentration and above.  Upon direct realization of the Four Truths, 
calm abiding of the first concentration and above are in fact attained in dependence on that, 
because in the Actual Basis of the Levels  it says:  
 
Otherwise, someone who fully knows suffering [and so on] up to the 
path as it really is and who has no t attained the first concentration and 
so forth, {247} places the mind and does not perform any thorough 
differentiation as soon as he attain s it. In dependence on just that 
special wisdom they combine it with the special state of mind. 
        [ 1 6 ]  
 
To simplify the designations, nine [different] mi nds can be called calm abiding and four types 
of investigation117 can be called special insight. Howeve r, actual calm abiding and special 
insight must be posited after pliancy has arisen, as is being explained [here]. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F How to train in them individually 
1 How to train in calm abiding 
2 How to train in special insight  
3 How to unite the two 
The sixth one has three points: how to train in calm abiding, how to train in special insight 
and how to unite the two. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 212  Explanation of how to train in calm abiding, 
the entity of concentration 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1 How to train in calm abiding 
A Attending to the prerequisites of calm abiding 
B How to cultivate calm abiding in dependence on them 
C The measure for the accomplishment of calm abiding through meditation 
The first one has three points: attending to the prerequisites of calm abiding, how to develop 
calm abiding in dependence on them, and th e measure for the accomplishment of calm 
abiding through cultivation. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1A Attending to the prerequisites of calm abiding 
The first one has six points.  
1 Staying in a favourable place  
As regards staying in a favourable place, the five  positive qualities of a place are: easy access118 
to food, clothing and so forth, in the sense that  they can be obtained without trouble, a good 
location in the sense that predators and other wi ld beasts as well as enemies and the like do 
not live there, good ground in the sense that it does not produce diseases, good company in 
the sense that one has companions of equal ethical discipline and views, and being well 
endowed in the sense that  during the day there are few people [around] and at night there is 
little noise. In Ornament of the Sutras  it says: 
 
A place for intelligent people’s attainments 
[Has] good access, a good location,  Good ground as well as good companions And conveniences for yoga.    [17] 
2 Few desires 
Few desires: not being excessively attached to good or numerous robes and so forth.  
3 Contentment 
Contentment: always being content with merely adequate robes and the like. 
4 Complete abstention from many activities 
{248} Complete abstention from many activities: completely abandoning mean activities such 
as trading, excessive association with lay or orda ined people, as well as one’s medical practice, 
astrological calculations, and so forth.r 
5 Pure ethical discipline 
Pure ethical discipline: with regard to prat imoksha and bodhisattva vows, not tearing down 
the basis of the trainings through natural or formulated misdeeds, an d even if it is torn due to 
non-conscientiousness, restoring it quickly throug h regret in accordance with the teachings.  
6 Complete abstention from  thoughts of desire 
Complete abstention from thoughts of desire and the like: you should abandon all thoughts 
of desire by meditating on their disadvantages fo r this life, such as bein g killed or arrested and 
for future lives such as going to bad realms. Or  you should meditate th inking ‘All the pleasant 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 213  and unpleasant things of cyclic  existence are impermanent and subject to destruction. If I 
shall certainly be separated from all of them be fore long, why do I get overly attached and so 
on?’ In Lamp on the Path  it says:  
 
Even if you exert yourself greatly, 
Even for a thousand years, if Calm abiding’s limbs are impaired, Stabilisation
119 will not be accomlished.   [18] 
 
For those with the heartfelt wish to accomplish  the meditative stabilisation of calm abiding 
and special insight, it is therefore essential to put effort into the 13 pr erequisites and the like 
set forth in the Shravaka Levels .  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B How to cultivate calm abiding based on that 
1 The preparation 
2 The main part 
The second one has two [points]: the preparation and the main part.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B1 The preparation 
First: You should long cultivat e the six preparatory practices ex plained earlier as well as the 
mind of enlightenment and, as part of that, al so train in the core meditation topics shared 
with lesser and intermediate beings.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2 The main part 
A What body posture to meditate in  
B Explanation of the stages of meditation themselves 
The second one has two points: what body post ure to meditate in an d explanation of the 
stages of meditation themselves.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2A What body posture to meditate in 
First: As it says in Stages of Meditation , you should [sit] on a very soft and comfortable seat [and 
adopt] {249} a body posture with eight characteristics: The legs are fully crossed or half-crossed, 
which is also correct. That is how you should si t. The eyes are directed over the tip of the 
nose, neither too open nor too closed. You shou ld sit with your body straightened up and 
erect rather than too bent or crooked, and with your mindfulness placed inward. Your 
shoulders should be straight and even. The he ad is held not [too] high nor [too] low and 
without tilting to one side; you keep yourself erect from the nose [dow n] to the navel. The 
teeth and lips should remain natural, just as they are. The tongue should be placed near the 
upper teeth. As for the breath, your exhalati ons and inhalations should not be audible, 
forceful or uncontrolled. Rather, their comi ng and going should by all means proceed 
imperceptibly, leisurely, and effortlessly. That is  the way to do it. In a ccordance with that, you 
should first of all achieve the body posture [wit h] the eight and especially even breathing, the 
way it has been explained.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B Explanation of the stages of meditation themselves 
1 Transition 
2 The actual [explanation] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-1 Transition 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 214  Second: Most expositions of the stages of the path teach the accomplish ment of calm abiding 
by way of eight [conditional] factors120 [for] abandoning five faults, which is taught in 
[Discrimination of ] the Middle and Extremes . The instructions from Geshe Lagsorwa’s lineage 
explain that on top of that, th e six powers, the four attentions, and the nine minds explained 
in the Shravaka Levels  need to be accomplished. In his Ornament of the Sutras  and 
[Discrimination of ] the Middle and Extremes , the venerable Maitreya also sets forth the nine 
means of mental abiding and the eight [compositi onal] factors [for] abandoning [the faults]. 
Following them, Indian scholars such as Hari bhadra, Kamalashila and Shantipa also wrote 
many compositions on the stages of accomplishng  meditative stabilisation. In the Mantrayana 
you also need to know them. In particular, faults121 of meditative stabilisation such as the five 
faults122 and the way to eliminate them are presented vividly and extensively in scriptures from 
the collection of sutras.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2 The actual [explanation] 
A How to generate flawless meditative stabilisation 
B The stages of mental abiding that arise in dependence on that  
This one has two points: {250} how to generate flawless meditative stabilisation and the stages 
of mental abiding that arise in dependence on that. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A How to genera te flawless meditative stabilisation 
1 What to do before focusing the mind on the object  2 What to do while focusing the mind on the object 
3 What to do after focusing the mind on the object  
The first one has three [points]: what to do befo re focusing the mind on the object, what to 
d o  w h i l e  f o c u s i n g  t h e  m i n d  o n  t h e  o b j e c t  a n d  what to do after focusing the mind on the 
object.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A1  What to do before focusing the mind on the object 
A The need to rely on antidotes to laziness at the outset  
First: If you cannot put an end to laziness whic h does not delight in cultivating meditative 
stabilisation but rather enjoys its opposite, from  the beginning, it will not let you engage in 
meditative stabilisation, and even if you achiev e [meditative stabilisation] once, it will not 
possibly be persistent and therefore deteriorate quickly.  For that reason it is of major 
importance to put and end to laziness at the outset.  
B Individual explanation of the four antidotes 
Now if you achieve pliancy and your body and mind expand with bliss, there will be no 
[more] weariness, day or night, in applying yo urself to virtue and thereby laziness will be 
stopped. To generate it, you must be able contin uously to muster joyous effort with respect to 
meditative stabilisation, the cause for generati ng pliancy. To generate that, you need the 
intense, continuous aspiration of striving for me ditative stabilisation. As a cause of that, the 
firm faith of strong fascination due to seeing th e positive qualities of meditative stabilisation 
is necessary. Therefore, you should repeatedly cu ltivate the faith of refl ecting on the positive 
qualities of meditative stabilisation.  
C The source of this  
In [Discrimination of ] The Middle and Extremes  it says: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 215  The basis and that which is based on it, 
The cause and the effect itself.     [19] 
 
Here the basis is aspiration - the basis of endeav our. That which is based on it is endeavour or 
joyous effort. The cause of aspiration is the faith of conviction concerning the positive 
qualities. The result of endeavour is pliancy.  
D How to reflect on the positive qualities of meditative stabilisation   
The positive qualities of the meditative stabilisat ion to be cultivated here are as follows. Once 
meditative stabilisation has been accompli shed, mental happiness and physical comfort 
greatly increase, so that you stay happy in this lifetime. Due to the acquisition of physical and 
mental pliancy, the mind is fit to make use of any virtuous object at will. Since uncontrolled 
distraction {251} to wrong objects has subsided, faulty conduct does not occur often while 
whatever virtue you do has great strength. In dependence on calm abiding, positive qualities 
such as clairvoyance and miraculous powers can be achieved, and in particular, the realization 
of special insight that realizes em ptiness arises in dependence on it, so that the root of cyclic 
existence can be cut quickly. If  you consider any of these and other positive qualities, the 
power of your enthusiasm for cultivating meditati ve stabilisation will increase. You should get 
to know them and meditate on th em. Once this has arisen, it wi ll constantly urge you, from 
within, to cultivate meditative stabilisation so  that you will easly attain it, and, upon its 
attainment, since you engage in the meditation ag ain and again, it will be very difficult for it 
to deteriorate.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2  What to do while focusing the mind on the object 
A Identifying the basis, the object, on which to place the mind 
B The way to focus the mind on it 
The first one has two points: identifying the ba sis, the object, on wh ich to place the mind, 
and the way to focus the mind on it. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A Identifying the basis, the object, on which to place the mind 
1 Presentation of general objects 2 Identification of objects for given situations 
The first one has two points: presentation of ge neral objects and identification of objects for 
given situations. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A-1 Pr esentation of general objects 
A Indication of the actual objects 
B Indication of what person should make what his object 
The first one has two points: indication of the actual objects and indication of what person 
should make what his object. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A-1A Indication of the actual objects 
First: The first from among two points regarding the first one:  
1 Identifying the divisions of objects  
As regards the four objects of yogis taught by the Bhagavat, the pervasive objects are four [in 
number]: [there are] the ones which you place [the mind] on without analyzing and analytical 
objects, [which makes] two, the limits of ph enomena – their mode and their variety – and the 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 216  accomplishment of a purpose - transformation th rough meditation by way of the previous two 
meditation methods that observe the mean ing of the mode and the variety.   
 As regards objects for purifying one’s conduct, there are five meditation objects 
[serving] as antidotes to one’s predominant conduct in previous lives – attachment, hatred, 
ignorance, pride and discursive thought – the repulsive, love, de pendent arising, the divisions 
of the elements, as well as on e’s respiration, respectively.  
 The objects for the skilful are also five [in number]: objects of skil l with regard to the 
aggregates, elements, sense fields, the tw elve links of dependent origination, {252} as well as 
the established and the unestablished. 
 The objects for purifying mental afflictions ar e two: the peaceful and coarse [states] of 
the higher and lower levels and the 16 [aspec ts] of the four truths, impermanence and so 
forth.  
2 How [all of] these individually serve a special purpose 
In this regard, the objects for purifying one’s conduct are special in th at the attachment and 
the like of those who act with attachment and the like more th an usual is easily stopped and 
meditative stabilisation is easily achieved in dependence on that.  
 The objects for the skilful are good objects of  calm abiding because they negate a self of 
persons apart from those phenomena and are ther efore concordant with the arising of special 
insight which realizes selflessness.  
 Meditation objects for purifying mental afflic tions are of great significance in that they 
become antidotes to mental afflictions in general.   There are no pervasive objects ap art from the preceding objects. 
 Therefore, meditative stabilisation should  be accomplished in dependence on the 
meditation objects of calm abiding with th eir specific purposes. Those who practice 
meditative stabilisation in dependence on pebbles , pieces of wood and the like clearly do not 
know the presentation of objects of meditative stabilisation.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A-1B Indication of w hat person should make what his meditation 
object 
1 How what person should make what his mediation object  
Second: In accordance with what is set forth in [the Sutra ] Requested by Revata , it is taught that 
persons [ranging] from those in whom attachment  predominates to those in whom discursive 
thought predominates should rely on the indi vidual objects specified, [ranging] from the 
repulsive to one’s respiration, respectively. Th ose whose conduct is balanced and those whose 
mental afflictions are small can concentrate on  any one object they are happy with and a 
specific one is not necessary.  
2 Differences in the level of predominance and the like of attachment and so forth  
In this regard, predominance of [one of] the five  [mental afflictions], attachment and so forth, 
[means that] through habituation to attachment  and so forth in previous lives long-term 
attachment and so forth arise towards small objects of attachment and so forth. {253} Those 
with balanced conduct have not got habituated to  attachment and so forth in previous lives, 
but they do not see them as disadvantages.  Therefore, even though strong, long-term 
attachment and so forth do not arise towards their [respective] objects, it is not like they do 
not occur [at all]. Those with small mental affl ictions have not got habituated to attachment 
and so forth in previous lives, and due to the fact that, among other things, they see them as 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 217  disadvantages, attachment and so forth [onl y] arise slowly towards major and numerous 
objects of attachment and so forth. Towards medium and small objects they do not arise. 
Moreover, the predominance of attachment or an other one of the five results in a lengthy, 
balanced behaviour in a not too lengthy, and small mental afflictions in a speedy 
accomplishment of quiescence. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A-2 Identification of objects for given situations 
A General explanation 
Now, in dependence on which object is calm abiding accomplished? In general, the 
meditation objects for individuals123 are just as explained above. In particular, the point that 
those with predominant  discursive thought shou ld meditate on the breath is important.  
B Numerous texts set forth how to  accomplish meditative stabilisatio n observing the Tathagata’s body  
Apart from that, the middle and final parts of Stages of Meditation  follow [the Sutras ] Meditative 
stabilisation  of the Present Buddha  Manifestly Abiding  and the King of Meditative stabilisation  in 
teaching the accomplishment of meditative st abilisation with the Tathagata’s body as the 
object. The commentary on Lamp on the Path  also quotes statements by Master Bodhibhadra 
that meditative stabilisation is achiev ed focusing on the Tathagata’s body.  
C How it is of great purpose to make it the basis of one’s observation accordingly  
As for concentration on the Buddha’s body, limi tless merit arises through recollection of the 
Buddha. If that body is clear and stable in its aspect, it makes a great difference with regard to 
visualizing the field for accumulating merit th rough prostrations, offerings, prayers, and so 
forth, as well as the field for purifying obscur ations through confession, restraint, and so 
forth. {254} The positive quality that one’s recollecti on of the Buddha does not deteriorate at 
the time of death, the great difference it makes to deity yoga when you cultivate the path of 
mantra, and so forth show that it is very purposeful.   
D How to make what bodily form [one’s object]  
In the King of Meditative stabilisation  it says:  
 
With his body just like the colour of gold 
The Lord of the World is excessively beautiful. The bodhisattva whose mind is involved in this object Is said to be in equipoised meditation.   [20]  
You should make something like that your basi s of observation. Furthermore, there are two 
[types of] visualizations: one [in which the obje ct] is newly created by the mind and one [in 
which the object] is naturally present. The latter [type] makes a great difference for the 
generation of faith and accords with sections  shared among the vehi cles. Therefore, you 
should proceed in the latter way.  
E How to research the basis of observation 
In researching the basis124 of observation, the basis125 for the mind to focus on, you should 
first find a good painted image, statue, and the li ke of the Teacher’s body, look at it again and 
again and, having captured the features, get used  to its appearance as an object of the mind. 
Or else you should reflect on the meaning of a description by some spiritual master that you 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 218  h a v e  h e a r d ,  m a k e  i t  a p p e a r  t o  t h e  m i n d  a n d  pursue [this as] your basis of observation. 
However, rather than making th e basis of observation [appear] li ke a painted image, statue or 
something like that, you should train for it to appear with the aspect of the actual Buddha.  
F It is inadmissible to practice meditative stabilisatio n looking at the meditation  support with one’s eyes 
It makes perfect sense that Master Yeshe De[y] refutes what some [people] do, namely set up 
an image in front of them, look at it with th e eyes and meditate by staring at it. This is 
because meditative stabilisation is not accomplish ed in a sense consciousness but rather in the 
mental consciousness, so the actual object of me ditative stabilisation is a direct object of the 
mental consciousness, which is why you must fo cus on that. Also, in accordance with what 
was explained earlier, it is taught that yo u must observe the meaning generality of the 
observed object or the image that appears.  
G The need to determine just one object in the beginning  
Elsewhere it says that although pa rt of the figure is detailed and part of it is rough, you should 
first observe the rough [part] and afterwards, wh en [your meditation has] stabilized on that, 
observe the details. {255} According to experience, the rough [features] appear very easily so 
you should [progress] from the rough outline of the figure, making it the basis of observation. 
In particular, when you practice, as long as a fully qualified meditative stabilisation has not 
been accomplished, it is inappropriate to move between many different types of objects. This 
is because, if you practice meditative stabilisat ion, moving between many dissimilar objects, it 
will become a great obstacle to the accomplishment of calm abiding. Says Aryasura: 
 
By stabilising on one object Stabilise the thoughts of the mind. Through a series of many objects It is disturbed by mental afflictions.    [21]  
And in the Lamp on the Path  it says: 
 
On any one object that is suitable – Let the mind settle on something virtuous.    [22] 
 [The above point] is being made by means of the numeral “one”.  
H The measure for getting the object and, having got it, the need to focus on that very object  
That being so, the measure for first getting the basis of observation that the mind focuses on 
is this: When you visualize the head, two arms , torso and two legs successively a couple of 
times and attend to the whole body  at the end of that, then, if yo u are able to see merely half 
the limbs and parts appear to the mind, you should  be satisfied with that and focus on it even 
if there is no radiant clarity. Th at is because if you do not focu s on to it, satisfied with just 
that, but desire more clarity, and repeatedly visu alize, the object will become clearer, however, 
not only will you fail to acquire stable meditative  stabilisation, this will become an obstacle to 
its acquisition. But if the object is not very cl ear and you nevertheless focus on just that mere 
partial object, you will acquire meditative stab ilisation quickly. Then, since clarity will be 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 219  increased, the clarity aspect will also be acco mplished easily. This appears in Master Yeshe 
De[y]’s instructions and is essntial.  
 Now, {256} you should focus on the whole body to the best of your abilities and if some 
parts of it appear clearly, you should focus on  those. If they get unclear again, you should 
focus on the whole again.  
 At that time, if a colour, shape, number  or size appears that was not ascertained 
[earlier] – for example126 you want to meditate on [something] yellow and [something] red 
appears, you want to meditate on a sitting fi gure and a standing one appears, you want to 
meditate on one and two appear, or you want to meditate on something big and something 
small appears – it is inappropriate to pursue th em, so you should only make that which is the 
original object the basis of observation. 
 In the context of practicing  the deity yoga of secret ma ntra, you must achieve a clear 
appearance of the deity, so until that appears, you should try to generate it by various means. 
However, here, if you have difficulty and the de ity’s aspect does not appear, you may place the 
mind and focus on any one of the objects presen ted above that is suitable or on the view 
ascertaining suchness, and accomplish meditative  stabilisation, for the main purpose is to 
accomplish calm abiding.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B How to direct the mind towards it 
1 Presentation of the faultless approach 
2 Eliminating faulty approaches 
3 Indicating the measure of sessions 
The second one has three points: presentation of the faultless approach, eliminating faulty 
approaches, and indicating the measure of sessions. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1 Pres entation of the faultless approach 
A Indication that faultl ess meditative stabilisat ion has two features 
B How it is unreasonable that some [people] add bliss and the like, making it three or four distinctions 
C Identification of laxity and exci tement and the importance of skill in a method of sustaining meditative 
stabilisation that puts  and end to the two 
D How both mindfulness and introspection are necessary as means for the mind not to wander off from 
its object 
E   How the mind is directed towards the meditation object through mindfulness  
F   Identification of mindfulness 
G   How it is shown through an analogy  that mindfulness  continuously ties the mind to the object
H   How meditative stabilisation will become faulty without a firm mode of apprehension of the
      ascertaining consciousness
I     Even someone wishing to achieve calm abiding by placing the mind without thinking of anything
 must generate the power of mindfulness
 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1A Indication that faultle ss meditative stabilisation has two features 
First: The meditative stabilisation that is to be accomplished here has two features; it has a 
factor of intense clarity, the mind being extremel y clear, and it has a factor of non-conceptual 
stability, [the mind] abiding single-pointedly on the object.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1B How it is unreasonable that some [people] add bliss and the like, 
making it three or four distinctions 
Here some add bliss and make it three [featu res], others add limpidity and make it four. 
However, the limpidity has two [aspects]: the limpidity of one’s consciousness feels more 
limpid than even an immaculate crystal bowl full of immaculate water being hit by sunlight in 
the absence of clouds. And {257} when the as pects of objects such as pillars appear, a 
limpidity arises that feels as if one could count even their finest particles. These two 
nevertheless arise from the intensity of the clar ity factor being generated and sustained after 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 220  s u b t l e  l a x i t y  h a s  b e e n  c u t .  T h e r e f o r e ,  i t  i s  u n n e c e s s a r y  t o  m e n t i o n  t h e m  s e p a r a t e l y  i n  t h e  
beginning.   Although joy and bliss in the form of plea surable sensations arise as a result of the 
meditative stabilisation to be accomplished he re, they do not arise in association with the 
meditative stabilisation included in the prel iminary stage of the first concentration and 
therefore are not counted here.  
 The emergence of such intensity in the clar ity factor is impeded by laxity, and single-
pointed non-conceptuality is impeded by excite ment. Precisely that is the reason why these 
two, laxity and excitement, become the main  obstacles to the accomplishment of pure 
meditative stabilisation.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2 A2B-1C Identification of laxity and excitement and the importance of skill 
in the method for sustai ning meditative stabilisat ion that stops the two 
Therefore, if you do not know how to identify subtle and gross laxity and excitement, and if 
you do not know a pure method for sustaining meditative stabilisation that stops both of 
them, even calm abiding – not to mention spec ial insight - cannot arise. Therefore, the 
intelligent striving for meditative stabilisation shou ld become skilled in this way. That is to say 
laxity and excitement are adverse conditions to  the accomplishment of calm abiding and since 
the identification of adverse conditions as well  as the actual methods for stopping them are 
taught below, here I shall [only] mention how to generate meditative stabilisation [as] a 
favourable condition to calm abiding.   
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1D How both mindfulness and introspection are necessary as means 
for the mind not to be distracted away from its object  
Here meditative stabilisation is the factor of the mind single-pointedly abiding on its object, 
that is to say it must stay on the object cont inuously. For that there are two requirements: a 
means of not letting the mind get distracted aw ay from its original object and awareness of 
exactly what distraction or non-distraction ther e is. The first of them is mindfulness, the 
second one is introspection. In Commentary on the Ornament of the Sutras  is says: 
 
Mindfulness and introspection make {2 58} it very well-directed, for one 
prevents the mind from scattering away from its object, and the second 
is fully aware of the mind scattering away.  [23] 
 
When mindfulness deteriorates and you forget th e meditation object, there is distraction and 
you lose the object immediately. Therefore, mind fulness that does not fo rget the object is the 
root. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1E How the mind is directed towards the meditation object through 
mindfulness 
This is how to fully direct the mind towards its meditation object: You visualize the object of 
observation as explained above. Then, once at least something appears, you should generate a 
forceful mode of apprehending that which is being apprehended with your awareness, uplift 
the mind and place it without newly analysing anything. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1F Identification of mindfulness 
1 A source identifying the entity of mindfulness 
2 The distinctive features of mindfulness 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1F1 A source identifying the essence of mindfulness 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 221  In the Compendium of All [Knowledge]  mindfulness is said to have three features: 
 
What is mindfulness? Non-forgetfuln ess of the mind with respect to a 
thing it is familiar with; its function is utter non-distraction. 
         [ 2 4 ]  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1F2 The features of mindfulness 
A The object feature 
The feature of the object: Since mindfulness does not arise with respect to a hitherto 
unfamiliar object it says: “a thing it is familiar with”. In this context, it is the appearance of 
the basis of observation having been ascertained before. 
B The feature of the mode of apprehension 
The feature of the mode of appr ehension, “Non-forgetfulness of the mind” is the factor that 
the mind does not forget that object; in th is context it does not forget the basis of 
observation. As for the manner in which [the mind ] does not forget, it is not said to be the 
mere ability to remember your master teaching “T he basis of observation is like this...” when 
others ask and when you are made to think abou t it. Rather, the mind tied to the object is 
immediately mindful of it and does not get dist racted even in the slightest. If there is 
distraction, mindfulness is lost th rough the mere occurrence of that. 
 Hence, after you have placed the mind on the basis of observation, you should 
generate the thought: “That is how it is ti ed to the object” and then, without renewed 
conceptual {259} thought, without interruptin g the force of this very mind, sustain it 
continuously. That is the essential po int about how mindfulness is applied127. 
C The feature of function 
Not letting the mind get distracted from its object. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1G How it is shown through an analogy  that mindfulness  
continuously ties the mind to the object 
That being so, tying the mind to an object so as to tame it is  taught through the analogy of 
taming an elephant. In [this] analogy, a wild elephant is tied to a very firm tree trunk or pillar 
with numerous solid ropes and if it follows the in structions of the elephant-tamer, [that] is [all 
the] better, if it does not, it is repeatedly pu nched into submission with  a sharp hook and thus 
tamed. Likewise, the mind, resembling an untamed elephant, is also tied to a firm pillar - the 
meditation object explained earlier - with the ro pe of mindfulness, and if it cannot stay there, 
it is pierced with the hook of introspect ion and gradually brought under control. In Essence of 
the Middle Way  it says: 
 
The elephant of the mind going wrong 
Is firmly tied with the rope of mindfulness To the stable pillar of the object And gradually controlled with the hook of intelligence . [25]  
And in the middle part of Stages of Meditation : 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 222  By means of the rope[s] of mindfulness and introspection, the elephant 
of the mind should be tied to th at very tree trunk of the object. 
         [ 2 6 ]  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2 A2B-1H How meditative stabilisation will become faulty without a firm 
mode of apprehension of the ascertaining consciousness 
It is said that meditative stabilisation is acco mplished in dependence on mindfulness and that 
- like a rope - mindfulness continuously ties th e mind to the object. Therefore, the principal 
method for sustaining the accomplishment of me ditative stabilisation is that of sustaining 
mindfulness. Yet mindfulness has a mode of appr ehension with an aspect of ascertainment. 
So when you sustain meditative stabilization and place [the mind] without a firm mode of 
apprehension [on the part] of the ascertaining consciousness, you gain the clarity factor of 
mental limpidity, but the clarity factor of st ark intensity of the ascertaining consciousness 
does not emerge. As a result, powerful mindfuln ess does not arise and since subtle laxity is 
not stopped either, the meditative stabilisation becomes faulty. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1I Even someone wishing to achieve calm abiding by placing the 
mind without thinking of anything must generate the power of mindfulness 
{260} Even someone who sustains mere non-conc eptuality of mind without placing it on any 
other basis of observation such as a deity’s body , should remind himself “I will place the mind 
without thinking of any object whatsoever” an d then prevent the mind from scattering and 
being distracted. Since non-distraction is also id entical in meaning with mindfulness that does 
not forget the object, he does not deviate fr om the method of sustaining mindfulness. 
Therefore, someone meditating in this manner also applies the mindfulness that empowers 
the ascertaining consciousness. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-2  Eliminating faulty approaches 
A Identifying a misconception that should be eliminated 
Second: There is this kind of misconception th at should be eliminated: “When the mind is 
roused as explained above, held tight and placed  [on the object] non-conc eptually, there is no 
laxity, but excitement predominates. So yo u see that you do not gain the capacity128 for a 
continuous stability factor. However, with your  lofty awareness lowered,  by loosening your 
tight grip [on it] a lot, you see the stability factor  arising quickly. This is an excellent method.” 
With this in mind a lot of people also hold  and expound: “Best meditation during best 
relaxation.” 
B Its elimination  
However, this [position] does not differentia te between the occurrence of laxity and the 
occurrence of meditation. As expl ained earlier, faultless meditative stabilisation necessarily 
has two features and the stability factor of the no n-conceptual mind by itself is not enough. If 
you think that “in such a case, when the mind ha s gone confused and there is darkness, this is 
laxity whereas, otherwise, it is faultless medi tative stabilisation because there is the clarity 
factor of mental limpidity”, apparently, you do  not distinguish between lethargy and laxity. 
These will be explained below. 
C How it is difficult for faul tless meditative stabilisation wi th the two features to arise 
Therefore, when your awareness, held overly tight, has been inte nsified, the clarity factor is 
present, but excitement predominates so that it is  difficult for the stability factor to arise. On 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 223  the other hand, when you relax it  a lot while sustaining [your meditation], the stability aspect 
is there, but laxity predominates so that intense clarity is absent. Yet it is difficult to stick to129 
just the right amounts of tightness and relaxa tion, and therefore it is {261} difficult for 
meditative stabilisation free from laxity an d excitement to arise. Thinking of that, 
Chandragomin says: 
 
When I make an effort, excitement arises, Dullness arises, when I abandon it. 
If through this it is hard to get
130 even engagement 
What shall I do with my confounded mind?  [27]  
And: 
When I engage with effort, excitement arises; 
Whenever I relax it, dullness arises. If through this it is hard to find the middle, What shall I do with my confounded mind?   [-}   
He is saying that when you hold [the mind] tigh t, thus making an effort, there is excitement. 
On the other hand, when you see that, relax the mi nd that tries hard to engage [in its object], 
and abandon the endeavour, the laxity of dullne ss within the mind arises. Therefore, it is 
difficult to find the middle [ground] free from th e two extremes of laxity and excitement - an 
even engagement in which the mind abides ev enly balanced. If he was thereby presenting 
relaxation as best, there would be no reason what soever for difficulties, and since he is saying 
that laxity arises from it, it would be inapprop riate to practice meditative stabilisation that 
way.  
D How to meditate balancing tightness and relaxation  
As for the point where tightness and relaxation  are balanced, having investigated this for 
yourself, you should be more relaxed than th at level of awareness where you think “If I 
heighten it this much, exciteme nt will surely arise”, and you sh ould also place it above that 
level where you think “If I place it at this  [low level], laxity will easily arise”. 
E Presentation of sources for this  
In the context of the first and second [stages of  stabilizing the] mind, Noble Asanga also says: 
 
That is to say when placement and thorough placement is performed, 
there is a mental attention that holds [its object] tight131 as it engages in 
it.132         [ 2 8 ]  
 
In Stages of Meditation I  it is also explained that:  
 
You should eliminate laxity and hold the object tightly.133 [29] 
F The fault of not knowing how to apply mindfulness 
If you sustain [your meditation] without knowin g the above method for applying mindfulness, 
however much you meditate, only lots of faults will come out of it: great forgetfulness, your 
intelligence discriminating phenomena growing dull, and so forth. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 224  G The need to watch with introspection while holding the object with mindfulness 
{262} One may wonder: “Well then, is it appropri ate to generate conceptual thought that 
watches whether or not the object is being held  well while the mind is  tied to the object 
through mindfulness?” In Stages of Meditation II  i t  s a y s  t h a t  t h i s  i s  w h a t  n e e d s  t o  b e  d o n e .  
Specifically, it is not that you first aban don meditative stabilisation and then watch134 in this 
way. Rather, from within your st ate of abidance in meditative stabilisation, you merely watch 
whether or not the mind is still remaining on the original object it was placed on earlier, and 
i f  n o t ,  w h e t h e r  i t  h a s  b e c o m e  e x c i t e d  o r  l a x .  O n c e  y o u r  [ m i n d ]  i s  p l a c e d  i n  m e d i t a t i v e  
stabilisation, you should watch it  now and then, neither at too sh ort nor at too long intervals. 
If you do this when the force of the previous aw areness is not yet exhausted, this will have the 
utitly that the intensity of awareness that has arisen will last long[er] and that laxity and 
excitement are recognized quickly.  
H The need to sustain this [meditation] again and again with mindfulness, without forgetting the object  
Sustaining the [meditation] like that, occasionally  recalling the first object, is also necessary as 
a cause of powerful mindfulness operating co ntinuously. That is why this method for 
sustaining mindfulness is set forth in the Shravaka Levels  and why it says in Explanations on the 
Discrimination of the Middle and the Extremes :  
 
As for the statement ‘Mindfulness consis ts in not forgetting the object’ - 
the instruction on making the mind abide is expressed by means of the m i n d . ”          [ 3 0 ]   
The application of mindfulness is for the purp ose of stopping [the mind] being distracted 
away from the object and forgetting it. Theref ore, not forgetting the object consists in 
mentally expressing the object, attending to it again and again. It is like when, for instance, 
you are afraid that you might forget something yo u know. If you recall it again and again, you 
will hardly forget it.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-3 The length of sessions 
A How it is taught in Stages of Meditation   
Third: Now then, is there a specified measure fo r meditation sessions, [something saying] that 
the mind is tied to the object and placeed for just this long? The major texts such as Shravaka 
Levels  do not seem to uphold a cl ear length. However, {263} in Stages of Meditation III  it says: 
  
Like that, gradually, you should sit for 24 minutes135, one and a half 
hours136, 3 hours137 or as long as you can.   [31] 
 
Apparently, this was set forth in the context of the measure of sessions for special insight 
meditation when calm abiding has already been accomplished, but in the context of 
practicing calm abiding in the beginning it is evidently the same.  
B How it is difficult for beginners to cut through laxity and excitement if the sessions are long  
In fact, if you recall the object every so of ten and watch every so often, the method for 
sustaining mindfulness and introspection as explai ned earlier is indeed faultless even for long 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 225  sessions. However, in most beginners forgetfuln ess arises if the sessions are long. They get 
distracted and wander off, and although laxity and excitement occur in the meantime, they do 
not identify them quickly but only recognize them after a long time. Alternatively, even if they 
do not forget their mindfulness, they easily fa ll under the power of laxity and excitement and 
do not identify them quickly. The former of  those two [problems] impedes the arising of 
strong mindfulness whereas the latter impedes the ar ising of strong introspection, so that it is 
difficult to cut through laxity and excitement. Specifically, it is a lot worse to forget the 
meditation object, get distracted, and then fa il to identify the occurrence of laxity and 
excitement than not to identify the occurrence of laxity and excitement quickly while still 
remembering the meditation object. Therefor e, as the antidote that counteracts a 
deterioration of mindfulness upon distraction,  the way of sustaining mindfulness explained 
above is very important.  
C The need to proceed in accordance with one’s mental abilities and so forth 
If the forgetfulness of getting distracted and wandering off is great and if the introspection 
that quickly identifies laxity and excitement is weak, short sessions are needed. On the other 
hand, if forgetfulness hardly arises and it seem s that laxity and excitement can be recognised 
quickly, there is nothing wrong with slightly lo nger sessions either. With this intention it is 
said that the duration - 24 minutes and so on - is not specified. In brief, since it needs to be in 
accord with one’s mental abilities it says “as long as you can”. 
 Apart from that, {264} rest in meditative equipoise unless you suffer some temporary 
physical or mental harm. If you do, you should not persist in your meditation but rather 
eliminate the constitutional obstacles and then meditate. That is the thought of experts, so 
you should understand acting like that to be  another factor for the length of sessions.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3  What to do once the mind has been directed towards the 
object 
A What to do when excitement or laxity occur 
B What to do while free fr om laxity and excitement 
The third one has two points: what  to do when excitement or laxity occur, and what to do 
while free from laxity and excitement. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A What to do when excitement or laxity occur 
1 Applying the antidote to non-identification of laxity and excitement 
2 Applying the antidote to not endeavouring to abandon them even though they have been 
identified 
The first one has two points: applying the anti dote to non-identification of laxity and 
excitement, and applying the antidote to not endeavouring to abandon them even though 
they have been identified.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1 Applying the antidote to non-identification of laxity and 
excitement 
A Settling the characteristics of laxity and excitement 
B The means of generating introspection that realizes them at the time of meditation 
The first one has two points: settling the char acteristics of laxity and excitement and the 
means of generating introspection that re alizes them at the time of meditation. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1A Settling t he characteristics of laxity and excitement 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 226  1 Settling the characteristics of excitement 
2 Settling the characteristics of laxity 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1A1 Settling the characteristics of excitement 
A Presenting a source 
First: Excitement is just as stated in the Compendium of Abhidharma : 
 
What is excitement? It is a very un peaceful mind that pursues pleasant 
features and belongs to attachment. It has the function of disrupting 
calm abiding.     [32] 
B Its three features object, aspect and function 
It has three [features]. Its object is something attractive and pleasant. Its aspect is the mind 
being unpeaceful and scattering outward. Since it is part of attachment, it engages in its 
objects through the aspect of craving. Its function is to disrupt the mind abiding on its object.  
C The manner in which [excitement] disrupts the mind abiding on its object 
While the mind is tied to an object within, through the excitement of attachment to forms 
such as sounds the mind is drawn withou t control towards those objects and becomes 
distracted. It is just as stated in the Praise of Confession : 
 
Regardless of how you are focused138 on calm abiding, 
Your mind directed at something again and again, 
Is drawn away by the noose of the mental afflictions 
Without control, with the rope of  attachment to objects.  [33] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1A2 Settling the characteristics of laxity 
A Some people lump together laxity and dullness, which goes against the scriptures 
{265} In many translations laxity is also rendered as discouragement. Some people consider a 
lethargy where the mind lacks lucent limpidity and abides without scattering to other objects 
to be laxity, which is incorrect, for it says in the Middle Stages of Meditation  and in [the Sutra ] 
Unravelling the Thought  that laxity arises from lethargy. In the Compendium of Abhidharma  laxity 
is indeed explained in the context of the second ary affliction distraction. However, as for the 
distraction explained there, virtue also arises [from it], so it is not necessarily afflictive 139. 
B How the identification of these two differs and a source for that 
Consequently, in the Compendium of Abhidharma  and in the commentary on the Treasury , 
lethargy refers to a heaviness, an unserviceabili ty of body and mind that is part of delusion. 
With laxity, the mode of apprehen sion of the mind holding its object is slack and the object is 
not held clearly or tightly. Therefore, even thou gh there is the factor of limpidity, when the 
mode of apprehending the object lacks clarity there is laxity. From the Middle Stages of 
Meditation : 
 
You should understand that at time s when the mind does not see the 
meditation object clearly - like someone blind or someone entering 
darkness or someone closing his eyes - at those times there is laxity.         [ 3 4 ]  
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 227  In the other great texts I have not seen a cl ear take on the characteristics of laxity. 
C Moreover, the two are not the same, because in laxity there is also virtue 
In laxity there is either virtue or neutrality whereas lethargy is only non-virtuous or neutral 
with respect to the obscurations140, and part of delusion. 
D The need for two factors, the factors of mental clarity and tightness to eliminate laxity 
In the great texts it says that in order to eliminate laxity you should uplift the mind, 
meditating on a joyful object such as a Bu ddha image and light. Thereby you prevent the 
object’s lack of clarity, which is like darkness having fallen within the mind, and [stop] the 
decline in the mind’s mode of apprehension. Th en you need the two factors of clarity of the 
object and tightness of the mode of apprehension. 
E The need to ascertain laxity in accordance with the Stages of Meditation  
{266} Excitement is easy to recognize, but laxity is  not clearly identified in the great texts which 
is why it is difficult to understand. Yet it is  essential, because this is a major ground for 
mistaking meditative stabilisation to be faul tless. Therefore, you should investigate and 
identify it well with mental subtlety based on your experience and in accordance with the 
statements in Stages of Meditation . 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1B The method for generating introspection that realizes these 
during of meditation  
1 The need to generate introspection that realizes whether or not laxity or excitement have arisen 
Second: It is not enough to have a mere understanding of laxity and excitement. Rather, you 
need the ability to generate introspection th at knows exactly whether or not laxity or 
excitement have arisen during meditation. In  fact, not only do you need the ability to 
generate introspection that identifies laxity and excitement as soon as they arise [and which is] 
due to the gradual generation of powerful intros pection. You also need the introspection that 
recognizes them when they have not actually aris en, when they are just about to arise, for in 
the latter two parts of Stages of Meditation  it says: 
 
If you notice141 laxity of the mind or a su spicion that it is lax...  
         [ 3 5 ]  
And:  
If you notice exitement of the mind or  a suspicion that it is excited...  
2 If you do not apply introspection,  your meditation will come unde r the influence of laxity and 
excitement 
As long as this kind of introspection has not ar isen, although you decide that from this point 
till that point there was flawless meditation wi thout laxity or excitement, this is not based 
upon anything, for even though laxity or exci tement arise, you cannot ascertain them, given 
that powerful introspection has not arisen. In  accordance with that, it also says in 
[Discrimination of ] the Middle and the Extremes : 
 
To realize laxity and excitement...     [36] 
 
- in order to realize laxity and excitement you need introspection. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 228   Therefore, if the introspection that cannot fa il to recognize laxity and excitement has 
not arisen, you may meditate for long and ev en while away years with subtle laxity and 
excitement but not sensing them as they occur. 
3 The method for sustaining mindfulness is esential as a cause of introspection 
Well then, how do you generate introspection? Its most esssential cause is the method for 
sustaining mindfulness presented earlier. {267} If you can generate continuous mindfulness in 
that manner, you will be able to stop forget ting the object and wandering off. Thereby you 
will counteract long-term insensitivity to the occurrence of laxity and excitement. Hence, you 
will recognize laxity and excitement easily. This  is very clear when you look at it from the 
perspective of your own experience of the lo ng time [it takes] to recognize laxity and 
excitement when mindfulness has deteriorated an d the short time it takes when it has not. 
With this understanding Entering [Bodhisattva ] Behaviour  says: 
 
Once mindfulness is there to stay at the 
Gate of the mind in order to guard it, At that point introspection will come…   [37]  
The Explanatory Commentary on  [Discrimination of ] the Middle and the Extremes  also presents 
mindfulness as the cause of introspection.  
4 Watching continuously whether or not the mind scatters is the essential point of sustaining 
introspection 
This one cause consists in observing the aspect of  the deity’s body and so forth, that which is 
being apprehended, or on the aspect of the apprehender, such as the experience, mere 
awareness, or mere clarity and then, while applyi ng mindfulness as explained earlier, hold the 
mind, watching continuously whether or not there is scattering. This should be held to be the 
essential point of sustaining intros pection. In accordance with that, Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] 
Behaviour  also says: 
 
Investigating again and again 
The state of body and mind, in brief, Just that alone is the characteristic Of the guarding of introspection.    [38] 
5 The need to differentiate well between the methods for sustaining mindfulness and introspection 
By doing this, you therefore generate introspect ion that recognizes any laxity and excitement 
as soon as they are about to arise, and by mean s of applying mindfulness, the forgetfulness of 
[your mind] being distracted and wandering off is  stopped so that you observe well. You need 
to distinguish them.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2 Applying the antidote to not endeavouring to abandon laxity 
and excitement although one has identified them 
A The need to intend the application of the antidote 
B How to actually apply it 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2A The need to intend the application of the antidote 
Second: Through doing well on the method for sustaining mindfulness and introspection as 
explained earlier, strong mindfulness will arise so  that even subtle laxity and introspection can 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 229  be recognized by means of introspection. Hence, there will be no fault of not identifying laxity 
and excitement. However, lack of endeavour for taki ng up [the task] by applying effort to stop 
the two as soon as they arise - non-application - {2 68} is a great fault of meditative stabilisation. 
That is why you should cultivate the intention referred to as application with respect to the 
antidote or endeavour.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B The actual manner of application 
1 Identifying intention and how to stop laxity and excitement 
2 Identifying the causes in dependence on which laxity and excitement arise 
This [one] has two points: identifying intentio n and how to stop laxity and excitement, and 
identifying the causes in dependence on  which laxity and excitement arise.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1  Identifying intention and how to stop laxity and excitement 
A Identifying intention 
B How to stop laxity and excitement 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1A Identifying intention 
First: In the Compendium of Abhidharma  it says: 
  
What is intention? It is the mind cr eating compositional factors, action 
of the mind that has the function of causing the mind to engage in 
virtuous, non-virtuous or neutral things.   [39] 
 
That means the mental factor moving the mind  and impelling it to something virtuous, non-
virtuous or neutral, any of those three - li ke iron moving under the power of a magnet 
without control - is intention. Here you should therefore understand it as the intention that 
motivates the mind to abandon either laxi ty or excitement when they occur.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1B How to stop laxity and excitement 
1 How to stop laxity 
2 How to stop excitement 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1B-1 How to stop laxity 
A Counteracting it by attending to something joyful or the features of light and the like 
Now, how do you stop laxity and excitement? A mind that is lax has withdrawn inward too 
much and lost its mode of apprehending the object . For that reason, it says in the first part of 
Stages of Meditation  that you should attend to a cause for the mind to move outwards again, 
something joyful. In fact it should be some thing like the Buddha’s body rather than 
something joyful giving rise to mental afflic tions. Alternatively, if you attend to the 
characteristics of light such as sunshine and cl ear away the laxity, this will immediately tighten 
your mode of apprehending the object and sust ain it. At this point, do not meditate on a 
disenchanting object, because disillusionment is  a cause for the mind to withdraw inward. 
When you examine any object you wish to examine with the wisdom of individual 
investigation and feel delighted, this  also counteracts laxity. From the Summary of Perfections : 
  
Becoming depressed uplift the mind through the 
Power of effort at special insight.    [40] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 230  B How to counteract [laxity] by heightening the mind’s mode of apprehension 
Now, as for [this] laxity or depression, {269} it is lax because the mode of apprehending the 
object has gone down, and it is depressed because it has withdrawn inwards too much. 
Therefore, it is counteracted by heightenin g the mode of apprehen sion and expanding the 
meditation object followed by delight. In Essence of the Middle Way  it says: 
 
When depressed, expand [the mind] through 
Meditation on spacious objects.  
And: 
When depressed, uplift it also  By seeing the value
142 of joyous effort.    [41]  
 
The most important antidote for stopping laxity is this: When you consider the positive 
qualities of the three jewels and bodhicitta as well as the positive qual ities of the leisure you 
have gained and the like, it should be as effe ctive for refreshing the awareness as cold water 
when it is splashed into the face of someone asleep. This depends on the experience you have 
gained through your analytical meditation of in dividual investigation on beneficial topics.  
C The discrimination of light, purifying meditation obj ects, and the like specifically against the object 
being unclear as if darkness had fallen upon the mind 
When you apply the antidote, meditation on light, to the causes that reinforce the 
development of laxity - lethargy, sleepiness and me ntal states with an aspect of darkness that 
induce those two - laxity which depends on th em does not arise either and that which has 
already arisen is counteracted.  
 The Shravaka Levels  also talk about having a break from this activity, taking to mind the 
characteristics of light and familiarizing oneself with them again and again, uplifting the mind 
with any of six [topics] - the three jewels, et hical discipline, giving, and the recollection of 
deities - or other purifying meditation objects, as  well as reciting teachings that point out the 
disadvantages of lethargy and sleepiness, lookin g to the sides or at th e moon and the stars, 
washing one’s face with water, and so forth. 
D How to apply special corrective measures against subtle and gross laxity separately 
Furthermore, if the mental laxity is very slight  and does not occur more than once [in a while] 
you should tighten the mode of apprehension of the mind as you me ditate. However, when 
intense laxity recurs again and again, {270} stop meditating, apply the antidotes as appropriate 
and [continue to] meditate as soon as laxity ha s been cleared away. If the object the mind is 
holding becomes unclear and an aspect, slight or intense, of something like darkness falling 
upon the mind emerges, as an antidote to that, take up the characteristic s of lights such as a 
butter lamp, fire and sunshine. If you familiarize yourself with them again and again, a great 
limpidity of mind will arise.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1B-2 How to stop excitement 
A The need generally to attend to something depressing as an antidote to excitement 
When it comes to excitement, the mind runs  after forms, sounds, and so forth due to 
attachment, so for that you shou ld attend to something depre ssing, a cause for the mind to 
withdraw inward. However, as soon as the exci tement has subsided beca use of that, you rest 
in equipoise. In Essence of the Middle Way  it says: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 231   
Pacify excitement by 
Attending, for instance, to impermanence 
And: 
You should withdraw the distracted mind 
By seeing the faults of the signs of distraction.  [42] 
B How to apply special corrective measures against subtle and gross laxity separately 
When intense or long lasting excitement occurs, it is effective to loosen the meditation for a 
while and meditate on something disillusioning,  whereas drawing in and placing the mind is 
not, because of its tendency to scatter. Once the excitement is not as significant [anymore], 
you should draw in the distracted [min d] and tie it to the object. In the Summary of Perfections  
it says:   
Whenever your mind has got excited Avert this by means of calm abiding.     [43]  
With an excited mind, you should not attend to inspiring or joyful objects, because they are 
causes of it being distracted outwards. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B2  Identification of causes which the development of 
laxity and excitement depend on 
A Common causes of laxity and excitement 
Second: The common causes of the two, laxity and excitement, are not guarding one’s sense 
doors, not eating the right amount, not puttin g effort into one’s practice without sleeping 
during the first and last parts of the nigh t, and remaining without introspection.  
B Causes of laxity 
The causes of laxity are great sleepiness, {271} excessive looseness in the mind’s holding its 
object, not balancing calm abiding and special insight but relying on calm abiding too much, 
the mind remaining as though in darkness, an d not enjoying directing the mind towards the 
object.  
C Causes of excitement 
The causes of excitement are said to be little disillusionment, the mind being excessively tight 
with respect to its object, not being used to making an effort , and the mind being distracted 
by thoughts of close ones and the like. 
D If you do not put effort into abandoning even subtle laxity and excitement, you do not know how to 
accomplish pure meditative stabilisation 
Therefore, you need to recognize, through intr o s p e c t i o n ,  e v e n  s u b t l e  a s p e c t s  o f  l a x i t y  a n d  
excitement and stop them all entirely. If you give up, thinking “Although in the beginning, I 
cut through subtle excitement, distraction and the like, they were never cu t off, so I shall not 
cut through them [any longer]” or if you think “Unless they are intense and come in 
excessively long chains, there is no need to  cut through them, because they are brief and 
weak, so that no karma will be accumulated” , you do not know how to accomplish pure 
meditative stabilisation. That is because yo u depart from the conclusions by venerable 
Maitreya and others on how to accomplish meditative stabilisation. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 232  E When you merely have the factors of  stability and limpidity, with that of clarity lacking intensity, there 
is no hope for medi tative stabilisation 
Therefore, summon your mind from distraction and excitement so that it is tied to the object 
within, and seek the stability factor. Whenever th e stability factor has arisen, beware of laxity 
and bring forth intense clarity. You should acco mplish faultless meditative stabilisation by 
alternating between those two. Do not trust me re limpidity lacking the factor of clarity 
endowed with the intensity of  the mode of apprehension. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3B What to do at times without laxity or excitement 
1 Since it is a mistake to apply antidotes although laxity and excitement have been cut off, you need to 
apply the antidote of that, the equanimity of natural composure 
Second: when even subtle laxity and excitement have been cut off as explained earlier and the 
mind enters into equanimity without the imbala nce of either becoming lax or excited through 
the meditation, at that time it would be a mist ake if you applied [antidotes] or endeavoured, 
so you should cultivate equanimi ty as the antidote to that. {272} This is how your meditation 
becomes faulty through application and endeavou r: by bringing the mind back inward and 
uplifting it whenever it is lax, you grow confid ent that laxity and excitement do not arise in 
every session. At that stage, it would be a mistak e greatly to beware of laxity or excitement. If 
you did, your mind would become distracted, so you need to know how to loosen up. That is 
to say loosen the endeavour rather than let go off[?] the intensity of your mode of 
apprehension.  
2 That is [what you do] from [the time] you are past the peak of laxity and excitement 
Therefore, this cultivation of equanimity is no t performed whenever laxity or excitement do 
not occur, but from the time you are past the peak  of laxity and excitement, because as long as 
you have not passed the peak for laxity and excitement, there is no equanimity.  
3 How to identify that very equanimity 
Well then, what is this equanimity? Among th e three types of equanimity - equanimity 
[towards netural] feelings, immeasurable equanimi ty and equanimity of application - it is the 
last one. Its entity is just as explained in the Shravaka Levels : it is the mind in equipoise upon 
its object from the class of calm abiding or sp ecial insight, settling into its natural state, 
operating spontaneously by itself, and achieving serviceability. When you have achieved such 
equanimity, you should fully actualize it while cultivating meditative stabilisation, without 
strong endeavour as long as laxity  and excitement do not arise.  
4 Presenting a source for these explanations on how to generate faultless meditative stabilisation 
This is in accordance with  what is set forth in [ Discriminating between ] the Middle and the 
Extremes : 
 
On that basis, the serviceability 
[Of one’s mind] attains all goals. It springs from the causes relied upon: The eight applications removing five faults - Laziness, forgetfulness Of the instructions, excitement and laxity Non-application and application, These are asserted to be the five faults. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 233  The base and what is based on it, 
The cause and the effect of it143, 
Not forgetting the object observed, Realizing excitement and laxity 
Application to remove them, 
{273} Resting naturally  when they are calmed.   [44] 
5 Explaining the meaning of the scriptural passage in detail 
Here “on that basis” is on the basis of mustering up joyous effort in order to eliminate 
unfavourable conditions. From that the meditative  stabilisation of mental servicibility arises. 
Furthermore, since it is the footing or basis of  miraculous powers that bring about all goals 
such as clairvoyance, it achieves  th[os]e goals. Such meditative stabilisation arises from the 
cause of giving up the five faults and relying on  the eight applications. The five faults are as 
follows. At the time of preparation, laziness is  a fault, because you will not apply yourself to 
meditative stabilisation. When you put effort into meditative stabilisation, forgetting the 
instructions is a fault, for, if you forget the object, there will be  no meditative equipoise of the 
mind on the object. When it is in meditative  equipoise, laxity and excitement are faults, 
because they cause mental servicibility to be lack ing. When laxity or excitement occurs, it is a 
fault not to endeavour, for by that these two will not be pacified. When there is no more144 
laxity and excitement, the intention to apply remedies is a fault. In Stages of Meditation it says 
that if you count laxity and excitement as one,  they are five, whereas if you divide them up, 
they are six. 
 Among the applications for abandoning them , their eight antidotes, laziness has four. 
They are faith, aspiration, endeavour, and plianc y. Then, the antidotes to forgetfulness, laxity 
and excitement, non-application, and applic ation are mindfulness, introspection, the 
intention to apply antidotes and the equanimity of resting naturally, respectively. They have 
already been explained above. 
6 How this manner of sustaining [meditative stabilisation]  is common to al l sutra and mantra 
instructions 
This is common to all the instructions on how to sustain the mind in single-pointed 
meditative stabilisation freed from laxity and excitement by means of mindfulness and 
introspection. Therefore, you should not hold it  to be a specific detail of the Lakshanayana145 
which, however, is unncessary in mantra, {274}because it is also taught in many highest yoga 
tantras.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B The stages of mental abiding that arise in dependence on it 
1 The actual stages of mental abiding that arise 
2 The method for accomplishing them by means of the six powers 
3 How they involve the four types of attention 
The second one has three points: The actual stages of mental ab iding that arise, the method 
for accomplishing them by means of the six powers, and how they involve four types of 
attention. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B1  The actual  stages of mental abiding that arise 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 234  [A Placement 
B Continuous placement 
C Patchy placement 
D Close placement 
E Taming 
F Pacification 
G Complete pacification 
H Making single-pointed 
I Even placement] 
The first one has nine [points]: 
 [A] Placing the mind on such and such consis ts in gathering the mind from all external 
objects and directing it towards the object within. In Ornament of the Sutras  it says: 
  
Having directed the mind towards the object, 146  [45] 
 
 [B] Continuous placement: The directed mi nd is continuously placed on the object 
over a period of time without it being distracted to anything else.  
 
Continuously don’t let it get distracted.  
 [C] Patchy placement: If you get distract ed due to forgetfulness so that you are 
distracted outwards, you realize it and tie [your mind] to its object again. 
 
Realizing distraction quickly, You should patch it up again.   
 [D] Close placement is explained as follows in the Instructions on the Perfection of 
Wisdom : The mind, while extensive by nature, is gathered again and again and thus refined, so 
that placement gets better and better . This accords with the statement: 
 
Intelligent people should more and more
[/The sensible should get better and 
better]  
Gather inwardly their minds  [/at gathering the mind within] . 
 
 [E] Taming: Having reflected on the positive  qualities of meditative stabilisation, you 
rejoice in it.  
Then, since you see the positive qualities, The mind is tamed in stabilisation
147. 
 
 [F] Pacification: You view distraction as a fault and pacify dislike for meditative 
stabilisation.  
Seeing distraction as a fault Pacify dislike for it. 
 
 [G] Complete pacification: completely  pacifying occurrences of attachment, 
unhappiness, lethargy, sleepiness and so forth. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 235   
Attachment, unhappiness, and the like 
Should be pacified as they arise. 
  
 [H] Making single-pointed: making an effo rt for the sake of effortless engagement. 
 
Then, by means of restraint and effort, 
{275} Along with actual application, 
You get it to come about naturally.  
 [I] Even placement: in the Stages of Meditation  this is said to be  the equanimity when 
the mind has become even. In the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  it is said to be 
spontaneous, natural engagement and the attainment of control
148 due to the habit149 of 
unifying the mental continuum. In acco rdance with that it also says [in Ornament of the Sutras ]:  
 
Since it’s habitual, there’s non-application.   [46] 
 
The names of these nine mental states ar e as quoted in the first part of the Stages of Meditation  
and elsewhere: 
 
This path of calm abiding is expl ained in [scriptures] such as the 
Perfection of Wisdom. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2  The method for accomplishing them by means of the six 
powers 
A Identifying the six powers 
B What minds are accomplished by them in what manner 
C How during the ninth mental  abiding you effortlessly en ter meditative stabilisation 
D How the ninth mental abiding has to be preceded by the earlier ones in turn 
E The summarized meaning of all that 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2A Identifying the six powers 
Second: The six powers are those of hearing, thinking, mindfulness, introspection, joyous 
effort and thorough acquaintance. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2B What minds are accomplished by them in what manner 
1 The power of hearing 
Through the power of hearing, the mental state of placement is accomplished, for, it merely 
consists in first tying [the mind] to the obje ct, following instructions you have heard from 
someone on how to place the mind on an object. It is not something that has become familiar 
through your own repeated reflections.  
2 The power of thinking 
Through the power of thinking, the mental stat e of continuous placement is accomplished, 
for, you keep thinking150 about the continuation of that first tie to the object and sustain it. 
From that you will initially achieve the capa city for a somewhat connected continuity.  
3 The power of mindfulness 
Through the power of mindfulne ss, the two mental states of patchy placement and close 
placement are accomplished, for,  when the mind gets distract ed from the object, you are 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 236  mindful of the earlier object and gather the mind inwards. Generating the power of your 
mindfulness from the start, you do not allow any distraction.  
4 The power of introspection 
Through the power of introspectio n, the two mental states of a taming and a pacification are 
accomplished, {276}for, through recognizing, with introspection, the disadvantages of 
scattering in discursive thought and among th e signs of secondary afflictions, and through 
viewing them as faults, you do not allow the mind to scatter in those two [sources of 
distraction].  
5 Joyous effort 
Through the power of joyous effort, you acco mplish the two mental states of complete 
pacification and making single-pointed, for you abandon even subtle occurrences of discursive 
thought and secondary afflictions with endeavou r, thereby not responding to them. Because 
you do so, laxity, excitement, and so forth canno t obstruct your meditative stabilisation and 
meditative stabilisation that arises  continuously is accomplished.  
6 The power of thorough acquaintance 
Through the power of thorough  acquaintance, you accomplish  the mental state of even 
placement, for through the power of intens e familiarization with the previous ones, 
meditative stabilisation that operat es naturally and effortlessly arises. 
 
These points accord with th e intended meaning of the Shravaka Levels , so you should not rely 
on any other explanations.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2C How during the ninth mental abiding, you effortlessly enter meditative 
stabilisation  
Now, when you have attained the ninth mental stat e, it is like in the following analogy. If you 
are very used to reciting a text or something li ke that, then whenever the motivation to recite 
it first arises and you recite it, even though yo ur mind is distracted by something else in the 
meantime, the recitation itself continues effort lessly and without interruption. Likewise, when 
you have placed your mind in equipoise once th rough mindfulness of having initially directed 
it towards the object, even though mind fulness and introspection are not applied 
continuously, you become capable of entering meditative stabilisation continuously over a 
long period without being interrupted by scat tering. When mindfulness and introspection are 
continuous, there is no need for the endeavour of  application, and that is said to be without 
application or endeavour.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2D How the nine mental abidings have to be preceded by an earlier one in turn 
For that to arise, long-lasting meditative stabilisation that cannot be obstructed by 
unfavourable conditions such as laxity and ex citement has to arise first through mindfulness 
and introspection applied with endeavour one at a time. That is the eighth mental state. {277} 
That and the ninth [state] are the same in th at conditions unfavourable to meditative 
stabilisation such as laxity and excitement canno t disrupt them. Yet, sinc e it is necessary here 
to apply mindfulness and introspection uninterru ptedly, it is said to be connected with 
application or endeavour.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 237   For that to arise, it is necessary to stop even subtle laxity, excitement, and so forth as 
soon as they arise without responding to th em. Therefore, the seventh mental state is 
necessary. For that to arise there is a need for po werful introspection watching that there is no 
scattering towards conceptual thought and second ary afflictions, distraction by them having 
been understood to be a disadvantage. Therefor e, you need the fifth and sixth mental states, 
because those two are accomplished by intr ospection that has become powerful. For 
something like that to arise, however, there is a need for mindfulness that immediately 
remembers the meditation object even if the mind  has been distracted from it, and [there is a 
need for] mindfulness that does not allow any distraction from the object in the first place. 
Therefore, the third and forth mental state ar e necessary, because those two are accomplished 
by the two [types of] mindfulness. For those to aris e, however, it is necessary, first of all, to tie 
the mind to the object and not to be distracted while it is tied to it. Therefore, the first and 
second mental states arise first. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2E The summarized meaning of those [points] 
Thus, to summarize, you should first follow the instructions you have heard and correctly act 
upon the method for placing the mind in eq uipoise. Then repeatedly think about that 
manner of placement and sustain its continuity by way of the ability to piece short periods 
together. Then, if mindfulness deteriorates an d you get distracted, you should gather the 
mind quickly and quickly be mindful of havi ng forgotten the object. Then, you should 
generate even stronger mindfulness and generate a power of mindfulness where you do not get distracted from the meditation object in  the first place. By accomplishing powerful 
mindfulness and by seeing the fault of laxity, excitement and so forth where your mind gets 
distracted from the object to something else, you should generate intense introspection to 
watch [over it]. Then you should generate st rong endeavour so that , when there is even 
distraction through subtle forget fulness, it is recognized immediately and cut short, and once 
it has been cut short the periods without ob strcution by unfavourable conditions are 
lengthened. {278} Once that has arisen, with  effort, having perfected the habit through 
familiarization, you accomplish the ninth state of  the mind going into meditative stabilisation 
without any exertion. In fact, before, when the ninth mental state has not yet been achieved, 
the yogi needs endeavour to place the mind in meditative stabilisation. But when the ninth 
mental state has been attained, even though you do not endeavour to place the mind in 
meditative equipoise deliberately, it natura lly goes into meditative stabilisation.  
 If despite your achievement of the ninth ment al state, which is li ke that, you have not 
achieved pliancy, you cannot assert to have ac hieved calm abiding, either, let alone special 
insight. This is explained below. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B3  How they  involve the four types of attention 
A The actual [types] 
The Shravaka Levels  explain that the nine mental abidings involve four types of attention. 
Explained in accordance with that, there is ti ght engagement at the time of the first and 
second mental states, because [the mind] needs to be tightened with effort. Then, during five 
mental states laxity and excitement interrupt  you and you cannot sustain long meditation 
sessions, so at that time there is interrupted a ttention. Then, in the eigh th mental state laxity 
and excitement cannot cause interruptions so that you can sustain meditation sessions for 
long. Therefore, at that time, there is uninte rrupted engagement. Then, in the ninth mental 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 238  state there is no interruption an d it is not necessary to rely on constant endeavour, so you 
settle into the attention of effortless engagement. 
B Setting out a doubt about that 
Well, there is interrupted engagement at the ti me of the first and second mental state, and 
there is also a need to tighten [the mind] at th e time of the five intermediate mental states. 
Why is it that the first and second are not said have interrupted attention and that the five in 
between are not said to have tight engagement?  
C The response to that 
In the first and second mental state, the mind  both goes and does not go into meditative 
stabilisation, however, the latter for much longer . With the five intermediate ones, abiding in 
meditative stabilisation is far longer. Therefore, the term interruption of meditative 
stabilisation has been applied to them and not to the former. {279} That  is why although the 
two [sets] are indeed the same in having tight engagement, the presence and absence of 
interruptions and engagement in the course of  it is not the same. Therefore, the five 
intermediate minds are not posited as a ttentions that have tight engagement.  
D The need continuously to rely on joyous effort along those lines 
In the Summary of Perfections it says: 
 
Through uninterrupted yoga strive151 
To bring about152 stable concentration. 
If you rest again and again, You will not get fire through friction. 
The method of yoga is like that: 
Don’t give up till you gain the distinction.  [47]  
You should accomplish it in accordance with that statement. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C The measure of having achieved calm abiding 
1 Indication of the dividing line between having accomplished it or not 
2 General indication of how to tread the path in reliance on calm abiding 
3 Indication of how to tread a worldly path in particular 
The third one has three points: indication of th e dividing line between having accomplished 
i t  o r  n o t ,  g e n e r a l  i n d i c a t i o n  o f  h o w  t o  t r e a d  t h e  p a t h  i n  r e l i a n c e  o n  c a l m  a b i d i n g  a n d  
indication of how to tread a worldly path in particular.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1 Indication of the dividing line between having accomplished it or not 
A Presenting the actual point 
B The signs of having [gained] attention along with a clarification of doubts 
The first one has two points: presenting of the actual point and the signs of having [gained] 
attention along with a clarification of doubts. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A Presenting the actual point 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 239  1 Indicating whether or not calm abiding has been achieved from the point of view of whether 
or not pliancy has been completely achieved 
2 Indicating the method by which calm abiding is accomplished once pliancy has been 
achieved 
The first one has two points: indicating whether or not calm abiding has been achieved from 
the point of view of whether or not pliancy ha s been completely achieved and indicating the 
method by which calm abiding is accomp lished once pliancy has been achieved. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-1 Indicating whether or not calm abiding has been achieved from 
the point of view of whether or not pliancy has been completely achieved 
A Setting out a doubt 
First: When you can sustain the ninth mental state free from subtle laxity and excitement 
throughout long meditation sessions as has b een explained earlier, and when you attain 
meditative stabilisation that operates spontane ously independent of the exertion of applying 
mindfulness and introspection continuously, ha s calm abiding been achieved or not?  
 B The response to that 
When meditative stabilisation has been attained, there is a twofold [division] - pliancy having 
been attained or not. If pliancy has not been attained, it is somethin g concordant with calm 
abiding rather than actual calm abiding.  
C The source  
In [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Intent  it says: 
 
‘Bhagavat, when the Bodh isattva directs his mental attention inwards, 
with his mind observing his mind, as long as physical and mental 
pliancy have not been attained, what is that mental attention called?’ – 
{280} ‘Maitreya, it is not calm abid ing, but should be referred to as 
aspiration that is concordant with  calm abiding and concomitant with 
i t ’ .          [ 4 8 ]   
In Ornament of the Sutras , it also says:  
 
Out of habit there’s non-application. 
Then his body and mind attain, 
Extreme, overwhelming pliancy and 
He is said to have mental attention.    [49] 
 
In this context “mental attention” is calm abiding. 
In the middle Stages of Meditation  it also clearly says: 
 
When body and mind of the one wh o has thus made a habit of calm 
abiding become extremely pliable and [when] his mind becomes fully 
controlled with regard to objects observ ed at will – he should know that 
calm abiding has then been accomplished. [50]  
And from the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom : 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 240  Here, the Bodhisattva dwelling alon e in seclusion should mentally 
attend to his intended object. Having abandoned the mind’s discourse, 
he should attend many times to the mind  itself as it appears. As long as 
physical and mental pliancy have not arisen, it is a mental attention 
concordant with calm abiding, whereas once they have arisen, it is calm 
abiding.     [51] 
D Although the meditative stabilisation before the attainment of pliancy belongs to the desire [realm] 
level, it is not a level of meditative equipoise in the desire [realm]  
Now, what level does meditative stabilisation be fore the attainment of pliancy belong to? It 
belongs to the desire [realm] level. Although it  has such single-pointedness of mind, it is a 
level of non-equipoise and it is not posi ted as a so-called level of equipoise. The Actual Basis of 
the Levels  explains this to be for the reason that it is not accomplished through non-regret, 
supreme bliss and pliancy.  
 E That meditative stabilisation is the meditative stabilisat ion of a single-pointed mind of [the] desire 
[realm] 
Thus, when pliancy has not been attained, the su perficial meditative stabilisation that does 
not rely on constant mindfulness, where the mind goes into non-conceptuality of its own 
accord, and which {281} can apparently also be combined with any physical activity: moving, 
walking, lying and sitting, is still called single-poi nted mind of the desire realm. It is not actual 
calm abiding.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-2 Indication of how calm abiding is achieved once pliancy has been 
fully accomplished 
A Explanation of how pliancy is identified and generated 
B Actual indication of how - once it has been fully accomplished - calm abiding is achieved  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-2A Explanation of how pliancy is identified and generated 
1 Identification 
Well then, what is the method fo r attaining pliancy? Once it ha s been attained, what is the 
method for proceeding to calm abiding? This is what the Compendium of Abhidharma  says with 
respect to pliancy: 
 
What is pliancy? It is that serviceabi lity of body and mind due to cutting 
through the continuity of taking on bad physical and mental states. Its 
function is to eliminate all obscurations.  [52] 
2 The meaning of the scriptural passage from Compendium of Abhidharma  
That bad physical and mental states are taken on  [implies] that body and mind are unfit to be 
employed for any virtuous activity at will. Its antidote, physical and mental pliancy, [implies] 
an extreme serviceability with respect to body and mind being employed for virtous activities. 
It is due to freedom from taking on bad states , both physical and ment al. Specifically, if you 
endeavour to give up mental afflictions and bad physical states that are within the class of 
mental afflictions and obstruct the joy of aban doning mental afflictions, you will get rid of 
such unserviceability as heavine ss of the body and then, its lightn ess is the serviceability of the 
body.  
 Likewise, if you endeavour to abandon ment al afflictions and bad mental states that 
are within the class of mental afflictions and obstruct the joy of abandoning mental 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 241  afflictions, you will pass beyond153 the unfitness of the mind for being directed towards the 
object and engaging [in it] with delight. Then the mind engaging in its object unobstructedly 
is a serviceable mind.  
3 Sources for that  
In accordance with that Acharya Sthiramati says: 
 
In this regard, serviceability of th e body is that from which whatever 
lightness arises for the activities of the body itself. Serviceability of the 
mind is another phenomenon arisen fr om mind that is the cause of the 
mind becoming fresh and happy afte r entering into pure attention. 
{282} When you are endowed with it, you engage in objects 
unobstructedly, which is why it is called serviceability of the mind.
         [ 5 3 ]  
 
In brief, although you want to endeavou r to abandon the mental afflictions, the 
unserviceability of body and mind, through diffide nce, [make this] as difficult to do as if you 
were engaging in some awful job you have. On ce pliancy has been achieved, this stops and 
body and mind become extremely easy to use. In the Shravaka Levels  it says that such perfectly 
complete serviceability of body and mind arises in small portions right from the beginning when you obtain meditative stabilisation. So, as it increases, it eventually turns into pliant, 
single-pointed calm abiding. In fact, at first it is subtle and therefore hard to recognize, but later on it becomes easy to recognize.  
4 How, among the two types of pliancy, mental pliancy is the first one to arise 
An early sign of such pliancy about to arise co mplete with all its characteristics and easy to 
apprecitate, is a feeling of heaviness at the top of the head, experienced by the person striving 
to cultivate meditative stabilisation. It is not an  uncomfortable heaviness. As soon as it arises, 
you are free from bad mental states that obstru ct the joy of abandoning mental afflictions, 
and its antidote, pliancy, arises first154. In the Shravaka Levels  it says: 
  
As an early sign that gross single-poi ntedness of mind which is easy to 
appreciate as well as pliancy of mi nd and body will arise before long, 
the top of his head will seem heav y. In fact, this symptom is not 
harmful. As soon as it arises, any bad mental states within the class of the mental afflictions that obst ruct the joy of abandonment are 
abandoned and their antidotes, serviceability of mind and mental pliancy, also arise.      [54] 
5 How physical pliancy arises from that 
Then, in dependence on the force of that plianc y of mental serviceability having arisen, {283} 
the energies that cause physical pliancy to arise circulate within the body. When those 
energies pass through your body parts and pe rvade them, you are freed from bad physical 
states, and the antidote to taking on bad states , physical pliancy, arises. Furthermore, after 
they have spread throughout th e body, [the latter] seems as th ough filled with the power of 
serviceable energy. In the Shravaka Levels  it says: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 242    
Through that having arisen, the energies of the great elements 
conducive to the arising of physical  pliancy circulate through the body. 
While they circulate, one is freed fr om any bad physical states within 
the class of the mental afflictions th at obstruct the joy of abandonment. 
Their antidote, physical pliancy, sp reads throughout the body so that 
[the latter] seems as though full [of it].  [55] 
6 The difference between those two kinds of pliancy 
In this regard, physical pliancy is an extremely pleasant sensation within the body, it is not a 
mental factor. Master Sthiramati says:  
If a distinctive physical sensation is conjoined with joy, you should 
recognize it as physical pliancy, for in the sutras it says that when the 
mind is joyful, the body becomes pliant.   [56] 
7 How among the two kinds of bliss, that of physical and that of mental pliancy, the bliss of physical 
pliancy arises first 
Thus, when physical pliancy first arises, throug h the force of the energies, a great experience 
of bliss arises within the body in dependence on which a very exquisite experience of joyful 
bliss is also produced within the mind.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-2A7B Indicating the actual manner in which calm abiding is accomplished once pliancy has been fully achieved 
1 The actual [manner] 
Then, the force of that pliancy having arisen for the first time gradually diminishes. In fact, it 
is not that pliancy has been exhausted and goes  away. However, that gross [pliancy] has moved 
the mind excessively, so when it neutralizes, unsh akable pliancy that is delicate like a shadow 
and in accord with meditative stabilisation arises. When the joy155 has dissapeared, the mind 
{284} remains firmly on its ob ject, and calm abiding free from the restlessness of agitation 
caused by great joy is attained. 
2 The source for that 
In the Shravaka Levels it says: 
 
When that first arises, you are endowed with joy, mental ease, and 
supreme happiness, and even the object appears manifestly endowed 
with joy. Then, little by little, all th e force of pliancy that first arises 
turns extremely subtle and the body becomes endowed with shadow-
like pliancy. The mind abandons a ll the joy again, and through calm 
abiding, engages in the object completely firm and utterly peaceful in 
a s p e c t .         [ 5 7 ]   
When that happens, through the attainment of the attention and the calm abiding included 
in the preparatory stage of the first concentratio n, the lesser attention of meditative equipoise 
is attained. This is explained in the Shravaka Levels .  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1B The signs of being endowed with attention and clearing up doubts 
[about this] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 243  1 The actual signs of being endowed with attention 
2 Clearing up doubts [about this] 
The second one has two points: explaining the actual signs of being endowed with attention 
and how to clear up doubts [about this]. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1B-1 The actual signs of being endowed with attention 
A How this is set forth in the Shravaka Levels  
First: The signs by which to recognize that ones elf or others have attained attention are set 
forth in the Shravaka Levels . Through attaining that, a set of fo ur is attained in small measure: 
a mind belonging to the form realm, physical [pliancy], mental pliancy, and single-
pointedness. Also, one is enabled to purify mental afflictions by means of calm and coarse156 
paths or paths associated with aspects of the [four noble] truths, physical and mental pliancy 
arise very quickly when the mind is equipo ised inwardly, for the most part, the five 
hindrances, desire for sensual pleasure, sleepin ess and so forth do not occur, and when one 
rises from equipoise one is [still] imbued with some physical and mental pliancy.  
B  Once this attention has been attained, it is easy for calm abiding to becomes pure 
Once attention with these signs is attained, {285 } it is easy for the path of calm abiding to 
become pure157. After establishing meditative equipoise  of the mind in single-pointed calm 
abiding, physical and mental pliancy can quickl y be induced so that pliancy increases. The 
Shravaka Levels  explain that the more pliancy increases the more calm abiding also increases, 
whereby they mutually increase each other. In br ief, when the mind is serviceable the energies 
become serviceable. At that time extraord inary physical pliancy occurs and upon its 
occurrence special meditative stabilisation ar ises. Through that, again, an extraordinary 
serviceability of energies is accomplished wh ereby physical and mental pliancy is induced. 
C Statements from the Shravaka Levels  on how other positive qualities also arise  
Furthermore, in the Shravaka Levels  it is explained that at the time the mind is first placed 
single-pointedly, it is placed without mindfulne ss of or attention to anything else whatsoever: 
 
In order not to turn toward all th e signs and prevent distraction, you 
prevent mindfulness and attention [to them] from the beginning by 
means of firm placement.     [58]  
When you have familiarized yourself with that, the Shravaka Levels  go on to say:  
 
Be sure to focus on single-pointedness itself and direct your mind like t h i s  b y  t h e  s t a g e s  o f  f o c u s i n g  o n  calm abiding within, which are: the 
mental continuum and the entire continuity of mind becoming free from signs, free from discursive th ought, and absolutely calm. When 
you have attained the mental state of calm abiding in that manner, if signs arise due to the faults of forg etfulness and unfamiliarity, or if 
appearances arise due to secondary mental afflictions, if holes start showing, if you conceptualize, you should not be mindful of such occurrences nor attend to them as a result of seeing their disadvantages 
earlier. Through your not minding th em and not attending to them in 
this manner those objects completely disintergrate, and {286} when they 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 244  have been completely cleared away, the mind is placed on the very 
absence of appearances. “Sir, this object is subtle and hard to 
comprehend, therefore aspire and strive in order to comprehend it.
     [ 5 9 ]  
 
That is how meditative stabil isation is said to arise. 
D Explaining the meaning of that 
Up to “in that manner”158 it is being shown how the three, ab sence of signs and so forth, arise 
gradually from sustaining [meditation] as before.  
 Then, up to “you should not [be mindful of such occurrences]” it is being explained 
that whenever signs and so forth [do] appear in  the mind even though calm abiding has been 
accomplished - because there is no great fami liarity with it and so forth - you should 
remember the disadvantages of the mind coming  under the influence of those, not pursue 
them and place [the mind] without thinking of anything. 
 Then, the section up to “absence of appearance”159 explains that through familiarizing 
oneself in that way, whichever of the three, ma rks and so forth, arises , through the force of 
familiarity with not thinking of anything at a ll, it will subside by itself independently of 
deliberately directing the mind. Then you abid e in the non-appearance of the three and you 
are not carried away by them as is being explai ned. The remainder [of the passage] points out 
that this calm abiding is subtle and that it is  difficult to comprehend the explanation of it. 
E How the mind is not directed at signs  
In this regard, the signs are explained as 10 sign s: of the five [sense] objects, forms and so 
forth, of the three poisons, and of male and female. As for the manner in which they 
disappear, first a multiplicity of signs of forms an d so forth appear and as soon as they appear, 
they subside by themselves and are purified. Fi nally, when you settle in meditative equipoise, 
the signs of forms, sounds and so forth do no t appear, only the aspect s of mind - knowing, 
clarity and vibrant happiness do.  
F How all conceptual thoughts also subside by themselves 
Then, this is how conceptual thoughts disappe ar: Since you have settled as before without 
being mindful of them and without attending to them, conceptual thoughts that have arisen, 
like bubbles emerging from water, cannot proliferate greatly or conjoin, {287} and subside by 
themselves. Then, through your sustaining [the  meditation] as [explained] before, awareness 
of the experience and the appearance of bliss,  without being stopped deliberately, unable to 
bear the spell, subside again by themselves, like peeling bark, and get purified by themselves as 
soon as they arise. Bliss and awareness of the experience become more subtle.  
G Differences between that and the time after meditative equipoise 
At that time, when equipoise has been establishe d, there are no appearances such as that of 
one’s own body, and there is a sense as if the mind has become indivisible with from space. 
As one arises [from meditation], it feels as if one’s body had suddenl y appeared. Afterwards, 
even afflictive conceptual thoughts of anger an d the like that arise are also different from 
before or originally: weak and incapable of conjoining over long periods of time.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 245  H Experiences of great mental clarity and the like also occur 
These periods are periods of what is called “com plete pacification”. The experience of clarity 
is great and you feel you can count the minute pa rticles of pillars and walls of a house. Due to 
the intense stability factor, sleep like at the time before achieving meditative stabilisation does 
not even come during the hours of sleep; it feel s as if mixed with meditative stabilisation and 
you have many pure dream appearances and the like. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1B-2 Eliminating a doubt 
A A doubt 
When the kind of meditative stabilisation explai ned above is achieved, which of the five paths 
is the context to place it in?  
B Its elimination  
If it is the meditative stabilisation explaine d above that is cultivated after the view of 
selflessness has been unmistakenly ascertained an d [the mind] has been placed within [that] 
view160, it can be put in the context of the path of liberation of ordinary beings. However, if it 
is a meditation cultivated otherwise, the Shravaka Levels  says that even worldly paths 
dependent on the view with the coarse and subtle  aspects that accomplish the actual level of 
the first meditative stabilisation are accomp lished in dependence on this meditative 
stabilisation. Therefore, non-Buddhist sages {2 88} who free themselves from attachment by 
means of worldly paths up to that of nothingn ess and those below also need to progress to 
higher paths in dependence on it. So it is a meditative stabilisation common to both non-
Buddhists and Buddhists.  
C If it is also conjoined with any of the three principal aspects of the path, it becomes a path of 
liberation and so on 
Furthermore, if it is conjoined with detach ment from cyclic existence due to the view 
correctly realizing selflessness and a realization of the faults of existence, and [if it is 
conjoined] with the thought of renunciation that strives for li beration, it becomes a path of 
liberation. If it is conjoined with bodhicitta , it even becomes a Mahayana path. Likewise, for 
example, if the generosity of giving a pinch of  food to an animal and the observance of any 
one ethical discipline is conjoined with those intentions, they will become accumulations of 
the paths of liberation and omniscience, respectively.  
 However, here, what is being analyzed is  not whether or not it becomes a path of 
liberation and omniscience by way of conjunct ion with other paths. Rather, what is being 
analyzed is what the path becomes through the ow n entity of this meditative stabilisation.  
D Therefore, the need to differentiate with regard to happiness, clarity and non-conceptuality whether or not [a given meditation] is an emptiness meditation 
That is why, in meditations without mindfulne ss and mental activity, the blissful, clear non-
conceptuality termed “unfabricated by the mind ” and “without grasping” is of two [types]: 
that which is and that which is  not an emptiness meditation with equipoise established on 
the meaning of suchness. Therefore, it is extr emely important to differentiate them well, for 
there is much ground for mistaking that whic h is not a realization of suchness as [its] 
realization. If you do not differentiate them as explained earlier, you will even take the 
meditative stabilisation which is  common to this Dharma and that  of others to be the main 
point of completion stage highest yoga tantra , so you should investigate this in detail. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 246  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C2 General indication of how to progress along the path in 
dependence on calm abiding 
 A How it is of great importance to cultivate special insight in dependence on it 
Second: Should someone who has thus {289} achieved attention, the non-conceptual 
meditative stabilisation explained above, sustai n just that non-conceptuality characterized by 
clarity, non-conceptuality, and so forth?  
 Such meditative stabilisation having been  generated in the mental continuum is for 
the sake of generating special insi ght that destroys the [mental] a fflictions. Therefore, if special 
insight does not arise in dependence on it, ho wever much you familiarise yourself meditative 
stabilisation, you will not even be able to aban don the mental afflictions of the desire realm, 
not to mention the mental afflictions as a whole.  For that reason it is necessary to cultivate 
special insight.  
B How there are two special insights to be cultivated 
In this regard there are two, the special insights that progresses along mundane paths 
abandoning manifest afflictions, and the spec ial insight that progresses along supramundane 
paths abandoning the seeds of afflictions from the root. The former is a meditation with the 
coarse and peaceful aspects of viewing lower levels as coarser and higher ones as more 
peaceful, and the latter is a view meditation wi th the sixteen aspects, impermanence and so 
forth, regarding the four trut hs. They are set out in the Shravaka Levels , the principal one 
being the view that realizes the selflessness of persons161.  
C How calm abiding constitutes the basis for the progress of all non-Buddhist and Buddhist yogis on the 
path  
That being so, anyone, non-Buddhists who aban don manifest afflictions by cultivating the 
path with coarse and peaceful aspects, and Bu ddhists who abandon afflic tions from their root 
by meditating on the meaning of selflessness, require the calm abiding explained above as the 
basis for abandoning afflictions of both non-Bu ddhist and Buddhist yogis. Not only that - any 
Mahayana or Hinayana yogi also n eeds to accomplish that meditative stabilisation, and as for 
Mahayana practitioners, again, all Mantrayana and Paramitayana yogis need to accomplish 
that calm abiding. Therefore, this calm abiding is crucial as the basis of progress on the paths 
of all yogis. 
D How it is unacceptable for us Buddhists not to have special insight realizing selflessness  
For Buddhists {290} it is not unacceptable to la ck the former of those two special insights, but 
the latter special insight that realizes selflessness is a factor162 whose lack is unacceptable. In 
fact, if you attain the calm abiding explaine d above which is included in the level of 
preparation for the first concentration, you can a ttain the liberation that is freedom from all 
bondage of cyclic existence by cultivating specia l insight in dependence on it - even without 
attaining the calm abiding of higher concentrat ions or formlessness. On the other hand, if 
you do not realize the very essence of selflessne ss and fail to meditate on it, you will not free 
yourself from cyclic existence even if you ab andon all manifest afflictions up to “complete 
nothingness” and thus attain th e “peak of existence” by means of the calm abiding explained 
above and the mundane special insight dependent on it. 
E A source for that 
From Praise of the Praiseworthy : 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 247  Beings who fail to turn to your teachings, 
Who are blinded by delusions, Having gone to the peak of existence 
Attain existence and suffer again. 
Those who follow your  teachings, without 
Attaining the basis of concentration Still avert existences, 
While being looked over by Mara.   [60] 
F Yogis of highest yoga tantra also need to progress along the path based on calm abiding 
For that reason, yogis of highest yoga tantra al so need to develop one kind of calm abiding 
even though they do not generate  the special insight that observes  the multiplicity of peaceful 
and coarse aspects and the calm abiding accompli shed by means of it. In fact the point where 
it first arises is during the generation stage.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C3 Indication of how to progress on mundane paths in particular 
A How features of two [kinds of] beginners are explained in the Shravaka Levels   
Here the Shravaka Levels  explains that from the ninth ment al stage, you are a beginner with 
regard to attention as long as you have not achieved attention163, whereas one who has 
achieved attention and, out of a desire to puri fy mental afflictions, cultivates the attention 
that individually recognises the characteristics164 is a beginner with regard to purifying 
afflictions.  
B The need to differentiate those two properly 
{291} If this [point] explained in the Shravaka Levels  is not ascertained properly, the false 
impression will arise that the lowest of the paths of concentration and formlessness is the 
preparatory stage of the first concentration, and that the first mind arising included in that 
preparatory stage is the individual recognition of  characteristics, since individually recognizing 
characteristics is the first of six attentions165 that are explained.  
C Establishing the validity of this [distinction]  
It is inadmissible to hold this, because there is  no way for the preparatory stage of the first 
concentration to arise like that without calm  abiding having been attained, and if that 
preparatory stage has not been attained, calm abiding is not attained166. Also, since the 
individual recognition of characteristics is an analytical meditation, calm abiding that has not 
been attained before cannot be freshly acco mplished  by means of that meditation.  
D The need for beginners to attain calm abiding out of the attention [included in] the preparatory stage 
of the first [concentration] before the attention in dividually recognising characteristics [included in] 
preparatory stage of the first concentration 
Therefore, the first of six attentions of the prep aratory stage is the beginning of cultivating the 
special insight included in the preparatory stage.  However, it is not at the beginning of the 
mere first preparatoy stage, for the calm ab iding included in the preparatory stage must 
precede it. All the meditative stabilisations prior to the attainment of the meditative 
stabilisation included in the first preparatory stage are single-pointed minds of the desire 
realm167, which is also why, according to the great texts, those who attain calm abiding seem 
to be very few. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Calm Abiding 
 
 248   The way to free oneself from attachment to the desire realm by means of the six 
preparatory stage attentions is not wri tten down here for fear of wordiness. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 249  Explanation of how to train in spec ial insight, the essence of wisdom 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2 How to train in special insight 
A Attending to the prerequisites of special insight 
B The subdivisions of special insight 
C How to cultivate special insight 
D The measure of having achieved special insight through cultivation 
Second: How to train in special insight has fo ur points: attending to the prerequisites of 
special insight, the subdivisions  of special insight, how to cu ltivate special insight, and the 
measure of having achieved special insight through cultivation. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A Attending to the prerequisites of special insight 
1 General presentation of how to attend to the prerequisites of special insight 
2 In particular how to settle the view 
The first one has two points: general presentation  of how to attend to the prerequisites of 
special insight and {292} in particular how to settle the view. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1 General presentation of how to attend to the prerequisites of special insight 
A Relying on holy beings 
B Seeking to hear the Dharma from them 
C Reflecting on it properly 
First: The middle Stages of Meditation  set out three prerequisites of  special insight: relying on 
holy beings, seeking to hear the Dharma fr om them, and reflecting on it properly.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A Relying on holy beings 
1 The need to hear and reflect on the scriptures 
2 The need to follow any of the great trail-blazers as appropriate 
3 [On the history of Madhyamaka] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-1 The need to hear and reflect on the scriptures 
It is an indispensable causal prerequisite of special insght to develop the view realizing 
suchness by means of the wisdoms of hearing an d reflecting, having heard the stainless texts 
in dependence on experts who unmistakenly know  the essential points of the scriptures. This 
is because if you lack the view that has come to a decisive conclusion about the meaning of 
the mode of being, it will be impossible for th e realization of special insight that realizes 
[things] as they are to arise.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-2 The need to follow any of the great trail-blazers as appropriate 
For such a view [to arise], again, it is nece ssary to seek relying not on the interpretable 
meaning but relying on the definitive meaning.  Therefore, you need to know the difference 
between interpretable and definitive meaning an d internalize the definitive meaning of the 
scriptures. Again, with this, if you do not rely on a treatise by one of the great, valid, trail-
blazing founders which elucidates the [Buddha’s]  intentions, you will be like a blind person 
without a guide, going off into a dreadful di rection. Therefore, you should rely on non-
mistaken commentaries.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3 [On the history of Madhyamaka] 
A The need to seek the view relying on Nagarjuna’s system B How the[various] ways of explaining Nagarjuna’s intended meaning emerged 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3A The need to seek the view relying on Nagarjuna’s system 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 250  On whom should you rely? On Arya Nagarjuna, widely renowned on the three levels, whom 
the Bhagavan himself prophesied very clearly in  numerous sutras and tantras as elucidating 
the essence of his teachings, the profound meaning free from all extremesof existence and 
non-existence. You should seek the view realizing emptiness relying on his texts. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3B How the [various] ways of explaining Nagarjuna’s intention emerged 
1 Identification of the original Madhyamika 
2 Examination of the designations used by earlier generations 
3 The validity of explanations in accord[ance] with that of Yeshe De on the authors of Madhyamika 
treatises and the stages by which the Madhyamika systems of Sautrantika and Yogachara emerged 
4 These terms are not suited to Master Chandrakirti 
5 The validity of the terms Svatantrika and Prasangika associated with scholars of the later propagation 
6 Which of the masters we follow[here] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3B1 Identification of the original Madhyamika 
{293} Since the great Madhyamikas168 such as the masters Buddhapalita, Bhavaviveka, 
Chandrakirti, Shantarakshita consider Aryadeva to  be as valid as his master, both the father 
and his [spiritual] son are sources for the othe r Madhyamikas. Therefore, earlier generations 
called those two “Madhyamikas of the original texts” and the others “partisan Madhyamikas”.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3B2 Analysis of the terms applied by earlier generations 
1 Terms applied from the point of view of how conventionalities are established  
Some spiritual teachers of earlier generations sa id that there were two [kinds of] Madhyamikas 
termed from the point of view of how they po sit conventionalities: those who assert that 
external objects conventionally exist, Sautra ntika-Madhyamikas, and those who assert that, 
conventionally, external objects do  not exist, Yogacara-Madhyamikas. 
2 Terms applied from the point of view of how the ultimate is asserted 
From the point of view of how the ultimate is asserted two terms were applied as well: 
proponents of illusions established by a reason ing consciousness [are] those who assert that 
the collection of an object such as a sprout and its appearances lacking true existence is an 
ultimate truth, and proponents of thorough non-abiding [are] those who assert that the 
affirmative affirmative eliminat ive phenomenon which is an el imination of the elaborations 
with respect to appearances169. The first of these were asserted to be masters such as 
Shantarakshita and Kamalashila. Some Indians al so asserted the designations illusion-like and 
thoroughly non-dwelling.  
3 How that designation to do with the way of asserting the ultimate is obscured 
The great Translator [Lodan Sherab] says “Posit ing them as two [groups] from the point of 
view of how the ultimate is asserted is an obscured presentation generating amazement.” 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3B3 The validity of explanations in accord[ance] with that of Yeshe De on the 
authors of Madhyamika treatises and the history of the founders of Sautrantika-Madhyamika and Yogachara-
Madhyamika  
With regard to this, the master Yeshe De expl ains: “In the Madhyamika treatises by the noble 
father[, Nagarjuna,] and [his sp iritual] son[, Aryadeva,] it is not made clear whether external 
objects exist or not. After them, the master  Bhavaviveka refuted the system of mere 
knowledge170, and established a system in which extern al objects conventionally exist. Then 
the master Shantarakshita made  a different Madhyamika system  based on Yogachara treatises 
teaching that external objects do not conventi onally exist and that ultimately the mind is 
without ineherent existence. {2 94} Thereby two kinds of Madh yamikas emerged. The former 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 251  were called Sautrantika-Madhyamikas, the latte r Yogachara-Madhyamikas.” The great treatises 
expose history of clarification in accordance with that.  
 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3B4 Those designations are not suited to Master Chandrakirti 
However, although Master Chandrakirti asserts that  external objects conventionally exist, it is 
unsuitable to call him a Sautrant ika, because he does not confor m to other proponents of the 
tenet system. To assert that he accords wi th the Vaibhashika is also inadmissable.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3B5 The validity of the designations Svatantrika and Prasangika associated 
with scholars of the later propagation 
The scholars of the later propagation [of teachi ngs] in the land of snowy mountains created 
two designations for Madhyamikas, Svatan trika and Prasangika. That accords with 
[Chandrakirti’s] Clear Words . 
 Therefore, [Madhyamikas] are definite as tw o [groups], those who conventionally assert 
external objects and those who do not. When terms are applied from the point of view of 
how the view ascertaining emptiness is generate d within the mental continuum, they are also 
definite as two [groups], Prasangika and Svatantrika. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A1A-3B6 Which of the masters to follow 
A Indication that the earlier Kadampas’ quest for the view following Chandra[kirti] was in Jowo [Atisha]’s intention 
Yet, following which of those masters do you s eek the intentions of the Noble Father and his 
[spiritual] son? Following the great Jowo [Atish a] who made Master Chandrakirti’s system the 
main [Madhyamika] system, the earlier great lama s of these instructions also held to this 
system as the main one.  
B How Je [Tsongkhapa] himself asserts the two systems, Buddhapalita’s and Chandra[kirti]’s, as the main ones and then Bhavaviveka[‘s] as important 
From the commentaries on Treatise on the Middle (Mulamadhyamakakarika ), Master 
Chandra[kirti] saw that Buddhapalita had elucid ated the noble one’s intentions completely. 
He based himself on that system, took a lo t of good explanations also from Master 
Bhavaviveka, refuted those that seemed slightly  incorrect, and elucidated the intention of the 
noble one. 
C How these two masters are important with respect to explaining the profound meaning  
{295} Since the commentaries of these two [masters] are seen to be very outstanding with 
respect to explaining the texts of  the noble father and son, the intentions of the noble father 
and son will be settled here following in th e footsteps of the masters Buddhapalita and 
Chandra[kirti]. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2 In particular how the view is settled 
A Identification of afflicted ignorance 
B Demonstration that it is the root of revolving in cyclic existence  
C Seeking the view of selflessness with the desire to abandon the apprehension of a self  
The second one has three points: identification of  afflicted ignorance, de monstration that it is 
the root of revolving in cyclic existence, and s eeking the view of selflessness with the desire to 
abandon the apprehension of a self.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A Identification of afflicted ignorance 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 252  1 Although attachment and the like are factors opposed to insight, they are not the main ones  
2 Although in general, the mere factors opposed to insight are posited as ignorance, here it is the 
factors opposed to an insight into lack of true existence 
3 Explanation of the two subtle conceptions of self as mental afflictions 
4 What self nature that ignorance misconceives [and] how so 
5 Detailed explanation of the conceptions of self 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-1 Although attachment and the like are in a class discordant with 
knowledge, they are not the main ones 
First: The antidotes to the other mental afflicti ons such as attachment taught by the Jina are 
partial antidotes, whereas the antidote to ignora nce he taught becomes an antidote to all [of 
them]. Therefore, ignorance is the basis of all errors and faults. In Clear Words  it says: 
  
In the nine divisions of the buddhas ’ teachings based on the two truths, 
Such as the sets of sutras proclaimed for the extensive conduct of 
wordly beings, The ones that were taught for the sa ke of removing attachment will not 
cause hatred to be exhausted, And those that were taught for the sake of removing hatred will not 
cause attachment to be exhausted, What was taught for the sake of exha usting pride will not overcome the 
other defilements. Therefore they are not so pervasive; all those speeches are not of [such] 
great meaning. Those that were taught for the sake of exhausting ignorance
171 
overcome all the mental afflictions 
That all the mental afflictions are thoroughly based on ignorance is 
what the jinas taught.”      [1] 
 
That being so you must meditate on suchness172 as the antidote to ignorance. Moreover, 
unless you have identified ignorance, you wi ll not know how to cultivate its antidote. 
Therefore it is extremely important to identify ignorance. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-2 Although in general, ignorance is posited as the mere opposite of 
knowledge, here it is the opposite of the knowledge realising the absence of true existence  
Ignorance {296} is the reverse side of knowledge,  but knowledge, again, should not be taken as 
any [knowledge]. Rather, it is the wisdom know ing suchness which is selflessness. Its opposite 
is not suitable to be the mere absence of that wisdom or just something else. Therefore, it is 
its antagonist.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-3 Explaining the two subtle apprehensions of self as mental afflictions  
It is the superimposition173 of self and, more specifically, th e two superimpositions of a self of 
phenomena and of persons. So both the appr ehension of a self of phenomena and the 
apprehension of a self of  persons are ignorance.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-4 How ignorance superimposes what inherent existence 
The manner of superimposition is by apprehen ding that phenomena exist by way of their 
own entity, by way of their own characteristics, or  inherently. In this regard, it says in [the 
Sutra ] Requested by Upali  that phenomena are posited by the power of conception: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 253  The various flowers that gladden the mind, 
The golden, resplendent, attractive mansions, Both completely lack a creator - 
Are posited by the power of conception.  
The world is imputed by the power of conception.  [2]  
And in the Sixty [Stanzas of ] Reasoning  [it] also [says]: 
 
Since the perfect Buddha said The world had ignorance as a cause, Why would it be invalid to say  That this world is [due to] conception.   [3]  
The commentary on the meaning of this stat ement explains that the worlds are not 
established by way of their own entity, but are merely imputed by conception. Again, in the 
Four Hundred Verses  it says: 
 
If, in the absence of conceptions, Desire and so forth do not exist 
Who with intelligence would uphold 
Intrinsic realities and conceptions?   [4]  
And in the commentary on this:  
[Things] that exist only through the existence of conception and do not 
exist without conception, are without doubt definite as unestablished by way of their own entity, like a snake imputed on a rope.        [ 5 ]   
This statement {297} explains that from the po int of view of being imputated while not being 
established by way of their own entities, atta chment and so forth resemble a snake imputed 
on a rope
174. [Yet] the latter is not the same as atta chment and so forth in terms of whether 
they conventionally exist or not.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-5 Detailed explanation of the apprehension of a self 
A Explanation that the apprehension of a self is twofold  
B The difference between the apprehension of a self and the view of the transitory collection  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-5A Explanation that the apprehension of a self is twofold 
1 How the two apprehen sions of a self are the same  in their [subjective] as pect, but still differentiated 
through their observed objects  
For those reasons, the manner of  apprehending [things] as truly existent, the object of 
negation, is to apprehend them not as posited by the power of beginningless conceptions, but 
as established on objects[themselves] by way of their own entity. Its referent object is called 
“self” or “inherent nature“. The non-existence of this with a person as substratum is taught to 
be the selflessness of a person, and the non-exis tence of it with phenom enona such as an eye 
and a nose as substratum is taught to be the selflessness of phenomena. Therefore, the 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 254  apprehension of that inherent nature existi ng in persons and phenomenona is implicitly 
understood as the apprehension of the two selves.  
2 The reason for differentiating the two apprehensions of a self in that manner  
In the commentary on the Four Hundred Stanzas  it says: 
 
In this regard, the ‘self’ is an entity  of things that does not depend on 
anything else, an inherent nature. Its non-existence is selflessness. 
Owing to the division of phenomena and persons, it is understood as twofold, namely “selflessness of phenomena” and “selflessness of p e r s o n s ” .         [ 6 ]  
 
It is like that. 
  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-5B Distinctions involving these two 
1 The apprehension of an I, the view of the transitory collection has a person as its observed object 
With respect to the observed object of  apprehending a self of persons the Entrance  [to the 
Middle Way  by Chandrakirti] explains that some Sammitiyas175 assert part of the five 
aggregates, and some assert only the mind to be th e basis or object of the view of a self. As for 
the mind, again, Cittamatrins176 and certain Madhyamikas who assert a mind-basis-of-all assert 
that the mind-basis-of-all is the observed obje ct, and some Madhyamikas such as Bhavaviveka 
who do not assert it, as well as many exponents of  Shravaka schools assert that it is the mental 
consciousness. However, with these systems, yo u need to know the me aning invested in the 
designation “person”, the one cultivating the path s, the one revolving in cyclic existence, and 
so forth, {298} the two modes of  positing the mere I and positi ng a mind-basis-of-all and so 
forth, as the basis that I’s characteristics.  
 With respect to the innate177 view of the transitory collection178 which is an 
apprehension of a self, the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] refutes that the aggregates are its 
observed object, and in the Commentary it is sa id to have the dependently imputed self as its 
observed object. It is said that even the mere collection of aggregates is not the conventional 
self, so neither the collection of aggregates at one time nor the collection which is the 
continuum of the aggregates from an earlier to a later moment are its observed object. Rather, 
the mere I which is the observed  object of the mere thought “I ” arising, or the mere person 
should be taken as its observed object. Neither th e individual aggregates nor their collection is 
posited as the basis of that I’s179 characteristics. However, th is [point], an unsurpassed 
distinguishing feature of this system, has b een explained in great detail elsewhere.  
2 The difference in observed objects between the two apprehensions of true existence  
The mind thinking “I” that arises towards the observed object of the innate view of the 
transitory collection must arise naturally. Ther efore, although the inna te apprehension of the 
self of a person that apprehends a person  associated with another continuum to be 
established by way of his own characteristics is  innate, it is not the innate view of the 
transitory collection of that person.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 255   The observed object of the innate view of  the transitory collection apprehending a 
mine is mine itself180, the observed object of the innate mind thinking “mine”. It should not 
be held that one’s own eyes and so forth are the observed object. 
Its aspect is to focus on that observed object and apprehend the mine to be established by way 
of its own characteristics.  
 The objects of the innate apprehension of a self of phenomena are the form aggregate 
and so forth, eyes, ears and so forth associated  with one’s own or someone else’s continua, as 
well as the environments and so forth which are not included in a continuum. Its aspect is as 
explained before. In the Commentary on the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says: 
 
Delusion is the ignorance superimposing a non-existent own entity of things. It has the nature of obstructing the view of their nature, conceals
181 [them].      [7] 
And: 
Thus {299} through the power of a fflicted ignorance included in the 
links of cyclic existence and involves mental afflictions...   
The statement asserts that the appr ehension of objects as truly existent is ignorance, and that 
it is an afflicted ignorance. Therefore, there is accordance here with the former of two 
manners of positing the apprehensi on of a self of phenomena, as a mental affliction and as an 
obscuration to knowledge.  
3 Showing that this manner of identifying the apprehension of true existence is asserted by the noble 
father and son 
This was also taught by the noble father and son. In the Seventy  [Stanzas ] on Emptiness  it says: 
  
That which conceives things produced from causes  
And conditions to be real 
Was said by the Teacher to be ignorance. From that the twelve links arise. With good understanding that things are empty 
Through seeing reality there is no ignorance. 
That is the cessation of ignorance. Therefore, it ceases the twelve links.     [8]        
To “conceive things ... to be real” is to apprehen d them as established in reality or truly. This 
is similar in meaning to a statement from the Precious Garland : 
 
As long as the aggregates are apprehended An I will be apprehended in them.    [9]  
which says that as long as the apprehension of  aggregates has not stopped, you will not stop 
the view of the transitory collection. 
 Again, in the Four Hundred Verses  it says: 
 
Like the body sense throughout the body 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 256  Delusion abides in all of them. 
Therefore, by conquering delusion, All the mental afflictions are conquered. 
Delusion will not arise in case 
Dependent origination is seen. Therefore, with all my effort, here, I will only talk about that.     [10] 
 
As regards the delusion set forth in this manne r, the context is an identification of the 
delusion which is one of the three poisons. It is  therefore afflicted ignorance. In order to top 
this ignorance, it is said to be necessary to realize the profound meaning of interdependence, 
the meaning of emptiness appearing as the mean ing of dependent origination. In accordance 
with the explanation in the commentary to this text, afflicted delusion should therefore be 
taken as a superimposition
182 of true existence on things. This manner [of understanding] 
{300} was set out clearly by the venerable Chandra[kirti] following the example of 
Buddhapalita’s commentary on the noble one’s intention. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2B Demonstration that [afflicted ignorance] is the root of cyclic 
existence  
1 Whereas the innate apprehension of a self must be posited as the root of cyclic existence, the 
artificial one is not suitable to be posited so  
Second: That being so, the ignorance of apprehen ding the two selves explained above is also 
not the apprehension of artificial selves of persons and phenomena that are applied by the 
uncommon assertions of non-Buddhist and Buddhis t tenet systems, (1) a permanent, unitary, 
independent person, (2) external objects of a pprehension, particles that do not have parts 
such as an eastern side and gross compos ites of them, (3) internal apprehending 
consciousnesses that are moments of awareness without time parts such as earlier and later 
and a continuum of awareness joining [such partless moments] together, and (4) self-
consciousness that is non-dualistic, empty of su ch objects and subjects. Rather, it is the two 
innate, beginningless apprehensions of a self that all those whose minds are or are not 
affected by tenets have in common and that have operated beginninglessly without depending 
on the mind’s being affected by tenets. Just that is held to be the root of cyclic existence here. 
In the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says: 
  
In those who spend numerous eons unconscious as beast , 
And do not perceive this unborn permanent [something] 
The apprehension of self is st ill seen to operate.  [11] 
 
Through this reasoning [it can be understood] th at what binds all sentient beings in cyclic 
existence is the innate ignorance, and since artificial ignorance is only present in the 
proponents of tenets, it is inadmissib le as the root of cyclic existence. 
2 Since the innate mode of apprehension does not in volve artificial manners of apprehension, it does 
not help to stop those manners of apprehension 
It is extremely important to gain discriminating  certainty about this. If you do not understand 
that, then, at the time of settling [emptiness] by means of the view, {301} you will not know 
[how] to hold as the main thing the ascertai nment of the absence of  real existence as 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 257  apprehended by innate ignorance and [how] to refute the objects of artificial apprehensions as 
a branch of that. If you negate the two selves  neglecting the refuta tion of the mode of 
apprehension of innate ignorance, you will ascertain just the selflessness that negates 
imputations by only the proponents of tenets mentioned earlier. Therefore, at the time of 
meditation, you will also necessarily meditate on just that, because the ascertainment through 
the view is for the sake of meditation.  
3 The absurdity of opposing innate mental afflictions by merely refuting the referent objects of artificial 
[concepts][/The absurd consequences [that would follow] if you were to counteract innate mental afflictions by ...] 
Therefore, as you meditate [on that selflessness]  and it becomes manifest, even if you brought 
that familiarization to its completion, there woul d be nothing more to it than just that. Thus, 
it isd very absurd to assert that through seeing  the non-existence of th e two selves merely as 
imputed by articifial apprehensions, the inna te mental afflictions are stopped. In the Entry  [to 
the Middle Way ] it says: 
 
When you realize selflessness, you abandon, 
The permanent self, but that’s not asserted as basis Of apprehending a self. Hence it’s quite strange To say that knowing [such] selflessness casts out the self-view          [ 1 2 ]
 
The commentary also sets forth: 
 
An explanation for the sake of clarifying this point, the mutual 
unrelatedness, by way of an analogy:  
“While seeing a snake in a hole in a wall of one’s house, To make oneself abandon the fear of the snake By clearing up doubts saying “There is no elephant here!” 
Alas would only be laughable to others.”   [13] 
 
Although this is said with regard to the selflessn ess of persons, it is also the same with regard 
to the selflessness of phenomena:   
When you realize selflessness, you abandon, The artificial self, but that’s not asserted as basis 
Of ignorance. Hence it is extremely strange 
To say that knowing [such] selflessness casts out the self-view 
4 Although both the view of the transitory collection and ignorance are the root of cyclic existence, 
there are no two roots of cyclic existence 
Objection: In the Precious Garland  it says: 
 
As long as one apprehends aggregates, 
So long one will apprehend a self. 
{302} From apprehending a self there is karma, And from karma there is rebirth.    [9] 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 258  The apprehension of a self183 of phenomena that apprehends the aggregates as truly existent is 
explained as the root of cyclic existence. In the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says: 
  
Seeing with his mind that all the faults of afflictions 
Arise from the view of the transitory collection.  [14]     
The view of the transitory collection is explai ned as the root of cyclic existence. The two 
explanations are contradictory, because two discordant roots of cyclic existence are 
inadmissible. Answer: There is no fault. The present system distinguishes the two 
apprehensions of a self by means of their obse rved objects, but they do not have differing 
aspects in their mode of apprehension, because both have the aspect of apprehending their 
object to be established by way of its own char acteristics. A contradict ion [involving] two roots 
of cyclic existence would be to posit two modes of apprehension that do not accord in their 
way of engaging in the object as the root of cyclic existence. Therefore, when the 
apprehension a self of phenomena is taught as the cause of the view of the transitory 
collection, the two internal divisions of ignorance are being pointed out as cause and effect. When the two are taught as the root of the ment al afflictions, they are being pointed out as 
the root of all the mental afflictions whose mode  of apprehension is di scordant with them. As 
that approach also exists for the two of them, th ere is no contradiction, just as there is no 
contradiction in both earlier and later [momen ts] of the same kind of ignorance being the 
root of cyclic existence.   Although it does not appear that the vene rable Chandra[kirti] specifically and clearly 
explains the view of the transitory collection  as ignorance, he ge nerally says that the 
apprehension of things as truly existent is a fflicted ignorance, without distinguishing between 
persons and phenomena, and he also assert that the apprehension of a self of persons is the 
apprehension of persons as established by way of  their own characteristics. He also frequently 
explains the innate view of the transitory colle ction as the root of cy clic existence. If he 
asserted it to be different in meaning from th e ignorance which is the apprehension of true 
existence, he would posit two roots of cy clic existence with discordant modes of 
apprehension, which would [indeed] be contradict ory. Therefore, both of them should be 
understood as ignorance.  
5 Demonstration that the way the apprehension of true existence becomes the root of cyclic existence 
is asserted by the noble father and son 
{303} All the other innate and artificial ment al afflictions, as they operate, apprehend 
individual features of that very object superimp osed by the innate ignorance explained earlier. 
Therefore, just as the other four sense powers, eyes and so forth, abide in dependence on the 
body sense power rather than abiding in their own independent place elsewhere, all the other 
mental afflictions also operate in dependence on innate ignorance which is why delusion is 
said to be chief. 
 
Delusion abides in all of them like the Body sense power throughout the body.   [10]  
The commentary on the [ Four]Hundred  says: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 259  Desire and so forth also operate by superimposing features such as 
attractiveness and repulsiveness on th e mere inherent nature of things 
imputed by delusion. Therefore, they  operate in a manner that in not 
different from delusion and even de p e n d  o n  i t ,  f o r  d e l u s i o n  i s  c h i e f .
         [ 1 5 ]  
 
After that, once delusion has apprehended the objects as established by way of their own 
characteristics, if the object is in accord wi th one’s own mind, attachment arises as it is 
observed, and if it appears discordant with on e’s own mind, anger arises towards it. If the 
object does not appear either in accord or discordant with one’s mind and remains as an 
ordinary thing in between, neither of the other tw o will arise when the object is observed, but 
still further delusion of the same kind will arise. In the Sixty [Verses of ] Reasons  it says: 
 
Why would the strong poison of the mental afflictions 
Not arise in those with a mind with its basis.  Even while in ordinary states  It’s seized by the snake of th e mental afflictions.  [16] 
 
In the commentary these lines are explained as above.  That the view of the transitory collection is born from apprehending the aggregates as 
truly existent appears to be the intended meaning of the Precious Garland  as well.  
 The way the remaining mental afflictions arise should be inferred and understood 
from the explanations
184 in the context of intermediate beings.  
6 How to understand the stages of how the mental afflictions arise from the Commentary on Valid 
Cognition  as well 
{304} Also, in the Commentary  [on Valid Cognition ] it says: 
 
He who sees a self will always 
Have adherence to “I” inside him. 
Through that adherence there’s craving for happiness, 
Through [that] craving faults are obscured. 
Good qualities are seen whereby there’s strong craving. What’s “mine” is grasped - that which achieves it. As long as there is attachment to self One will thus revolve in cyclic existence.   [17]  
You should come to understand it that way.  Although this system and the way the two apprehensions of self are posited according 
to the above explanations are not the same, you should come to understand the stages of how 
the mental afflictions arise in dependence on it. Initially, once the observed object of the thought “I” is apprehended as established by way of its own characteristic s, attachment to the 
self arises. That generates craving for the se lf’s happiness. However, since there is no 
independent happiness of the self that does no t depend on mine, there is craving for mine. 
That obscures its faults and causes one to s ee good qualities in it. Consequently, mine is 
grasped as something accomplishing the self’s ha ppiness. Due to the mental afflictions arisen 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 260  in this manner, there is compositional action an d through that action, again, one is reborn in 
cyclic existence. In the Seventy  [Verses ] on Emptiness  it says: 
 
Actions have mental afflictions as cause 
Volition‘s nature: from mental afflictions The body has actions as its cause Those three are empty of entityness.     [18] 
 
You should train in this manner to really seek certainty regarding the stages of revolving in 
cyclic existence.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C One wishing to abandon that apprehension should seek the view 
of selflessness  
1 The reason why you need to seek the view realizing selflessness if you wish to abandon 
that ignorance  
2 How to generate the view realizing selflessness 
The third one has two [points]: th e reason why you need to seek the view realizing selflessness 
if you wish to abandon that ignorance and how to generate the view realizing selflessness.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1 The reason why you need to seek the view realizing selflessness if you wish to abandon that ignorance 
A It is stupid not to make an effort so that the pure view arises in one’s mental continuum, despite the 
wish to abandon ignorance 
B Pointing out the need to give up conceiving a self 
C Indication that scriptural and logical investigation is essential for abandoning the concept of self  
D In order to abandon the concept of self it is necessary to refute its referent object, and the reason for 
that 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1A It is stupid not to make and effort so that the pure view arises in one’s 
mental continuum, despite the wish to abandon ignorance 
First: It is necessary to want the extinction  where the ignorance ex plained above, the two 
apprehensions of self have been abandoned, th at necessity is also asserted {305} and even 
seems to be wanted. That being so, someone who wants to, but does not put effort into 
understanding how apprehending a self becomes the root of cyclic existence, has very low 
faculties. So does someone who, despite partia l insight into this, does not put effort into 
generating the pure view of selflessness in his continuum, having thoroughly refuted the 
object apprehended by the apprehension of self  with scriptures of definitive meaning and 
reasonings. That is because they have lost the vital essence of the path leading to liberation 
and omniscience, yet they remain indifferent about it.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1B Showing that the apprehension of self must be abandoned 
1 How it is taught in the treatises 
2 How it is taught out in the sutras 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1B1 How it is taught in the treatises 
A How it is taught by the glorious Dharmakirti 
That is why the glorious Dharmakirti said: 
 
Without these objects being refuted, 
They cannot possibly be abandoned. 
Abandoning desire, hatred, and so forth Connected with good qualities and faults, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 261  Is done by not seeing those in objects, 
Not through some external approach.   [19]  
When removing an external object of abando nment such as a thorn that has pierced you[r 
skin], you [can] completely remove it by mean s of something like a needle, without depending 
on a refutation of the object that it apprehends. You do not do it like this when getting rid of 
an internal, mental object of abandonment. Ra ther, you must abandon it seeing the lack of 
real existence of the object as apprehended by  something like the apprehension of self.  
B How it is taught by the glorious Chandra[kirti] 
The glorious Chandra[kirti] also taught that once all the afflicti ons like attachment as well as 
birth, aging and so forth are seen to arise from  the the apprehension of self, the desire to 
refute and abandon it will arise. At that po int the yogi refutes with reasoning the object 
superimposed by the apprehension of self, the self of a person. 
In the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it clearly says: 
  
Once his mind has seen: all afflictions and faults 
Arise from the view of the transitory collection, The yogi knows the self to be its object And performs the refutation of self.    [20] 
 
In fact that is what someone meditating on  suchness must do. Therefore it says “yogi”. 
C This is also the meaning intended by the protector Nagarjuna 
{306}  This approach is also the most superior intention of the protector Nagarjuna. In the 
Sixty [Verses of ] Reasons  it says: 
 
That is the cause of all the views, 
Without it afflictions do not arise. Therefore, if you thoroughly know this, Views and afflictions are thoroughly cleansed. If you wonder how this is known - By seeing dependent origination - That things born dependently are unborn. That was taught by supreme omniscience.  [21]  
[The statement] points out that the apprehension  of true existence called asserting as things, 
which is the cause of all afflicted views and all other mental afflictions, is abandoned through 
realizing the suchness of things, that they are no t inherently born, by means of the reason of 
dependent origination. The insight that there is  no inherent nature does not arise without a 
refutation of the object of the apprehension  that things are inherently established.  
D How it is taught by Aryadeva 
A statement by Aryadeva that accords wi th this was already quoted earlier185. In the Four 
hundred  [Verses ] he also says: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 262  If selflessness is seen in objects, 
The seed of existence will be ceased.   [22]  
That is through seeing that the object of ob servation apprehended by  the apprehension of 
self
186 lacks a self, the root of ex istence, ignorance, is cut. 
E How Shantideva also taught in accordance with that 
The venerable Shantideva also [taught]: Thus , the emptiness of persons is thoroughly 
established. Therefore, since their root has been cut, all the mental afflictions do not at all.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1B2 How it is taught in the sutras 
It is as the Noble Sutra of the Tathagata’s Secrets  says: 
 
Shantimati, it is like this. For exampl e, when a tree is cut at the root, all 
the branches, leaves and twigs will dry up. Likewise, Shantimati, when 
the view of the transitory collection is fully pacified, all the mental afflictions and secondary mental afflictions will be fully pacified.         [ 2 3 ]  
 
{307} It is saying that through cultivating the realization of the person as emptiness, empty of 
being inherently established, the view of the tr ansitory collection is stopped and once it has 
stopped all the other mental afflictions will al so be stopped. On the other hand, without the 
object of the apprehension of a self of pers ons having been refute d, the realization of 
selflessness is impossible.  
 The sutra passage points out that the view of the transitory collection is the root of all 
the other mental afflictions. If that were diffe rent in meaning from ignorance, there would be 
two discordant roots of cyclic existence, so it  should also be understood as ignorance.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1C Indication that the analysis of scriptures and reasonings is important for 
abandoning the apprehension of self 
In brief, when the many supreme scholars wh o commented on the meaning of the scriptures 
on the profound settled the meaning of suchness,  they did a thorough analysis by means of 
numerous scriptures and reasonings. They did th at having perceived that  it is impossible to 
realize selflessness and emptiness without seeing that the self as apprehended by the mistaken 
apprehension does not exist and that it is empty of that self. It is essential to gain certainty 
with regard to this.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1D In order to abandon the apprehension of self it is necessary to refute its 
referent object; the reason for that 
1 In order to abandon the apprehension of self it is necessary to refute its referent object 
2 The reason for that 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1D1 In order to abandon the apprehension of self it is necessary to refute its 
referent object  
If you do not meditate like this on the meanin g of having refuted the mistaken object which 
is the root of being bound in cyclic existence,  even though you meditate on something else 
you consider profound, it will not harm the appreh ension of self at all.  That is, because unless 
the mind enters the suchness of selflessness an d emptiness, the apprehension of self cannot 
possibly be stopped, and because without the obje ct of the apprehension of self having been 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 263  refuted, although you perfor th e mere withdrawal of the mind goes away to its object, that 
cannot be posited as entering selflessness.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-1D2 The reason for that 
A The existence in general of three ways of apprehending I 
The reason for this is that  when the mind engages in an object , there is one out of three: an 
apprehension of that observed object as truly existent, an apprehension of it as not truly 
existent, and an apprehension that does not qual ify it with either of those two. Therefore, 
although you do not apprehend something as not truly existent, you do not necessarily 
apprehend it as truly existent, and likewise, al though you are not engaged in the two selves, 
{308} you are not necessarily engaged in the two selflessnesses. For, there are infinite minds 
abiding in the third category. 
B The need to settle that the very basis with respec t to which the apprehension of true existence is 
mistaken does not exist the way it is apprehended  
The two apprehensions of self mainly operate ob serving a [concrete] thing, which is a person 
or a phenomenon. Therefore, you need to settle that the very bases with  respect to which they 
are mistaken do not exist the way they are appr ehended. Otherwise it will be like searching 
for a thief in a meadow after he has gone to  the forest. So, since you make the mistake 
terminate by thus meditating on the meaning that has been settled, such emptiness is the 
supreme meaning of suchness. With the meaning of suchness settled as something else that 
discards this, only something imputed by one’s  wishes will terminate. Therefore, remember 
that this would deviate from meaning of the scriptures.  
C The need to greatly cherish the realization of the view of suchness, having seen that if you stop the 
conception of true existence, you w ill turn away from cyclic existence  
That being so the ignorance that apprehends the elaborations of persons such as men and 
women and of phenomena such as form and feelin g to be truly existent is stopped by gaining 
the view that realizes their emptiness, selflessne ss, and meditating on it. Once it has stopped, 
you stop projections, the improper mental attention that superimposes signs such as 
attractiveness and repulsiveness when the object  of the apprehension of true existence is 
observed. Once they have stopped, the other ment al afflictions such as attachment that have 
the view of the transitory collection as their root  are stopped. Once they have stopped, actions 
motivated by them are stopped. Once they have stopped, birth in cyclic existence projected by 
karma without any control is stopped whereby libe ration is achieved. With this in mind you 
s ho uld gen erat e s t rong cert ain t y an d t hen  seek t o  co me t o  a decis iv e co n clus io n  abo ut the 
view of suchness. In the Root [Text on ] Wisdom  it says: 
 
Through karma and kleshas spent there is freedom. 
Karma and kleshas arise from conceptions, 
Elaborations from elaborating those. They are stopped by emptiness.     [24] 
 
{309} You need to know those stages of enteri ng into and turning away from cyclic existence 
and greatly cherish the realization of the me aning of suchness. However, through a vague 
involvement which fails to distinguish the objects well it will not come. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2 How to generate the view realizing selflessness 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 264  A The stages of generating the two views of selflessness 
B The actual generation, by stages, of the two views of selflessness 
C Presentation of conventional and ultimate truths 
The second one has three points: the stages of generating the two views of selflessness, the 
actual generation, by stages, of the two views of  selflessness, and presentation of conventional 
and ultimate truths. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2A The stages of generating the two views of selflessness 
1 The stages themselves 
2 The reason for that 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2A1 The stages themselves 
First: As for the stages in which the two apprehen sions of self arise, the apprehension of a self 
of phenomena generates the apprehension of a self  of persons. Still, when you engage in the 
suchness of selflessness, you first need to gene rate the view of the selflessness of phenomena 
and then, after that, generate the view realizing the selflessness of phenomena. In fact in the 
Precious Garland  it says: 
 
Persons aren’t earth nor water, 
Aren’t fire, wind nor space, Aren’t consciousness. If they are none of these
, 
What could persons be other than that? 
Since beings are composites of the six elements, 
They are not real and just like that 
Each element is a composite too And therefore is not real either.    [25]  
It is as stated: first the person and then the basi s it is imputed on, the elements such as earth, 
are said to lack inherent existence. The Clear Words  and Buddhapalita also explain that when 
entering into suchness, one first enters from the selflessness of persons. Shantideva says is it 
in this way.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2A2 The reason for that 
A A proof through reasoning 
The reason why it must be done like this is th at although there is no difference in subtlety 
with regard to the selflessness to be ascertai ned on the basis of persons and phenomenona, 
due to essentials of the substratum it is easier to ascertain it in persons and more difficult to 
ascertain it in phenomena. Likewise it is mo re difficult, for example, to ascertain that 
selflessness of phenomena in eyes, ears and so fo rth, and easier to ascertain it in reflections 
and the like, which is why these are taken as illustrations for settling selflessness in the 
former.  
B A proof through scripture 
{310} This meaning is intended in the King of Concentration  where it says: 
  
Just as you know the notion of self 
Apply it to everything mentally. The entityness of all phenomena 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 265  Is completely pure like space. 
All of them are known through one and All of them are seen through one.    [26] 
 
It says that once you know well the mode of subistence of the I with regard to which the 
discrimination of self thinking “I” operates, you should apply its reasoning to all internal 
phenomena such as eyes and ears and external phenomena like pots. By knowing them to be 
equivalent to it, you will be able to know and see the inherent nature of all other phenomena 
through knowing and seeing the natural disposition of one phenomenon.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B  The actual generation, by stages, of the two views of 
selflessness 
1 Settling the selflessness of persons 
2 Settling the selflessness of phenomena 
The second one has two points: settling the self lessness of persons and settling the selflessness 
of phenomena.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1 Settli ng the selflessness of persons 
A Identification of persons 
B Settling them as not inherently existent 
The first one has two points: identification of  persons and settling them as not inherently 
existent. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1A Identification of persons 
1 The actual identification of persons 
First: “Persons” are persons of the six classes187, gods and so forth, and persons who are 
ordinary beings, aryas and so forth. Furtherm ore, they are the accumulators of white and 
black actions, the experiencers of  the results of those, revolvers in cyclic existence, cultivators 
of paths for the sake of liberation, a ttainers of liberation, and so forth.  
2 Commenting on the meaning of sutras that teach the self to be merely imputed upon the aggregates 
A sutra quotated in the commentary on Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] says: 
 
The so-called “self” is a fiendish mind and 
You have come to hold this view. 
The compositional aggregates are empty. 
There is no sentient being here. Just as based on collections of parts People speak of chariots Likewise, based on the aggregates, Conventionally, they say “sentient beings”.   [27] 
 {311} The first verse indicates the selflessness of persons, that ultimately persons do not exist. 
The first line says that the apprehension of a self of persons is a fiendish mind, the second 
one says that those who apprehend in this ma nner are under the power of bad views, and the 
third and fourth say that the aggregates are empt y of a personal self. The second verse points 
out that persons exists conventionally. More spec ifically, the first and second lines present an 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 266  analogy and the last two, connect it to the meaning, indicating that persons as merely 
imputed upon the aggregates.  
3 How to posit that person, the imputed phenomenon, as the object of observation of the innate 
apprehension of I  
The sutra passage is saying that the collection of  aggregates is the basi s of imputation of the 
person, and the basis of imputation is no t admissible as the imputed phenomenon. The 
collection of aggregates must be understood as  both the collection of aggregates at a given 
moment and the collection of aggregates at earlie r and later ones. Therefore, it is inadmissible 
to posit the continuum of the collec tion of aggregates as the person188. When the collection is 
posited as the basis of imputation, that which is collected189 is also posited as the basis of 
imputation and therefore it is unreasonab le for both to be the person. In the Entrance  [to the 
Middle Way ] it says: 
 
The sutras say that since it depends on the aggregates, 
The mere collection of aggregates isn’t the self.  [28] 
And:  
The teacher said: “The aggregates are the self.” If that’s why you posit the aggregates as the self -  It [only] refutes the self is other than aggregates, For other sutras say things like form isn’t self. 
 Therefore, even the statement “The view of I and mine by whatever Buddhist ascetics or 
Brahmins is only a view of these five aggregates” refutes, by means of the word “only”, that a self
190 which is a different entity from the aggregat es exists as the observed object of one’s 
innate apprehension of an I. That having been  refuted, however, the aggregates are not shown 
to be the observed object of the innate appr ehension of an I. I they were, that would 
contradict the statements in other sutras refuti ng that the five aggregates are the self. The 
reason for this is that, out of the two, the obse rved object and the aspect of the apprehension 
of an I, if they were the observed object, {312} they would have to be posited as the self191. 
Therefore, the meaning of the sutra statement ab out viewing the aggregates must be explained 
as observing the self that is imputed on the aggregates.  
4 Hence, the need to differentiate between the self that exists and the self that does not exist  
That is why you should differentiate between stat ements that the mere I, referred to as self, 
conventionally exists and statements that an in herently established person, referred to as self, 
does not exist even conventionally. Still, you shou ld not say this system a sserts that the self of 
persons conventionally exists192. Its identification of persons, which is like that, is a 
distinguishing feature of this unsurpassed system . Ascertaining this well is an excellent means 
of realizing the uncommon selflessness of persons. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B Settling that it does not inherently exist  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 267  1 Settling that the I does not inherently exist 
2 Settling that mine does not inherently exist 
3 Showing how, in dependence on that, persons appear like illusions 
The second one has three points: settling that th e I does not inherently exist, settling that 
mine does not inherently exist, and showing how, in dependence on that, persons appear like 
illusions.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1 Settling that the I does not inherently exist 
A How the view realizing selflessness is born from the four essential points being complete 
B Extensive explanation of the third and fourth essential points in particular 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1A How the view realizing selflessness is born from the four essential 
points being complete 
1 The essential point of ascertaining the object of negation 
2  The essential point of ascertaining the pervasion 
3 [The third essential point: to see the faults in claiming that the person and the aggregates are of one 
essence, established through their own nature] 
4 [The fourth essential point: to clearly see the points invalidating [the position] that the person and the 
aggregates are established as essentially distinct] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1A1 The essential point of ascertaining the object of negation 
First: The first of four essential points that ex ist with regard to this is to examine one’s own 
m i n d  s o  a s  t o  i d e n t i f y  t h e  m a n n e r  o f  a p p r e h e n d i n g  a  s e l f  o f  p e r s o n s .  T h a t  w a s  e x p l a i n e d  
earlier193.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1A2 The essential point of ascertaining the pervasion 
A If a person is inherently established, it is either one or different and nothing beyond that 
The second one is the decision that if the pe rson is inherently established, it must be 
established as either one entity194 with or different from the aggregates and that there is no 
means of establishment other than these two.  
B Through their direct opposition, accompanied and unaccompanied, in general, a third alternative to 
one and many is excluded 
Generally speaking, it is established through experience that, when you determine something 
to be “accompanied”195 thinking something like “pot and pillar”, you eliminate that it is 
unaccompanied, and when you determine so mething to be “unaccompanied” thinking 
something like “pot”, you eliminate that it is  accompanied. A third alternative, something 
that is neither one nor several, does therefore not exist. {313} Consequently, you are made to 
ascertain that to be neiter one entity  nor different is also impossible.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1A3 [The essential point of seeing the faults in claiming that the person and the aggregates are one inherently established entity] 
The third one is to see the damage to [the position] that the two,  the person and the 
aggregates, are one inherently established entity.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1A4 [The fourth crucial point: to clearly see the points invalidating [the position] that the person and the aggregates are established as essentially distinct] 
The fourth one is to see well wh at does damage to [the positi on] that the two are established 
as inherently different. When the four are comp lete in that manner, the pure view realizing 
the suchness that is the selflessness of persons will be born from that.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1B Extensive explanation of the third and fourth essential points in particular 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 268  1 [Third essential point:] Refutating that the self and the aggregates are inherently one 
2 Fourth essential point: Refutating that the self and the aggregates are inherently different 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1B1 [Third essential point:] Refuting that the self and the aggregates 
are inherently one 
In this regard, if the self and the aggregates  were one inherently established entity, there 
would be three faults doing damage [to this position].  
A First refutation 
First it would be pointless to assert a self. If the sameness of entity of the two were inherently 
established, they would be a permanently indivisi ble one. This is because if their sameness of 
entity were ultimately established, then what ever mind those two appeared to, they would 
necessarily not appear to be different. The reas on for this is that al though with falsities, 
conventions, it is not contradictory for the mo de of appearance and the mode of subsistence 
to be discordant, with something established as  true those two are necessarily contradictory, 
because something truly established that appears to a mind must appear just the way it is.  
 The assertion of a self established through it s own entity is for the sake of establishing 
an agent discarding and adopting aggregates, beca use if he were one with the aggregates, this 
would be impossible. This is also set out in the Root [Text on ] Wisdom : 
 
Once you have understood that apar t from the appropriated aggregates 
there is no self, the appropriated aggregates themselves are the self. 
That self of yours does not exit.    [29] 
B Second refutation 
Second: the self would be many. There would be th e fault that if the self were established as 
one with the aggregates, one person would have many selves in conformity with having many 
a g g r e g a t e s ,  a n d  i n  c o n f o r m i t y  w i t h  h a v i n g  n o  m o r e  t h a n  o n e  s e l f  h e  w o u l d  h a v e  o n l y  o n e  
aggregate. In the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says: 
 
If the aggregates were the self, they are many, 
Therefore there would also be many selves.   [30] 
C Third refutation 
Third: {314} The self would have pr oduction and a destruction. In the Root [Verses on ] Wisdom  
it says: 
 
If the aggregates were the self, it 
Would have production and destruction.   [31]  
In conformity with the aggregates that are pr oduced and destroyed, the self would also be 
produced and destroyed, because the two are one. 
D It would amount to asserting that the self is produced and destroyed not merely conventionally but 
inherently  
You may think  “ I t  i s  a s s e r t e d  t h a t  t h e  s e l f  o r  p e r s o n  i s  p r o d u c e d  a n d  d e s t r o y e d  i n  e a c h  
moment.” There is no fault in merely assertin g this conventionally. However, an opponent 
asserting that the person is established by w ay of its own characterist ics thereby necessarily 
asserts that that person is pr oduced and destroyed inherently. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 269  E The consequence that memory of [former] lives would be inadmissible 
In this regard, the commentary on the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] sets forth three faults. The 
first one is set forth in the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ]: 
 
Things distinct by their characteristics, included 
In a single continuum do not make sense.   [32] 
 With respect to something earlier and something later established as distinct by way of their 
own entities, a relationship of dependence be tween what is later and what is earlier is 
inadmissible, because since they are established as  capable of setting themselves up, with their 
o w n  p o w e r ,  t h e y  c a n n o t  d e p e n d  o n  a n y t h i n g  e l s e .  I f  a  s i n g l e  c o n t i n u u m  i s  t h e r e f o r e  inadmissible, the memory of [former] lives “In that life, at that time, I was such and such” 
does not make sense. It is like with Devadatta when he remembers his [former] lives. He does 
not remember “I was Yajnadatta” whose continuum is distinct [from his]. 
F The validity [of memory] in our system 
In our system a single continuum of the earlier and the later is not contradictory even though 
it disintegrates in each moment196, so the memory of [former] lives is valid.  
G When certain people assert that buddhas and ordinary beings are one, it is an extreme view 
In [people] who have not realized the meaning of this, the frequent statement in sutras: “In 
the past I was this [person]” { 315} generates the first wrong view out of four bad views that 
were taught and that are based on an extreme a ssociated with the past. “The two, the person 
at the time of buddhahood and the person at an earlier time are one. Moreover, if they 
products they would disintegrate moment by  moment and therefore could not be one. 
Therefore the two are permanent”. In order not to fall to that [view] you need to understand 
well the particular manner of remembering in  which you remember the “I” in general, 
without making a distinction, at the time of re membering, in terms of the specific country, 
time, and nature of a [former] life.  
H The consequence that actions done would be wasted 
Second: The fault that actions done would be wast ed is that both the agent of an action and 
the experiencer of its result could not be grou ped together on the one basis of the mere I. 
I The consequence of meeting with actions one has not done 
The fault of meeting with actions one has not done is the absurd co nsequence that all the 
results of actions accumulated by other differ ent continua would be experienced by other 
continua.  
J If the earlier and the later were established by way of their entities a single continuum would be 
impossible 
These two faults are associated with the essential point explained in the Entrance  [to the Middle 
Way] and above. Accordingly, if the person were es tablished by way of its entity, its earlier and 
later moments could not be the same continuum. In the Root [Verses on ] Wisdom  it also says: 
 
If a god and a human were other, 
Their continuum would not be valid.    [33] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 270  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-1B2 The fourth essential point: Refuting that the self and the 
aggregates are inherently different 
A Indication of a source 
But what fault is there if you yo u assert the two, the self and th e aggregates, to be inherently 
different? The fault is set forth in the Root [Text on ] Wisdom : 
 
If it were different from the aggregates, 
It would not have their characteristics.   [34] 
B The consequence that if the two were different by way of their entity, the self would not have the 
characteristics of the aggregates  
In this regard, if the self existed as inherently  different from the aggregates, it would not have 
the characteristics that characte rise the aggregates as products: production, destruction and 
abidance. It would be like a horse, for example, that does not have the characteristics of an ox 
because it is established as an object different from an ox.  
C The other approved syllogism establishing that by the sign of being uncompounded it is unsuitable to be apprehended as the basis of designation and as the self   
You may think: “It is like that, but…” Well then, it {316} would be inadmissible as the 
observed object that is the basis of designatin g the verbal convention “self” by one’s innate 
apprehension, because it is a non-product, like , for instance, a flower in the sky or nirvana197. 
D Explaning that it is not apprehended in that manner with the consequence that something other than 
the characteristics of the aggregates would be apprehended as self 
Furthermore, if it existed inherently different  from the characteristics of the aggregates, 
suitability as form and so forth, it would have to be observed as such, just as, for instance 
form and mind are observed to be different. Since there is not such  apprehension, though, 
the self does not exist as factually other. In the Root [Text on ] Wisdom  it says: 
 
It is inadmissible for the self to be 
Other than the appropriated. 
If it were other, you could apprehend it 
In their absence, which you cannot.    [35] 
 
And in the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ]: 
 
Therefore, besides the aggregates there is no self  
For, those apart, apprehending it is not established. [36]  
E The importance of gaining certainty concerning such reasoning 
You should train in order to really gain the fi rm certainty which sees that such reasonings 
d a m a g e  a  s e l f  e x i s t i n g  i n h e r e n t l y  d i f f e r e n t  from the aggregates, because if you have not 
induced the pure, damaging certainty concerni ng the two sides of sameness and difference, 
the conclusion that persons do not inherently ex ist will merely be a thesis, so that you do not 
gain the pure view.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-2 Settling that mine does not inherently exist 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 271  A That reasoning refuting the inherent establishment of the self also refutes an inherently established 
mine; sources for this 
When you have thus sought, with reasonings, whet her the self does or does not have inherent 
establishment, you refute the inherent existence of  the self by means of your failure to find it 
as either one or many. At that point, throug h the reasoning analyzing suchness, you will not 
find an inherently established mine, just like , for example, when you do not observe a barren 
woman’s son, you will not observe his mine, such as his eyes. In the Root [Verses on ] Wisdom  it 
says: 
  
If the I does not exist, How possibly could mine exist?    [37] 
 
{317}  And in the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says : 
 
Since without an agen t no actions exist, 
Therefore, there’s no mine without a self. Therefore, by seeing the I and mine as empty The yogi is completely liberated.    [38] 
B The need to know how, through these reasonings, all other persons and their mine are also 
established as without inherent existence  
Thus, those reasonings settle that the I of on e’s own continuum, apprehended thinking “I” or 
the self or the person does not exist by way of  its own entity. Through them, you should also 
realize the entire meaning of the suchness which is  the selflessness of persons: that all persons 
from hell-beings through buddhas and all their mine are not inherently established as one 
entity with or a different entity from their bases of designation, their contaminated or 
uncontaminated aggregates. Through them, also , you should know how all their mine is 
likewise established as without inherent existence. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3 Showing how, in dependence on that, persons appear like 
an illusion 
A Indicating the meaning of saying like an illusion 
B How they appear like an illusion, based on what method 
The third one has two [points]: in dicating the meaning of saying like an illusion and how they 
appear like an illusion, based on what method. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3A Indicating the meaning of saying like an illusion 
1 The unmistaken manner of appearing like an illusion 
2 The superficial manner of appearing like an illusion 
The first one has two [points]: indicating the un mistaken manner of appearing like an illusion 
and the superficial manner of appearing like an illusion. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3A1  The unmistaken manner of appearing like an illusion 
A How all phenomena are ultimate ly illusion-like without signs 
First: In the King of Concentration  [Sutra ] it says: 
 
Like a mirage, a gandharva city198, 
Like an illusion, just as a dream 
Meditate on signs as empty of entity, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 272  Know all phenomena as like that.    [39] 
 
In the [ Sutra of the ] Mother of the Jinas199 it is also taught that all phenomena from form 
through exalted knowers of all aspe cts are like illusions or dreams. 
B From among the two that  are like an illusion, here it is  the appearance that is illusion-like 
There are two meanings of that which is thus sa id to be like an illusion: something like an 
ultimate truth that is said to be illusion-like – although it is established as merely existent, 
{318} its true existence is understood to be refuted - and something like the illusion-like 
appearance of that which appears while being em pty. From among these two, here it is the 
latter.  
C The need for the collection of two, the conventional mind to which appearances appear rather than 
being utterly non-existent and the reasoning consciousness to which [the object] occurs as empty of true 
existence in accordance with appearances 
For this, the two, appearance as that and empt iness of true existence in accordance with 
appearances, are necessary. However, if [an obje ct] is utterly non-existent even as a mere 
appearance, just like the horn of a rabbit or the son of a barren woman, and if despite an 
appearance it does not occur to you that [an ob ject] is empty of true existence in conformity 
with appearances, then the meaning of it being an illusion-like appearance will also not occur 
to your mind.  
D [The way in which phenomena resemble illusions] 
Hence this is how you understand other phenomena to be resembling the example of an 
illusion. For example, although the illusions co njured up by a magician are from the start 
empty of being horses and elephants, their a ppearances as horses and elephants undeniably 
arise. Understand that likewise, although ph enomena such as person s are from the start 
empty of inherent existence, of being establishe d by way of their own entities on top of the 
objects, it is undeniable that they appear as if established that way.  
E Such an emptiness is nothing like a nihilistic em ptiness or a mentally fa bricated emptiness or a 
limited emptiness 
That being so, the appearances as god, huma n, and forth are posited as persons and the 
objects that appear as form, sound, and so forth are posited as phenomena. Therefore, 
although persons and phenomena do not have ev en a mere particle of inherent existence 
established by way of their own characteristic s, accumulators of karma and so forth, the 
activities of seeing and hearing and so forth,  all the interdependent actions and agents are 
valid.  All actions and agents are valid, th erefore the emptiness is not nihilistic. Since 
phenomena have primordially always been empt y like that and are merely being understood 
as empty, it is not a mentally fabricated empt iness either, and since all objects of knowledge 
are asserted in this manner, it  is not a limited emptiness either. That is why, through being 
meditated on, it becomes the antidote to any ad herence apprehending of true existence. This 
profound meaning is not unsuitable to beco me the object of any awareness whatsoever. 
Rather, it {319} can be settled by means of the pure view  and it can be made the object [of 
mind] by meditating on the pure meaning. Theref ore, it is also not an emptiness that could 
not be practiced on the path or [one ] with nothing to see or realize. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 273  F Setting out the doubt that the ascertainment of reflections as empty of what they appear to be is an 
ascertainment of their being empty of inherent existence  
Well then, if the ascertainment of reflections and so forth as empty of wh at they appear to be 
were the realization that they are without in herent existence, their absence of inherent 
existence would be realized by the direct pe rceiver of normal beings, so those would be 
aryas200. Otherwise, how could they be suitable analogies for the absence of inherent 
existence?  
G Even if you realize that a reflection is empty of a face, this is not a realization of its suchness since 
you have an apprehension of the true existence of the reflection  
In the Four Hundred Verses  it says: 
 
It is explained that a seer of one thing 
Is a seer of everything. That which is the emptiness of one Is the emptiness of all.      [40] 
 [What is being] explained is that the seer or re alizer of the emptiness of one thing can realize 
the emptiness of other things. The realization that  the reflection of a face is empty of being a 
face does not in any way damage the object of  one’s apprehension of true existence, that 
apprehends the reflection to be established by way of its own entity. Without the refutation of 
its object, the emptiness of inherent establis hment of the reflection cannot be realized. 
Therefore, that mind does not realize the such ness of the reflection. Even though you realize 
that illusions are empty of being horses and el ephants and that the appearances in dreams are 
empty of what they appear to be, you have not found the Madhyamika view realizing that 
[objects are] like illusions and dreams.  
H The reason why the analogies of  reflections and illusiory horses,  elephants, and so forth have 
nevertheless been set out 
However, the reason for taking them as analogies is the fact that it is easier to realize their 
emptiness of inherent existence compared to other phenomena like forms and sounds. {320} 
That they are empty of inherent existence establis hed by way of their own entities is proven by 
showing the contradiction in their mode of ab idance and the way they appear to the mind, 
because if an object is established as true, th ose two cannot be different in aspect. You need 
to first enter into realizing that these analogies,  well known in the world as false, lack inherent 
existence, and then generate the realization that other phenomena, not well known in the 
world as false, lack inherent nature. The me aning intended by [stating] the need for a 
sequence in which one of those two is earlier an d the other later is not that by realizing the 
emptiness of one phenomenon th e emptinesses of all other phen omena are explicitly realized. 
Rather, the meaning is that when the mind tu rns to whether other phenomena do or do not 
truly exist, it is able to realize it.  
I The need to differentiate between the two realizations, that appearances such as reflections are 
empty of what they appear to be and that reflections are empty of being inherently established  
That being so, there is a difference in meanin g between being in a dream, knowing it, and 
realizing the appearances of men, women, and so forth to be empty of those, and what is said 
in Ornament of Clear Realization : 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 274  Even in dreams, to view that all 
Phenomena are like dreams and so forth  
… that in a dream all phenomena should be viewed  as dreamlike. Likewise, the realization, in 
visions of meditative experience [during] medita tive stabilisation, that appearances like pots 
and woollen cloth are empty of what they appe ar to be is different in meaning from the 
realization that they are like illusions and dreams that are not inherently established. 
Therefore, you should investigate well the uncommon manner of appearing like illusions 
which is set forth in scriptures and treatises of  definitive meaning saying that it should be 
known to be like illusions and dreams.  
 Having said this, a child still unfamiliar wi th words, apprehending a reflection in the 
mirror as a face, a spectator without knowle dge of illusions, apprehending illusiory 
appearances as horses, elephants, and so fort h, and someone in a dream who does not know 
it and therefore apprehends the appearances of mountains, houses and so forth as real {321} 
resemble each other. One the other hand, an ol der person familiar with words, a magician, 
and a person who, in a dream knows it to be a dream also resemble each other in terms of 
knowing their particular appearances to be untrue. Both have not found the view of  
suchness.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B- 3A2  Presentation of the s uperficial manner of appearing 
like an illusion 
A Without [the discrimination] “it is this and not that” due to a mistake concerning the measure of the 
object of negation and the consequent non-existence of the object to be analyzed and analyzer, an appearance is vague and nihilistic, but does not carry the meaning of an illusion 
If the measure of the object of  negation explained earlier has not been grasped well and the 
object is analyzed by means of reasoning and broken up, the thought “That object does not 
exist” will first come up. Then, the analyser is al so seen to be alike and since the ascertainer of 
his non-existence is also non-existent, any ascert ainment [in terms of] “it is this and not that” 
becomes impossible. Then, the vague appearance s that arise do so in dependence on the 
failure to differentiate between inherent exis tence and non-existence and mere existence and 
non-existence. Therefore, such an emptin ess is an emptiness that also destroys 
interdependence. Hence, even though the vague a ppearance arises induced by that realization, 
it is not at all the meaning of being like an illusion. 
B Although such vague appearances arising at the time of analyzing the view are frequent, they are not 
Madhyamika illusions  
That is why it is not difficult, upon reasoned analysis, to think “Persons and so forth do not 
have any mode of subsistence established on to p of the objects by way of their own entities” 
and it is not difficult for appearances to si mply arise as vague in dependence on that. 
Something like that occurs to everyone with an interest in Madhyamika tenets who has heard 
a little bit of Dharma being taught about how there is no inherent existence.  
C The difficult point with pure illusion-like appearances  is that they are a co llection of the two, the 
absence of inherent existence and the existence of mere nominal meaning  
However, the difficult point is to achieve ce rtainty, from the depths, about refuting all 
inherent existence established by way of an own entity and positing those inherently non-
existent persons and so forth as accumulators of  karma, experiencers of results and so forth. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 275  Since that collection of two that enables one to posit them is ne xt to impossible, {322} it is 
extremely difficult to acquire the Madhyamika view.  
D If you refute everything due to a mistake concerning the measure of the object of negation, the 
illusion cannot be anything beyond a rabbit’s horns 
Therefore, as you analyze suchness with analytic al reasoning, you do not find production and 
thereby refute inherent production, but you do not refute every kind of production, cessation 
and so forth. If you did, they would become empty of serving an y purpose, like the horns of a 
rabbit or the son of a barren woman. However,  with respect to what little illusion-like 
appearance remains, the fault that all interdepen dent actions and agents do not have validity 
is set forth. In the Four Hundred Verses  it says: 
 
If that is so how would existence 
Not resemble an illusion?      [41]  
And in the commentary:  
Once that which is dependently origin ated is seen as what it is, it 
becomes like an illusiory creation, but not like the son of a barren woman. If one were to assert that through this analysis production is refuted in every way and that therefor e the non-existence of products is 
demonstrated, then they would be not like illusions, but rather 
something to be examined in terms of the son of a barren woman and 
the like. For fear of the conclusion  that the dependently originated 
does not exist, [we] do not compare [phenomena] with those, but rather 
with illusions and the like which do not contradict the dependently 
o r i g i n a t e d .        [ 4 2 ]  
E Although it is a fault if a subject exists in the face of a reasoning consciousness, it is not a fault for an 
illusion-like appearanc e aspect to remain as a trace of refutation by it  
And: 
Therefore, upon thorough analysis in this manner, since the inherent 
existence of things is not established, that illusion-like quality will be 
left as a remnant with respect to things individually.  
F Hence, although it is wrong to apprehend illusion-like appearances as truly existent in their own 
entityness, it is not wrong to ap prehend them as mere illusions  
Therefore, the apprehension of appearances as something illusion-like, interdependent, 
merely existent is not a faulty apprehension of  illusions, but if illusion-like appearances are 
apprehended as established by way of their enti ty and truly existent, {323} it is a fault.  
G The reason for those points 
In the King of Concentration  it also says: 
 
Going through cyclic existence is like a dream. 
Noone is born there nor does anyone die. 
No sentient beings or humans nor life can be found. These phenomena are like foam, hollow trees, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 276  Like illusions, lightning in the sky, 
Like the moon in water, like a mirage. Even after one dies here in this world, 
One does not move on to another world, still, 
Actions done aren’t lost, their white and black fruit Ripen in cyclic existence - there’s no contradiction.  [43]  
When sought with the reasonings analysing such ness, the likes of persons that are born, die, 
and transmigrate, and that withstand analysis are not found, not one particle. Nevertheless, 
positive and negative effects occur relative to illusion-like phenomena. You need to arrive at 
an understanding of such statements. 
H Furthermore, even if [phenomena] appear empty of gross obstructiveness, this is not an illusion-like 
appearance 
Furthermore, some do not place and sustain th e mind within the view  that has come to a 
decisive conclusion, in meditative equipoise, about the mode of being, but gain a firm mere 
single-pointedness in which the mind does not a pprehend anything at all. Through its power, 
when they arise from it, appearances such as that of a mountain, rath er than appearing as 
they did before as hard and obstructive, appear  insubstantial like a rainbow or thin smoke. 
This is also not the illusion-like appearance explained in the scriptures, because it is an 
appearance [of objects] as empty of gross obstru ctiveness, rather than an appearance that the 
apparent objects are empty of being inherent ly established, and because the meaning of 
emptiness, which is the absence of inherent ex istence, cannot possibly be  the non-existence of 
obstructive hardness. Otherwise there would be the fallacies that when apprehending 
rainbows and the like as substrata, it would be  impossible for the apprehension of the true 
existence to arise, and when apprehending ob structive objects as substrata, it would be 
impossible to generate the consciousness re alizing the absence of true existence.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3B  The way things [are made to] appear illusion-like in 
reliance on certain means 
1 The way an illusion-like appearance comes about 
2 How both a rational cognition and a conventional awareness occur combined, simultaneously with 
regard to this 
3 How there is consequently no ne ed for an ancillary reasoning estab lishing [that appear ances are] like 
illusions 
4 How you [then]  do everything in the post-meditation p hase [where appearances are] like an illusion 
5 Instructions on seeking certai nty of things being like illusions 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3B1 How illusion-like appearances arise 
Second: {324} Well then, what has to be done  for illusory objects to appear correctly? 
For example, in dependence on seeing illu sory horses and elephants with one’s eye 
consciousness, and ascertaining, with one’s mental  consciousness, that no horses or elephants 
in accordance with the appearance exist, the ascertainment arises that this appearance of 
horses and elephants is an il lusory or false appearance. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3B2 How the collection of the two, a reasoning consciousness and a 
conventional mind, occur simultaneously with regard to this 
Likewise, in dependence on both the undeniable appearance of persons and so forth to one’s 
conventional mind and one’s ascertainment by means of a reasoning consciousness that they 
are empty of an inherent existence establishe d by way of an own entity, the ascertainment 
arises that those persons are illusory or false appearances. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 277   Due to that, if the meditative equipoise on  space-like emptiness, in which the object 
aims for apprehending attributes do not even  exist one bit, hits home, an illusion-like 
emptiness will appear when you look at object  appearances in the subsequent attainment 
period after you have risen from that [equipoise].  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3B3 How there is consequently no need for a separate reasoning 
settling [appea rances] as illusion-like  
Thus, you analyse phenomena a lot with the re asoning analysing whet her or not they are 
established by way of their own enitites, and you generate a very strong certainty with respect 
to their lack of inherent existence. Subsequent ly, when you look at the appearances arising, 
they will appear like illusions. There is no se parate way of settling the illusion-like emptiness, 
though.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3B4 How the illusion-like subsequent a ttainment acts on everything  
Therefore, even when engaging in the si de of conduct such as prostrations and 
circumambulations, you engage in them affected  by the ascertainment of your analysis as 
[explained] earlier. Thereby, you should train in illusion-like appearance, and do them from 
within that. Once you have traine d in it, they will appear like illusions even through the mere 
recollection of the view. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B1B-3B 5 Instructions on seeking asce rtainment of th e illusion-like 
A How to train in emptiness, because of the need to induce ascertainment with respect to both 
appearance and emptiness  
Put [simply and] easy to understand, the method  for seeking this ascertainment is as follows. 
As has been explained earlier, you should cause the generality of the ob ject of negation by 
reasoning to appear well, {325} consider well the way ignorance in one’s continuum 
superimposes inherent existence, and identify it. Then, you consider how if there is such 
inherent existence, it will not be beyond onen ess and difference, and how, thinking about it, 
there is damage done to assertions of it as ei ther. You induce the ascertainment of seeing the 
damage done and finally stabilise the ascertainm ent thinking “A person lacks even the least 
inherent establishment”. Like that you should train a in the factor of emptiness a lot.  
B How persons appear illusion-like wi thout your forge tting emptiness 
Then, you should let the undeniable appearance  of the designation of person arise as the 
object of your mind, attend to the interdepende n t  f a c t o r s  o f  p o s i t i n g  i t  a s  a c c u m u l a t o r  o f  
karma and experiencer of results, and gain  certainty concerning the ways in which 
interdependence is valid in the ab sence of inherent existence.  
C How the analogy of a mirror image is necessary when appearance and emptiness appear to be 
contradictory  
At a time when these two appear to contradict each other, you should take the analogy of a 
mirror image and the like and consider how they are non-contradi ctory. Although the 
reflection of a face is empty of the eyes, ears , and so forth, whichever way it appears, it 
nevertheless arises in dependence upon a face  and a mirror and disintegrates when some of 
the conditions are withdrawn. The two are undeniably contained in the common base201. You 
should train in the thought that likewise, althou gh persons also lack even one bit of inherent 
establishment, this does not contradict their accumulating karma, their experiencing results 
and their being born in dependence on previous  karma, afflictions, and so forth. This you 
should know in all such circumstances.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 278  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2 Settling the selflessness of phenomena 
A How there is no difference in subtlety among objects of negation, but rather a distinction between two 
selflessnesses on account of their subjects 
B How it is established 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2A How there is no difference in subtlety among objects of negation, but 
rather a distinction between two selflessnesses on account of their subjects 
Second: The basis of designation of a person, the five aggregates, the six elements such as the 
earth element, the six sense fields such as th e eye, are phenomena and their {326} emptiness 
of an inherent existence established by way of their own entities is the selflessness of those 
phenomena.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B  How it is settled 
1 Refutation transfering the reasoning explained earlier 
2 Refutation by means of another  reasoning not explained earlier 
There are two ways of settling it, a refutation transfering the reasoning explained earlier and a 
refutation by means of another reasoning not explained earlier. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-1 Refutation transfering of the reasoning explained earlier 
First: Among the things202 that are aggregates, elements and sense bases, there are two types. 
With physical phenomena, you examine both th eir parts in the various cardinal directions 
such as East and that which possesses the parts,  and with consciousnesses, you examine their 
temporal parts such as earlier and later ones  and that which possesses the parts. Having 
examined whether they are established, by way of  their entites, as one or different, you refute 
them in the above fashion. That is the me aning of a sutra statement quoted earlier203: 
 
Just as you know the notion of self 
Apply it to everything mentally.    [26] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2 Refutation by  means of another reasoning not explained 
earlier 
A Presenting the argument of dependent origination 
B How even non-products are established as not truly existent through that and the former 
reasoning 
The second one has two points: Presenting the argument of dependent origination and how 
even non-products are established as not truly ex istent through that and the former reasoning.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A Presenti ng the argument of dependent origination 
1 Mentioning the sources 
2 Explanation of what the sutra [quotation] means 
3 Praise to the argument of dependent origination as that which cuts all inferior views 
4 Identification of where the view goes wrong - the extremes of exaggeration and denigration 
5 How the two extremes are overcome at the same time through the reasoning of dependent origination 
6 Presentation[s] of dependent origination 
7 How truly established sameness and difference are also refuted by these [two arguments] 
8 Corresponding statements in Nagarjuna’s writings 
9 The way it is praised as a view in which appearances and emptiness are seen to be complementary 
10 Instruction that it is necessary to differentiate between inherent existence and non-existence and, 
generally, between the four types of existence and non-existence 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A1 A citation of sources 
With regard to the argument of interdependence, it says in [the Sutra ] Requested by Sagaramati : 
 
That which originates interdependently 
Does not exist by way of its entity.    [44] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 279   
Inherent establishment is clearly refuted with the sign204 of dependent origination. 
In [the Sutra ] Requested by Anavatapti  it also clearly says: 
 
Whatever is born from conditions is not born, 
It is not born by way of its entity. 
Whatever depends on conditions is said to be empty. Whoever has realized emptiness is conscientious.  [45]  
This is [said] very frequent in the precious scriptures. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A2 Explanation of what the sutra means 
The meaning of what the first line refers to as  “ n o t  b o r n ”  i s  e x p l a i n e d  b y  t h e  s e c o n d  l i n e  
saying: “not born by way of its entity”. Therefore,  a qualitification of the object of negation is 
applied to the refutation of birth . In [the] Descent to Lanka  [Sutra ] quoted in [Chandrakirti’s] 
Clear Words  it also says: 
 
Thinking of their not being born in herently I said: ‘All phenomena are 
u n b o r n ’ .         [ 4 6 ]   
{327} For fear that without a qualification havi ng been made, statements  that birth does not 
exist could be held [to indicate] that all birth whatsoever is non-existent, the Teacher himself 
took up the thought of the su tras and explained the meaning to be the non-existence of 
inherent birth.   Then, the third line says that dependence an d reliance on conditions is the meaning of 
being empty of establishment by way of one’s ow n entity. This indicates that the emptiness of 
inherent establishment is the meaning of de pendent origination whereas an emptiness of 
performing functions that would negate mere birth is not.  
 In the Root [Text on ] Wisdom  it also says: 
 
That which arises in dependence 
Is pacified of an entity.      [47]  
By reason of arising dependently, it is pacified  or empty of establishment by way of its entity. 
You should know that whatever obscure fabricat ions have been propounded - that because of 
dependent arising itself, the Madhyamika system  must propound non-arising and so forth - 
are thereby cleared away.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A3 Praise to the argument of dependent origination as that which cuts 
all inferior views 
The argument of dependent origination which is  like that is praised very much. In [the Sutra ] 
Requested by Anavatapta  it says: 
 
The wise who realize phenomena arise in dependence 
Do not at all depend on extreme views.   [48]  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 280  Through realizing dependent origination as it is, one does not depend on views holding to 
extremes. The meaning of this is set forth in the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ]: 
 
Since things originate totally in dependence, 
These conceptions cannot be imputed. This reasoning of dependent origination Therefore cuts the net of all bad views.   [49]  
This is the unexcelled distinguishing featur e of Mahatma Nagarjuna, the father, and his 
spiritual son. That is why, from among [various ] reasonings, I will describe that of dependent 
origination here.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A4 Identification of places where the view goes wrong - the extremes 
of superimposition and deprecation  
Here, there are mainly two places of obstructio n where the pure view goes wrong: One is the 
{328} view of permanence and superimposition th at has the object aim of the apprehension of 
true existence apprehending phenomena to be tr uly existent. With the second one, the view 
of annihilation and deprecation, the measure of  the object of negation has not been grasped 
and is excessive whereby it becomes impossible  to induce the ascertainment of dependently 
originating causes and effects in one’s own system  so that there is no way of identifying that 
something is this and not that.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A5 How the two extremes are simulataneously eliminated through the reasoning of dependent origination 
When inherent establishment is refuted in dependence on arguments inducing the 
ascertainment that from these causes and co nditions these effects arise, those two are 
abandoned without remainder. This is becaus e through ascertainment of the argument, the 
view of annihilation is radically refuted, and through ascertaining the meaning of the thesis, 
the view of permanence is.205  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A6 Presentation of dependent origination 
A Presentation common to Cittamatrins 
Therefore, external things such as sprouts and internal things such as compositional factors 
arise gradually in dependence on seeds and so fo rth and ignorance and so forth, respectively.  
B The Madhyamika’s uncommon way of presenting dependent origination 
If that is so, their establishment through own characteristics is inadmissible because if they 
were established through their own entities, th ey would necessarily be established through 
their own inherent nature capable of setting th em up under their own power, for themselves, 
so their dependence on causes and cond itions would be contradictory. In the Four Hundred 
[Verses ] it says: 
 
That which exists arisen dependently 
Does not have autonomy. All these lack autonomy, Hence, the self does no t exist.     [50] 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 281  Through this you should understand that si nce persons and pots and the like are also 
imputed in dependence on their own collections [o f parts], they lack inherent establishment.  
Those are the two presentations of the argument of dependent origination.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A7 How truly established oneness and difference are also refuted by 
these 
If [something] arises dependently and is labelled dependently, it does not exist established by 
way of its own entity as one with whatever it is dependent on. If it did exist as one, all actions 
and agents would be one.  
The two {329} also do not exist established by way of their entities as other because if they did, 
one could refute their connection, so their dependence would be contradicted.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A8 Statements of this in Nagarjuna’s texts 
In [the] Root [Text on ] Wisdom  it says: 
 
Whatever arises dependent on something 
Is not that thing for a while. 
Nor is it other than it. Hence,  It’s not annihilated, nor permanent.    [51] 
 
And in the Praise of the Supramundane : 
 
Sophists assert that suffering is 
Created by itself or other, Or by both itself and other, Or that it is without cause. You said that it arises dependently. That which arises in interdependence Is asserted by you as empty. ‘Things don’t exist autonomously!’ -  That’s your matchless lion’s roar.    [52]  
That is through the argument of dependent origination the apprehensions of oneness and 
difference, of the extremes of permanence an d annihilation, and of the four extremes of 
origination
206 are refuted.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A9 How it is praised as a view in which appearances and emptiness 
arise as mutual assistants  
Having thus induced certainty through the emptiness empty of all object aims for 
apprehending characteristics, one does not gi ve up one’s ascertainment of the relation 
between actions and their effects. Reliance on discarding [non-virtues] and assuming [virtues] 
through that is highly praised. In the Essay on Bodhicitta  it says: 
 
Relying on actions and their results 
While knowing this emptiness of phenomena - 
This is more wonderful still than the wonderful, 
This is more marvellous still than the marvellous.  [53] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 282  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2A10 Advice that it is necessary to differentiate between the four, 
inherent existence and non-existence as well as existence and non-existence in general 
A The actual [advice] 
For that to happen it is necessary to differentia te between inherent existence, mere existence, 
non-existence by way of own characteristics an d  n o n - e x i s t e n c e .   I t  i s  a s  s t a t e d  i n  t h e  
Commentary on  [the] Entrance  [to the Middle Way ]: 
 
What wise person, while knowing the presentation of causes and 
effects, reflections without inherent existence, would observe as merely existent forms, feelings, and so fort h that do not exist other than as 
causes and conditions, and by doing so  {330} ascertain that they possess 
inherent existence? Therefore, although observed as existent, they have no inherent production.     [54] 
B How you fall to the two extremes if you do not differentiate between them along with a source 
If you do not differentiate between those [four] , things will exist by wa y their own entity as 
soon as they exist, and they will be non-existent  as long as they do not exist by way of their 
own entity. You will not move beyond the two extremes of supermposition and deprecation. 
In the Commentary on the  [Four] Hundred  [Verses ] it says: 
  
According to those who propose that real substantial things exist, as 
long as a thing is existing, so long will an own entity be existing in 
accordance with it, whereas when it is rid of its own entity, then the 
thing will no longer exist in any way and will therefore resembles a 
donkey’s horn. Therefore, since th ey do not pass beyond propounding 
those two, all their assertions ar e only match with difficulty.  
         [ 5 5 ]   
C The manner in which those two extremes are eliminated 
This being so, you are freed from  all extremes of existence thro ugh the absence of existence by 
way of an own entity, and from all extremes of non-existence through the ability to posit, in 
that [absence], causes and effect s without inherent existence.  
D The mere extremes of existence and non-existence and the two extremes associated with the places 
where the view goes wrong  do not have the same meaning  
With regard to extremes it says in Reasoning for Detailed Explanations :  
 
‘mtha’ is used for finish, for end, 
Nearness, direction, and the lower     [56] 
 
Such extremes are indeed asserted in our syst em as well, however, concerning the extremes 
that are places where the view called ‘fr ee from extremes’ goes wrong, it says in Illumination of 
the Middle : 
  
If in the Middle Way system there we re any ultimate thing at all, [an 
object] of the mind with its own en tity by nature, then how could the 
strong adherence [thinking] ‘it is pe rmanent’ or ‘it is impermanent’ be 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 283  an extreme, since it would exist for th at [system]? It is unreasonable to 
say that proper mental attention go ing after the suchness of things as 
they are is a position one falls to.    [57] 
 
{331} As is being said, mental attention in accord ance with how an object [actually] is, is not a 
position one would fall to, so it does not consti tute holding to an extreme. In the world, an 
abyss is called “mtha’”207 and falling into it is called “mtha’ la lhung”. Likewise the 
apprehension of phenomena as truly existent and the apprehension th at nothing at all is 
established or exists constitute the “mtha’ lh ung” of permanence and annihilation which are 
the opposites of correct fact. The apprehension s that phenomena do not ultimately exist and 
that causes and effects and so forth conventi onally exist and so forth do not constitute 
holding to extremes, because the objects abide in the way that they are apprehended.   
E Sources for that 
This is why: In Refuting Objections  it says: 
 
The lack of inherent existence, inverted, 
Is establishment as inherent.     [58] 
 
That is if something is not ultimaty  non-existent, it ultimately exists. 
 Also: 
 
The non-assertion of conventionalities - 
That is not what we explain. 
 
In Seventy Verses on Emptiness  it says: 
 
‘Depending on this thing that arises‘ - 
This worldly mode has not been refuted.   [59] 
F The distinction that through [the phrase] ‘neither existent nor non-existent’ and the like there is no 
falling to extremes, is a fixation on mere words  
Therefore, the difference being ma de between both “is not existent208“ and “exists” [on the 
one hand] and “does not exist” and “is not non-ex istent” [on the other hand], is nothing more 
than a difference in the way of expressing it. In the manner the two appear to the mind, there 
is still no difference whatsoever, however much yo u investigate. Therefore,  it is nothing more 
than a fixation on mere words to propound that one falls or does not fall to extremes through 
that manner [of expression].  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2B2B-2B  How non-products are also established as not truly 
existent through this and earlier reasonings 
1 Pointing out the intended meaning from the Root  [Verses on ] Wisdom  that once products have been 
established through reasoning as not truly existen t, non-products are easily established as not truly 
existent 
Once products, persons and phenomena, have thus  been established as not truly existent by 
way of the reasonings explained earlier, it is es tablished with little diffic ulty that non-products 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 284  such as space, analytical cessations209, non-analytical cessations and suchness do not truly exist. 
With that intention it says in Root [Verses on ] Emptiness : 
 
Since products are thoroughly not established, 
{332} How could non-products be established?  [60]  
2 The reason for that 
As for the manner of easy establishment: when  inherently established products have been 
refuted as above, even though they are not inhere ntly established, it is established that with 
regard to them, agents and actions such as bond age and liberation, causes and effects, objects 
of comprehension and those who comprehend  them may be posited. When that is 
established, even though non-products like real ity and analytical cessations are not established 
as truly existent, the presentation of objects of attainment on the path, objects of comprehension, the jewel of Dharma as refuge fo r disciples, and so forth may be posited well. 
If they are not asserted to be truly existent, one cannot at all say that these presentations of 
the need to posit them are inadmissible. Therefor e, it would be pointless to assert them as 
truly existent.  
3 How to refute the assertion that products such as reality and cessations are inherently truly existent 
by means of the reasoning of interdependence as well 
Those who assert them as truly existent must an d do indeed also assert presentations of their 
definitions and definienda, [their] causes of separation and results of separation, [their] 
comprehension by such and such a valid cognitions and so forth. At that point, if they do not 
relate them to their respective objects of atta inment, characteristics, comprehenders, and so 
forth, they will not be able to refute all unre lated things becoming definitions and definienda 
[of each other] and the like. If they asserted li nks, they would not be ab le to posit the links, 
since something truly existent, inherently esta blished, cannot depend on something else.  
4 Another refutation by way of [their] not being one nor many  
Similarly, you should also perform the refutati on, investigating [whether a non-product is] one 
[with] or different210 [from its basis of designation]. If by this reasoned analysis, you cannot 
refute the assertion that they are truly establis hed, you cannot refute true existence even in 
the slightest, because it is the same in all respects for products.  
5 The assertions that with products the emptiness of inherently existing in their own right is a nihilistic 
emptiness and that suchness is established as truly existent are misguided with regard to emptiness 
{333} You may think that if the meaning of “products are empty of inherently established own 
entities” is that those phenomenona do not have  such entities, it is thereby a nihilistic 
emptiness. However, suchness truly exists, becaus e it has its own entity. That is the furthest 
you can go wrong settling products as empty of inherent establishment, a view deprecating the 
interdependence of products. The latter is a te rrible view of permanence that superimposes 
true existence if something has its own entity. Therefore, they engage in the correct meaning 
of emptiness211 wrongly.  
6 If emptiness of an own essence thus meant that he himself were empty of [being] himself, it would also be inadmissible for someone such as the holder of the thesis that certain phenomena truly exist, to posit certain phenomena as truly existent, having been considered inherently empty himselff 
If the emptiness of an inherently established ow n entity were the absence of him in himself, 
the absence in himself would mean  that nothing at all could possi bly exist, so the holder of 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 285  the thesis that certain phenomena truly exist, th e scriptures and reasonings establishing this, 
and so forth would also be empty of an inherent ly established own entity. Therefore, the basis 
would not be established and therefore, positi ng the tenet that some phenomena are truly 
established is a random statem ent without investigation.  
7 The two, asserting that all phenomena lack true existence, a true existence that has been refuted 
through reasoning, and propounding that all phenomena lack true existence with a mistaken manner of understanding emptiness are by no means the same 
With good insight into the way this reasoning progresseses, all our own [Buddhist] schools of 
the country of aryas212 that propound that phenomena truly exist are called proponents of 
things, since they definitely propound that  things are established as truly existent. 
Propounding that things lack true existence and no more asserting any phenomena 
whatsoever to be established as truly existent wo uld seem to be a sign of distinct superiority 
over the nonsensical expositions of this faction.  
 With the above explanations you should al so come to a good understanding of those 
who advocate two discordant [positions] with re gard to suchness and of how they pursue their 
modes of debate on whether or not ultimate realit y is ultimately established, having agreed on 
the above kind of emptiness of an inherent ly established own entity with regard to 
conventional phenomena.   {334} This is because the two, not asserting true existence with regard to any things or 
phenomena having refuted true existence with  regard to phenomena by reasoning, and 
propounding that all phenomena lack true existe nce in dependence on a nihilistic emptiness, 
a mistaken manner of understanding emptine ss, are dissimilar in every respect.  
8 The doubt that if all non-products did not truly exist, this would be in contradiction with scriptures that 
teach nirvana to be true  
If the meaning of “Since products are thoroughly not established,  / How could non-products 
be established?”213 were as [explained] earlier, would th is not be in contradiction with other 
statements [by Nagarjuna]? - In the Sixty [Stanzas of ] Reasoning  it says: 
 
When the Jinas taught nirvana 
As the one and only truth, 
Who, what wise person would think 
That the rest are not the opposite?    [61] 
 
Only nirvana is said to be true while ev erything else is said to be untrue. In Praise of the 
Dharmadatu  it also says: 
 
All the sutras teaching emptiness 
That were set forth by the Jina, Counteract the mental afflictions -  
They don’t prejudice this realm.    [62] 
 
That is the sutras teaching emptiness, the abse nce of inherent existence, are for the sake of 
abandoning mental afflictions, but they do not teach that the realm of natural purity does not 
exist.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 286  9 The reply to this: although nirvana is non-deceptive to a mind looking at it with direct perception, it is 
not a truth that would bear analysis, so there is no contradiction with the above scriptural passage  
Those [who think that way] approach the meanin g of the statements wrongly. The meaning of 
the above statement [60] is that of the following statement by the Buddha: 
 
Monks, this ultimate truth is singular , it is this: nirvana, that which has 
the quality of non-deceptiveness. All compositional factors have the 
quality of being false, deceptive.    [63] 
 
This sutra also says that nirvana is true and th at all compositional factors are false. The earlier 
[part of the] sutra passage very clearly explai ns that truth means non-deceptiveness and the 
latter one [very clearly explains] that fals e means deceptive. {335} Furthermore, the 
Commentary on  the Sixty  [Stanzas of ] Reasoning  explains nirvana214 to be an ultimate truth which 
it is: Therefore, to a mind looking at it wi th direct cognition, it does not have any 
deceptiveness of appearing [inherently establishe d] while not being inherently established. To 
a mind to which the remaining [phenomena], comp ositional factors, directly appear they have 
the deceptiveness of appearing [inherently establ ished] while not being inherently established. 
That is why [you find that] they are not establ ished as truths that bear analysis, when you 
examine them with the reasoning that analyzes wh ether or not they are truly established, [you 
find that] they. Therefore, what is the point of being attached to  mere labels without thinking 
about the meaning deeply.  
10 Establishing the validity of that 
In the Sixty [Verses of ] Reasons  it also says: 
 
Conditioned existence and nirvana - 
Neither of these two exists. 
Thorough knowledge of existence That is what is expressed by ‘nirvana’.    [64] 
 
What is being explained is that both existenc e and peace do not inherently exist and that 
nirvana is posited as the very object of the kn owledge that an inherently established existence 
does not exist. So how could this be a position  that asserts emptiness,  the non-true existence 
of existence, as a nihilistic emptiness?  
11 Although emptiness exists, it need not be truly established; that eliminates the [alleged] contradiction 
with the scriptural passage from Praise of the Dharmadhatu   
This is what the scriptural passage [62] from the Praise  [of the Dharmadhatu ] means, though: 
 
In order to avert the apprehension of  things as truly existent, the root 
of all the other mental afflictions, the sutras teaching emptiness, the 
absence of inherent establishment, teac h that the referent object of that 
[apprehension] does not exist. They do not teach that emptiness does 
not exist - the naturally pure realm which refutes the object of that 
apprehension of true existence,  the two types of self. [65] 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 287  Although that emptiness exists, it is not truly es tablished. That is why this scriptural passage 
serves as a source for refutating the propositio ns “the emptiness that refutes the object of 
negation, true existence, does not exist eith er” and “in order to exhaustively abandon the 
mental afflictions, it is not necessary to  realize emptiness, the ultimate suchness.” 
12 You cannot avert the apprehension of true existence by making a truly established reality your object 
of meditation 
That being so, it says in that very Praise : 
 
{336} The three called ‘impermanence’, ‘emptiness’, ‘suffering’ 
Are what purifies the mind. 
The teaching that puri fies it best is the 
Absence of inherent existence.    [66] 
And: 
Phenomena’s lack of inherent existence Should be meditated on as dharmadhatu.   [67] 
 The fact that these phenomena lack  inherently established inherent  existence is said to be the 
dharmadhatu that is the object of meditation, an d just meditation on that is said to be the 
supreme purifier of the mind. Therefore, how co uld it be suitable to interpret this as the 
position that the emptiness wh ich is the absence of inherent establishment of phenomena 
appearing [inherently established] is a nihili stic emptiness and that therefore, a truly 
established emptiness separate from it [should] be posited as the emptiness that is the object 
of meditation. That is like propounding that for eliminating the suffering of fear [arising] 
from apprehending a snake in the east even th ough there is none, showing that there is no 
snake in the east will not serve as an antidote , but rather one needs to show that there is a 
tree in the west. This is because one would pr opound that for eliminating the suffering of 
sentient beings as they adhere to true existenc e with regard to what appears [truly existent], 
the realization that the basis with  regard to which there is the apprehension of true existence 
lacks true existence will not serve as an anti dote, but rather one needs to show some other 
useless basis to be truly existent.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C  Presentation of conventional and ultimate truths 
1 The basis from which th e two truths are divided 
2 The number of divisions 
3 The meaning of dividing them in that way 
4 Explaining the meaning of the individual divisions 
The third one has three [points]: the basis from  which the two truths are divded, the number 
of divisions, the meaning of dividing them in  that way, and explaining the meaning of the 
individual divisions. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C1 The basis from which the two truths are divided 
First: Earlier scholars had many ways of asse rting the basis of division of the two truths. 
However, here, objects of knowledge are the basis of division, because in the Compendium of 
Instructions  it says: 
 
Objects of knowledge215 are also exhausted as these conventional216 and 
ultimate truths.        [68] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 288  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C2 The number of divisions 
Second: According to the Mulamadhyamakakarika  which says: 
 
[They are] worldly conventional truths and ultimate truths. 
 
[objects of knowledge] are divided into the two, conventional and ultimate truths. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C3 The meaning of dividing them in that way 
A Presentation of earlier positions  
Third: {337} Two [things] that are divided into two need to be different, so in what way are 
they different?  
 In this regard, many earlier [scholars] prop ounded three [types of] difference: different 
entities such as a pot and a woollen cloth, one entity and different isolates such as a product 
and impermanence - with these two [types], the constituting causes of the difference are both 
[functioning] things - and the difference wher e whichever one is not a [functioning] thing217, a 
difference where their being one is negated. So  they propounded that the two truths were 
different in that their being one was negated. One the other hand, some asserted the two to 
be one entity and different isolates.  
B Proving the validity in our own system 
The relation of essential identity218 is fine according to Illumination of the Middle Way  which 
says that it is not contradictory even for non- [functional] things. Therefore, the oneness of 
entity and difference of isolates  is not contradictory even if both constituting causes of 
difference are non-things or if whic hever one of them is not. In the Commentary on Engaging  
[in Bodhisattva Behaviour ] it says: 
 
Two aspects [of] the entity of a ll things are taught: they are the 
conventional and the ultimate.    [69] 
 
Thus, with regard to the entity of each and every object, there is both a conventional and an 
ultimate entity. If the two truths were not one en tity, since it would also be very unreasonable 
for them to be different entities, they woul d be without entity and therefore non-existent219, 
because whatever exists necessarily exis ts as either one entity or many.  
Again in Elucidation of Bodhicitta  it says: 
 
Conventions are explained as emptiness. Emptiness is nothing but a convention
220, 
For, certainly, [neither] occurs without [the other], 
Just like a product and impermanence.   [70] 
 
If a sprout, for instance, were a different entity from its own ulti mate [entity], it would also be 
a different entity from its emptiness of true existence, so the sprout would be truly 
established. Therefore, since it is not a different  entity, it is one entity. Although a sprout is 
empty of its own true existence, it  is not its own ultimate truth.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 289   A few texts {338} set forth that the two tr uths are neither one nor different. Some of 
them are referring to inherently establishe d oneness and difference whereas others are 
referring to their not being either di fferent entities or one isolate.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4 Explaining the meaning of the individual divisions 
A Conventional truths 
B Ultimate truths 
C Pointing out that the number of the two truths is definite 
The fourth one has three points: conventional tr uths, ultimate truths, and pointing out that 
the number of the two truths is definite. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4A Conventional truths 
1 Explaining the meaning of the words “conventional” and “truth” 
2 The characteristics of conventional truths 
3 Divisions of conventionalities 
The first one has three points: explaining th e meaning of the words “conventional” and 
“truth”, the characteristics of conventional truths, and divisions of conventionalities.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4A-1 Explaining the meaning of the words “conventional” and 
“truth” 
A Explaining the meaning of the word “conventional” 
B Explaining the meaning of the word “truth” 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4A-1A Explaining the meaning of the word “conventional” 
1 The actual [meaning] 
First: In Clear Words  three [meanings] for “the conventi onal” are explained: “concealers of 
suchness”, “mutually dependent objects”, and “wor ldly designations”. The latter are said to 
have the characteristics of objects to be ex pressed and means of expression, knowers and 
objects of knowledge and so forth, so they ar e not just subjective designations, that is 
consciousnesses and expressions. Also, objects of knowledge and objects to be expressed 
should not all be held to be conventional truths.   In this regard, the convention which is  the concealing consciousness from whose 
perspective form and the like is posited as truly ex istent, is the first of th e three. In fact, it is 
the ignorance superimposing on phenomena that they have their own inherently established 
entity which does not exist. This is because true  establishment is in fact impossible, so that 
the positing [of objects] as truly existent is [n ecessarily] from the mental perspective. From a 
mental perspective that does not apprehend true existence, there is no positing [objects] as 
truly existent. That being so, it says in the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ]: 
 
Delusion is a concealer, for it obscures nature. Its fabrications made to seem truly existent 
Were called ‘conventional truths’ by the Capable One 
And fabricated things he called conventions.   [71]  
2 Abandoning mistakes about this 
In the Commentary on Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says: 
 
In this way, conventional truths are posited provisionally under the 
power of afflictive ignorance whic h is included in the limbs of 
existence. For hearers, {339} solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas who 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 290  have abandoned afflictive ignorance and who see compositional factors 
as resembling the existence of mi rror images and the like, they are 
fabricated natures rather than trut hs, because they do not exaggerate 
them as truly existent. For children they are deceptive, but for others 
they are mere conventionalitie s due to their their dependent 
origination in accordance with illusions and the like. [72] 
 
This statement does not indicate that whenever  conventional truths are posited as existent, 
they are posited as existent due to ignorance nor [does it indicate] that from the perspective of 
the minds of hearers, solitary realizers and bodhisattvas who have abandoned afflictive 
ignorance, conventional trut hs are not established.  
 The reason for the first [point] is that, as explained earlier, affl icted ignorance is the 
apprehension of true existence, so the ob ject it apprehends does not even exist 
conventionally. Whatever is a conventional trut h necessarily exists conventionally. Therefore, 
if [something] is conventional [in the se nse] of bases for positing phenomena as 
conventionally existent, it is necessarily not [s omething] held to be conventional with regard 
to afflicted ignorance.   The reason for the second point is that  from the perspective of those who have 
abandoned the conventionality of afflicted igno rance, the conventional ities of adherence to 
true existence that posits things as true do no exist. That is the reason why compositional 
factors are established as untrue from their perspe ctive, but it does not establish that they are 
not conventional truths. Consequently, the statement that, from their perspective, 
compositional factors are mere conventions means that for them, from among the two 
[components], conventional and truth, truth
221 cannot be posited. So the word “mere” 
eliminates truth, but not conventional truth.  The meaning of setting forth the two, mere 
conventions and conventional truths, should be understood like that.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4A-1B Explaining the meaning of the word “truth” 
1 The actual [meaning] 
In Clear Words  it says: 
 
{340} That which is a tr uth for the world in a concealing manner is a 
worldly concealer truth.     [73] 
 
This is explained in the Commentary on the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ]: 
That which appears truly existent and inherently separate due to a 
concealer while not existing inherently is true for a worldly, mistaken 
concealer. Therefore they are worldly concealer truths. [74] 
 
In accordance with this clear statement, [wor dly concealer truths] should be understood as 
truths for the concealer which is the ignora nce explained earlier. They should not be 
understood as truly established conventionally be cause otherwise, it would contradict a system 
in which establishment by way of own characteri stics is impossible even conventionally. Also, 
the refutation of true existenc e and the establishment of the la ck of true existence are done 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 291  conventionally. The explanation by Master Jnan agarbha of abidance as conventionally true 
should also be understood in this manner.  
2 Clearing up doubts about that 
Now, one might think: from the point of view of a concealer apprehending true existenence, 
reality and the two selves are truths. Theref ore, they are truths for a concealer.  
 If that which is merely true from the poin t of view of a concealer apprehending true 
existenence were posited as a truth for a concealer, it would indeed be like that. However, 
that has not been advocated. It was only explained for what concealer the truth of 
“conventional truth” is a true convention, an d how it is true from that perspective.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4A-2 The definition of conventional truth 
A How all phenomena have two natures, along with a source  
Second: Each and every external and internal phenomenon has both a conventional and an 
ultimate nature. More specifically , if this is illustrated for some thing like a sprout, they are the 
sprout’s nature found by the reasoning consciousness222 perceiving the meaning of suchness, a 
true object of knowledge, and the sprout’s es sence found by the conventional consciousness 
comprehending a deceptive object, a false object of knowledge. The former is the nature of 
the sprout’s ultimate truth and the latter is the nature of the sprout’s conventional truth. In 
accordance with that, it says in the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ]: 
  
{341} Two natures223 of all things are apprehended, 
By seeing what is real and what’s deceptive. 
The objects of seeing the real are taught to be suchness, 
Deceptive [objects] seen are conventional truths.  [75] 
B Indication that they are found by dissimilar valid cognitions 
This indicates that with respect to the sprout’s  nature, there are two natures, the two truths. 
Of those the ultimate one is found by the form er consciousness [“seeing the real”] and the 
conventional one is found by the latter [“Decept ive objects seen”]. It does not indicate one 
single nature of the sprout as two truths in dependence on the former and latter 
consciousness. In the Commentary on Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says: 
 
Two aspects of the nature of all th ings have been taught. They are 
conventional and ultimate.    [76] 
 
It is saying that the natures of each and ever y thing having been divided into the two, the 
ultimate ones are found by consciousnesses perc eiving the real meaning and the conventional 
ones are found by consciousnesses seeing what is false. 
C How it is necessary to acquire the Madhyamika view in order to ascertain the basis as a conventional 
truth 
Conventional truths are not really true but merely true from the point of view of the 
apprehension of true existence. Therefore, in order to ascertai n their meaning isolates, it is 
necessary to understand them as deceptive. In order to understand a basis of characteristics, 
for instance a pot, as a false obje ct, a deceptive object of knowledg e, it is necessary to acquire a 
view with regard to that basis, which refutes th e referent object apprehended as true by means 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 292  of a reasoning consciousness. For, a falsity is  not established by valid cognition without its 
truth having been refuted by reasoning.  
D Although the meaning of conventional truth is not established from the point of view of a mind, that 
does not contradict its ascertainment of a basis of characteristics such as a pot  
Although a pot, woollen cloth, and so forth are conventional truths, when they are being 
established by a mind, the mind does not need  to establish the meaning of conventional 
truth. Likewise, although pots, woollen cloths, and so forth are not inherently existent and 
accordingly illusion-like in their appearance, th e minds that establish them need not establish 
their meaning of being illusion-like.  
E How it is inadmissible to posit pots and the like as  conventional from the point of view of a worldly 
consciousness and as ultimate in relation to aryas   
That is why {342} it is inadmissible to propound  that, in this system, pots, woolen cloths, and 
so forth are posited as convention al truths in relation to the consciousness of ordinary beings 
without the Madhyamika view, and that they are posited as ulti mate truths in relation to 
aryas. That would be the opposite of what is set forth in the Commentary on the Entrance  [to the 
Middle Way ]: 
 
That is to say, whatever ultimate th ere is for ordinary beings, the same 
is a mere conventionality for aryas with the sphere of activity involving 
appearances.Whatever emptiness of inherent existence there is, is 
ultimate for them.      [77] 
 
Ordinary beings apprehend pots and the like as truly existent and precisely that is the 
conception of ultimate existence. In relation to their consciousness, pots and the like are 
therefore ultimately established rather than be ing conventionial objects. The bases that are 
ultimately established for them, pots and the li ke, are conventionalities in relation to the 
vision of exalted wisdom in the continuu m of aryas which comprehends illusion-like 
apperances. Since they cannot be posited as true  in relation to that consciousness they are 
said to be “mere conventionalities”.  
F The need to differentiate between pots and the like and their inherent nature 
Since their inherent nature is thus set forth as an ultimate truth, you should discriminate and 
say that pots and the like are conventionalities and their inherent nature is ultimate for aryas. 
You should not propound that pots and the like  are ultimates for aryas. This is because the 
reasoning consciousness seeing the meaning of reality does not find pots and the like, and 
because that which the reasoning consciousness s eeing the meaning of reality finds is set forth 
as the meaning of an ultimate truth.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4A-3 Explaining divisions of conventionalities 
A The ways in which Prasangika and Svatantrika posit the object of negation do not agree, therefore 
they are also not the same in their distinction of real and wrong conventionalities  
The Svatantrika-Madhyamikas ascertain that cons ciousness which appears to be established by 
way of its own characteristics224 exists just as it appears. Th erefore, they do not distinguish 
between real and wrong subjects [but instead] distinguish whether the appearances of objects 
do or do not exist by way of their own charac teristics in accordance with how they appear225. 
They assert [this] in accordance with th e [following] statement in [Jnanagarbha’s] Two Truths : 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 293   
They seem the same, but since some can 
{343} And some cannot fulfil a function 
A distinction is made between real 
And unreal conventionalities.     [78]  
The present system asserts that whatever appears to the ignorant as established by way of its 
own characteristics is an appearance of that co nsciousness polluted by ignorance. Therefore, 
conventionial objects are not distinguished as the two, real and wrong.  
B Although the reflection of a face is  not a conventional trut h in relation to a worl dly person familiar with 
terminology, it is a conventional truth generally speaking  
Now, it says in the Commentary on Entrance [to the Middle Way ]: 
 
Whatever is false even convention ally is not a conventional truth.
         [ 7 9 ]   
For the worldly conventional [consciousness]  of someone familiar with terminology 
something like the reflection of a face is not true  as a face. Hence, it is  not conventionally true 
in relation to it. While this is  s o  i t  i s  s t i l l  t h e  o b j e c t  f o u n d  b y  [ a  c o n s c i o u s n e s s ]  s e e i n g  a  
deceptive object, a false object of knowledge, so  it is a conventional truth. The consciousness 
to which the reflection appears is mistaken about its appearing object, and likewise the 
ignorant to whom something blue and the like appears to be established by way of its own 
characteristics are mistaken about that appearing object.  
C That mistaken consciousness helps posit a false object of comprehension even though it does not 
posit a true object of comprehension 
When a true object of comprehension is posited, it would be contradictory for a 
consciousness mistaken in that way to posit it. However, precisely that is helpful for positing false objects of comprehension. Otherwise some thing could not be posited as a conventional 
truth if it had not been established conventional ly, so when illusion-like falsities are posited 
conventionally, they could not be po sited [as] conventional truths.  
D How real and wrong conventionalities are posited in relation to the world, along with a source 
The Prasangika system posits si x consciousnesses unaffected by temporary causes of deception, 
six consciousnesses that are the opposite of th ose, six objects apprehended by the former six 
consciousnesses, and {344} six objects apprehen ded by the latter six. The wrong objects and 
subjects are posited as wrong conventionalities,  whereas the objects and subjects that are not 
wrong are posited as real conventionalities. Fu rthermore, it posits them as real and wrong 
conventions in relation to worldly or conventional  valid cognition rather than in relation to a 
reasoning consciousness that accords with an arya’s vision. In our Madhyamika system the 
two, the appearances of reflections and the like and [the appearances] of blue and the like to 
someone ignorant therefore do not differ with re gard to whether or not they are mistaken in 
relation to their appearing objects. That is  why real and wrong conventionalities are not 
distinguished 226. In Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says: 
 
That which the worldly realize, apprehended 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 294  With the six non-defective senses 
Is true from only the worldly perspective. The rest Is posited as wrong from that perspective.   [80] 
E The exception that conventional valid cognition cannot posit the opposite of the mode of 
apprehension associated with temporary pollution through [bad] tenets  
Conventional valid cognition does not establis h the opposite of, for instance, the mode of 
apprehension arising from the mind’s being temp orarily polluted by one’s own bad tenets, the 
two that exist with respect to the apprehen sion of persons and phenomena established 
through their own characterist ics. This is an exception227.  
F A consciousness need not to be mistaken even though it has dualistic appearance   
Moreover, although dualistic appearances occur for the wisdom cognizing varieties free from 
all causes of pollution through predispositions of ignorance, it is not mistaken with regard to 
its appearing objects. The reason has been explained elsewhere.228  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B Explanation of ultimate truths 
1 Explaining the meaning of “ultimate” and “truth” 
2 The characteristics of ultimate truths 
3 Divisions of ultimate truths 
The second one has three points: explaining the meaning of “ultimate” and “truth”, the 
characteristics of ultimate truths, and divisions of ultimate truths. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-1 Explaining the meaning of “ultimate” and “truth” 
A The actual meaning 
First: In Clear Words  it says: 
 
It is an object229 and it is ultimate, therefore it is the ultimate object. It 
is true, therefore it is the ultimate object truth.   
      [ 8 1 ]  
 
T h i s  a s s e r t s  [ t h a t ]  b o t h  { 3 4 5 }  “ u l t i m a t e ”  a n d  “ o b j e c t ”  [ a p p l y ]  w i t h  r e g a r d  t o  t h e  “ u l t i m a t e  
object truth”. 
B How it is true  
The way in which an ultimate truth is true is its non-deceptiveness. Sp ecifically, it does not 
deceive the world, abiding in one way and appe aring in a different way. In the Commentary 
on Sixty [Verses of ] Reasoning  it says that an ultimate truth is merely posited as existent by 
means of worldly conventions230. 
C The different meanings of the word “truth” associated with the two truths 
That being so, the meaning of the word ‘truth’ in  ‘conventional truth‘ which is ‘a truth from 
the point of view of the appreh ension of true existence’ and [t he meaning of the word ‘truth’ 
in] ‘ultimate truth’ are not the same. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-2 The definition of an ultimate truth 
A The actual definition 
B Rejecting an objection 
The second one has two [points]: the actual definition and rejecting objections. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-2A The actual definition 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 295  1 How to identify the definition of an ultimate truth 
First: The definition of an ultimate truth is as explained above: in the Entrance  [to the Middle 
Way] it is said to be that which is found by seei ng the meaning of a real object of knowledge. 
In the commentary on that it says:  
 
That is to say the ultimate gains it s own entity through being the object 
of the special exalted wi sdom of those perceiving reality but it is not 
established by way of its own selfhood. This is one nature.          [ 8 2 ]   
It is said to be found by uncontaminated ex alted wisdom comprehending suchness and not to 
be established by way of its own entity, so th e proposition that something is established as 
truly existent if found by uncontaminated medi tative equipoise, is being refuted. “Special 
exalted wisdom” indicates that what is found by  any wisdom of an arya is not sufficient, and 
that instead only what is found by a special exalted wisdom, the exalted wisdom that knows 
the mode
231,  i s  a n  u l t i m a t e  t r u t h .  T h e  m e a n i n g  o f  “ f o u n d ”  i s  “ e s t a b l i s h e d  a s  s u c h  b y  t h a t  
consciousness”, like with conventionalities.  
2 How it is found by an arya’s uncontaminated exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise that knows the 
mode 
Yet how does it find it? While the eyes of so meone with a cataract see falling hairs on the 
basis of the air around, {346} the eyes of so meone without a cataract do not see even an 
appearance of falling hairs on the same basis. Likewise, those who are damaged by the cataract 
of ignorance observe an own entity of aggreg ates and the like. With the uncontaminated 
exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of thos e who have exhausted all the predispositions of 
ignorance and [of] aryas on the path of lear ning, employing the mode of perception of 
suchness, not even subtle dualistic appearance is  perceived, like with the eyes of someone who 
does not have a cataract. The inherent nature perceived through this mode of perception is 
an ultimate truth.  
3 A source for that 
In the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says: 
 
Where wrong entities such as falling hairs 
Are imputed through the force of cataracts One with pure eyes sees the nature, suchness. Suchness should be known here in like manner.  [83]  
In its commentary it also says:  
“Whatever inherent nature of aggreg ates and the like those free from 
the predispositions of ignorance, th e Buddhas, perceive in the manner 
of those without cataracts seeing falli ng hairs - that is their ultimate 
t r u t h . ”         [ 8 4 ]  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 296  4 Indicating that a nirvana is an ultimate truth 
The ultimate perceived in this manner is the ul timate nature of two natures that each and 
every phenomenon has. More specifically, it is both the naturally pure nirvana, which is the 
emptiness of inherent establishment of phenomen a, and just that free from all the different 
seeds of defilements, the nirvana which is a true cessation.  
5 It is not the intended meaning of the commentary on Sixty  [Verses of ] Reasoning  that nirvana is a 
conventional truth 
In the commentary on Sixty [Verses of ] Reasoning  it says: 
 
If you ask ‘is nirvana also a co nventional truth?’ - it is so. 
Also: 
Therefore, a nirvana is only impu ted as a conventional truth.  
         [ 8 5 ]  
 
That means positing a nirvana, an ultimate truth, as existent, {347} also [implies] positing it as 
merely existent for a conventional consciousness,  a conventional truth. It does not mean this 
system views a nirvana as a conventional truth,  because that same commentary also explains 
that the three truths are conventional truths an d that nirvana is an ultimate truth. In the 
Commentary on the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] the other three truths are also set forth as 
conventional truths and the truth of cessation as an ultimate truth. In response to the 
objection that if a nirvana were posited as conv entionally existent, this would contradict the 
statement that it is an ultimate truth, it says th at it was taught as conventionally true only by 
worldly designations232“.  
6 A source for positing all phenomena by the power of designations  
Therefore, everything posited as existent is po sited by the power of worldly designations. In 
the [Sutra of the ] Perfection of Wisdom in 100,000 Verses  it says: 
 
All these phenomena are labelled in dependence on worldly designations, they are not ultimate.    [86]  
And in the Seventy  [Verses ] on Emptiness  it also says: 
 
Abidance, production, destruction, existence, Non-existence or low, equal, special Were taught by the Buddha by the power of the World’s designations and not reality.   [87] 
 [In other words] all the various presentations of production, destruction and abidance, low, supreme and intermediate, ‘This exists and this do es not exist’ the Jina taught, were taught as 
merely posited by the power of worldly designat ions. He did not say they were posited by the 
power of appreciating real abidance that is not merely merely posited by power of 
designations. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 297  7 Establishing as valid that something need not to be truly established if it is ultimately true given the 
need to differentiate between a truth for a reasoni ng [consciousness] and a truth bearing analysis  
Master Jnyanagarbha explains: 
  
Since it is a truth for an ultimate [c onsciousness], it is an ultimate truth.
         [ 8 8 ]  
 
He thereby also explains that a reasoning consciou sness is ultimate and thus says that what is 
non-deceptive for it is a truth. However, he {3 48} does not mean truly existent in terms of 
bearing analysis, because in that text the true  establishment of all phenomena is refuted. 
Therefore, we assert the proposition “If th e ultimate were not true for an ultimate 
[consciousness], the conventional would not be  true for a conventional [consciousness]”. 
However, to propound that “If the former were not established for the former, the latter would not be established for the latter” is to say that if the negation of a truth were not truly 
established, the phenomenon that is the basis of  the negation would be truly established. This 
is because an ultimate truth is posited as the mere negation of true existence in the 
phenomenon which is
 the basis of the negation, and because to suggest that phenomena are 
not conventionally established is to suggest that they are not falsely esta blished. Like that it 
would be totally incoherent, because it is due to  the very fact that the appearing phenomena, 
which do not exist in a truly established way, are not established as truly existent, that the 
bases of negation must be established as falsities.  
8 For something to be posited as conventionally existent it must not be damaged by any valid cognition 
Therefore, although for somethin g to be posited as conventionally existent, it need not be 
established by a reasoning consciousness of su chness, it must not be  damaged by any valid 
cognition, [that is by] a conventional or reasoning consciousness. The commentary on Sixty 
[Verses of ] Reasoning  explains that since the appropriated aggregates conventionally abide as the 
four, impermanent and so forth, the apprehension  of the four is unmistaken in relation to 
them, and since the aggregates do not abide ev en conventionally as the four, permanent and 
so forth, the apprehension of those four is mistaken in relation to them. In the Entrance  [to 
the Middle Way ] it says: 
 
The self as imputed by non-Buddhist extremists Carried away by the torpor of unknowing And what is imputed on magic displays and illusions Does not even exist from a worldly perspective.  [89]  
This is saying that the self, the primal subs tance, and so forth, imputed by non-Buddhist 
extremists, as well as the objects conceived as th e horses, elephants, and so forth of illusions 
do not even conventionally exist. Therefore,  the proposition that it is the Prasangika 
approach to posit as conventionally existent wh at only exists for a mistaken mind, {349} is 
meaningless prattle. None of the other great Madhyamikas asserts this either. 
 Also, in Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] objects and subjects are taken to be equal in terms 
of existence and non-existence.  This is so not with refere nce to mere existence and non-
existence in general. Rather, th e two are taken [to be equal in terms of] inherent existence and 
non-existence.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 298  9 Although [phenomena] are merely posited by the power of designations, this does not eliminate their 
establishment by valid cognition and so forth 
That being so, [whatever] is posited as conventi onally existent is posi ted as existent by the 
power of nominal conventions, but not everything posited by the power of these is asserted to 
be conventionally existent. Although [phenomena ] are asserted as merely posited by the power 
of designations, the word “mere” eliminates  the meaning that they  are not subjective 
conventions. It does not at all eliminate that  the object posited is established by valid 
cognition.  
 What this system does not do is search - dissatisfied with such a way of positing 
[phenomena] by the power of conventional impu tation - for an imputed object which is not 
merely that but exists in accordance with its mean ing and, if it is found, posit it as existent 
whereas if it is not, posit it is as non-existent. Rather, it a sserts that if something findable 
ermerged as one searches with this search method , it would be truly established. Therefore, it 
does not assert even conventionally that anythi ng is found to exist upon such analysis. From 
there the diving line between analyzing and not analyzing suchness is also drawn. So [the 
Prasangikas] see that if [something] established by way of its own characteristics existed, it 
would have to exist by way of its own entity as  an object not merely posited by the power of 
subjective designations. [Having seen that], they  do not even conventionally assert inherent 
existence, existence by way of own characteristic s or existence by way of an own entity. This 
has already been explained in detail elsewhere.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-2B Rejecting an objection 
1 Setting out an objection 
2 Explanatory answer 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-2B1 Setting out an objection 
If the Buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing the mo de [of being of phenomena] finds ultimate 
truths, [how about] the following statement from the Commentary on Entrance [to the Middle 
Way]: 
 
Is such a nature not invisible? Theref ore, how do they perceive it? That 
is indeed true, however, {350} it is said that they perceive it by means of 
non-perception.      [90]  
It explains the non-perception of anything at all to be suchness. As a source for that the 
explanation that ultimate truth transcends even  the objects of omniscient exalted wisdom is 
quoted. It is also explained that at the level of buddhahood  the movement of mind and 
mental factors has permanently stopped and that  at the time of [atta ining] the ten powers, 
when the Buddha does not perceive aggregates and so forth, he knows all phenomena. How 
are you not contradicting these [explanations]?  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-2B2 Explanatory answer 
A There is no contradiction, because what that system [representative] means to point out is that from 
the point of view of an exalted wisdom knowing the mode and perceiving the ultimate, conventionalities 
are not observed  
“They perceive by means of non-perception” does  not refer to not seeing  any objects at all. 
Rather, it points out that if these objects, observ ed due to the cataract of  ignorance, existed in 
reality, they would have to be observed by the uncontaminated exalted wisdom of an arya’s 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 299  meditative equipoise, so their suchness is percei ved by way of their utter non-perception. This 
is because if the object of negation existe d, it would be observable, so given its non-
observation the realization of the negation of th e object of negation is  posited. The meaning 
of “Without seeing seeing is best“ shou ld also be understood in this way. 
B A source for that 
Thus it also says in the Summary  [Sutra of the Perfection of Wisdom ]: 
 
‘Those who don’t see forms, and also don’t see feelings, 
Don’t see discriminations, and do not see intentions, Do not see consciousness nor mind nor intellect, See reality’, is what the Tathagata teaches. Sentient beings see space and put that into words. Through that way in which spac e is seen investigate this! 
That’s how reality’s also s een, the Tathagata teaches. 
Through other analogies, seeing cannot be expressed. [91] 
 What is not seen are said to be the five aggregates  and what is seen is re ality. {351} That is the 
meaning of suchness just as in the statement “He who sees interdependence sees reality.” 
C Elucidating the meaning of that sutra [passage] 
More specifically, in the analogy, space is the me re elimination of obstructive, tangible objects 
and seeing or realizing it is like not seeing th e obscuring obstructive objects of negation which 
would be observable if they were present. What  is seen is space and what is not seen are 
obscuring obstructions.   The two last lines negate that suchness is seen the way you see blue rather than in 
accordance with the analogy. The statement that the five aggregates are not seen indicates that 
in the face of suchness perceived by uncont aminated meditative equipoise, phenomena are 
not seen.  
D The Sutra on Engaging in the Two Truths  explains that in the face of perceiving the ultimate with an 
exalted knower of all aspects, dualistic appearance disappears, but it does not teach that the ultimate is 
not realized 
In [the Sutra on ] Entering the Two Truths  it says: 
 
Son of the gods, ultimate truth is beyond [all objects] up to and 
including objects of omniscient exalted wisdom possessing the supreme 
of aspects; it is not like what is  expressed by “ultimate truth”. [92] 
 
What is being explained is that [ultimate tr uths] are not seen in accordance with the 
appearance to the mind of object and subjec t as separate when you say “ultimate truth”. 
Therefore, the quotation is a source for the disa ppearance of dualistic appearance rather than 
for the non-realization of the ultimate by the Buddha.   
E How such a mode of perception is also set forth in the Commentary on Entrance  [to the Middle Way ]  
In the Commentary on Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it also says: 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 300  Without touching created things, he realizes suchness by making 
manifest their nature only. That is why he is called “Buddha”.          [ 9 3 ]  
 
From the perspective of perceiving suchness  with a Buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing the 
mode, reality only is said to be realized without touching what dependends on other
233.  
F The sutra statement that during meditative equipoise there is no movement of mind posits that there 
is no movement of conceptual thought 
The movement of mind and mental factors234 coming to an end {352} means that while 
suchness is actualized, the movement of concep tual thought comes to an end. It does not 
indicate that the mind or mental factors do not exist. In Clear Words  it says: 
 
If conceptual thought is moveme nt of the mind, suchness is non-
conceptual, for it is free from it. As is set forth in sutra: “What is 
ultimate truth? If there is not even  movement of the mind in it, what 
need is there to mention the written word.”   [94] 
 The meaning of the statement that there is no  movement of the mind is explained as the 
absence of conceptual th ought. Moreover, in the Commentary on Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it 
is set forth that at the time of an arya’s medita tive equipoise on the path of learning, it has 
not come to a permanent end, whereas at the time of buddhahood it has. 
G How the proposition that ultimate truth is not an object of knowledge and such like are nothing but 
wrong 
Apart from that, Entering  [the Middle Way ] establishes with an accompanying source, that if 
that inherent nature did not ex ist, the bodhisattvas would po intlessly undergo hardships for 
the sake of realizing it: 
 
One may well ask: “What is their nature?” That which is unfabricated about them and which does not depend on anything else: their own nature
235 that is realized by a consciousness free from the cataract of 
ignorance. Whoever wonders whether or not it exists: If it did not exist, 
then for what purpose what would bo dhisattvas cultivate the path of 
the perfections, why would bodhisattvas undertake hundreds of hardships in order to realize reality?   [95]  
 And as a source for that: 
 
Son of the lineage, if the ultimate did not exist, pure conduct would be 
meaningless and it would be pointle ss for tathagatas to come forth. 
Since the ultimate exists, bodhisattvas  are called ‘those skilled in the 
ultimate’. 
 
If ultimate truth {353} did not exist, it would be  pointless to engage in conduct for the sake of 
the purity of final nirvana, disciples would not be  able to realize it, it would be pointless for a 
buddha to come to the world, and the great ch ildren of the jinas wo uld not be skilled in 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 301  ultimate truth. Thus a sutra establishing that ul timate truth exists is quoted. Therefore, it is 
simply wrong to say that the great master’s sy stem propounds ultimate truth not to be an 
object of knowledge and the exalted wisdom realizing suchness not to exist in an arya’s 
meditative equipoise.   
H From the perspective of uncontaminated meditative equipoise object and subject are not posited as 
separate  
Furthermore it says in the Commentary on Entering  [the Middle Way ]: 
 
Therefore, it is posited from imputa tion that suchness is realized, but 
actually it is not that something is known by something else, because 
neither the knower nor the object of knowledge have even arisen.
         [ 9 6 ]  
 
The first [part] means that the realization of su chness is posited with th e two, exalted wisdom 
and suchness, taken separately as object and subj ect. It is posited merely from the perspective 
of conventional consciousness rather than from  the perspective of that  wisdom. “The knower 
has not arisen” means that it has not inherently ar isen and is said to be like water put in water 
with respect to its object236. 
I Suchness is actualised by way of stopping the movement of conceptual thought 
[When] it says: 
 
Since mind and mental factors do not operate with respect to suchness, 
the object of exalted wisdom, it is acutalised only by the body. 
         [ 9 7 ]   
… the object to be actualised is suchness, the su bject, exalted wisdom, is  that which actualizes 
it, and the enjoyment body is the agent of actualisation, that is the knower
237. The manner in 
which it is thereby actualized is by way of st opping conceptual minds and mental factors as 
explained earlier. From th e {354} explanation in the Commentary , it is understood that the 
body by means of which suchness is actualized is in the nature of peace because it is free from 
mind and mental factors. 
J If a buddha did not perceive the aggregates and the like, his exalted knowledge of varieties would be 
deprecated 
If a buddha did not perceive the aggregates and the like, his exalted knowledge of varieties as 
well as the varieties of all objects would be deprecated, because the two, existing and not 
being known by a buddha, are contradictory. 
 
K The exalted knower of all aspects must know them since they appear to that knower of varieties, 
hence there are two appearing objects 
Therefore, the varieties of objects must appear to the exalted knower of varieties, and since 
knowledge without aspects is no t [part of] this system, the as pects occur [to it]. Yet the 
varieties of appearing objects consist both of th at which is unpolluted by the predispositions 
of ignorance such as the major and minor mark s of a buddha, and that  which is polluted by 
the predispositions of ignorance such as the im pure inanimate and animate world. As for the 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 302  first of these, it would be mean ingless if they came to an end at the Buddha level, whereas the 
latter come to an end at that level beca use their causes have come to an end. 
L How the manner in which they appear to an exalted knower of all aspects that realizes varieties 
differs from the manner in which they appear to other persons 
The mode of appearance is as follows. When a Buddha’s major and minor marks appear to a 
person who has not abandoned ignorance, they  are not established by way of their own 
characteristics, but still appear to be. The reason  for this is not that those objects arise due to 
the predispositions of ignorance.  Rather, they appear due to the subjects being polluted by 
the predispositions of ignorance. This is not because they appear  to that subject merely from 
the perspective of appearing that way to other pe rsons, but because they appear that way from 
its own perspective. Forms, sounds, and the like , objects that are not established by way of 
their own characteristics, but still appear that way to someone who has not abandoned 
ignorance, appear to a buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing the varieties only by means of their 
appearance to persons with the pollution of ignorance. {355} They do not appear from a 
buddha’s own perspective, independently of thei r appearing that way to others. Therefore, a 
buddha knows forms and the like th at are not inherently established but still appear to be, yet 
it is from the perspective of their appearing th at way to the ignorant. Independently of their 
appearing that way to those persons, from a buddha’s own perspective, he would not know 
them in the manner of their appear ing that way. Hence, there is no sense that he is deceived 
by appearances, because they do not appear fr om pollution existing within exalted wisdom 
but due to the fact that that wisdom necessari ly knows all objects of knowledge. That being 
so, all things appear to be selfless, inherently non-existent entities from  the perspective of an 
exalted knower of the varieties whereby they a ppear as illusion-like fa lsities. They do not 
appear as truths. When they appear to that ex alted wisdom in terms of their appearance to 
the ignorant, they merely arise as that which appears true for other persons238.  
M It is also set fort h like this in the Sixty  [Verses of ] Reasoning 
In Sixty [Verses of ] Reasonings  it also says: 
 
Those who are skilled with respect to things See collections - impermanent things,  Deceptive phenomena - and [their] emptiness,  Selflessness as [their] aspects as “isolates”.  [98] 
 In the commentary on this it says that those wh o have completed the deeds perceive things in 
that way.  
N Although they are one entity, it is not contradictory to posit individual exalted knowers in relation to 
the two truths, the object 
Thus it says in the Two Truths : 
 
Omniscient knowers directly perceive All the dependently arisen Free from imputed entities - Just this, just as it appears.     [99] 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 303  They are said to perceive all the variet ies directly and vividly. Furthermore: 
 
When consciousness and objects of knowledge 
And the self are not perceived, 
Since signs do not appear [to him], [He] firmly abides, so he does not arise. 
 
What is being explained is that he never aris es from the concentration in which dualistic 
appearance has been completely pacified.  
 {356} To someone who does not understand  these statements of two modes correctly, 
it will seem contradictory to assert both and not [just] one of the two, but there is no 
contradiction. The exalted wisdom perceiving suchness and the exalted wisdom perceiving the 
varieties are one entity, but that does not in the least contradict the fact that in relation to 
individual objects it is the two, a reasoning co nsciousness and a conventional consciousness.  
O When the two valid cognitions comprehend objects individually on the occasion of the view of the 
bases or on the occasion of the fruit, you need to know which of the two valid cognitions iis active 
This depends on knowing well that there is not the slightest contradiction in the occurrence 
of two different modes of finding [objects] by means of the two, reasoning and conventional 
valid cognitions, on the basis of one object on the occasion of the view of the bases239. If you 
know well that on the occasion of the fruit, wh en the objects are comprehended by means of 
the two exalted wisdoms, that is [indeed] the case, and furthermore which of the two valid 
cognitions is active, then you will also be ab le to know that they do not become a common 
locus240 even though they do not ascertain their ob jects separately. Through this you will also 
understand fine details of the definitions of the two truths.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-3 Explaining the divisions of ultimate truths 
A The fact that different ways of dividing ultimate truths have emerged 
When ultimate truths are divided, it is in accordance with the Commentary on Entering  [the 
Middle Way ] which sets forth 16 emptinesses in case emptiness is divided in detail, four in 
case of a middling division - the emptiness of th ings, non-things, self entity and other entity - 
and two if it is abridged - the selflessness of persons and phenomena.  
 Other texts set forth the two, actual ultimates and concordant ultimates. In 
Illumination of the Middle it says:   
This non-production accords with the ultimate and is therefore called an “ultimate”, but actually it is not,  because in actuality the ultimate is 
beyond all elaborations.    [100] 
 
And in Ornament of the Middle  it also says: 
 
Since it accords with the ultimate, 
This is {357} called an “ultimate”. If it really were, it would be  Free from all hosts of elaborations.   [101] 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 304  In the Two Truths  this is set forth in the same way and in the auto-commentary on the Two 
Truths  as well as the Ornament  [of the Sutras ] it is explained that the negation of ultimately 
[existent] production and the like is conventional.  
B How [masters of] earlier generations explain the entity of the ultimate set forth in those texts 
With respect to the meaning of those [stateme nts], many earlier [masters] differentiate two 
ultimate truths, specified and unspecified ones. They assert that the emptiness which negates 
ultimate production and so forth with regard to  form and the like is the former - an imputed 
ultimate truth with the characteristics of a co nventional truth – and that the latter cannot be 
made the object of any awareness whatsoever, so  that it is not an object of knowledge.  
C Those texts explaining the two ultimates are not meant to refer to objects only 
Since that is not the meaning of those [texts], th ey should be explained like this: although the 
object, reality, must indeed be taken as ultimate, the subject, a reasoning consciousness, is 
also often explained as such. In the Two Truths  it says: 
 
Since it is without deception, a reas oning [consciousness] is an ultimate.
         [ 1 0 2 ]  
It is just as it says in Illumination of the Middle  as well: 
 
Propositions such as ‘Ult imately, there is no production whatsoever’ are 
also asserted to mean this: all consciousnesses arisen from correct 
hearing, thinking, and meditating  are unmistaken subjects and 
therefore, called “ultimate”, becaus e their objects are most superior.
       [ 1 0 3 ]  
 
Of the two types of reasoning consciousness, th e non-conceptual exalted wisdom of an arya’s 
meditative equipoise is without concepti ons whereas the reasoning consciousness 
comprehending suchness based on signs is conceptual and so forth. The explanation in Blaze 
of Reasoning  that with respect to the ultimate, there is both a non-conceptual exalted wisdom 
and a wisdom that accords with it, has the sa me implications as the explanation of two 
ultimates in Illumination of the Middle . Therefore, {358} the meaning of the texts is  not that the 
explanation of two ultimates should be applied to objective ultimates only without applying 
them to subjects.  
D How to separately posit the two reasoning consciousnesses, the actual ultimate and that which 
accords with it  
In this regard, the first one is an actual ultimate , because when engaging in suchness, it is able 
to simultaneously eliminate elaborations of true existence and dualistic appearance with 
respect to its object. That is also what  is meant by “beyond all elaborations”241. The second 
one is able to refute the elaboration of true ex istence with respect to its object, however, it 
cannot eliminate the elaboration of dualistic appe arance. Therefore, it is an ultimate that 
accords in aspect with the supramundane ultimate. 
E In relation to the perspective of the[se] minds, it  is necessary to explain two modes also with respect 
to the ultimates of objects  
It is necessary to explain two modes also with respect to the ultimates of objects which refute 
ultimate production and so forth with regard to forms and so forth. For a reasoning, non-
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 305  conceptual consciousness that emptiness of the ob jects is the actual ultimate always free from 
the two elaborations. For a reasoning, conceptual  consciousness on the other hand, it is not 
an actual ultimate always free from the two elab orations, because it is only free from one class 
of them. Still, this is not to say that in general it is not an actual ultimate truth. So, except for 
some minds from whose perspective all the elabor ations of dualistic appearance are gone, the 
emptiness of true existence cannot be free from  all elaborations. Therefore, the meaning of 
the texts is not that if something is an ultimate truth, it must be free from all elaborations of 
dualistic appearance.  
F The ultimate asserted by [those propounding] an establishment of illusion by a reasoning 
[consciousness] is not an actual ultimate 
This being so, [proponents of] the establishmen t of illusion by a reasoning [consciousness] 
assert that a mere object established by an in ferential reasoning consciousness, the collection 
of a basis such as an aggregate and the appearan ce of its emptiness of true existence, is an 
ultimate truth. It is a concordant ultima te, but it is not an ultimate truth.  
G It is inappropriate to prove that sprouts and the like appear to lack true existence with their appearing free from [being] one and many  
Also, proving that sprouts and the like lack true existence with their appearing free from 
[being] one and many {359} does not have th e point of such a proof for a person with 
understanding, who has not eliminated doubt as to whether or not that basis truly exists. For 
those who have eliminated the doubt, th is sign, although a sign, is not correct242. In 
Illumination of the Middle  it says that both the sign and th e predicate are mere eliminations and 
that it is the same if “it is neither one nor many” or non-duality are taken as signs. From those 
very examples, you know that the statemen ts do not refer to affirming negatives243. Therefore, 
this is not at all the assertion of Master Sh antarakshita, his son [Kamalashila], or Master 
Haribhadra.  
H The manner in which Madhymika [proponents] of complete non-abidance assert the ultimate is not in 
accordance with how earlier [scholars] explain it 
As for the elimination of elaborations that are the object of nega tion with regard to 
appearances, a distinction is made between a mere elimination and a determining 
elimination. None of the great Madhyamikas asserts that the latter, the mere object 
comprehended by an inferential conference, is an ultimate truth. The explanation of their 
presentations in the extensive lamrim should be  understood in detail along these lines.  
I Although the refutation of ultimate production and so forth is not a conventionality, that does not 
contradict the demonstration that it exists conventionally 
In the course of explaining the negative of pr oduction and so forth as a concordant ultimate 
truth244, [Jnyanagarbha in his] auto-commentary on the Two Truths  says: 
 
Others hold it to be only real. So, ‘also’245 has the meaning of union. In 
fact, if analyzed with reasoning, it is only conventional. Why? Since the 
object of refutation does not exist, it is clear that, in reality, what has 
been refuted does not exist.  [104] 
 
[He is saying that] others, Cittamatrins, a ssert the emptiness which refutes a self of 
phenomena in the basis of refutation to be established in reality while [his] own system 
teaches that since the object of refutation, the self of phenomena,  does not exist, the negation 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 306  that is its negative is not established in realit y. Therefore, the explanat ion that a negative of 
ultimate production and so forth is conventional  means that it exists conventionally rather 
than indicating that it is a conventionality.  
J The statement that when something blue appears, its emptiness of true existence appears to the eye 
consciousness implies an affirming negative. Therefore,  it is not contradictory for its emptiness of true 
existence to be an ultimate truth 
In the same [commentary] it also says: 
 
‘Since real production and so forth {360} does not appear when a thing 
appears, it is a wrong conventionalit y. Likewise, the negative of real 
production and so forth is a conventi onality: when the thing, the basis 
of negation, appears, it does not a ppear.’ The answer to that: it is not 
that it does not appear, because it is not different from the entity of the 
t h i n g .         [ 1 0 5 ]  
 
The explanation that when[ever] something like bl ue appears, its appearance of true existence 
will [also] appear. [does] not [imply] that a mere  elimination, the negative of true existence, 
appears to the eye consciousness. Rather, it  implies an affirming negative. Therefore, 
something like that has the charac teristics of a conventionality, yet it is not contradictory for 
an emptiness, the mere elimination of true  existence, to be an ultimate truth.  
L The way in which the two reasoning consciousnes ses, non-conceptual and conceptual, along with 
their objects, are posited separately as actual and concordant ultimates is the same as before 
The Ornament of the Middle  explains that although the negati ve of ultimate production and so 
forth is included among real conv entionalities, it is [a concor dant ultimate] since it accords 
with the ultimate. As for the ultimate, it says th at the entire web of elaborations such as the 
existence and non-existence of things has been abandoned. As for the web of elaborations, it 
says in the auto-commentary on Two Truths : 
  
“It is not empty, not non-empty, Not existent nor non-existent, Neither produced nor non-produced”, Such is what the Bhagavan taught.    [106] 
And:  
Why is that? It is without elaborations. Suchness is free from the entire web of conceptions
246. 
  
As explained [here], the web of conceptions is  a web of elaborations. However, since those 
stop in the face of the direct realisation of su chness, that is the actual ultimate. A reasoning 
consciousness, which is unlike it, along with it s object, is concordant with the former and so 
forth as before. With regard to the negative of  ultimate production and so forth, there are 
also the two, the reasoning consciousness that ne gates it and its object of comprehension, so 
the way in which it is included among real co nventions should also be understood on that 
basis.  
 This manner of explaining freedom from th e web of all elaborations that exist in 
association with the two truths is {361} needed on many occasions.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 307  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4C Indication that the number of the two truths is definite 
1 The actual [indication] 
Third: If a given basis is positively set off as  a false, deceptive object, it is necessarily 
eliminated as being a non-de ceptive object. Therefore, non-deceptive and deceptive are 
mutually exclusive, so that there presence is contradictory. Since they  pervade all objects of 
knowledge in a mutually exclusive manner, they also exclude a third group. For that reason, 
you should know that with respect to objects of knowledge, the enumeration  as the two truths 
is definite.  
2 The source for that 
In [the] Meeting of Father and Son  [Sutra ] it says: 
 
In this manner, the Tath agata realizes the two truths, conventional and 
ultimate, and objects of knowledge are also exhausted in these 
conventional and ultimate truths.    [107]  
[Thus,] all objects of knowledge are said to  be exhausted in the two truths. In the Noble 
Concentration Definite ly Showing Suchness  the enumeration as the two tr uths is set forth clearly: 
 
Everything is a convention or likewise an ultimate; 
A third truth whatsoever do es not exist.   [108] 
3 Establishing the validity of the need to become skilled in the two truths 
It is said that if you know the division between the two truths, you will not be confused about 
the words of the Muni whereas if you do not kn ow it, you will not know the essence of his 
teachings. Moreover, you need to understand  it in accordance with how the Protector 
Nagarjuna settled it. In the Entrance  [to the Middle Way ] it says:  
 
Outside the path of Lord Nagarjuna, 
Methods for pacification do not exist. 
Those are corruptions of truths, of conventions and suchness. 
Through their corruption one cannot attain liberation. Once conventional truths have turned into methods, Ultimate truths will be produced from them. One who does not know this twofold division Enters bad paths because of wrong conceptions.  [109] 
 Therefore, it is extremely important for those who want liberation to be skilled in the two 
truths. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B  Divisions of special insight 
1 The prerequisites of special insight 
2 The special insight to be cultivated by ordinary beings will mainly be explained 3 The actual divisions 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B1 The prerequisites of special insight 
Second: {362} Once you gain the view realizing the two types of selflessn ess, having attended 
to the prerequisites of special insight as explaine d before, you should cultivate special insight.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 308  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B2 The special insight to be cultivated by ordinary beings will mainly be explained 
Now, how many [types of] special insights are there? Here, not the special insight of exalted 
levels but the special insight yo u should cultivate while still a normal being will mainly be 
pointed out.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B3 The actual divisions 
A Brief presentation 
B Extensive explanation 
C Explanation of categories 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B3A Brief presentation 
If you carry out an exhaustive division of that special insight, there are the special insights of 
the four natures, the three gate s, and the six search modes.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B3B Extensive explanation 
1 Explanation of the four 
2 Explanation of the three 
3 Explanation of the six 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B3B-1 Explanation of the four 
The four are thorough differentiation and so forth taught in [the Sutra ] Unravelling the 
Thought . In this regard, thorough differentiation ob serves the varieties of things. Exceedingly 
thorough differentiation observes the mode. The first has two types, full investigation and full 
analysis. The second one also has two types, investigation and analysis. They discriminate 
coarse and fine objects. The identifica tion of those four is set forth in Shravaka Levels , 
Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  and other scriptures.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B3B-2 Explanation of the three on account of the entrance gates to special 
insight  
The three gates, arisen from a sign, arisen from thorough searching, and arisen from 
individual investigation, are stated in [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Intent . To illustrate, with 
regard to the meaning of selflessness for exampl e, those three are identified as follows: The 
first one observes the selflessness already ascertained and attends to its signs, but does not 
settle much [itself]. The second one does settle [t he meaning] for the sake of ascertaining that 
which has not been ascertained before. The third one carries ou t an analysis, as [was done] 
before, of the meaning already ascertained.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B3B-3 Explanation of the six 
A Brief presentation of the six in terms of the objects of special insight 
The six search modes {363} carry out a thorough research of mean ings, things, characteristics, 
sides, time as well as reasoning and, having so ught them, also individu ally investigate them.  
B Individual explanations 
With regard to those [six], the research of meanings is the research “The meaning of this word 
is this”. The research of things is the research “This is an intern al thing. This is an external 
thing”. There are two search modes of characteristic s: “This is a specific characteristic, that is 
a general characteristic,” or  the common and the uncommon. The research of sides is a 
research in terms of faults and disadvantages, th e black side, and in terms of positive qualities 
and benefits, the white side. The research of time  is the research “In the past, such and such 
occurred. In the future, such and such will occur.  At present, such and such is occurring”. As 
for the research of reasoning, the reasoning is of four types. The reas oning of dependency is 
that the occurrence of effects depends on causes and conditions. It is also [a reasoning] in 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 309  terms of the conventional, the ultimate and thei r bases. The reasoning of the performance of 
functions is that phenomena perform their ow n functions, such as fire performing the 
function of burning. It is also the research “This is the phenomenon. This is the function. 
This phenomenon performs this function”. Th e reasoning of establishment through validity 
is to establish a meaning without contradicting valid cognition. It is a research where you 
wonder whether or not the three valid cognitions , direct perception, inference, and reliable 
scripture, are present with regard to such and such. The reasoning of nature is dedicated to 
natures that are well-known in the world, such as  heat being the nature of fire, moisture being 
the nature of water and so fort h, to inconceivable natures, an d to abiding natures. They are 
sought without thinking of other reasons for their being like that. 
C Explaining those six as three [groups] from the point of view of their object  of observation  
Through the sixfold presentation in this way, the objects to be know n by a yogi {364} are 
ascertained as three: the meaning of expression s, the varieties of objects of knowledge, and 
the mode. The first research is [posited] in term s of the first [object]. The research of things 
and the research of characteristics is [posited ] in terms of the second one. The remaining 
three and the research of gene ral characteristics are posited in terms of the third one.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2B3C Explanation of condensed divsions 
1 The way in which the three gates and the six [search modes] are included in the four natures  
The gates of the four special in sights explained first are thr ee [in number] while the search 
modes are taught as six. Thus, the three gate s and the six researches are included in the 
former four.  
2 How there are four types of mental attention with regard to them 
In the Shravaka Levels  it is set forth that the four types of mental attention explained above, 
forced attention and so forth247, are common to both calm abiding and special insight. 
Therefore, the four mental attentions ar e also present with special insight.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C  How to cultivate special insight 
1 Explaining the meaning of the statement that special insight is cultivated in dependence on 
calm abiding 
2 What point of view this system adopts, that of Hinayana or Mahayana paths 
3 Explanation of the actual way to cultivate special insight in dependence on calm abiding 
The third one has three points: Explaining the meaning of the statement that special insight 
is cultivated in dependence on calm abiding, what point of view this  system adopts, Hinayana 
or Mahayana paths, and explanation of the actual way to cultivate special insight in 
dependence on calm abiding.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C1 Explaining the meaning of the statement that special insight is 
cultivated in dependence on calm abiding 
A The statement in many texts that they should be practiced in this order 
In [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought  it says that special insight should be cultivated later, after 
calm abiding has first been accomplished. This is also stated similarly in many other texts 
such as those by Venerable [Maitreya], the Bodhisattva Levels , the Shravaka Levels , Bhavaviveka, 
Shantideva, Kamalashila’s three [tomes] Stages of Meditation  and the Instructions on the Perfection 
of Wisdom .  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 310  B Those texts do not say that after prior generation of calm abiding observing the varieties, special 
insight consists in just sustaining the observation of selflessness  
The intended meaning of these [texts] is not that after prior generation of calm abiding 
observing any object without observing the me aning of selflessness, special insight is 
understood as just sustaining the observation of  selflessness. {365} This is because the two, 
calm abiding and special insight, are not differentiated by way of their object of observation. 
The Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  also explain that afte r observing suchness, the 
emptiness of duality between subject and object, and  generating calm abiding, you generate 
special insight through analytical meditation obse rving that same object of observation. Arya 
Asanga also discusses a special insight observing the varieties and says that after calm abiding 
has been generated, in dependence on it spec ial insight with peaceful and coarse aspects248 is 
cultivated. Moreover, he says it is a path common to both non-Buddhists and Buddhists as 
well as to common beings and aryas.  
C When calm abiding is initially being achieved, it is inappropriate to analyze various aspects in the 
object of observation rather than placing [the mind] on it single-pointedly  
That being so, it is inappropriate for someone wh o has not attained calm abiding, as he newly 
practices, not to practice placing [the mind] sing le-pointedly on whatever object of observation 
it may be, but rather to practice analyzing va rious aspects with regard to his object of 
observation. The reason for this is that if he  proceeds in the former manner, he will achieve 
calm abiding, whereas if he proceeds in the latt er manner, he will not be able to achieve it. 
D If instead of mere placement meditation by means of  the calm abiding achieved previously, analytical 
meditation is carried out, very powerful single-pointed concentration is achieved 
If instead of extending your earlier habituation  to mere placement meditation by means of 
calm abiding achieved previously, you carry ou t analytical meditation  that individually 
differentiates with wisdom whichever object is a ppropriate on a [given] occasion - the mode or 
the varieties - you can eventually induce a sp ecial single-pointed concentration. Since the 
extremely powerful kind of single-pointed co ncentration achieved through that cannot be 
achieved through the former [method of mere plac ement], analytical concentration is praised.  
E Just that manner of achieving it is the reason why the different modes of sustaining either calm abiding or special insight occur even with regard to one single object  
Just that manner of achieving it is how you first seek calm abiding and then afterwards 
cultivate special insight in dependence on it. {3 66} Therefore, it is the general reason why the 
two different modes of sustaining either calm abiding or special insight occur even if the 
object of observation, for instance selflessness, is the same.  
F The great power of cultivating the special insight that has the aspect of peacefulness and coarseness and the special insight that has the aspect of selflessness 
In particular, the cultivation of the special insi ght that has the peaceful and coarse aspects of 
individually analyzing the faults and positive qu alities of higher and lower realms as well as 
the cultivation of the special in sight that has the aspect of se lflessness in which the meaning 
of selflessness is investigated and then sust ained by means of the wisdom of individual 
investigation are necessary for the development of  strong and stable ascertainment. Therefore, 
they have great power with respect to abandoni ng their individual objects of abandonment.  
G How there are yet other special insights observing the varieties 
The special insight observing the varieties is not restricted to  the meditation that has the 
peaceful and coarse aspects of abandoning ma nifest mental afflictions. According to the 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 311  explanation in the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom , there is also the analytical 
meditation differentiating the ch aracteristics of the 18 spheres.  Thus, from that illustration, 
you should know [that there are] yet other spec ial insights where you meditate differentiating 
the objects of the varieties.  
H The way in which the [order] here, while different from that explained in the Instructions on the 
Perfection of Wisdom , is in accordance with the assertions of Shantideva and so forth  
The Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  explain that prior to the development of calm 
abiding and special insight observing the mode, calm abiding and special insight at the level 
of yoga observing the varieties should be deve loped. However, here, in accordance with the 
assertions of Shantideva, Kamalashila and so fo rth, some kind of calm abiding is developed 
first and then special insight is developed. In fact, just that sp ecial insight observing the mode 
will be taught [here].  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C2 What point of view this system adopts, that of Mahayana or 
Hinayana paths  
A Explanation that [this procedure] is common to all [vehicles], Mahayana and Hinayana, and that it is 
similar even for the three lower classes of tantra  
Second: Now, what point of view does this se quential approach to the development of calm 
abiding and special insight adopt, that of Ma hayana or Hinayana, sutra or mantra? It is 
common to hearers and pratyekabuddhas as well as  practitioners of the Mahayana perfection 
vehicle, that is to say to the four tenet systems. In my [ Great Exposition of the ] Stages of the Path 
of Mantra , I have already explained the assertions  of individual tantras and their great 
commentators that it is similar fo r the three classes of tantra.  
B Highest Yoga Tantra asserts a mode of attaining calm abiding and special insight through the yoga of 
analysis and placement, observing mind only, suchness, and so forth  
{367} With regard to Highest Yoga Tantra it says in the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  
quoting from the Guhyasamaja Tantra :  
 
When you investigate your own mind - 
All phenomena dwell in your mind. These dharmas dwell in that vajra of space. Phenomena do not exist no r their nature.   [110] 
 
Also, in [the Sutra ] Descent from Lanka : 
 
In dependence on mind only - 
External things are not conceived.    [111] 
 With these and other statements [Ratnakarashan ti] explains that three levels of yoga are 
taught: the one mentioned, observing mind on ly, one observing suchness, and one without 
appearance. It appears that the mode of attainin g calm abiding and specia l insight on the first 
two levels through placement and analytical medi tation is explained as above. Therefore, he 
asserts that the way they are generated in a mind observing the mode is similar.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 312  C The requirement that even in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, the method for developing an 
understanding of the view accords with the Madhyamika texts, and the subtlety that although it is necessary, during completion stage meditative equi poise, to place [the mind] within the view, no 
analytical meditation is done 
Even in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, ou r system requires one’s method for developing 
an understanding of the view to be in accord  with what appears in the Madhyamika texts. 
With respect to how it is sustained, there is an alysis of and then mental attention to suchness 
during some subsequent attainment phases of the generation and perfection stage. However, 
those practicing the perfection stage who have a ttained the ability to penetrate vital points of 
the body249 certainly must meditate placing [the mind ] within the view when sustaining [the 
meditation on] suchness, nevertheless they do no t perform the analytical meditation of special 
insight in accordance with what appears in other texts. Therefore, at th at point, do not stop 
your single-pointed meditation on suchness wi thin the view on the occasion of stopping 
analytical meditation. Since this is not the time  to clarify the reasons why proceeding like that 
is sufficient, I shall explain here the reasons for proceding like that on the other paths.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3 The actual way to cultivate special insight based on calm abiding  
A The need to gain the view 
B Summary of the essential points on how to sustain [the view]  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3A  The need to gain the view 
Third: If you have not gained the view of self lessness, no matter what meditation system you 
embark upon, {368} that meditation will not rest on the meaning of suchne ss. That is why it is 
necessary to gain the view.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B Summary of the essential points on how to sustain [the view] 
1 The actual way to sustain [the view] 2 How those ways to sustain [the view] were set forth by siddha pandits such as Atisha 
3 Specifics of how the view is sustained, preliminaries, conclusion etc.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1 The actual way to sustain [the view] 
A The need for both analytical and placement meditation 
B The need to alternate between analytical and stabilizing meditation C How stabilizing meditation is neces sary if the stability as pect [of one’s meditation] is lessened due to 
increased analysis and how more analysis is necessary if it has been impaired by increased stabilizing meditation 
D The fact that it is unreasonable to stop analytical meditation [altogether] considering all conceptual 
thought a fixation on attributes associated with the conception of true existence 
E Not only that, it is also unreasonable to think that, although this it not the case for the conception of 
conventional objects, with ultimate objects, anythi ng the mind conceives of constitutes a fixation on 
attributes 
F Clearing away an objection 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1A The need for both analytical and placement meditation 
If although you have an understanding of the view, you are not mindful of it and place the 
[mind] upon it during meditation on suchness, it will not be a meditation on suchness. 
Therefore, placing [the mind] wi thout reflecting on anything at the end of each preparatory 
analysis of the view does not constitute sust aining suchness either. Becoming mindful of the 
view and merely familiarizing oneself with plac ing the mind upon it also amounts to nothing 
more than the above method for sustaining calm  abiding. Hence, that is not the meaning of 
texts explaining a different method for sustaining special insight.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1B The need to alternate betw een analytical and st abilizing meditation  
That is why you should individually analyse th e meaning of suchness by  means of wisdom as 
explained before and then sustain it. If you only  do analytical meditation, however, your calm 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 313  abiding developed before will deteriorate. Th erefore, you should mo unt the horse of calm 
abiding, sustain analysis and occasionally alternate it with stabilizing meditation. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1C If th e stability factor lesse ns through too much analysis, stabilizing 
meditation is needed, and if too much stabilizing medita tion dammages one’s analysis, more analysis is needed
  
More specifically, if the stability factor lesse ns through increased analytical meditation, you 
should do more stabilizing meditation and refres h the stability factor. If you do not want to 
analyze because of increased stabilizing mediation or  if despite analysis your mind is not fit to 
go anywhere and becomes engrossed in the stab ility factor, you should do more analytical 
meditation. Since it is very powerful if you cult ivate the two, calm abiding and special insight, 
in continuous equality, you should do it that way. In the final [part of] Stages of Mediation  it 
says: 
  
At times when wisdom becomes ve ry predominant because special 
insight has been cultivated, stabilit y is lessened. Ther efore, since the 
mind will be moving like a butter lamp set in a breeze, it will not 
perceive suchness very clearly. That  is why you should do stabilizing 
meditation at those times. Also, whenever calm abiding predominates, 
like someone asleep, {369} you do not see suchness clearly. Therefore, at 
those times, you should cultivate wisdom.   [112] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1D It is inappropriate to stop analytical meditation, holding that all 
conceptions are apprehensions of signs i.e. apprehensions of true existence 
With respect to sustained analysis in this manne r, it is inappropriate to hold all conceptions 
whatsoever to be apprehensions of signs, i.e. apprehensions of true existence, and stop them. 
This is because it was proven several times before that conceptions that apprehend true 
existence are only one class of conceptions.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1E Not only that, it is also inappropriate to think that, when the ultimate is taken as the object, anything the mind apprehends is an apprehension of signs even though this it not asserted for the apprehension of conventional objects 
The view that anything apprehended by concepti on falls down, a casualty of reasoning, is a 
deprecation whose object of negation is excessive,  and it has been proven that this is not the 
meaning of the scriptures either. Even if you do not make such an assertion regarding other 
objects, if you think that everything the mind apprehends regarding suchness is an 
apprehension of signs, which is an adherence to true existence – the latter would [indeed] be 
the fault of an erroneous mode of apprehensi on. However, it does not concern everything 
apprehended, for it has been set forth that th ose who do not see beyond and seek liberation 
need to search for suchness by variou s means of scripture and reasoning.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1F Rejecting an objection 
1 The objection 
2 The response 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1F1 The objection 
Here one may think: “If meditation on su chness is for the sake of generating non-
conceptuality, it will not arise from individual investigation, for cause and effect must agree.” 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-1F2 The response 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 314  A How non-conceptual wisdom arises from individual investigation  
The Bhavagavat himself gave a clear answer to that. In the Kashyapa chapter  he says: 
 
Kashyapa, it is like this. Fire spri ngs up from two trees rubbed together 
by the wind and once it has sprung up, both trees are consumed by it. 
Likewise, Kashyapa, when there is correct individual investigation, an arya’s wisdom faculty develops and through its development that individual investigation itself is consumed.          [ 1 1 3 ]   
Thus, [the Buddha] {370} says that an arya’s wi sdom arises from individual investigation.  
B If you analyze in this manner, non-conceptual wisd om will arise; it does not arise because you 
abandon mental attention 
In the middling Stages of Meditation  it also says: 
 
That is how they analyse with wisdom. When yogis definitely do not apprehend any entityness of things ul timately, they enter the meditative 
stabilisation of complete non-conceptu ality. They also realize that the 
entityness of all phenomena is no n-existent. Those who fail to 
individually investigate the entityness of things with wisdom, and to meditate upon that, who instead cultivate just the mere abandonment of mental attention, will never stop conceptual thought. They will never 
realize the non-existence of entity ness either, because they will be 
without the light of wisdom. The Bh agavat said: ‘When the fire of 
knowing reality just as it is thus springs from correct individual investigation, it consumes the wood of conceptions like the fire that 
springs from wood rubbed together.’   [114] 
C It would be very absurd if cause and effect had to be alike in all aspects 
If it were not like that, it would be imposs ible for the uncontaminated to arise from the 
contaminated, for the supramundane to arise from the mundane, for a Buddha to emerge 
from among sentient beings, for an arya to emer ge from among ordinary beings and so forth 
because the causes and the[ir] effects are not alike.  
D The [passages where] Nagarjuna, in his Commentary on Bodhicitta  and so forth, reviles adherence to 
concepts such as the object of investigatetion and the investigator indicate the refutation of adherence to 
true existence, but they are not refutations of discriminating wisdom  
In the Commentary on Bodhicitta  it says: 
 
Where conceptual thought appears, 
How could there be emptiness? Tathagatas don’t perceive minds with aspects of Investigators and things to investigate. Where these agents and objects exist, Enlightenment does not exist.     [115]  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 315  What is being pointed out is that someone who apprehends objects of investigation and 
investigators as truly existent has not attained  enlightenment. If the wisdom of individual 
investigation were refuted {371} and if the mere objects of investigation and investigators were 
refuted, this would be in contradiction to the settling of suchness, in this text, through many 
avenues of analysis associated with individual  investigation. Also, if those two were not 
perceived by buddhas, they would be non-existent250.  
 And in that same text it says: 
 
Meditating on emptiness -  
Called non-production, emptiness,  
And selflessness - as inferior nature, 
Is not to meditate on it.     [116] 
 This does not refute the meditation that observ es selflessness, the emptiness which is the non-
existence of inherent production. Rather, it refu tes meditation on an emptiness that is being 
reviled, an inferior nature apprehended as truly existent. In Praise of the Transcendental  it says: 
 
When teaching the nectar of emptiness To clear away all conceptuality, 
Whosoever adheres to it, 
Is very much reviled by you.    [117] 
 
In the same way it says in the Precious Garland : 
 
Accordingly, self and selflessness 
Are not, as they should, correctly observable. The views of self and selflessness were Therefore opposed by the Mahamuni
251.  [118] 
 
This is also saying that since neither self nor selflessness are established in reality, the 
[Buddha] opposed the view that the two really  exist, but he did not refute the view of 
selflessness. This is because acco rding to the above quotation from Rebutting Points of 
Contention , if [phenomena] were not without th e inherent existence of inherent 
establishment, inherent establishment would exist. 
E Likewise, how sutra statements about engaging in signs also imply truly established signs  
In the Summary  [Sutra ] of the Perfection of Wisdom  it says: 
 
Although the bodhisattva thinks “This aggregate is empty”, 
Engaged in signs he distrusts252 the basis of non-production. 
         [ 1 1 9 ]  
 
And in the [ Sutra ] Great Mother : 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 316  When engaging in so-called empty fo rm and selflessness one engages in 
signs, one does not engage in the perfection of wisdom. [120] 
 
The meaning of these statements {372} refers to  the apprehension of emptiness and so forth 
as truly existent.  
F Otherwise it would contradict the fact that, in the sutras, the analysis of emptiness with wisdom is 
praised 
Otherwise [the phrase] “he distrusts the basi s of non-production” would not make sense 
either, for having trust in it also constitutes engaging in signs. In the same sutra it says: 
 
One who thoroughly knows that things253 lack inherent existence 
Is engaged in the supreme perfection of wisdom. 
And:  
When non-products and products  and black and white phenomena 
Are shattered by wisdom and not even dust remains to be seen, 
In the world this is counted as the perfection of wisdom. [122] 
 
Again, in the King of Concentration  it says: 
 
If phenomena are discerned as selfless, And once discerned are meditated on, 
That is the cause for attaining the fruit, nirvana. 
Through any other cause [you] won’t find peace.  [123] 
 
Also, in the Essence of the Perfection of Wisdom
254, Shariputra asks: 
 
“How should a bodhisattva who wishes to engage in the profound 
perfection of wisdom train?”  
 
and Avalokiteshvara replies:   
“He should thoroughly and correctly vi ew even these five aggregates as 
empty of inherent existence.”     [124]  
 
There are many statements like these wh ich would [otherwise] be contradicted.  
G Nagarjuna and Chandra[kirti] praise individual investigation and analysis of the meaning of 
selflessness as the cause of complete liberation 
That is why it says in Praise of the Dharmadhatu : 
 
The Dharma supremely cleansing the mind 
Is the lack of inherent existence.    [66] 
And: 
As long as “I” and “mine” are conceived255, 
Attributes are ascribed256 from without. 
When the two aspects of non-self257 are seen, 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 317  The seeds of conditioned existence cease. 
 
In Entering  [the Middle Way ] it also says: 
 
Therefore, by viewing the self and mine as empty, 
The yogi will be completely liberated.   [125] 
 You should understand this in accordance wi th the statements and sustain the causes of 
ascertaining selflessness and the absence of inherent existence. 
H The meaning of [the Sutra ] Dharani of Non-Conception  is also not merely to abandon mental activity; 
it implies investigation by means of wisdom followed by placement [of the mind] free from the observed 
object of the apprehension of true existence 
{373} Here it says in the first [part of] Stages of Meditation : 
 
In the Dharani of Non-Conception  it says: “The signs of form and so forth 
are abandoned by not attending to them”. This  implies that one does 
not attend258 to whatever is not observ ed upon investigation with 
wisdom. It does not imply the mere ab sence of attention. It is not an 
abandonment where you merely aban don the attention which is your 
beginningless strong adherence to form and so forth, like in the 
absorption of non-discrimination259.    [126] 
 
These passages from the scriptures are saying  that the apprehension  of signs should be 
abandoned through meditation in which the mind does not attend to anything . Yet the 
intended meaning set forth is that you correctly  investigate with analytical wisdom and then 
establish meditative equipoise on the meaning of your realization that not even a shred of the 
observed object apprehended as truly existent is observed.  
I In the Stages of Meditation  the Jewel Cloud Sutra  is quoted and said to mean that one enters into 
signlessness only through analytical meditation on the meaning of emptiness and not by merely 
abandoning mental activity  
In the middle Stages of Meditation  it says: 
 
There is the following statement: ‘When you search what the mind is, 
you realize that it is empty. When you thoroughly search for the mind 
realizing that, its entityness, you realiz e that it is empty. Through such a 
realization you enter the yoga of signlessness.’ This indicates that preparatory reflecti on is the entrance to signlessness. 
It very clearly indicates that it is impossible to enter into complete non-
conceptuality [by] merely abandoning mental attention altogether, without analyzing the entityness of things by means of wisdom.           [ 1 2 7 ]  
 
This statement from the Jewel Cloud Sutra  is saying that if you have not gained the view of 
suchness through correct prior analysis, you {374} wi ll not be able to engage in the meaning of 
suchness  non-conceptually.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 318  J Advice that you need to understand the ways in which the Stages of Meditation  refute the bad 
propositions of the Chinese Hoshang, the assertions that one enters complete non-conceptuality by 
abandoning mental attention  
In the last [part of] Stages of Meditation  it says: 
 
In order to refute the presumptuous claim that you can realize what is 
said to be inconceivable, beyond mind and so forth by merely hearing 
and thinking about the profound meaning, it was taught that since these are objects known by each individual arya himself, they are inconceivable by others, and so forth. This was also set forth in order to 
refute improper reflection followin g the apprehension of the profound 
meaning as truly existent. However, it  does not refute correct analysis 
by means of the wisdom of individual in vestigation. It is said that if that 
were refuted, many reasonings and scriptures would be contradicted. Although it is held to be an entity of  conceptual thought, it is an entity 
of correct mental attention, so that  nonconceptual wisdom arises from 
it. Therefore, those who want that wisdom should rely on it.     [128] 
 It is very important to understand the way in which these statements refute the Chinese 
abbot’s proposition that even without gaining the view settling suchness in dependence on 
scriptures and reasoning, suchness is realized  by meditative equipoise without any mental 
attention whatsoever.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-2 How this manner of sustaining [the view] was taught by siddha pandits of 
the past such as Atisha 
A How the past Kadam masters [have] explained the meaning intended by Atisha 
These methods of meditation have also arisen fr om earlier instructions on the stages of the 
path. In Potowa’s Jewel Box260 it says: 
 
While hearing and thinking, through reasoning, some say,  
You settle that there’s no  inherent existence,  
But when you meditate, cultivate non-thought261. 
If so, this emptiness, unconnected, 
Practiced262 apart, would not serve as antidote. 
Therefore, even at the time of meditation, 
Discriminate263 what you’re familiar with such as 
Not one nor many, dependent connectedness, ... 
Abide a bit, also, in what’s nonconceptual.  
Meditating like that {375} is an antidote for kleshas264. 
Those wishing to follow the singular deity, 
And wishing to practice the system of perfections 
Cultivate wisdom in that manner.- 
Once familiar with the selflessness of persons They should engage in it accordingly.    [129] 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 319  B Between the two, Madhyamikas and Cittamatrins, Atisha praised Nagarjuna and his [spiritual] son. 
The explanations of his oral instructions are in agreement with Master Kamalashila 
Jowo [Atisha] also said this: 
 
Through whom to realize emptiness? 
Through him foretold by the Tathagata, 
Who saw reality, the truth, Nagarjuna [and] Chandrakirti, his student. Through oral instructions transmitted from them, 
The truth, reality will be realized.    [132 ]
 
 
These instructions set fo rth by Atisha in [his] Instructions on Madhyamaka , and Master 
Kamalashila’s intentions which appear to be similar are being presented more extensively 
[here]. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2C3B-3 Specifics to do with the preparation, conclusion, and so forth of 
sustaining special insight 
In order to sustain special insight in that mann er, you should know about reliance on the six 
preparatory practices265 and about what to do during the actual meditation session, 
afterwards, and in between sessions. In partic ular, [you should know] the above methods of 
sustaining it free from laxity and excitement.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2D  The measure for having accomplished special insight through 
cultivation 
A Indication that it has been accomplished when pliancy arises through analytical meditation 
As long as you investigate with the wisdom of individual investigation and the pliancy 
explained above does not arise in your meditation , it is a similitude of special insight. When 
pliancy has arisen, it is fully qualified special insight. The entity of pliancy and the way it 
arises are as explained above.  
B The mere pliancy of calm abiding is not enough 
Yet, since the calm abiding that has [already] b een attained is present without deteriorating, 
also inducing pliancy, this is not the mere presence of pliancy.  Well then, what is it? When 
the power of analytical meditation itself is able to  induce pliancy, there is  special insight. It is 
the same for both the {376} special insight ob serving the varieties and the special insight 
observing the mode.  
C The source for the fact that such is the measure for having attained special insight  
In accordance with that [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Intent  also says: 
 
‘Bhagavat, as long as that bodhis attva has not achieved physical and 
mental pliancy, what do you call his mental attention that mentally 
attends to images within, to the obje cts of meditative stabilisation for 
phenomena he has properly thought abou t?’. ‘Maitreya, it is not special 
insight. It should be described as an  aspiration that accords with special 
insight and is similar to it.’     [131] 
 
And in the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  it also says: 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Special Insight 
 
 320  Thereby, he abides in that physical  and mental pliancy he has attained: 
he should individually investigate the object of that very reflection with 
intense interest in the inner object that is the image of his meditative 
stabilisation. As long as physical an d mental pliancy have not arisen, it 
is a mental attention that accords wi th special insight.  However, when 
they have arisen, at that poin t it is special insight.”   
      [ 1 3 2 ]  
D How stable concentration is induced when pliancy is induced by analysis 
When it is able to induce pliancy by its own powe r, it is also able to induce single-pointedness 
of mind. Therefore, this inducement of ca lm abiding by the power of individually 
investigating analytical meditation is a positive  quality of having accomplished calm abiding 
before.  
E How misconceptions [about this] are therefore inappropriate 
Through the analytical meditation practice of  someone well-accomplished in calm abiding, 
more excellent calm abiding is thus going to come about. That is why you should not hold 
that if you practice the analytical meditation of individual investigation, the stability factor [of 
your meditation] will lessen. 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
How calm abiding and special insight unite 
 
 321   
Explanation of how calm abid ing and special insight unite 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-3 How calm abiding and special insight unite 
A The actual [explanation] 
B Advice that it is necessary to abandon errors and come to an understanding in accordance with 
authentic scriptures [as well as a summary of the general path contents] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-3A The actual [explanation] 
1 For calm abiding and special insight to unite both calm abiding and special insight must have been 
achieved 
Third: {377} How calm abiding and special insigh t unite: If calm abiding and special insight 
have not been achieved as explained in the co ntext of the measure for their accomplishment, 
there will be no causal basis for their union. Th at is why, for their union, both must have 
definitely been achieved.  
2 The achievement of special insight and the achievement of the union are simultaneous 
Now, from the point where special insight is firs t achieved, the union is also achieved. [It is] 
therefore like this: When mental attention is ac hieved by the power of analytical meditation 
in dependence on the above calm abiding, [that attention] operating by itself without actual 
application as explained before in the cont ext of calm abiding becomes the union.  
3 A scriptural passage concerning the union of calm abiding and special insight, [saying] that the two 
need to be united equal in strength 
In the Shravaka Levels  it says: 
 
T o  w h a t  e x t e n t  d o  c a l m  a b i d i n g  and special insight mix and unite 
evenly, and why is it called the “p ath where they enter into union“? 
From the nine mental abidings [onwar ds] it is like this: One attains the 
kind of meditative equipoise that constitutes the ninth [stage], and in 
dependence on that full accomplishment of meditative stabilisation, 
one puts great effort into higher wisdom, the thorough differentiation 
of phenomena. At that point, the pa th of that thorough differentiation 
of objects will operate completely by itself and effortlessly. Since it is 
without actual application just as th e path of calm abiding [is], special 
insight will be thoroughly conjoi ned with perfect purity, perfect 
refinement, as well as a sense of bli ss, and it will follow calm abiding. 
This is why calm abiding and specia l insight mix and equalise, and why 
it is called the “path where calm ab iding and special insight enter into 
union”.   [133]  
4 A source for the time when the union is accomplished  
In the final Stages of Meditation  it also says: 
 
When {378} the mind is balanced due to freedom from laxity and 
excitement and becomes extremely clear with respect to suchness because it operates by itself, at  that point you should establish 
equanimity by letting go of the effo rt. You should know that at that 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
How calm abiding and special insight unite 
 
 322  point, you have accomplished the pa th of union between calm abiding 
and special insight.     [134] 
 
It is as stated: from the junction where fully qu alified special insight has been achieved [there 
is union].         
5 A source [saying that] at the time when investigation induces calm abiding, calm abiding and special 
insight simultaneously unite in mutual association  
In the Instruction on the Perfection of Wisdom  it also says: 
 
After that, you observe that very image connected with the analysis. 
When you experience both of th em in your mind through the 
continuum of uninterrupted and unobst ructed mental attention, it is 
called the path of union between calm  abiding and special insight. That 
is to say calm abiding and specia l insight are a couple and their 
connection is one of conjunction: they operate bound to each other.
         [ 1 3 5 ]  
 
“Unobstructed” means that there is no need to  stop the analytical meditation and place the 
mind in non-conceptuality. Non-conceptuality is induced by that analytical meditation itself. 
6 Although analysis and placement [were] sequential, not simultaneous, they operate in correlation 
once united 
To “experience both” is to experience both the calm abiding that observes the non-conceptual 
image and the special insight that observes th e image connected with analytic conceptions. 
“Through the continuum” means this: the special insight that analyzes and the calm abiding 
at the end of the analysis do not arise simult aneously. However, when there is actual calm 
abiding induced by the power of analysis, both special insight, the inte nse differentiation of 
phenomena observing the mode, and calm abidin g, the meditative stabilisation firmly and 
single-pointedly abiding on the mode, operate in  association. At such time calm abiding and 
special insight are mixed and operate equally.   For that, it is {379}[?*] necessary to ga in a realisation arisen from meditation. 
Therefore, a combination of the two allowing on e to individually investigate the meaning of 
selflessness from within a non-conceptual state of firm stability - like a little fish moving through water that remains unmoving – may be posited as something concordant with calm 
abiding and special insight. Yet this is not th e meaning of the actual union of calm abiding 
and special insight.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-3B Advice on the need to abandon errors and come to an understanding in 
accordance with authentic texts as well as on the need to get to know the extensive explanation of the stages of the path from the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path  
You should understand this manner in which calm abiding and special insight unite in 
accordance with what appears in those authentic texts rather than trusti ng explanations that 
fabricate it in some other way.  
 Reasoned final analyses, scriptural source passages, and detailed methods for cultiating 
the stages of the path to enlighte nment should be gleaned from the Great Exposition of the 
Stages of the Path . 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
How calm abiding and special insight unite 
 
 323  2 Summary of topics of the general path 266 
A General procedure 
Now I shall present a short summary of topics of  the general path: Before anything else: the 
root of the path meets back to the way you rely on a spiritual teacher, so you should be clear 
and decisive about that. Then, if an uncontrive d wish to take advantage of your leisure has 
arisen, it will urge you on to practice from within. Therefore, in order to generate it, you 
should meditate on the topics of leisure and endowments. Then, if you endeavour for [things 
of] this life is not inverted, a serious endeavour for future lives will not arise. Therefore, apply 
yourself to meditation on impermanence, the fa ct that the body you have obtained will not 
last long, and the way you will wander about in bad migrations after death. At that time, a 
natural attitude of conscious fear will arise, so you should sincerely develop certainty about 
the positive qualities of the Three Refuges, ab ide by the vow of common refuge, and practice 
its trainings. Then, you should develop - from ma ny angles - the faith of conviction in actions 
and their effects, the foundation  of all white dharmas. Having made it firm, you should try 
hard to engage in virtue and counteract non- virtue, always entering the path of the four 
powers.   {380} Once you have thus internalized th e cycle of teachings of lesser beings, you 
should think about the general and specific disa dvantages of cyclic existence a lot and turn 
your mind away as much as you can from cyclic existence in general. Then, identify the causes 
from which cyclic existence arises, action s and mental afflictions, and develop the 
uncontrived desire to abandon them. Apply your self to the three trai nings in general, the 
path of liberation from cyclic existence, and in particular to the [vow of ] individual liberation 
which you yourself have undertaken.  Once you have thus internalized the cycl es of training of intermediate beings, 
contemplate that just like you yourself have fa llen into the ocean of existence many others 
have. Train in bodhicitta which has its root in love and compassion. You need to try as hard 
as you can for it to arise; without it the six pe rfections, the two stages and so forth are like 
upper stories without foundations. Once you have  had some little experience of it, you should 
assume it through a ritual and apply yourself to its trainings, so that you make the aspirational 
mind as stable as you can. Then hear about th e great waves of [bodhisattva] conduct. As you 
get to know the boundary between what should be counteracted and what should be engaged in, generate the desire to train in it. When it  has arisen, take the engaging vow through the 
ritual. Train in the six perfections that ripe n your own mental continuum and in the four 
means of gathering and so forth that ripen the menal continua of others. In particular, risk 
your life to [avoid] a root downfall. Try ha rd not to be tainted by small and medium 
contaminations or infractions either. If yo u are, try hard to restore [your vow].  
 Then you need to train in the last two pe rfections in particular. Therefore, become 
skilled in the method for sustaining concentrat ion and accomplish meditative stabilisation. 
Do everything you can for the pure view of th e two selflessnesses to arise in your mind and 
having gained it, understand how to sustain it  by placing the mind right on the view and 
sustain it. Such concentration and wisdom are de signated with the names of calm abiding and 
special insight. However, since they are not di fferent from those two, they come within the 
points of training of the bodhisa ttva vow once it has been taken.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
How calm abiding and special insight unite 
 
 324  B The difference between meditation that does or does not hit home and how to pierce through to the 
core through fine thought 
Now, {381} cultivating the lowe r paths, you should grow more  and more keen on attaining 
the higher ones and when you hear about the hi gher ones, you should increasingly wish to 
accomplish the lower ones. When you meditate on  them, you also need purify your thoughts 
for a balanced mind. Thus, if your respect fo r the spiritual teacher who guides you on the 
path appears to be low, you put effort into yo ur manner of relying on him, for the root of 
your collection of goodness would [otherwise] be  severed. Likewise, if your enthusiasm for 
practice is small, you should make the topics  of leisure and endowments your main thing 
whereas if your adherence to this life increase s, you should mainly work on the topics of 
impermanence and disadvantages of the bad migr ations. If you seem to neglect the [ethical] 
boundaries you have accepted, you should mainly  meditate on actions and their effects. If 
your disenchantment with cyclic existence is small, your endeavour for liberation will be 
nothing but words, so reflect on the disadvantages of cyclic existence. If it appears that your 
mind is not forcefully making everything you do into something for the benefit of sentient 
beings, the root of the Mahayana will be severed, so you should train in the aspirational mind 
[of enlightenment] along with its causes. In case  you take the vow of the Jinas’ children and 
train in their conduct: if the bond which is the apprehension of signs appears to be very 
strong, you should unravel the object aim of that apprehension with a reasoning 
consciousness and train in space-like and illusion -like emptiness. If your mind does not stay 
on its object of observation and appears to be come subservient to distractions, you should 
mainly train in the stability factor of your sing le-pointed [meditation]. This is what the earlier 
[masters] taught.  
C Advice that your practice should not become one-sided 
From these indications, you should also understa nd [situations] that have not been explained. 
In brief, you should not become one-sided. Your  mind should be serviceable in all virtuous 
directions.  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Conclusion 
 
 325  CHAPTER VI 
CONCLUSION 
Explanation of how to train in th e uncommon vehicle, the Vajrayana 
2B4B-2B3B-3C2 Explanation of how to train in the uncommon vehicle, the Vajrayana 
A The advice to make sure and engage in mantra  
Second: In particular how to  train in the Vajrayana:  
Having thus trained in what the two paths of sutra and mant ra have in common, {382} you 
should doubtlessly engage in mantra267, because that path is extremely rare compared with 
other Dharma teachings and lets you co mplete the two collections quickly.  
B It is essential to rely on a spiritual teacher when you engage in it 
When you engage in it, you should first make your teacher happy in ex cess of what has been 
explained above according to the statements in Lamp on the Path . It should be someone who 
has at least all the characteristics explained there.  
C The gateway, receiving an empowerment, and the importance of guarding one’s commitments and 
vows 
Then you should first have your mental co ntinuum ripened by means of an empowerment 
explained in the authentic tantra [source] text s. Then you should hear and understand the 
vows and commitments taken on that occasion an d guard them. If a root downfall occurs, 
even if the vow is taken again, the development of positive qualit ies of the path will be greatly 
delayed in one’s continuum, so endeavour not to be tainted by that. Try not to be tainted by 
serious downfalls and even apply the means of restoring the 100 [lesser ones], if you get 
tainted [by them], because they are the root for cultivating the paths so that without them, it 
will be like an old house whose side walls are collapsing. In the Manjushri Root Tantra  it says: 
 
Lord Buddha did not say that you would accomplish Mantra with twisted ethical discipline.   [136]  
Statements such as this are saying that there will be no great, medium or small 
accomplishments whatsoever. In th e highest yoga tantras it also  says that those who do not 
guard their commitments, have an inferior empowerment
268 or269 do not understand suchness 
will not accomplish anything despite their prac tice. Therefore, someone claiming to cultivate 
the path without keeping his co mmitments and vows is straying  far from the principles of 
mantra. 
D How to train in the paths of ripening and liberation 
That being so, those who are guarding vows and commitments should gradually {383} train in 
the two yogas with and without signs according to the three lower tant ra classes and in the 
two stages of yoga according to the highest on e in order to cultivate the paths of mantra. 
Here only the side of entering mantra is pres ented just nominally, so you must get to know 
these more in detail from the Stages of the Path of Mantra .  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Conclusion 
 
 326  E How to make your leisure and endowments meaningful in that manner 
If you train in such a way, you will perfectly complete the [entire] body of the path that 
summarises all the essential points of sutra and tantra, and make the leisure you have 
achieved meaningful through your training. You wi ll be able to make the jewel of the Jina’s 
teachings develop in your own mind and that of others.  
3 Conclusion of the explanations 
A How the treatise was composed 
B Dedicating the virtue of its composition 
C The author who put together the text and how he did it 
3A How the treatise was composed 
1 Explaining the greatness of the instructions 
2 The purpose of a writing a treatise that has such great qualities 3 Indication of the sources: the instructions from which the subject matter of this treatise was 
transmitted 
3A1 Explaining the greatness of the instructions  
A The greatness that, in general, all the scriptures of sutra appear as instructions  
The Jina has set out the sutra and tantra approaches - 
Two aspects of the path. The excellent texts, On paths of all sutric sciptures and treatises, 
Easily come to be seen as direct instructions 
Through the fearless confidence one is given. 
B The greatness that, in particular, all the essential points of the paths shared by sutra and mantra are 
[made] clear 
Shared great vehicle paths explained in the tantras 
Are all made clear, which supremely trains the mind. 
C The greatness of removing places of error about the meditative stablisation of yogis through a clear 
explanation of how the meditative stabilisation co mmon to non-Buddhists and Buddhists is achieved 
Moreover you realize well the errors of paths  
Sought by yogis and correctly explained  According to very clear texts by many scholars 
On stabilization
270 common to Buddhists, non-Buddhists, 
Hinayana, both kinds of Mahayana, 
Higher and lower tantras and both stages. 
3A2 The purpose of a writing a treatise that has such great qualities 
This summary of the stages of the path271 
I rearranged for those who want liberation 
3A3 Indication of the sources: the instructions from which the subject matter of this treatise was 
transmitted 
The path of the view that’s profound and extensive behaviour 
Passed on from the regent, Maitreya, and noble Manjushri To the protector, Nagarjuna, Asanga  
And Shantideva, three rivers that were merged - 
The supreme instructions of Shri Atisha. 
3B  Dedicating the virtue of composing the treatise as a cause for the propagation of the teachings 
Through the merit gained here by my effort 
May the Jina’s teachings, root of all welfare272  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Conclusion 
 
 327  Prosper, uncorrupted, for a long time. 
3C  The author who put together the text and how he did it 
This was a summary of all the sc riptures of the Buddha, the tradition of the great trail-blazers 
Nagarjuna and Asanga, the Dharma system of supreme beings who progress towards the level 
of omniscience. [It was a presenta tion of] the stages of the path  to enlightenment that teaches 
in full all the stages to be practiced by the th ree types of beings, the meaning of instructions 
that I have heard and that were transmitte d both from Gönpawa to Neuzurpa and from 
Jenngawa, from Potowa to Sharawa as well as fr om Potowa to Tölpa. Th is additional summary 
of [an extensive presentation of] the stages of the path was composed by the learned and 
renounced monk Tsongkhapa Lozang Dragpa in the glorious mountain monastery of Geden.  
This Middling Exposition of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment composed by the Lord of the teachings of 
the three realms, the great Tsongkhapa, is also known as the lesser Lamrim. Its outlines are not restricted to the ones found in the original text. Since I had never seen nor heard about a thorough explanatory division, I 
thought ‘If only there were a thorough division along the lines of the Four Annotations273 on the Great 
Exposition of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment’. With that intention I started off from the points that 
clearly match in the outlines of Four Annotations  as my basis. Where the sequence is different and where the 
divisions are more condensed or more detailed I left thi ngs out and made insertions as appropriate in a given 
context. The outlines of new divisions that have become necessary, for instance in the sections on calm abiding and the two truths, were put in wherever the argument could be broken up.I have received profound and 
extensive explanations on this Middling Exposition of the Stages of the Path from both the exalted master 
possessed of inconceivable great compassion, Büldü Dorje Chang Lobzang Yeshe Tenpä Päl Sangpo of Drä Gomang and the sovereign holding the essence of kindness that comprises all the refuge objects of the three 
times till the end of samsara, Dorje Chang Phabonkha in that order. Written down by th e indolent lazybone lying 
around and lacking practice, the guise of a teacher, the tutor named Ganden Trijiang in this life [and known as] 
Lobzang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso, in the Tibetan year of 2903 and the Western year of 1966 in Dharamsala, in the 
state of Himalcha Pradesh, India. I kindly request impartial scholars to correct any distortions - additions, 
omissions and errors - that I have made.  
Through this virtuous effort may all lives 
Be undivorced from this supreme, complete, 
And flawless path. May I grasp all the Jina’s teachings, And gain the power to guide all migrating beings.  
 
 
 Prayer for the purity of publications: 
Meant for a multiplicity of good things, either present or future, such as the complete 
propagation of the Buddha’s long-standing tradition that points out the path of non-harm and 
peace all over the world, the [f ollowing] lines were composed as a dedication prayer that 
may be appended to any publication or reproduction of Buddhist scriptures associated with non-partisan schools of thought by the Shakya’s  monk, the exponent of Dharma, the Lord of 
speech Lobzang Tendzin Gyatso. 
 
Of the same taste as that ocean-like peace - liberation: 
The slow-moving river of limitless Dharma that leads there 
Whose every word component removes some stains 
Of the three poisons - this nectar of good explanations  Through the massive virt ue of its publication 
May open the hundreds of thousands  of doors of pure Dharma. 
May all five kinds of beings without exception Command the jewel treasur e of definite goodness. 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 328   
NOTES 
                                              
1 Dharma king 
2 bcom ldan ‘das, a title of the Buddha combining th e concepts of “conquering” and “transcending” is 
rendered here by its Sanskrit cont extual equivalent “Bhagavan” (“poss essing fortune, prosperious, happy, 
glorious, adorable, venerable”) 
3 rgyal ba, “conqueror, victorious one”  is a close equivalent of Sanskrit jina, which will be used consistently 
here for rgyal ba  
4 bde gshegs “gone to bliss” is the equivalent of Sans krit “sugata” (“going well, one who has fared well”) which 
will be used consistently here for bde gshegs 
5 Nagtso, who was among the envoys inviting Atisha to  Tibet and who acted as his translator and companion 
for many years 
6 Bengal 
7 by Dharmakirti 
8 Mahavibhasha 
9 King of Guge 
10 the nephew of Lha Lama 
11 thub pa, “capable one”- as in Shakyamuni 
12 i.e. Nagarjuna and Asanga 
13“perfection vehicle”- the Sanskrit terms Mahayana, Hinayana, Paramitayana and Vajrayana are used where 
possible 
14 sems skyed, lit. mind-generate(d) is a very commo n ellipsis for “byang chub mchog tu sems skyed” 
“generation of a mind or mental attitude [aiming] for supreme enlightenment” or “generated mind/mental 
attitude [aiming] for supreme enlightenment” 
15 Sanskrit for “enlightenment” 
16 the implication being that in the mantra vehicle, too,  the rules of conduct binding upon bodhisattvas apply 
17 i.e. Dromtonpa. This could also be rendered as “the precious Tonpa”, the Tibetan word for “teacher”- 
“tonpa” forming part of the name of Atisha’s foremost disciple. 
18 i.e. the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge - Abhidharmakosha  by Vasubandhu  
19 The word “hear” (thos pa) includes reading texts. “thos pa mang po” lit.: “hear/having heard a lot” means 
“well read”, “educated” which is why, depending on th e context “thos pa” may also be rendered as “study”. 
20 Udanavarga 
21 “legs par rab tu nyon la yid la zungs shig” – the division into three is not quite clear 
22 Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour  
23 cf. Note 18 
24 Sutra Requested by Drag Shul Chan 
25 common epithet of the Perfection of Wisdom (sutras) 
26 i.e. the Buddha 
27 1 yojana (Tib. dpag tshad) is equivalent to 4.5 miles (7.4 km) or 9 miles (14.8 km) 
28 lit.: planted (to) thrive 
29 i.e. full moon day 
30 Sutra on the Vows of Individual Liberation 
31 the three collections of sc ripture or pitakas, i.e. sutra, vinaya and abhidharma 
32 cf. Note 20 
33 lit. “eye support”- something to rest the eye on 
34 “capable” as in the “muni” of Shakyamuni 
35 Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 329                                                                                                                                                        
36 to be more precise: “with a mind in anguish due to bias” 
37 Sutra of the Ten Dharmas  
38 theg pa’i mchog - vehicle as in Mahayana, “great vehicle” 
39 Gandavyuha 
40 lit. “everything should be done” 
41 lit. “this accumulation turns into the highest attainments” 
42 gang gis bla mar mi ‘dzin pa - lit.  “and does not hold/und erstand/apprehend as (a/the) spiritual teacher” 
43 by Shantideva, better known as Guide to a Bodhisattva’s Way of Life   
44 lus gnas ‘ba’ zhig phyir – lit. “just for the body to endure” 
45 cf. Note 19 
46 i.e. true existence 
47 Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in 80000 Verses  
48 i.e. realms of form and formlessness – as opposed to “higher realm” 
49 “three” - “dang gsum” is an insertion by Trijang Rimpoche 
50 i.e. leisure complemented by the endowments 
51 JN: Is this correct? It seems like two outlines have been merged into one. 
52 Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment  by Atisha 
53 “srid pa’i bde la rgyab phyogs shing” – lit. : “h aving turned one’s back on  the happiness/pleasures of 
existence 
54 Vasubandhu’s Auto- Commentary on the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge  cf. Note 18 
55 i.e. “bodhicitta” or “the mind  toward supreme enlightenment” 
1 According to the cosmogony alluded to here, everything ph ysical will be destroyed by fire at the end of a cycle 
of eons. 
57 See introduction above, note 27 
58 bsdus 'joms –  lit. “(hell of) bringing together (and) destroying”, Skt. samghata 
59 The tibetan expression, which is consistently translated as “well-being” here, consists of a combination of the 
two syllables “bde legs” (lit. “happy good”), “bde” referring to the happiness of happy, i.e. “higher” realms and 
“legs” referring to “certain goodness” i.e. liberation from cyclic existence or enlightenment. Thus “well-being” 
implies both temporary and ultimate happiness. 
60 dkon mchog, “rare (and) precious/most excellent” is th e word used for “jewel” in the context of going for 
refuge. 
61 a berry with a somewhat transparent skin that allo ws for the veins, seeds and pulp to shine through. 
62 Six principal Indian tenet systems at the time of the Buddha, literally “forders”, so called [?] because they 
were pointing out fords for crossing the river of suffer ing – paths to liberation – which they did not achieve 
due to ignorance about the truly appropriate means. 
63 lit.: this is the root of all carelessness 
64 go rim - 1) [in] [intrinsic or situational] order/ sequ ence; 2) succession of causes and effect; 3) steps, rank 
class, strata 
65 de dag gyi phud kyis mchod pa – what has been render ed here as “offer the first portion” literally mean 
“worship with the first portion” and thus follows on to the previous paragraph 
66 This verse from Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour (chapter 2, verse 7) is commonly recited during offering 
ceremonies. 
67 “myang ‘das kyi bsam pa” – the literal meaning of “mya ng ‘das”, a contraction of “mya ngan las ‘das pa” is 
“passing beyond suffering”. It is the Tibeta n rendering of the Sanskrit term “nirvana”. 
68 In Tibetan, the word for “action” and “karma” is the same (“las”). It will be useful to keep this in mind 
throughout the following explanations  on karma. The word “karma” has b een chosen in cases where the term 
“action” failed to put across the implied relation with an effect, e.g. “karma that is certainly experienced” or 
“accumulate karma”. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 330                                                                                                                                                        
69 Geshe Thubten Ngawang (Tib. Centre Hamburg) offere d the following explanation for this passage: Buddha 
Shakyamuni, apart from accu mulating the collections of  merit necesssary for attain ing Buddhahood, also spent 
some time accumulating further meri t which he dedicated to the goal that his followers may meet with the 
necessary living conditions. Howeve r, according to the laws of karm a, they can only experience the 
corresponding results, if they themse lves accumulate part of the causes. 
70 Lit. “lus can rnams” – “those endowed with bodies” 
71 synonym for “shravaka”, the “hea rers” of [Buddha's teachings]  
72 synonym for pratyekabuddha – solitary realizer 
73 synonym for bodhisattva 
74 In this context the term “basis” (“gzhi”) refers to the object of the action 
75 That is, as regards the discrimination, the basis is co rrectly perceived as what it is. As regards the mental 
affliction, one or several of the three poisons may be pres ent. This is how the following references (“as above”) 
should also be understood. [?*] (Oral explanation by Geshe Soepa) 
76 i.e. your mother or other close relatives 
77 In the corresponding passage of his Great Treatise of the Stages of the Path, Je Tsongkhapa also mentions 
women under the care of their families in general, as well as the wives of other men. 
78 Following common practice at the time, the text ad dresses male readers. Contemporary Tibetan scholars 
point out that to women, the opposites apply.  
79 chung ma – wife, mate, consort, partner 
80 In this regard, Geshe Thubten Soepa explains that all these aspects of denying existent phenomena are 
associated with the problem of nihilism, the refusal to a ccept certain conventional tr uths. In this context each 
of them has its special significance. 
81 Despite the precise distinction drawn here, the genera l term “ten non-virtuous actions” has become common 
in English. Tibetan texts, too, frequently refer to “act ions” in less specific contexts, although, according to the 
definition proposed here, the last three of the “ten non- virtues” [?] do not constitute actions. Thus “action” 
should often be understood more loosely as a term th at only requires specification in certain contexts. 
82 'khor sgyur ('khor los sgyur ba'i rgya l po) - lit. “wheel-turning king” - le gendary universal monarchs ruling by 
means of a wheel made from gold, silver, copper or iron 
83 In this context “support” refers to the vows of ethical discipline.  
84 synonym for monastic robes 
85 cf note 10 
86 Trijang Rimpoche is proposing an additional classificati on of Je Tsongkhapa’s first item into five sections 
some of which, however, overlap with Je Tsongkhapa’s second item. Trijang Rimpoche’s points three to five 
belong to Je Tsongkhapa’s second item and thus do not form a sub-division of the first one. 
87 The ten exceptions are set out in Je Tsongkhapa's Grea t Treatise of the Stages of the Path: Actions carried 
out (1) in a dream, (2) unknowingly, (3) unconsciously, (4) without intensit y or long duration, (5) mistakenly, 
(6) forgetfully, (7) without meaning to , (8) actions that are naturally neutral, (9) that have been purified 
through regret or (10) through antidotes. 
88 lit. “second” life. The “third life” wa s rendered as “next but one life” below. 
89 This quality is not listed in the Sera edition of the text, however, it may be found in the Asian Classic Input 
Project version and in Je Tsongkhapa’s Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path . The present translation follows 
the latter because otherwise the list of eight positive qualities would be incomplete . Apart from that it is 
included in the subsequent explanation of the qualities of the Sera edition as well. 
90 As has been noted above in the context of the teacher disciple relationship, the term vessel (“snod”) refers to 
someone fit for receiving instructions etc. In Je Tsongk hapa's - and to some extent even contemporary - Tibet 
these were mainly men. The social determination is obvious from the following explanation of advantages 
associated with this quality. 
91 This sutra consists of numerous life stories il lustrating the karmic consequences of actions. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 331                                                                                                                                                        
92 The somewhat unusual term “chos kyi sgrib pa” is uncl ear. According to Geshe Soep a's oral commentary it is 
either a synonym for “shes sgrib” i.e. “obscuration of objects of knowledge” or “chos spong gi sgrib pa”, i.e. 
“obscurations [caused] through abandoning the Dharma”. 
93 depending on whether gods and demigods are listed separately or grouped together 
94 Geshe Thubten Ngawang's explanation of the phrase “'gag bsdoms” (lit. “stop - bind”): imagine a central 
station where all the various tracks come together and where tracks in certain directions can be blocked or 
joined. 
95 longs spyod rtsa 'jing 'khor lus sdug pa phun sum tsho gs – it is not quite clear whether the two qualifiers 
(“lovely” and “splendid”) at the end of the phrase refer to the noun they follow – “body”  – or indeed to all four 
nouns 
96 The term implies that the elements of one's presen t existence have arisen under the power of karma and 
mental afflictions which is why they entail correspon ding tendencies tainting them (cf [?] Geshe Thubten 
Ngawang in Systematic Study of Buddhism, semester XII, transcript 4/5, p. 8). See also the fourth aspect of the 
suffering of birth. 
97 and the suffering of meeting with the unpleasant, the se paration from what is pleasant and seeking what you 
desire and not getting it 
98 He thereby emphasizes that the karmic action itself which is decisive for its effect consists in the intention - 
see also note 24 [*] for the exceptions of accumulated karma 
99 the special ability to see through matter and over long distances without obstruction 
100 The colours refer to the complexion of beings in a given intermediate state (Geshe Thubten Ngawang, 
Systematic Study of Buddhism, semester XII, lesson 8/ 9, as well as oral explanations by Geshe Soepa). 
101 According to the Tibetan understanding “birth” signif ies the entry into the maternal womb rather than 
one's exit from it. 
102 According to an oral commentary by Geshe Soepa the consciousness at that point connects with two subtle 
aggregations contained in the mixture of paternal and ma ternal substances: one that will develop into the sense 
faculties and another one that will become the seat of the mental consciousness. 
103 The opposite of the vows “sdom min” wh ereby killing, harming etc. are given up. 
 
105 The three scriptural collections (Skt. tripitaka) often referred to more literally as “three baskets” are vinaya 
(words of the Buddha on monastic discipline) sutr a (his teachings proper) and abhidharma (“higher 
knowledge” – a systematic, philosophi cal presentation of his teachings). 
106 These are products of a cow that has lived in remote  mountain areas for a certain period of time feeding 
only on the pure grasses and herbs of such pl aces (oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa). 
107 JN: Although the Tibetan  text actually says smon lam , prayers, it would seem to be more correct for it to read 
smon sems , aspiring mind. 
108 Those six characteristics of the higher realms constitute results related to the six perfections as their 
respective causes: excellent commodities as the result of gi ving, excellent bodies as the result of ethics, excellent 
companions as the result of patience, conditions for th e accomplishment of one’s enterprises as the result of 
joyous effort and the absence of wrong views concerning  actions as the result of wisdom. (cf. Wayman, Alex: 
Ethics of Tibet, Delhi 1992, S. 106) 
 
109 Terms for certain concentrations: “liberation” from at tachments of the various re alms, control over colours 
and elements in the concentration of “complete pe rvasion” and of forms and other objects in the 
concentration of “overcoming”. 
110 rgyud  
111 literally: taking bad states 
112 so sor rtog pa, usually translated  here as individual investigation 
113 The term “sems nyid” (mind itself) is often us ed synonymously with “nature of the mind”. 
114 synonym for emptiness 
115 ‘ong ba 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 332                                                                                                                                                        
116 The implication here is that analytical meditation generates a level of pliancy exceeding that of calm 
abiding, which, however, does not co me about without it. Cf. A. Wallace, The Bridge of Quiescence , Open Court 
1998, p. 125, and R. Thurman, Life and Teachings of Tsongkhapa , Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1993, 
p. 114 and 235. 
117 Investigation of phenomena from the point of view  of their nature, the performance of functions, 
dependence and logical establishment. 
118 rnyed pa, usually translated here as find/obtain 
119 ting nge ‘dzin, usually translated  here as meditative stabilisation 
120 i.e. “antidotes” 
121 skyon 
122 nyes 
123 gang zag so so, lit.  individual persons 
124 rten 
125 gzhi 
126 sogs, the examples for colour, shape, number , and size are each concluded by this word 
127 bsten, usually translated here as rely on, attend to 
128 thub pa 
129 zin pa 
130 rnyed 
131 bsgrims 
132 T h e  p r o c e s s  o f  d e v e l o p i n g  c a l m  a b i d i n g  i s  d i v i d e d  u p  i n t o  o f  n i n e  s t a g e s  a s s o c i a t e d  w i t h  f o u r  t y p e s  o f  
attention. The first two stages, known as “placement” and “thorough[?*] placement”  ( o f t e n  r e f e r r e d  t o  a s  
“continuous[?] placement”), are associated wi th the concentrated attention mentioned here. 
133 dam du gzung 
134 lta ba, usually translated here as view 
135 1 “chu tshod”, a unit based on traditional Indian time measurement and used in the Abhidharma. It is 
equivalent to one out of 60 part s of a day i.e. 24 minutes.  
136 “half a night watch”[?*] 
137 “one night watch” – common measur e for a full meditation session  
138 dmigs pa, usually translated here as observe 
139 That does not mean distraction is a totally pure state without any mental affliction but rather that it does 
not necessary come under the 20 secondary afflictions,  because there are wholesom e varieties, too. (oral 
explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
140 Although in the latter case it is not unwholesome it  is nevertheless a mental affliction. Another example of 
such a “neutral mental affliction” is the attachment of beings in higher realms. It also belongs to the[?] afflictive 
obscurations, however, it is not cl assified as unwholesome. (oral ex planation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
141 mthong, usually translated here as see 
142 yon tan, usually translated here as positive qualities 
143 cf. 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A1B: Individual explanations on the four  antidotes to laziness 
144 bral ba, usually translated here as free from 
145 mtshan nyid theg, vehicle of characteri stics, vehicle of metaphysical dialetics 
146 Unless identified otherwise[?] all the follow ing quotations are taken from the same text. 
147 ting nge ‘dzin, usually translated  here as meditative stabilisation 
148 rang dbang, usually translated here as independence 
149 goms pa, usually translated here as familiarization 
150 think again and again 
151 brtson, the first component in brtson ‘g rus, translated here as joyous effort 
152 bsgrub, usually translated here as accomplish 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 333                                                                                                                                                        
153 bral ba, usually translated here as be free from 
154 Getting rid of negative mental tendencies and the deve lopment of the antidote are in direct opposition[?*] 
to one another: the more you have of one, the less the other one will be present. Otherwise the obvious 
question would be why the antidote develops if you are already rid of negative states. The relationship should 
rather be understood in these terms: at the point where th e negative states have come to an end, the antidote is 
fully developed - according to Geshe Thubten Soepa: “Like hot and co ld. One comes [as] the other one goes 
away.” 
155 lit. joy of the mind 
156 A so-called worldly special insight that consists in lo oking at lower levels as coarse and higher levels as 
peaceful (cf. 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C2 B). 
157 In this context “becomes pure”[?*] means 'becomes a higher level path' (oral ex planation by Geshe Thubten 
Soepa). 
158 up to the equivalent of  “direct the mind” in the Tibetan text 
159 up to the equivalent of  “is placed on” in the Tibetan text 
160 A given meditation[?*] does not need to have this view  as its[?*direct/main] object. Still, it remains linked 
with it in so far as it is shaped[?*] by it, deriving its part icular taste from it (oral explanation by Geshe Thubten 
Soepa). 
161 “Selflessness” forms part of the 16 aspects of the four  noble truths. It is the most important one in this 
context. 
162 yan lag 
163 This term for the stage where calm abiding has be en accomplished was mentioned in 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-
3B2F-1C1A-1C and 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-2A7B-2. 
164 One out of six special[/distinct]  attentions taught in the context of the access stage to the first meditative 
stabilization . Cf. also note 16. 
165 Those six attentions are not equivalent to[?*kongruent] to the four attentions described above (p. 43). 
Rather they are another set of attentions associated wi th special contemplations which, however, Tsongkhapa 
does not elaborate on here. Cf. also notes 21 and 16. 
166 in other words calm abiding and the access stage to the first meditative stabilization  are attained 
simultaneously and may be thought of as sy nonymous. This access stage is not the first meditative stabilization  
proper[?] and therefore not its lowest path. Between the realization of calm abiding and the attainment of the 
actual first meditative stabilization  there is a phase of investigative[/explo rative] meditation[?*] - the so-called six 
attentions. It follows that the first of those is not the first mental state of the access stage, as the latter is 
preceded by actual calm abiding which is the first me ntal state of the access stage. (Explanation by Geshe 
Thubten Soepa) 
167 cf. 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-1E 
168 T i b .  “ d b u  m a ” ,  l i t .  “ c e n t r e ,  m i d d l e ”  a n d ,  b y  e x t e n s i o n ,  t h e  “ M i d d l e  W a y ”  i . e .  “ M a d h y a m a k a ”  a s  a  
philosophical system. Its exponent s are referred to as Madhyamika. 
169 These two philosphical positions will be taken up be low when the divisions of ultimate truth are presented 
under 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-3F through H. 
170 Tib. rnam rig, synonym for Chittamatra (Tib. sems tsam ): the philosophical school of Mind Only so called 
because its proponents maintain that all phenomena are of the same nature as the mind cognizing them. Also 
a synonym for Yogachara. 
171 In the system of Dharmakirti[?*Nagarjuna] and Chan drakirti which the present text is largely based on, 
delusion (gti mug) and ignorance (ma rig pa) are syno n y m o u s .  I t  i s  o n l y  i n  t h e  s y s t e m  o f  A s a n g a  a n d  
Vasubandhu that the two terms are defined differently wi th ignorance covering a wider range of meaning than 
delusion.  
172 the ultimate nature of phenomena without any elaborations[?*]; synonym for emptiness 
173 “sgro 'dogs” literally means “attach feathers”. It is usually rendered as “imputation”, “misinterpretation”, 
“exaggeration”, “misconception ”, “superimposition” etc. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 334                                                                                                                                                        
174 This is a popular analogy: in the twilight someone mist akes a coiled up rope for a snake and gets frightened, 
'designating' it as “snake” and 'imputing' the characteristic s of a snake to it. “btags pa” (“distort, tie, attach, put 
on, name, impute”) is therefore translated here and below as the near-synonyms “impute” and “designate” 
commonly used in this context. However, the main emphas is is not on the actual designation but rather on the 
characteristics the mind thereby imputes on the object apprehended. 
175 Exponent of one philosophical system within Hinayana Buddhism 
176 Follower of the “Mind-only” school of Mahayana Buddhism 
177 Tib. “lhan skyes”, lit. “connascent”, “co-emergent” - refers to an association whereby every living being 
perceives itself as well as other persons and phenomen a independently of conscious thought or philosophical 
doctrines[/tenets]. 
178 cf. chapter III, 2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1F[?*where is that ]. Although the view of the transitory collection 
consists in “regarding the aggregates one has assumed[?] as self or possession s of the self” (“la dmig nas”), they 
are not its referent object according to the Prasangika sy stem. The statement that this view is directed at the 
aggregates should be understood as an explanation of the term “view of the transitory collection ” rather than a 
description of its referent object. (oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
179 in other texts, particularly those associated with debate [?*Tibetan debate], “mtshan gzhi” is also translated as 
“illustration” or “example” 
180 Tib. “nga yi ba nyid”, lit. “mine-ness”  
181 The Tibetan word used, “kun rdzob”, is also part of the term for “conventional truth”, “kun rdzob kyi[?*] 
bden pa”. That term therefore explic itly signifies conventional truths as  something concealing or obscuring 
something else. 
182 for “true” or “truly existent” refers  to something existing (merely) by way[/through the power of] of its own 
characteristics, i.e. independen[ly] of ot her factors. Cf. 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-4 
183 „ bdag (“self”) and nga (“I”) are used sy nonymously in the Tibetan source text.. 
184 cf. chapter III, 2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B2  
185 S. 9, Zitat [10] 
186 It is important not to confuse the object of observation[?*referent object?] (“dmigs yul”, “dmig pa”) of the 
conception of self with the object it  will apprehend[?*][?*, i.e. the one th at (wrongly) appears? doesn't make it 
clearer!]. See 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2A-5B on th e object of observation and 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-
2A2B-4 on how it is apprehended, i.e. the “ aspect  of the mode of apprehension” (“'dzin stangs kyi rnam pa ”) 
which again should not be confused with the “ object  of the mode of apprehension” (“'dzin stangs kyi yul”) 
which is non-existent.  
187 the six types of beings in samsara 
188 because one can neither say that it consists in the aggr egates at a given point of time nor at an earlier or 
later point. Where else in the continuum would it be found? 
189 “tshogs can”, lit. “that which has collection ”, “that which possesses collection ”, i.e. the parts 
190 “nga” (“I”) and “bdag” (“self”) are equivalent  
191 as the self in terms of the “mere I” which is the refe rent object of the person according to the Prasangika 
system. This is mentioned under 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2 F-2A2A-5B1. (oral explanations by Geshe Thubten 
Soepa) 
192 in the sense that an inherently existent pe rson is accepted as existing conventionally 
193 This point is explained in detail in Je Tsongkhapa's Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path  (which was 
composed before the present text[/Middling Lamrim]) and other works. 
In order to get a real sense of this manner we apprehend  our own selves, the teachings suggest imagining a 
situation where one is unjustly blamed for something. One then observes the sense of I that emerges (“why, 
not me!”) which is considered a particularly tangible apprehension  of “I” in that case. 
194 “by its own nature” (“rang bzhin gyis” also rendered as “inherently”), “by its own essence” (“ngo bo nyid 
kyis” also rendered as “essentially”) and “through its own characteristics (“rang gi mtshan nyid kyis”) are 
synonyms. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 335                                                                                                                                                        
195 Generally speaking, the opposites “one  and distinct” (“gcig dang tha dad” ), “one and many” (“gcig dang du 
ma”), “single and several” (“zla med dang zla bcas”) are no t real synonyms, however, their alternative use here is 
due to the fact that Je Tsongkhapa is summarizing th e arguments from various texts. They may therefore be 
considered equivalent here. (Oral ex planation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
196 As it is conventional disintegration which is depe ndent rather than inherently existent, there is the 
possibility of transformation and continua tion in a future dependent continuum.[?] 
197 Je Tsongkhapa is giving two common examples for uncompounded phenomena - the flower in the sky for 
something non-existent and nirvana for a (conventionally) existent phenomenon. 
198 Gandharvas (“scent-eaters”) are deit ies from the ancient Indian Vedic scriptures who reveal celestial secrets. 
Their task is to prepare the divine potion soma. In the Tib etan tradition they are treate d as one kind of spirits. 
199 synonym for the Sutra of the Perfection of Wisdom 
200 Tib. “'phags pa”, “noble beings” who have gained direct insight into the nature of reality i.e. emptiness and 
thereby reached the path of seeing which makes them hi gher beings. 
201 technical term in debate: Tib. “khyad gzhi mthun mo ng ba” - a phenomenon comp rising the characteristics 
at issue 
202 “dngos po” (“thing”) is often used in the more restrictiv e sense of “tangibe object”, but occasionally it refers 
to any “existent phenomenon”. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
203 under 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2A2B 
204 The word “rtags” (“sign”) is used as a technical term  of debate here meaning “logical sign”: that which 
contains[/holds] the reason in a proposition. For instan ce, in the proposition “there is a fire on the hill, 
because smoke is rising” the logica l sign is “smoke is rising”. 
205 The argument is dependent origination, the thesis is  “there is no self that  inherently exists[?*]”. 
206 Origination from self, from other, from both or from neither i.e. without cause. 
207 Je Tsongkhapa is playing on the double-entendre of  Tib. “mtha'“ meaning both “extreme” and “bottomless 
abyss”. He[/The whole paragraph] explores its use in the se nse of “extreme”, indicating that it does not refer to 
one pole of arbitrary sets of opposites (such as warm an d cold) - which may well be valid conventionally - but to 
certain misconceptions. 
208 In Tibetan a clear distinction is made between “to be” as in “to be young” or “to be a farmer” (“yin”) and 
“to be” as in “to exist” (“yod”). However, in this partic ular case where the two are co mbined i.e. “yod pa yin” 
(“to be existent”) as opposed to “yod pa” (“to  exist”) there is no difference in meaning. 
209 Analytical cessations are achieved by overcoming mental afflictions through methods of the path such as 
investigation, meditation, etc. Cessa tions are not “compound phenomena”, because they consist in the absence 
of something. 
210 In the case of a non-compound phenomenon one investigat es in detail whether it is the same as or different 
from its definition and definiendum, from its basis of  designation and imputed phenomenon, from its essence 
and its characteristics etc. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
211 There is an important distinction here between “o wn essence” (something which does indeed exist 
conventionally) and “inherently existent essence” (s omething which is not possible even conventionally 
according to the Madhyamika position). 
212 “'phags yul” - a synonym for “rgya gar”, “India” 
213 quotation [60]  
214 the term “nirvana” is used here as explained on  p. 60***, under  2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-2A4  
215 “shes bya” - literally: “(things) to be known” - everything there is 
216 “kun rdzob” - literally: “concealing”, “all-veiled” . As the literal translation may easily lead to 
misunderstandings (for instance if you say that paths to be  cultivated are based on “concealing” truths or if you 
criticize philosophical positions because they neglect “concealers”) the common term “conventional” is[/will 
be] employed here. Wherever the concealing aspect is stre ssed, it is[/will be] pointed out explicitly. The same is 
true for sections where the primary meaning of its ne ar-synonym “tha snyad”, “d esignation” is stressed. 
217 i.e. a non- product , a permanent phenomenon 
218 “bdag nyid gcig” (“of one nature”) and “ngo bo gcig ” (“of one essence”) are synonyms in this context. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 336                                                                                                                                                        
219 Everything that exists has its own e ssence, however, none that subsists only through its own nature. In that 
respect the statement does not contradict the argument presented in the previous paragraphs, as it does not 
refer to an essence established by its ow n nature independently of anything else. 
220 insertions based on explanations by[/due to] Geshe Thubten Soepa 
221 The Tibetan term “bden pa” can mean “truth” as well as “true”. Likewise, “kun rdzob” can mean 
“conventional”, “conventionally existent”, and “conventio n”. This uncertainty as to the grammatical function 
of words can lead to ambiguities, misinterpretations an d extensive explanations of how each word should be 
understood - like the one here. 
222 This does not refer to a conception al consciousnesses only. Direct knowle dge of suchness may also be called 
a “reasoning  consciousness” (“rigs shes”), presumably becaus e such knowledge is also based on reasoning, 
having arisen from logical investigat ion. (Tibetan-Sanskrit-English Dicitionary, A project of the Tibetan Studies 
Institute, Boonesville, Virginia, an d the University of Virginia Tibetan Studies Program, © Jeffrey Hopkins 
1992, ongoing project). -  Cf. 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-3C. 
223 According to the above explanations (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C- 3B2F-2A2C-2C3) the two truths are two distinct[?*] 
aspects of one essence (“ngo bo”). Here these two aspect s are being stressed and referred to as two essences 
(“ngo bo”). To avoid confusion the term  will be rendered as “nature” here. 
224 The Svatantrika-Madhyamika assert that all phenom ena exist conventionally, bu t not ultimately, through 
their own characteristics. 
225 Appearances that do not accord with reality and are recognized by the world as deceptive are wrong 
conventionalities according proponents of Svatantrik a-Madhyamaka. By contrast conventional phenomena 
commonly taken to exist and certifiable by conventional me ans are referred to as true conventionalities in that 
system. The Prasangika-Madhyamika do not subscrib e to the latter view. (Geshe Thubten Ngawang, 
Systematisches Studium des Buddhismus, semester no. 7, unit 16, transcript p. 5) 
226 “That is why the Prasangika-Madhyamika do not acce pt the division of convenional truths into true 
(unobjectionable)[/(irreprochable)][?] and false (wrong)[?] conventional truths, the way Svatantrika-Madhyamika 
do: According to the proponents of Prasangika conventional truths are false conventional truths at any rate. 
Consequently a conventional truth is always decept ive and never unobjectionable and genuine. The only 
division they endorse discriminates between phen omena the world apprehends as unobjectionable 
conventional truths and phenomena the world apprehen ds as wrong conventional truths.” (Geshe Thubten 
Ngawang, Systematisches Studium des Buddhismus, semester no. 9, unit 10, transcript p. 5 f.)  
227 This is a departure from the foregoing and an except ion in that, here, one's perception is impaired by a 
temporary source of deception which is not detected as wrong by one's worldly understanding. 
228 The topic is taken up under 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A 2C-2C4B-2B2L. It is explained in detail in Je 
Tsongkhapa's Illumination of the Thought  (dgongs pa rab gsal ), his commentary on Chandrakirti's Entrance  [to the 
Middle Way ]. There it says: “In the case of  a Buddha, indirect (implicit) knowledge such that something is 
known without itself[?] appearing [to the consciousness] is inconceivable. Therefore [conventional phenomena] 
must [also] appear [to his wisdom[?]] and be apprehended in this manner [directly (explicitly)]. It follows that 
the Buddha knows [conventional phenomena] in a way wh ere they appear to his[?* ]wisdom that realizes the 
multiplicity of phenomena, with the duality of object and subject.” 
Guy Newland comments on this in The Two Truths  (New York, 1992, p. 199): “When a concealer-truth appears 
to a non-conceptual awareness that expl icitly realizes it, it must appear in association with dualistic appearance. 
This holds true regardless of whether the person involved is a Buddha or an ordinary  sentient being. However, 
when sentien t beings - including Foe Destroyers[?*Hinayana] and pure ground Bodhisattvas - see a concealer-
truth, the latencies of their own ignorance cause the obje ct to appear to be inherently existent. Buddhas, on 
the other hand, do not have any appearnce of inhe rent existence from their own side. They see the 
appearances of inherent existence that arise within the minds of sentient beings, but see them only through the 
force of their appearance to those sentient beings. Th erefore, while Buddhas do ha ve dualistic appearnce of 
pure and impure conventionalities, they have no error or imperfections because all phenomena appear to them 
exactly as they are, without any superimp osed appearance of inherent existence. 
229 Depending on the context, the Tibetan term “don” ca n mean “object”, “meaning”, “purpose”, “result” and 
many other things. 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 337                                                                                                                                                        
230 “Without relying on conventions, the ul timate cannot be taught.” (Nagarjuna, Root [Text on ] Wisdom , chap. 
XXIV, verse 10, quoted from Geshe Thubten Ngawang, Systematisches Studium des Buddhismus, semester no. 
9, unit 3, transcript p. 3) 
231 The other distinctive feature of wisdom is knowledg e of the multiplicity of phenomena along with their 
individual characteristics. 
232 Here the double meaning (“convention” and “designation”)  of “tha snyad” should be kept in mind. In this 
paragraph and the following it is tr anslated as “designation[s]” beca use of the context. Cf. note 52*** 
233 A c c o r d i n g  t o  a n  e x p l a n a t i o n  b y  G e s h e  T h u b t e n  S o e p a ,  t h i s  s h o u l d  b e  u n d e r s t o o d  a s  
“manifesting”[?*suchness] in the sense of “realizi ng” and “without touching ” should be understood 
metaphorically “the way you can take an egg from underneath a brooding hen without touching her.” 
234 in the statement by Chandrakirti quoted in the objection (under 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-2B1) 
235 “rang bzhin ” (“inherent n ature ”) and “ngo bo ” (“nature”)  should be understood as synonyms here. (Geshe 
Thubten Soepa) 
236 As the word translated here as “object” can also mean “meaning”, the Tibetan sentence allows for two 
slightly different readings of this simile: 
1) The consciousness has not arisen through its own nature and is thus of the same nature as its object: the two 
are not distinct from each other and therefore like water poured into water. 
2) The very meaning of non-origination through an inherent nature is the object being realized, so one's 
consciousness pours into that meaning like water being poured into water. 
237 “How is it manifested? - Through wisdom. Who manifests it? - The sambhogakaya. That is a description of 
realization and embodiment[?*] at the time of bu ddhahood.” (Explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
238 Cf. note 66***  
239 conceptual understanding at a time when emptiness has not yet been realized directly (Geshe Thubten 
Soepa) 
240 “gzhi mthun mong ba” (cf. note 37***) 
241 in quotation [100]  
242 According to the Tibetan theory of de bate, the question as to whether or not something is a logical sign also 
depends on whether it is suited to the opponent[/ opposite party], e.g. whet her, given his level of 
understanding, the argument may bring about fresh insight.  In the former case the reason is given prematurely 
(as the person is lacking certain conditions that would ma ke it meaningful and thus worth-while. In the latter 
case the reason is given too late to spur new re alizations. (Explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
See note 39*** concerning the term “(logical) sign” 
243 Affirming negatives are negatives that  do not just negate something but al so imply i.e. affirmatively establish 
something else. 
A correct reason according to Prasangika-Madhyamaka: “T he subject, a sprout[?*], is without true existence, 
because it is free from being one or many.” In contrast, the reason advanced as part of the position criticized 
here: “The subject, a sprout, appears to be without true existence, because it appears to be free from being one 
or many.” - which is not a mere negation due to the manner of appearing[??]. The “e xponents of complete non-
abiding” mentioned in the next outline also accept an  understanding which is tied up with appearances and 
does not realize a mere negation. (Explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
244 It is debated whether or not the refutation[?] of ultimate origination is an ultimate. The Svatantrika-
Madhyamika (such as[?*] Jnanagarbha) do not accept th e refutation of ultimate or igination as an ultimate, 
because the object of this refutation is not the same as with[?] the refutation of true existence. (Explanation by 
Geshe Thubten Soepa)  
245 The commentary quoted refers to the word “also” in the roo t text it elucidates. 
246 Contrary to our common understanding of “concept ions”, “rtog pa” is not restricted to conscious thought, 
but also refers to unconscious mental construction - an y meaning the mind imputes on its object (and which a 
conventional consciousness would then take to be present in the object by its own nature).  
247 See chap. IV B under 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B3  
248 cf. chap. IV B, p. 50, note 16*** and p. 54, 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C2B 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Notes 
 
 338                                                                                                                                                        
249 i.e. causing his energies to enter the centra l channel (explanation by  Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
250 cf. p. 67, 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-2A2C-2C4B-2B2J 
251 thub pa chen po, the great sage, the great subduer 
252 da pa is usually translated as faith here 
253 chos, usually translated here as phenomena 
254 more commonly referred to as Heart Sutra  
255 'dzin, usually translated here as apprehend(ed) 
256 btags, usually translated here as imputed 
257 bdag med, usually translated here as selflessness 
258 “yid la byed pa” can mean “attentio n”, but also, more generally, “mental activity”. It is the mental factor 
directing the mind to a given object. 
259 A level of the formless realm where the mind is so d e e p l y  a b s o r b e d  t h a t  i t  a b i d e s  i n  s o m e  k i n d  o f  
unconscious state. 
260 The word “be'u bum” denotes[/refers to] a round contai ner, Tibetan Lamas use to stow and carry[?] texts as 
well as other precious items. (Explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
261 mi rtog, usually translated here as non-conceptuality 
262 bsgoms, usually translated here as meditate(d) or cultivate(d) 
263 so sor brtag, usually translated here as individually investigate 
264 nyon mongs, usually translated here as (mental) affliction 
265 chap. I, 2B4A-2 
266 In the first chapter Trijang Rinpoche anticipated this headline under 2B4B-2. It was not inserted there as a 
separate headline, because it seemed somewhat out of context[/the connection was not obvious]. Je 
Tsongkhapa himself appends this paragraph here without prior announ cement and without setting it off from 
the foregoing. 
267 cf. chap. I, note 1***. 
268 An inferior empowerment is one where either the one gi ving it or the one receiving it does[/do?] not meet 
all the necessary requirements. (Exp lanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
269 dang, usually translated here as and 
270 ting nge ‘dzin, usually translated  here as meditative stabilization 
271 byang chub gyi lam, usually translat ed here as path to enlightenment 
272 lit.: root of the welfare of all living beings 
273 Well-known text book by scholars of Sera Monastery. It contains a deta iled outline and annotations to Je 
Tsongkhapa’s Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path . 