Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Reference Material/MLR_CommGJGyatso_ILTK05_07.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:01.752883
================================================================================

 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM  
Stages of the Path 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
 
by 
Lama Tsongkhapa 
  
Transcript of Oral Commentary 
 
by 
Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005 & 2007 
   
 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim translated into English by Philip Quarcoo 
with provisional changes by Joan Nicell 
Special Insight  section of the Middle Length Lam-rim  translated by Jeffrey Hopkins  
 
Geshe Jampa Gyatso’s Commentary transcribe d and lightly edited by Joan Nicell 
 
 
 
  
 
Transcripts of the Oral Commentary to the Middle Lam-rim 
© Geshe Jampa Gyatso and Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa 
This edition December 2007 
 
All rights reserved 
No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopyi ng, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system or technologies now know n or later developed, without permission in 
writing from Geshe Jampa Gyatso and Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa. 
 
  
Translation of Middle Length Lam-Rim 
© FPMT, Inc. 
Third Draft February 2006 
 
All rights reserved 
No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopyi ng, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system or technologies  now known or later developed,  
without permission in writing from FPMT, Inc.  
 
  
Special Insight from Dzong-ka-ba’s Medium Exposition of the Stages of the Path  
to Enlightenment Practiced by Persons of Three Capacities 
© Jeffrey Hopkins, 1995. 
 
All rights reserved. 
No portion may be reproduced by any means without written permission 
Reproduced for use in the FPMT Basic Progra m with permission from Jeffrey Hopkins. 
 
1 Transcript of the Oral Commentary  
to Lama Tsongkhapa’s 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
by 
Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2005-2007 
 
  
Monday afternoon, 17 January 2005 
 
Note: Lama Tsongkhapa’s Middle Length Lam-Rm,  t r a n s l a t e d  b y  P h i l i p  Q u a r c o o ,  ©  F P M T,  I n c . 2 0 05 ,  i s  i n d e n t e d . Th e  
numbers in brackets { } correspond to the Tibetan text of the Middle Lam-Rim  published by Sera Je Computer Project, Sera 
Je Monastic University, Bylakuppe, 1999. Footnotes added by Joan Nicell begin with the initials JN. 
 
Today as we begin the Basic Program everyone should be relaxed and not worried. Okay? We 
should try to develop the motivation wishing to  attain enlightenment for the benefit of all 
sentient beings thinking, “I will study and practice  an inner path in order to be able to lead all 
sentient beings to enlightenment.” 
 
The text we will study – Middle Stages of the Path to Enlightenment  or Middle Lam-Rim  – is by 
Lama Tsongkhapa but later on some more outlines were added by the younger tutor of His 
Holiness the Dalai Lama, Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche . We should try to understand this text 
deeply. At the beginning I will read ahead a littl e bit so as to give the transmission of the 
Tibetan text and after that I will try to explain what I have read. If there are problems due to 
my English being broken and some of you mayb e not being able to understand me, you can 
ask the two teaching assistants, Olivier and Birgit, to clarify what was said.  
 The main point is to develop renunciation. Re nunciation means to not be attached to the 
t h i n g s  o f  t h i s  l i f e  –  w e a l t h ,  n a m e ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  T o  d e v e l o p  r e n u n c i a t i o n  w e  n e e d  t o  understand that cyclic existe nce is the nature of suffering . Wherever we are born we 
experience suffering. Sometimes we experience  some enjoyment, but after that again we 
suffer. Therefore, we need to think about the fact that the na ture of cyclic existence is 
suffering and thereby generate the wish to aban don the qualities of cyclic existence or the 
qualities of the desire realm, and develop our inner qualities and happiness. This is 
important. This is the main point.   In addition, we should try to have an open he art, not a closed heart but an open heart, and 
try to understand what we need to do. We need to develop our inner qualities and knowledge so that we can become more confident of ourselves. Sometimes we are not confident, however that is not right. We need to take care of ourselves, others cannot take care of us.
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
2  Other people cannot give us their mind of en lightenment or knowledge, like giving someone 
some clothing, a watch, and other things. When  someone teaches you something, listen to 
what he or she says, try to understand it, an d put it into practice. In this way our inner 
qualities will grow. Other people cannot give them to us. It would be a mistake to wait for this 
to happen. In the mind of th e Buddha there is great compassi on, wisdom, and power, and if 
he could have given them to us he would have , but he cannot. In our world we see that if 
someone does not study and instead of going to school hides and plays, that he or she cannot 
learn. We know this very well. We need to think about this. We ourselves need to study. If a 
university teacher is good but we do not listen to him or her, we cannot attain qualities. Even 
to become a good cook we need to study, we need someone to teach us how to cook. I know someone who was a very learned ge she but when he was at home his family did everything for 
him and even when he was at th e monastery his brothers took ca re of him. It then happened 
that one day when he needed to cook for hims elf, he could not. He did not know how to 
cook! So if we need someone to teach us ev en how to cook, then in order to go to 
enlightenment we definitely need someone to teac h us how to go there. We need to listen to 
teachings on this, try to keep the teachings in  our mind, contemplate their meaning, and then 
put that into meditation practice. This is important.  
 What I just said is my idea. It does not mention this here in the Middle Lam-Rim . Please try 
to do as I said.  
 The title of this text   is:  
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
 
Lam in Tibetan, marga  in Sanskrit, is translated into En glish as “road” or “path,” meaning 
that which takes one somewhere.  There exist small narrow paths, middling-size roads, and 
large wide roads, like the highways in Europe . Similarly Lama Tsongkhapa wrote a large or 
extensive presentation of the st ages of the path called the Great Stages of the Path  (Lam rim chen 
mo), a middling-length presentation called the Middle Stages of the Path  (Lam rim ‘bring ba ) 
which is also known as the “Small,” and a brief presentation called A Song of Experience (Lam 
rim nyams mgur ).  
 The lam-rim teachings were given to us by the Buddha. He taught the three baskets – the 
vinaya basket, sutra basket, and abhidharma basket. The lam-rim teachings form part of the 
abhidharma basket. Abhidharma  means “higher knowledge.” The subjects of the three baskets 
are the three higher trainings in morality, concentration, and wisdom. Buddha Shakyamuni 
taught that it was important to develop these th ree trainings within us. Morality in general is 
defined as a mind of safeguarding or a mind of abandonment. In other words, it is a mind that wishes to abandon something. Concentration is a mind single-pointedly set on an object 
without distraction. Wisdom is the correct discri mination of what to is to be abandoned, for 
example, killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lyin g and so forth, and what is to be practiced, 
not killing any being, not stealing anything, not engaging in sexual misconduct, not lying, and 
so forth. It is also the discri mination of the categories of phenomena The basis of the other 
two qualities is morality. In other words, on th e basis of morality we develop concentration, 
and on the basis of concentration we develop wisd om. This is a brief explanation of the three.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
3  Morality in this case refers to the thr ee vows: the vows of individual liberation, the 
bodhisattva vows, and the tantra  vows. Most monks and nuns have these three sets of vows. 
However, in general morality means to practice the ten virtuous actions. This should be the 
basis of our practice in daily life. In addition, we should try to concentrate our mind. For 
example, when reciting prayers we should try to keep the mind on the prayer. It should not be 
that the mouth is verbally saying prayers but the mind is going here and there thinking “I will buy this,” “I will sell this,” “I will go to the disco, the cinema,” and so forth. We should not 
do like this. We need to concentrate single-poi ntedly on what we are doing. Then wisdom is 
based on this concentration.   In your everyday life try to have less desire and more satisfaction regarding material things, 
okay? In this way you will be more relaxed. On the other hand, if you want more and more 
material things and, not satisf ied with what you have, continua lly think “I need more, I need 
more,” then the mind will become more an d more disturbed and unhappy. Whatever you 
have think “This is enough,” and try to be satisfied. This is ve ry important. The main obstacle 
to a happy life is a strong desire for the materi al things of the world and dissatisfaction. They 
make our mind unhappy and can even induce phys ical sickness. This is because our physical 
illnesses are caused by the mental afflictions.  According to Tibetan medicine there are 400 
types of illnesses and their main root is the af flictions. Thus it is said that ignorance, 
attachment, hatred, and a combination of all three each produce 10 0 types of physical 
illnesses. More precisely, attachment produces 10 0 types of physical illnesses, anger or hatred 
produces another 100, ignorance produces anot her 100, and a combination of all attachment, 
hatred, and ignorance in equal parts produces  another 100. In this way there are 400 
illnesses, and these four are the main roots.   This means that physical illness can be caus ed by attachment to eating. It can also be 
caused by attachment to drinking, for example, al cohol, or attachment to smoking. It can also 
be caused by ignorance, for example, thinki ng that drinking a lot will produce joy or 
happiness. While it temporarily appears that dr inking brings happiness, in the end it only 
harms one’s body and mind. For example, if one becomes drunk one m ay even lie down in 
the middle of a road. We need to understand that the main cause of our problems is inside us, not outside. We tend to think that if we  have a problem someone did something to us. 
We point to the source of the problem as be ing outside ourselves. However, this is not 
correct. We need to understand this. To do so we need to understand that the mental 
poisons are the main problem-maker, that they are the cause of our sufferings, not something 
outside us. For example, when a man and woman have attachment for each other, they stay 
together, go everywhere together, and do ever ything together. However, later on something 
happens, they start to fight and eventually sepa rate. Why does this happen? It happens due to 
attachment and dissatisfaction. They each came to think that their part ner was no longer the 
right one and developed a wish to have another partner. When this happens however, people 
often end up remaining alone! Check whether this is how things happen. All this is caused by 
attachment. Attachment accompanies us ever yday, wherever we go. And then it makes 
problems for us. Hatred is not like this. Someti mes we have hatred and sometimes not, it is 
not always present. When it comes, it is bad bu t it is not always present. On the other hand, 
attachment is always present, when walking,  talking, or sleeping. Therefore, the most 
dangerous affliction is attachment. We should try to recognize the negative emotions and to 
understand that they are our main enemy, and then try to destroy them. A foe destroyer is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
4 someone who has destroyed the mental afflictions, it is not that he has destroyed the foes that 
are other people.  
 In short, we need morality, concentration,  and wisdom. These three are important. We 
definitely need these qualities in our life. Theref ore, we should try to develop them as in this 
way we will become happy. We should try to do this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
Middle length explanation of the stag es of the path to enlightenment  
to be practiced by the three [types of] beings 
with supplementary insertions and a thematic structure 
The word “middle” implies that there is also a big and a small. Sometimes the word “middle” 
refers to center but in this context it refers to the length of the expl anation. When condensed 
there are five spiritual paths – th e path of accumulation, path of  preparation, path of seeing, 
path of meditation, and path of no-more-learning – that we need to develop. In this context a 
path is an inner quality. It is defined as: a cl ear knower conjoined with definite emergence. A 
path is therefore that which bring us to enlightenment or buddhahood.  
 “Stages” refers to the different stages: the st age of beings of small capacity, the stage of 
beings of middling capacity, and the stage of beings  of great capacity. It also refers to the small 
path, the middle path, and the gr eat path, so-called because the practitioners of these paths 
are respectively small beings, middling beings , and great beings. Small beings are further 
divided into ordinary and special small beings. Ordinary small beings include dogs, cats, 
horses, and birds. They too are small ordinary beings. Likewise, human beings who do not think to practice a religion or spiritual path  but only think of this life, whose minds are 
occupied with obtaining food, clothing, wealth , and so forth, are small ordinary beings. A 
special small being, on the other hand, is some one who thinks that the next life is more 
important than this life and, wishing to obtain  a good human rebirth in the future, practices 
pure morality. While this person is considered to be a small being, since he or she practices 
the Dharma for the success of his or her future  life, that is, to obtain a precious human 
rebirth with the eighteen qualities, he or she is a “special” small being.   A middling being is someone who wishes to atta in nirvana, the state of a foe-destroyer. In 
other words, he or she wishes to eliminate his or her own suffering, all the sufferings of cyclic 
existence, and to go beyond cyclic existence and to achieve nirvana, a state of solitary peace. A 
great being is someone who wishes to attain enlightenment himself or herself but also wishes that all other sentient beings attain enli ghtenment, and therefore strives to attain 
enlightenment in order to be of benefit to all sentient beings. Thus, a great being is a being 
with a big mind.   These three types of beings, the small, middli ng, and great, do not have anything to do 
with the height of the body but are in relati on to their inner mental qualities. Thus, if 
someone’s mental qualities are small he or she is  a small being, if they are middling then he 
or she is middling being, and if they are great then he or she is a great being. There was a 
Tibetan in the past who though t that higher members of the government were great beings, 
that businessmen and rich men were middling beings, and that monks and nuns and those 
who practice with humility were small beings ! However, he was mistaken as, not knowing 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
5 their correct meaning, he thou ght that due to their possessi ng great power the members of 
the government were great beings; that due to their possessing wealth that can buy the 
support of others but not possessing power that businessmen and rich men were middling 
beings; [and that due to lacking both wealth and power monks and nuns and those who 
practice with humility were small beings ]. It is not like this. 
 We need to develop our inner qualities, and for this reason in our everyday life when we 
w a k e  u p  w e  s h o u l d  t h i n k ,  “ T o d a y ,  w h a t e v e r  I  d o ,  I  w i l l  d o  i t  t o  s e r v e  a n d  b e n e f i t  o t h e r  sentient beings,” for example, to benefit one’s friends and family members. In this way we should develop a good motivation wishing to serve others. Then when we are at work we 
should check whether we are doing what we pr omised that morning, and in the evening we 
should dedicate whatever we did with this g ood attitude that it becomes the cause for all 
sentient beings to attain enlightenment. In th is way, everyday one will collect virtue and merit 
and one’s inner qualities will grow. At the same time our bad energy and non-meritorious actions will slowly decrease. Therefore, in orde r to attain enlightenment we need to practice. 
Enlightenment is a state in which all obscurations and all sufferings have been abandoned, and all knowledge, the omniscience that can s ee all phenomena directly, has been attained. 
When this knowledge has been realized, one ha s attained enlightenment. For this aim, we 
need to practice whatever morality we can and to develop a good heart.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
  
Respectfully I prostrate at the feet of the venerable saints who are full of great 
compassion. 
 
We too need to develop respect for holy be ings such as Buddha Shakyamuni and then to 
show this by prostrating to  them. This is important. Je tsun  (rje btsun ) is translated here as 
“venerable.” Tsun implies that this person has good morality and practices well, does not 
perform mental, verbal, or physical bad actions and does not harm other people, and tries to 
take care of his or her body, speech, and mind. This is a simple way of explaining the term 
tsun. Dam pa ,  h e r e  t r a n s l a t e d  a s  s a i n t ,  r e f e r s  t o  o n e  w h o  i s  a  h o l y  b e i n g ,  t h a t  i s ,  o n e  w h o  
engages in virtuous actions and does not engage  in non-virtuous actions. “Great compassion” 
(thugs rje chen po ) is the mental attitude wishing that a ll sentient beings be free from suffering 
and the causes of suffering. Great love, on the other hand, is the thought, “How wonderful it 
would be if all sentient beings were to have  happiness and the causes of happiness.” Based on 
this thought, one tries to avoid causing th em suffering and to avoid harming them.  
 Compassion is the main cause of bodhichitta, the mind of enlightenmen t. There is a small, 
a middling, and a great compassion. In Chandrakirti’s Supplement to the Middle Way  there is an 
explanation of three types of compassion: compassion observing sentient beings, compassion 
observing phenomena, and compassion observing th e unobservable. This text also says that in 
t h e  b e g i n n i n g  c o m p a s s i o n  i s  l i k e  a  s e e d  t h a t  o n e  s o w s  i n  a  g o o d  f i e l d ;  i n  t h e  m i d d l e  compassion is like fertilizer, water, and heat; an d at the end compassion is like the fruit of the 
seed that one sowed that one can then use or en joy. Compassion is likened to a seed because 
it is from this that the mind of enlightenm ent develops in one’s mental continuum. Then 
having generated the mind of enlightenment, if later on one loses one’s compassion, also 
one’s mind of enlightenment will degenerate an d disappear. Also if at the end one achieves 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
6 enlightenment but does not have compassion on e will not teach the Dharma to other beings. 
Therefore, compassion is important in the be ginning, during the middle, and at the end of 
the spiritual path. For this reas on in our everyday life we need  to try to develop compassion 
and love.  
 Then the text says “I prostrate.” Prostratio ns are done with the body, speech, and mind. 
Bodily prostrations involve bowi ng the body and prostrating it on the ground or just putting 
the hands together in a gesture of respect. A verbal prostration involves the recitation of 
praise. A mental prostration is to go for refuge and to generate respect for all the holy beings 
from the depth of one’s heart. Hence, it is not enough to do just a physical movement of the 
body. In Tibetan the word for prostration or homage is chag tsel  (phyag ‘tshal ). Chag  refers to 
the qualities of great wisdom or omniscience,  great compassion, and great energy or power 
that exist in the mind s of the holy beings. Tsel includes the wish “May I develop these 
qualities,” and the request “Please bless me to de velop them within myself.” If one prostrates 
the body while thinking in this way it becomes a real prostration. When one prostrates to the 
holy beings, one prostrates to all those abiding in the ten directions, in the infinite buddha 
lands, and in the billion world systems, wh ile developing respect for them, as well as 
confidence and faith in them. This is what is  meant by prostrating to the holy beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
  
This here is the middling of three lam-rim texts – the great, the middle length, and the small – which the gentle 
protector, the Dharmaraja1
, the great Tsongkhapa, composed. It is also widely known as the “small lam-rim”.  
 
This text is also known as the Small Lam-Rim . Who is the great Tsongkhapa? He is considered 
to be a manifestation of Manjushri and therefor e of the omniscient mind. He was born in the 
region of Amdo. Tibetans often call the people  f r o m  t h i s  a r e a  “ b i g  n o s e . ”  L a t e r  o n  L a m a  
Tsongkhapa went to central Tibet. His first lama was from the Drikung Kagyu tradition, 
Kyopa Rinpoche, whose name was Jigten Sumgon. Jigten is usually translated as “world” 
(literally, support of the transitory), sum means “three” and gon, short for gon po  means 
protector. Therefore his name translated into  English would be “Protector of the Three 
Worlds.” Later on Lama Tsongkhapa studied th e Sakya tradition in a Sakya monastery. One 
day one of the monastery’s benefactors offere d all the monks a red hat, but when Lama 
Tsongkhapa arrived the red cloth needed to make  him a hat had come to an end and all that 
remained was some yellow cloth. Due to this, a yellow hat was quickly ma de and given to him. 
For this reason his followers later on came to be called the Yellow Hats. It was not that he 
started a new tradition of wearing yellow hats, it  just happened because of what had occurred 
at the Sakya monastery. In the past all the Sa kya monks had red hats but now it seems that 
everyone wears a yellow hat, maybe they are nicer! A hat of this particular shape is called a 
pandit hat from the Indian tradition in which pandits wore a hat shaped like this.   We will go ahead with the explanation of th is text like a turtle, not like a rabbit! 
 
                                             
 
1 Dharma King 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
7 Tuesday morning, 18 January 2005 
 Try to develop a loving-kind mind and the mind  of enlightenment, and then meditate on 
this.  
 Lama Tsongkhapa is the compa ssionate Dharma king. He compos ed three lam-rim texts, the 
great, the middling, and the small. Th e text that we are studying is the Middle Lam-Rim  but it 
is also renowned as the small.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
Its source text has three sections: 
1 The introductory elements of the explanations 
2 Composition of the explanations themselves 
3 Their completion 
1 The introductory elements of the explanation 
A Expression of veneration 
B Vow of composition 
C Identification of the Dharma to be explained in the context of what the title means 
Expression of veneration an d the vow of composition 
 
“The introductory elements of the explanatio n s ”  o r  “ t h e  b r a n c h e s  f o r  e n g a g i n g  i n  t h e  
explanation” include the two main points that occur at the beginning of any text: prostration 
or veneration and the promise to compose the text.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
1A  Expression of veneration 
Bhagavan, forbearing Lord of this world system, 
Conqueror’s regent, Jamgön, lord of the Dharma, Manjughosha, single father of all the sugatas, 
Nagarjuna and Asanga, foretold by the Conqueror,  
bowing to you with respect, 
 First Lama Tsongkhapa sets out a verse of pr ostration or veneration. To whom does he 
express veneration? First he expresses venera tion to the Bhagavan, that is, to Buddha 
Shakyamuni, and then to Jamgön, the king of Tushita, that is , Maitreya. Then he expresses 
veneration to Manjugosha or Manjushri, who all wisdom of the sugatas manifested in the 
form of a deity. Then he venerates Nagarjuna and Asanga who were predicted by the Conqueror.   Buddha Shakyamuni is the founder of the doctrine , that is, it is he who taught the Dharma 
in this world, Jambudvipa. In Sanskrit he is called bhagavan , which is translated into Tibetan 
as chom den (bcom ldan ). Chom  (to destroy) indicates he has co mpletely destroyed or abandoned 
both the afflictive obscurations and the obscurations to knowledge and so forth. Den (to 
possess) indicates that he possesses the six qualit ies of knowledges. Since the word “bhagavan” 
was also used in the Indian culture to refer to Mahadeva, Indra, Brahma, and so forth, in 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
8 order to show that the Buddha wa s not a mundane god the syllable de (‘das), meaning gone 
beyond or transcended, was added to chom den  in Tibetan to indicate that the Buddha was 
one who had gone beyond cyclic existence.  
 Buddha Shakyamuni teachings are composed of two types of teachings, the profound and 
the vast. The Buddha taught the vast to Maitreya, who then ta ught Asanga, who then taught 
his brother, Vasubandhu, and so forth. In this  way they were passed down to us without 
interruption from the Buddha himself. Buddha  Shakyamuni taught the profound teachings 
on emptiness to Manjushri, who then taught them to Nagarjuna. Asanga and Nagarjuna are 
very important in that Nagarjuna clarified the Middle Way point of view while Asanga 
clarified the Chittamatra or Mind-Only point of vi ew. Due to this they are said to be the trail-
blazers or innovators respectively of these tw o schools. For this re ason, Lama Tsongkhapa 
includes them among his objects of veneration . The text says “foretold by the Conqueror” 
because Buddha Shakyamuni gave many teachings on sutra and tantra in which he predicted 
the coming of Nagarjuna who would be born in  such-and-such a place and would clarify his 
doctrine, and also likewise predicted the coming of Asanga. I will not go into this in detail. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
1B  Vow of composition 
I shall once more 
give explanations here in a summary fashion 
of the stages of the path of the most profound view 
and of vast conduct, making it easy to access. 
 
The “profound” refers to emptiness. There are si xteen or twenty emptinesses. In this context 
“emptiness” refers to the emptiness of inhe rent existence of all phenomena. Why are 
phenomena empty? They are empty of inhere nt existence because they are dependent-
relations. All functioning things depend on causes and conditions. While permanent 
phenomena, also called non-things or non- functioning things, such as space and non-
analytical and analytical cessations, do not depe nd on causes and conditions, they do depend 
on their parts. In addition, all phenomena are dependent-relations in the sense of their being 
dependent on imputation by name and thou ght. In other words, in dependence on 
something being given a name it comes into exis tence. For example, when a nation chooses a 
president, while previously the person who won the election was not the president, after being 
voted for he came to be called “president,” to  think of himself as president, and to perform 
the function of a president.   In a similar way, everything is created by th e mind. For example, scie ntists create many new 
machines. First these machines were  just thoughts or projects in  the minds of their inventors, 
only later on were they actualiz ed. All these machines that make it easy to work and so forth 
came about from thought. It is not that they ha ve existed from primordial time. Rather in the 
beginning they did not exist and only later on were they created by people. For this reason, 
from the Buddhist point of view all things are created by the mind and not by a god such as 
Ishvara, as is believed in India. Hindus thin k that first Ishvara thinks about something and 
then it arises. If it were like this, then no on e would ever need to suffer as Ishvara would have 
the power to make everyone happy and relaxed. He would just have to think “How nice it would be if all sentient beings had happiness and the causes of happi ness” and then this 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
9 would occur. However, it is not like this. Happiness and suffering are created by our mind. 
We should examine this.  
 In short, all phenomena are only imputed by  thought and name. Ther efore, they do not 
exist at all from their own side, not even the smallest atom. Hence, all phenomena are empty 
of inherent existence. This is what is referred to by the word “profound.” 
 
The “vast” refers to many things. It includes the five paths, the ten bodhisattva grounds, the 
six or ten perfections, and the four means of ga thering disciples. All th ese were taught by the 
Buddha and set out by Maitreya in his Ornament for Clear Realizations , in relation to which 
many Indian pandits wrote commentaries. In fact, the main root text for the lam-rim 
teachings is the Ornament for Clear Realizations  (Abhisamayalamkara ).  
 We need to understand which are ordinary  paths and which are arya paths. Then we 
should try to develop these qualities in our me ntal continuum. The main quality to develop is 
renunciation or definite emergence – the thou ght to definitively emerge even from the 
pleasures of cyclic existence. Th is thought is based on the unders tanding that even the best of 
pleasures will eventually bring suffering since it  is caused by afflictions and contaminated 
actions. To avoid this suffering  we must strive to commit less  non-virtuous actions and to 
reduce the mental afflictions, such as anger or  hatred, jealousy, miserliness, and so forth. 
There are many afflictions, there being six root and twenty secondary afflictions. We need to 
study them and then check whethe r or not they exist in our mind . We will probably find that 
everyone of them exists in our mind! Therefore, our main aim should be to eliminate the mental afflictions. If we eliminate them, we will experience real happiness and joy. Since 
everyone wishes to be happy and no one wants to suffer, we ourselves need to create the 
causes of happiness. For this reason we need to practice the Dharma in daily life. This is said 
here very briefly.   Here Lama Tsongkhapa says that he will give  a very brief explanation of the profound and 
v a s t  s o  a s  t o  m a k e  i t  e a s y  t o  p u t  t h e m  i n t o  practice. By continuous ly engaging in study, 
thinking, and meditation on them, it will definitely bring a result.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
General introductory explanation of the instructions being taught here 
1C Identification of the Dharma to be explained in the context of what the title means 
The Dharma to be explained here consists  in how the fortunate are lead to the 
level of buddhahood by mean s of the stages of the pa th to enlightenment. It 
summarizes all the points of the Conque ror’s excellent speech, [follows] the 
tradition of the two great trail-blazers Nagarjuna and Asanga, {2} constitutes the 
Dharma system of the supreme beings wh o progress to the state of omniscience,2 
and contains all the stages without omission that the three [types of] beings need 
to practice. 
 
                                              
2 JN: “who progress to the ground  of a knower of all aspects” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
10 The name of the text, Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment , sets out what is to be explained – the 
path to enlightenment. Budd ha Shakyamuni’s teachings incl ude 101 volumes of sutra and 
tantra that have been translated into Tibetan.  The essence of these teachings is condensed in 
the teachings of Venerable Nagarjuna and Vene rable Asanga, thus their teachings show the 
entire path. All sentient beings wish to attain omniscience, that is, to become holy beings. For 
this it is necessary to practice  the paths of the three beings: th e great, middle, and small paths 
of the beings of great, middling, and small capaci ty. All the stages necessary to accomplish this 
are contained in their entirety in this text, no thing is missing. This is because if one being 
wishes to go to the state of omniscience one needs to practice the complete path without 
anything missing.  
 How are sentient beings led to enlightenment?  They are led to enlightenment by teaching 
them the stages of the path, af ter which they must put them in to practice. In this way the 
fortunate ones will gradually go to enlightenment,  that is, to the pure land of a buddha, such 
as Akanishta, Tushita, and Sukhavati, or  to buddhahood. Once there one will always 
experience enjoyment.   Thus, that which is to be explained is the th ree paths of the beings of great, middle, and 
small capacity. These are then to be practice d. First one practices the common small path, 
then the common middle path, then the common great path, and then the uncommon great 
path, that of tantra. The fortunate are thos e who have taken a precious human rebirth 
complete with the eighteen qualities, are en dowed with intelligence, understand whatever 
they hear or study, have met the doctrine, an d have interest in the Buddha’s teachings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2 Composition of the explanations themselves 
A Correspondence with the manner of explanation proposed by the scholars 
B The actual explanations in accordance with that 
2A  Correspondence with the manner of explanation proposed by the scholars 
The scholars of glorious Vikramashila [Mon astery] considered it vital to start off 
with three preliminaries, i.e., the greatn ess of the authors of  the teachings, the 
greatness of the teachings, and the way to explain and listen to them. 
 
Vikramashila Monastery was a great monastery th at once existed in eastern India. How did 
the pandits or scholars of this monastery teach?  They were very learned in Buddha’s teachings 
as well as in what was not Buddha’s teachings, that is, the five sciences. They understood all 
of these clearly and therefore possessed very hi gh qualities. They also greatly benefited the 
Dharma.   It is important to understand how did to te ach the Dharma and how to listen to it. The 
teachings of Buddha are of great benefit becaus e they come down to us from great holy 
beings. We need to try to integrate the instru ctions on how to elimin ate and solve problems, 
how to develop realizations, and so forth with  our mind. We need to learn this. For this 
reason, these holy being first explained how to  listen to the Dharma. They said that the 
teacher is like a doctor, whereas the Dharma, th e teaching or explanation, is like medicine. 
The doctor diagnoses our illness and, if we ta ke the medicine, our physical sickness can be 
cured. Similarly, if we put th em into practice, the Buddha’s teachings can cure our mental 
illness. Thus, if we listen to them, think abou t them, and meditate on them, they can cure our 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
11 mental illness. We should not think that what he  taught is not right, no r should we listen to 
the Dharma while looking for faults in it.  
 Whenever someone teaches he or she should  do so motivated by compassion and love, 
wishing to benefit the listeners. He should not do so for name or fame or to gain material 
things. This is not the right motivation on the part of the teacher. Both teacher and listener 
need a good motivation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B  The actual explanations in accordance with that 
1 The greatness of the author for the sake of showing the authenticity of the teachings 
2 The greatness of the teachings for the sake of generating respect towards the instructions 
3 How the teachings characterized by these two greatnesses should be listened to and 
explained 
4 The stages by which a disciple should be guided by means of the actual instructions  
In accordance with that, the guide to the stages of the path to enlightenment has 
four [parts]: The greatness of the author fo r the sake of showing the authenticity of 
the teachings, the greatness of the teachi ngs for the sake of generating respect 
towards the instructions, how the teaching s characterized by these two greatnesses 
should be listened to and explained, and the stages by which a disciple should be 
guided by means of the actual instructions. 
 
The Dharma comes from an authentic sour ce – Buddha Shakyamuni. Since all these 
instructions and scriptures come from a holy being, it possesses all his qualities. For this 
reason we should generate respect for these explanations and instructions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
Showing the greatness of the auth or for the sake of showing  
the authenticity of the teachings 
2B1 The greatness of the author for the sake of showing the authenticity of the teachings 
A The root and actual author 
B His greatness 
2B1A The root and actual author 
First, the author: Generally speaking, the present instructions are the instructions 
that the venerable protector Maitreya gives in his Ornament for Clear Realizations . In 
particular, they are based on the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment , therefore its 
author is also the author of this presen t text. Other than under the name of Great 
Master Dipamkara Shrijñana, he is al so widely known as Glorious Atisha. 
 
From whom does the Dharma comes? Who comp osed the Dharma? It was composed by the 
Buddha, for example, the Perfection  of Wisdom Sutras. Although the Ornament for Clear 
Realizations  was written by Buddha Maitreyanath, thes e instructions come from the teachings 
of the Buddha. Later on Atisha wrote the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment . Is the Buddha or 
Atisha the author of this text? Although they are not the same people, their qualities and what 
t h e y  w r o t e  a r e  v e r y  s i m i l a r .  A s  A t i s h a ’ s  t e x t  c o n t a i n s  i n s t r u c t i o n s  t h a t  c o m e  d o w n  f r o m  Buddha Shakyamuni, these instru ctions are useful. Why is this? It is because the text 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
12 composed by Atisha is easier to put into practi ce due to being short and concise, yet it still 
contains all the practices of sutra and tantra in a complete way. For this reason it is easier to 
study, to memorize, and to hold in mind so as to then be able to integrate the meaning with 
one’s mind.  
 An “instruction” is an explanation of what to do and what not to do, for example, an 
explanation of how to clean. At the beginning ou r parents taught us how to walk, to eat, to 
get dressed, and so forth, all of these are called instructions.  
 
Dipamkara Shrijñana is his full name in Sanskr it, whereas in Tibetan he is commonly known 
by the shorter name, Atisha. Dipam  means “lamp,” kara means “illuminating,” shri means 
“glorious,” and jñana  means “wisdom.” The letter a in Sanskrit represents the essence of all 
the Buddha’s teachings. A-tisha was so-called because he possessed the essence of Buddha’s 
teachings in his mind and then gave others these teachings.   There is an explanation below of  were Atisha was born, the deed s he did, and so forth, but, 
in short, he wrote the text Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment , which even nowadays remains 
very useful for us. This text is entitled “lam p” because just as an ordinary light dispels 
darkness, similarly this text dispels our mental ig norance, which is like darkness. In fact it is 
the light of wisdom, not normal light, that  eliminates the darkness of ignorance and 
confusion. Due to this, he called his text a “lamp.”  I explained the word “path” yesterday. It means a road that when traveled brings one to one’s destination. In our case in order to travel  to enlightenment, we need a path. A path is 
defined as a clear knower conjoined with defi nite emergence or renunciation. This clear 
knower is called a path because it is what brings us to enlightenment.   The word “enlightenment” refers buddhahood . There are three types of enlightenment: 
small enlightenment, middle enlightenment, an d great enlightenment. Small enlightenment 
is the enlightenment of hearer foe-destroyers ( shravekas ) which is achieved by practicing their 
particular path; middle enlightenment is the enlightenment of solitary realizers 
(pratyekabuddhas ) which is achieved by practicing  their particular path; and great 
enlightenment is buddhahood which is achieved by practicing the bodh isattva path. From the 
point of view of sutra, the bodhisattva path is  divided into five paths and ten grounds or ten 
perfections, by means of which one can attain  enlightenment. In this particular context 
“enlightenment” refers to great enlightenment or buddhahood.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B1B [Atisha’s ] greatness 
1 How [Atisha] took birth in an excellent family 
2 How [Atisha] achieved his good qualities on that basis 
3 Having achieved them, how [Atisha] performed deeds for the sake of the teachings 
His greatness is threefold: How he took  birth in an excellent family, how he 
achieved his good qualities on that ba sis, and having achieved them, how he 
performed deeds for the sake of the teachings. 
 
Then Lama Tsongkhapa set out the excellent fa mily into which Atisha took birth; then, 
having taken a human body as a basis, how he attained his good qualities; and then, having 
attained these qualities, how he performed d eeds or worked for the Buddha’s teachings in 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
13 India and Tibet such that his teachings still ex ist in the world and that there still exist his 
followers who put them into practice.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B1B-1 How [Atisha] took birth in an excellent family 
{3} According to the [great] translator’s Praise : 
 
Due east in the excellent country of Sahor 
lies a city, big and tall, 
namely Vikramanipura. In its midst: the royal court, an extremely spacious palace 
called “the one with golden banners.” 
Its pleasures, might, and wealth resemble those of King Tongkhun of China. King of that land is Kalyanashri  and his queen is called Shriprabha. The royal couple have three sons: Padmagarbha, Chandragarbha, 
and Shrigarbha they are called. 
Again, Prince Padmagarbha has five royal consorts and nine sons – the oldest one, named Shriguna, is a mahapandita widely known as Dhanashri. His youngest brother, called Shrigarbha, is the Bhikshu Viryachandra. The middle one is Chandragarbha – he is our exalted guru. 
 Atisha was born in eastern India in the area of Sahor, now in East Bengal. Even now near 
Kushbihar one can see the palace  of Sahor, and, although no  one lives there, everyday at 
midday someone still distributes food from there to the poor.   Atisha was born in what was in the great ci ty that was then called Vikramanipura. In its 
center was a large and vast palace possessing golden victory banners and so forth. It was complete in wealth, like the we alth of King Tongkhun of Chin a. This Chinese king was said 
to be very rich and each day, although he woul d be given thousands of foods, still he was not 
satisfied. For this reason he was called Tongkh un, meaning “not satisfied by a thousand foods 
or tastes” (literally, a thousand rumblings). Just  as the Chinese king was rich, so too was the 
family of Atisha. Atisha’s father was called Ka lyanashri, and his mother, Shriprabha (Glorious 
Light). They had three sons called Padmagar bha (Lotus Essence), Chandragarbha (Moon 
Essence), and Shrigarbha (Glory Essence). Pa dmagarbha had five wives and nine sons. The 
oldest was Shriguna (Glorious Merit). He was a great pandit known as Dhanashri (Glorious 
Giving). His youngest brother was a fully-or dained monk called Viryachandra. The middle 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
14 one, Chandragarbha (Moon Essence)  is our venerable guru, Atisha. For this reason, Atisha is 
known as the son of a king.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B1B-2 How [Atisha] achieved his good qualities on that basis 
A How [Atisha] attained the positive qualities of comprehensive scriptural knowledge 
B How [Atisha] attained the realizational qualities of its correct accomplishment 
How he attained his positive qualities [is presented under] two [headings]: how he 
attained the positive qualities of compre hensive scriptural knowledge and how he 
attained the realizational qualities of its correct accomplishment. 
2B1B-2A How [Atisha] attained the positive qualities of comprehensive scriptural knowledge 
1 How [Atisha] learnt the areas of general knowledge 
First: By the age of 21, having studie d the four areas of knowledge common to 
Buddhists and non-Buddhists – language,3 logic, crafts, and medicine – he had 
become an excellent scholar. In particular, the great Drolungpa relates how at the 
age of 15, having heard the4 Lines of Reasoning  just once, he debated with a non-
Buddhist intellectual renowned for his er udition and defeated him, which spread 
his fame far and wide. 
 
Atisha possesses the quality of having much kn owledge of the scriptures. In fact, how he 
gained inner realizations was that he first studied many scriptures. He studied the common 
fields of knowledge or sciences: linguistics (t his includes poetry and so forth), logic or 
reasoning or dialectics, crafts (how to make tangkas, tables, and so forth), and medicine, 
including the different kinds of illness, how to  recognize them, their treatment, and so forth. 
Then at the age of fifteen, having li stened one time to teachings on the Lines of Reasoning , a 
text written by Chandrakirti on logic, he debated with a well-known non-Buddhist scholar 
and defeated him.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2 How [Atisha] learnt Mantra 
Then he requested complete empowermen t from the master yogi of the main 
temple on Black Mountain, the glorious  Rahulagupta who had received direct 
visions of Hevajra and a prophecy from Va jradakini, {4} receiving the secret name 
Jñana-guhya-vajra. Up to the age of 29 he studied the Vajrayana under numerous 
highly realized gurus due to which he became knowledgeable in all texts and 
instructions. When the thought “I am kn owledgeable in secret mantra“ occurred 
to him, dakinis pointed out, in his drea m, several volumes of mantra he had not 
seen before. That abated his pride. 
 
                                              
3 JN: sgra could also be translated as  ‘grammar’ or ‘linguistics’ 
4 Dharmakirti’s 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
15 Atisha also studied tantra in a temple on Blac k Mountain with a yogi who had had a vision of 
Hevajra and received a prophecy from Vajradakin i. He received empowerment from this yogi, 
Rahulagupta, and was conferred the name Jñan a-guhya-vajra (Vajra of Secret Wisdom).  
 
This is all similar to a story, it is not so important. What we need to do is to try to take care of 
our own mind, to try to keep it happy and rela xed, to not worried or agitated, and to enjoy 
ourselves.  
 
Tuesday afternoon, 18 January 2005  Atisha requested his guru Rahulagupta to be stow upon him the complete empowerment, 
whereby he was conferred empowerment and given the secret name of Jñana-guhya-vajra. Up 
to the age of twenty-nine he received teaching s and studied the vajrayana in the presence of 
many realized holy beings due to which he  became knowledge in the scriptures and 
instructions. When he came to th ink that he was the best of tant ra practitioners or the best in 
understanding of tantra, the dakinis came to him in a dream and told him that there were 
many tantra texts that he had not yet seen an d therefore could not say this. Due to this his 
pride was abated.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
3 How [Atisha] was ordained and learnt the collections of inner knowledge 
Both in his dreams and directly, the gurus and protectors5 then made known to 
him that vast benefit would accrue for th e teachings and many migrating beings, if 
he took monastic vows as appropriate. Upon their encouragement he had himself 
ordained. The great upholder of monastic di scipline, Shilarakshita, an elder of the 
Mahasamghika tradition who had attained the concentration in which you single-
pointedly enter [ultimate] reality on the pa th of preparation, officiated as abbot. 
Chandragarbha received the name Shri Dipamkara-jñana. 
 Atisha had visions of some lamas and meditati onal deities and also dreamt of them. He was 
told by them that if he took ordination he  would benefit the teachings of the Buddha and 
many migrating beings. Due to this, he took  the vows of a monk in the Mahasamghika 
tradition. According to the Vaibhashikas th ere are four different traditions of vows: 
Sarvastavadin, Mahasamghika , Sthavira, and Sammitiya.  
 Shilarakshita, Atisha’s lama from Indonesia who acted as abbot, had achieved the path of 
preparation. This is the second of the five  paths – the path of accumulation, path of 
preparation, path of seeing, path of meditation , and path of no-more-learning. On the path of 
accumulation, one accumulates merit and the hear ing of many teachings in order to develop 
faith in the teachings of the Buddha. Having studied and contemplated them, one puts what 
one has learned into meditation practice wh ereby one develops the wisdom arisen from 
meditation. At this time, one attains the path of preparation, which is divided into four levels: 
heat, peak, tolerance, and supreme mundane qualit ies. From the point of view of realization 
                                             
 
5 JN: yi dam , also translated as ‘meditational deity’ or ‘tutelary deity’ 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
16 Shilarakshita was a being on the path of preparat ion, and from the point of view of tenets he 
was a Vaibhashika. Shilarakshita (Protecting Mo rality) was one of Atisha’s main teachers. 
Upon receiving ordination, Atisha came to be called Shri Dipamkara-jñana and then 
practiced in accordance with the vinaya.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
 
 Afterwards, up to the age of 31, he studied the upper and lower divisions of 
inner philosophical knowledge, in particular, for 12 years, the Great Detailed 
Explanation6 under Guru Dharmarakshita in Od antapuri. As he was very well 
versed in the scriptures of the four origin al traditions, he had an infallible grasp of 
the tiniest details in modes of behavior that should be cultivated and rejected 
according to the various philosophical school s, like [for instance the monastic rules 
concerning] accepting gifts. 
 
Up to the age of 31, Atisha studied the vehicl e of philosophy, that is, he studied the upper 
tenets, the Madhyamaka and Chittamatra, an d the lower tenets, the Sautrantika and 
Vaibhashika. These tenets have different assertions  or points of view. In particular, he studied 
all four tenet systems under the guidance of  Dharmarakshita (Protecting the Dharma) for 
twelve years in Odantapuri. For example, he  studied the five bases which are the main 
subjects of the Treasury of Manifest Dharma , as well as the two subjects of the Supplement to the 
Middle Way , the profound and the vast. He gained kn owledge of the scriptures and then the 
realization of their meanings. He came to unders tand all the subtle details of the vinaya, for 
example, that a fully-ordained monk cannot take things if they have no t been offered to him. 
If he needs to take food, for example, because ther e is no one to offer it to him, he must first 
ask permission from Buddha Shakyamuni to do this . Atisha understood all of this clearly and 
completely without any mixing. Thus, from the po int of view of scripture Atisha understood 
all of sutra and tantra, the th ree baskets and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B1B-2B How [Atisha] attained the realizational qualities of its correct accomplishment 
1 How all realizational qualities are contained in the three trainings 
2 How [Atisha] was accomplished in the three trainings 
2B1B-2B1 How all realizational qualities are contained in the three trainings 
Second: As generally speaking all the sc riptural teachings by the Conqueror are 
contained in the three precious collection s, the realizational teachings are also 
contained in three precious trainings. 
 
All the scriptural teachings of the Buddha are included in the three baskets – the vinaya, 
sutra, and abhidharma baskets. The realizationa l teachings – the higher trainings of morality, 
concentration, and wisdom – are the subject of these three baskets. The main subject of the 
vinaya basket is the higher trai ning in morality, the main subj ect of the sutra basket is the 
higher training in concentration, and the main subject of the abhidharma basket is the higher 
                                              
6 Mahavibhasha 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
17 training in wisdom. Likewise the doctrine of  realization are included in three. A more 
detailed explanation of this subject is given by Maitreya in his Ornament for the Mahayana 
Sutras  (Sutra-alamkara). In short, the main object  to be practiced is the three: morality, 
concentration, and wisdom. We need to study them and then try to develop them in our 
mind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B1B-2B2 How [Atisha] was accomplished in the three trainings 
A Ethical discipline 
B Accomplishments in the training of concentration 
C Accomplishments in the training of wisdom 
2B1B-2B2A [Ethical discipline] 
1 Transition to ethical discipline 2 How he was actually accomplished in ethical discipline 
3 Proper protection [of ethical discipline] 
2B1B-2B2A-1 Transition to ethical discipline 
{5} In this regard, the training in ethi cal discipline is often praised in the 
[Buddha’s] excellent teachings and in th e commentaries as the foundation of all 
good qualities such as the trainings in co ncentration and wisdom. Therefore, it is 
necessary, first of all, to have realizationa l qualities in terms of ethical discipline. 
 
First one accomplishes the training in morality ( abhishikya ), then one develops concentration, 
and then one generates wisdom. This is the orde r in which they are necessarily accomplished. 
The training in morality or ethical discipline is  often praised in sutra and tantra as well as in 
the commentaries by the Indian pandits because in order to achieve the good qualities of 
realization one first needs morality.  
 Morality is a mind of safeguarding. While mora lity can also be physic al, it is mainly the 
mental attitude wishing to safeguard not killing,  not stealing, not engaging sexual misconduct, 
not lying, not engaging in divisive talk, not enga ging in harsh words, and not engaging in idle 
talk. It is also a mind of abandonment, the wish to abandon bad ideas and bad actions.  
 Morality includes the five vows or precepts of lay people, who are called upasikas  if they are 
men and upasikanis  if they are women. Upa means “close, whereas sika means becoming, 
therefore this word means “becoming close,” that  is, approaching, nirvana. A lay vow-holder 
has five precepts – those of not killing, not st ealing, not engaging in sexual misconduct, not 
l y i n g ,  a n d  n o t  t a k i n g  i n t o x i c a n t s .  S u c h  a  p e r s o n  s h o u l d  g u a r d  t h e s e  f i v e  v o w s .  T o  k e e p  morality means just this. One should think, fo r example, “I will not harm or kill even an 
insect”; this is a mind of safeguarding or a mind of abandonment.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B1B-2B2A-2 How [Atisha] was actually accomplished in ethical discipline 
A How [Atisha] possessed the highest vows of individual liberation 
In this regard there are three [kinds]: Ho w he held the first of those, the highest 
vows of individual liberation: 
Having received the bhikshu vows, he protected them the way a yak protects its coat; a yak is so attached to its coat that it rather risks its life trying to save a strand 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
18 of tail hair that has got caught  on a tree than to part with it, even if it sees its life is 
being threatened by a hunter. That is how Atisha protected every detail of the 
foundation of trainings, not to speak of  the major [rules of] the foundation of 
trainings which he had undertaken, so that (therefore) he came to be called the 
elder who is a great upholder of discipline. 
 In the case of the vows of indivi dual liberation, one first takes the lay vows, then the vows of a 
novice monk or nun ( shramanera ), and then the vows of full ordination of a monk or nun 
(bhikshu  or bhikshuni ). They are necessarily taken in this or der. Atisha kept his vows even if his 
life was in danger, meaning that he did not tr ansgress even the smallest of abandonments but 
strove to keep all his vows very precisely. It is said  that if a yak gets its tail caught in a bush, it 
will not pull away from the bush even if a hunter  were to threaten his li fe because it does not 
want to lose even a single strand of tail hair. Just as Atisha took care of his vows in this way, so too do we, his followers, need to take ca re of our vows. He became an elder who was a 
great upholder of the vinaya or discipline. The word “elder” in Tibetan is ne ten  (gnas brtan ), ne 
meaning “abiding,” that is, abiding in the vows, and ten meaning “stable,” that is, stable in the 
vows like a mountain that ca nnot be moved by anything.  
 There are eight types of individual liberation vows: 
(1) the vows that are taken for one full day called one-day precepts (Tib. bsnyen gnas ; Skt. 
upavasa ; literally, approacher-abider); 
(2-3) the vows of laymen (Tib. dge bsnyen ; Skt. upasaka ; literally, male virtue-approachers)  and 
laywoman (Tib. dge bsnyen ma ; Skt. upasika ; literally female virtue-approachers);  
(4-5) the vows of novice monks (Tib. dge tshul ; Skt. shramanera ; literally, male virtue-mode) and 
novice nuns (Tib. dge tshul ma ; Skt. shramanerika ; literally, female virtue-mode); 
(6) the vows of probationary nuns (Tib. dge slob ma ; Skt. shikshamana ; literally, female virtue-
trainees); and (7-8) the vows of fully- ordained monks (Tib. dge slong ; Skt. bhikshu ; literally, male virtue-
beggars) and fully-ordained nuns (Tib. dge slong ma ; Skt. bhikshuni ; literally female virtue-
beggars). 
 
There are eight one-day precepts. [Lay vow-holders have five vows ], novices have thirty-six 
vows, probationary nuns have forty-eight vows, fully-ordained monks have 253 vows, and fully-
ordained nuns have 364 vows. These vows of indivi dual liberation are wh at liberate one from 
cyclic existence and set one in nirvana.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
B How [Atisha] possessed the bodhisattva vows 
Bodhisattva vows: He practiced numerous in structions for training in the mind of 
enlightenment which is rooted in love and compassion, and in particular, in 
attendance upon Serlingpa, he trained for a long time in the highest instructions 
passed on by Venerable Maitreya and Manjugosha through Asanga and 
Shantideva. Thereby the mind of enlighte nment that cherishes others more than 
oneself, arose in his heart. This aspiration al mind gave rise to the mind of active 
involvement and due to the good behavior of training in the trainings following 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
19 the promise to train in the vast conduct of bodhisattvas, he never transgressed the 
rules of Buddha’s children. 
 
Love is the mental attitude wishing all sentie nt beings to have happiness and the causes of 
happiness. Compassion is the mental attitude wishing all sentient beings to be free from 
suffering and the causes of suffering. These tw o attitudes are the roots or bases upon which 
one develops bodhichitta, the mind of enlightenm ent. Atisha received many instructions on 
how to develop the mind of enlightenment, in  particular he received instructions from 
Serlingpa, a lama from Sumatra, who is also  called Dharmakirti. Buddha taught Maitreya who 
then taught Asanga, the author of five texts known collectively as the Five Treatises on the 
Grounds. Buddha also taught Manjushri who then taught Shantideva, the author of Engaging 
in the Bodhisattva Deeds  (Bodhisattvacharyavatara ), the Compendium of Trainings  
(Shiksasammucchaya ), and so forth. Atisha received al l these teachings from Dharmakirti and 
then trained in them for a long time until he developed the mind of enlightenment that 
cherishes all sentient beings and gives up cheris hing oneself. One comes to see that oneself is 
just one whereas others are infinite, whereby one comes to see that oneself is unimportant 
and thereby generates the mind of enlightenmen t. One exchanges oneself for others, meaning 
that one changes the mental attitude of ordina ry beings who wish only to take care of 
themselves for the attitude that wishes to only take care of and cherish other sentient beings.  
 There are two kinds of mind of enlightenmen t. The first is the wishing or aspirational 
mind of enlightenment which is the mere wish to attain enlightenment for the benefit of all 
sentient beings. The second is the engaging mind of enlightenment (translated above as 
“mind of active involvement”) which involves ge nerating the mind of enlightenment and also 
engaging in the vast conduct of  a bodhisattva. This conduct co nsists of training in the six 
perfections of generosity, morality, patience, e ffort, concentration, and wisdom or in the ten 
perfections. One engages in these perfecti ons for the purpose of ripening one’s own 
continuum. In addition, engages in the four me ans of gathering disciples for the purpose of 
ripening others’ continua. Similarly, Christians al so first give others material things, and then 
they talk nicely to them, whereby people genera te confidence in them. They then teach others 
how to do the practices related to  Christianity, and, as this is not enough, they also practice 
what they preach. These are the ways of ripeni ng or maturing others’ minds that are also 
practiced by bodhisattvas. Thus, they are called the conduct of a bodhisattva.  
 Generosity is a mind of giving. One can give material things, the Dharma or one’s 
knowledge, and protection. From the point of view of sutra there are these three types of 
generosity. From the point of view of tantra th ere are four types with the addition of giving 
love. The generosity of material things includes giving food to those without food, clothing to 
those without clothes, bedding to  those without bedding, and so forth. The giving of Dharma 
is to teach without miserliness what one knows of the three baskets. One can also teach other 
things that one knows, for example, one can te ach how to paint those who want to know how 
to paint. The generosity of protection is to pr otect those whose life is in danger. For example, 
although in general monks are not permitted to lie,  if it is for a good purpose they can tell a 
lie. When a hunter, for example, has lost his prey  in the forest and asks a monk if he saw the 
animal, even if he did see it he  can say instead, “I saw a man pa ss by,” even though in actual 
fact he saw, for example, the rabbit. Also if someone is trying to murder a person who has 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
20 taken shelter in one’s home and one has hidden him in a closet in order to protect him, one 
can say to the murderer that the other person has left and gone elsewhere.  
 There are also different kinds of morality: th e morality of safeguarding the vows that one 
has taken, the morality of benefiting all sentient  beings, and the morality of practicing virtue. 
In addition, we need to practice patience. Just as even a small fire ca n burn down an entire 
forest, similarly even one instant of anger or hatred toward someone can destroy many eons 
of the collection of merit or virtue. Anger is therefore the most dang erous of minds as it 
harms oneself as well as others. For this reason , we need to practice patience. Patience means 
that when someone acts against us, deprecates us, criticizes us, or yells at us, at this time our 
mind should be relaxed and as unmoved as a mountain. Also when someone beats us we 
should not retaliate by beating the person. We n eed this patience of non-retaliation. We also 
need patience with respect to the Dharma. For example, when it is difficult to understand 
something, we should put great effort into ou r studies, bearing the ensuing difficulties with 
patience. This is called the patience of practicing the Dharma. Chandrakirti in his Supplement 
to the Middle Way  says: 
 
The Sugata mainly praise d these three practices  
Of generosity, morality, and patience for lay people.  
These are also the collection of merit, the cause  
Of a buddha body, the nature of which is form.    [ 3 . 1 2 ]  
 
The Buddha said that lay people should mainly  practice the three perfections of generosity, 
morality, and patience. For example, when we become angry with our wife or husband, we 
need patience. We also need to avoid getting angry and instead practice patience with our 
c h i l d r e n  w h e n  t h e y  c r y  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  I n  f a c t  we need to continually practice patience with 
respect to our wife, husband, children, and other family members.   The practice of effort, on the other hand, is necessary for everyone, whether lay or 
ordained. The main practices of the ordained, monks and nuns, are the last two perfections, 
those of concentration and wisdom. Because th ey do not need to care for a partner or 
children, it is easier for them to meditate and develop concentration.  
 However, whether one is lay or ordained it  is important to try to develop one’s inner 
qualities. We should try to practice the bodhisa ttva conduct or activities as much as we can in 
the same way that bodhisattvas do. To do this, we should train in the morality or vows of 
bodhisattvas. The bodhisattva vows consist of eighteen root vows and forty-six secondary 
vows. We should learn them and then try to keep  them well, just as Atisha trained in keeping 
these vows.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
C How [Atisha] possessed vajrayana vows 
Vajrayana vows: Owing to the fact that he had the meditative stabilizations of the 
generation stage in which one’s own body is seen as that of a deity and of the 
completion stage of the vajra mind, {6} he became chief among yogis. In particular 
he protected his tantric commitments properly by not transgressing the prescribed 
rules. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
21 In order to enter the vajrayana, one must first receive an empowerment. And prior to taking 
the four empowerments of highest yoga tantra, on e must first take the tantra vows. In highest 
yoga tantra there are in general the vase, se cret, wisdom, and word empowerments, however 
in the case of Kalachakra they are slightly different. Having taken an empowerment, one is 
permitted to visualize that one’s body of bones, flesh, and skin, this presently impure body, is 
completely purified and that one arises in the body of deity, the nature of which is wisdom. 
T h i s  i s  c a l l e d  “ t h e  g e n e r a t i o n  s t a g e ”  ( bskyed rim ) .  W h a t  i s  i t  t h a t  i s  g e n e r a t e d ?  T h e  f i v e  
aggregates – form or body, feelings, di scriminations, compositional factors and 
consciousnesses aggregates – are transformed and generated into the tathagatas of the five 
lineages. Thus, the body or form aggregate is transformed into Vairochana, the feeling 
aggregate into Ratnasambhava, the discri mination aggregate into Amitabha, the 
compositional factors aggregat e into Amoghasiddhi, and the consciousness aggregate into 
Akshobhya. In this way the five aggregates take  on the aspect of the five buddha lineages. In 
short, this is the generation stage in which on e generates one’s body as the body of a deity. 
 After that there is the completion stage ( rdzogs rim ). It generally consists of five stages, 
although there are slight differences between the different tantras. From the point of view of 
Guhyasamaja there are either five or six stages. The six are: the isolation of body, isolation of 
speech, isolation of mind, impure illusory body, actual clear light, and the union of the pure 
illusory body and actual clear light. In order to achieve these, we first need to meditate on the 
generation stage, in particular on the practice of taking death into the path to the truth body, 
the intermediate state into the path to the en joyment body, and birth into the path to the 
emanation body. This is a very general description of tantra. 
 In short, Atisha practiced tantra and obtained  the realizations. He also had the realizations 
or qualities of the vows of individual liberati on, the bodhisattva vows, and the tantra vows. 
He had both the scriptural qualities and the realizational qualities. We should generate 
interest in attaining these qualities and th en generate the intention to develop them. 
 In our everyday life we should try to do a littl e bit of meditation, for example, the meditation 
on the breath. When the mind is  unclear, agitated, or disturbe d by many thoughts, at that 
time one should try to meditate a bit on the breath. Imagine that one exhales from the right 
nostril, thinking that all one’s negative emot ions, agitation, nervousn ess, and the pains of 
body and mind are completely exhaled in the as pect of black smoke an d go out into space. 
Then one inhales through one’s left nostril all the compassion, love, omniscience, and energy 
of the holy beings in the form of white ligh t. Think that one’s body becomes completely 
transparent, like crystal, and filled with this wh ite light and qualities, and that one’ mind also 
becomes clear and very relaxed. One should do this for three, four, or five minutes, while 
inhaling and exhaling. This meditation is not difficult. One thinks “Now I am exhaling. Now 
I am inhaling.” It is a method for making one’s  mind more relaxed. One should try to keep 
one’s mind happy by reducing thoughts in this way. Many different conceptions arise in our mind that disturb us and make us unhappy, fo r example, the thought “I cannot do it. I better 
give up.” This way of thinking is a mistake. We  are all able to become a buddha, a holy being. 
We should think “Why not I? I too have been born in the human race.” We should think in this way.   From the Christian point of view, in Italy and in other Western countries there are many 
saints, both male and female. Likewise, also fr om the Buddhist point of view there are many 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
22 foe-destroyers and buddhas. In the different cult ures there are different ways of teaching but 
the final aim is the same. For example, if there are four roads that all lead to this building, 
whichever road one travels to get here, when one arrives the building is the same. Because 
there are different mentalities and different cultures, there is a need to teach in different ways 
in order for human beings to gain realizations . On the other hand, animals in general cannot 
be taught the Dharma or a religion. However, it is said that Saint Francis, for example, gave teachings to a wolf that had killed many people , due to which it stoppe d killing, became calm, 
and like a dog stayed near Saint Francis’s medi tation place. While it is possible to teach 
animals some things, for example, some animals are trained how to kill, in general we cannot 
teach them the Dharma. For example, although  we can teach a parrot to recite OM MANI 
PADME HUM, we cannot teach it to understand the meaning.  
 Wednesday morning, 19 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B2B-2B2A-3 Proper protection [of ethical discipline] 
Not only did he courageously undertake th e trainings in ethical discipline of the 
three vows, he also upheld them as he  had promised. He kept the vows without 
transgressing the rules associated with them and even if he transgressed them ever 
so slightly, he quickly, very quickly purifi ed this by means of a suitable ritual for 
restoring the given vow. 
 
Atisha safeguarded the three moralities comple tely without transgression. However, when he 
did transgress them, he immediately confessed it in  order to purify the transgression. It is said 
that he always carried a statue of Buddha Sh akyamuni with him wherever he went, and when 
he committed even a very slight transgression he would take out the statue, set it in front of 
him, and perform three prostrations to it. In th is way he strove to keep proper morality or 
ethical discipline. On the other hand, we ordinary  beings tend to keep our vows well after we 
first take ordination but then, as time goes by , we become distracted and no longer keep our 
vows so purely. Atisha, who was a holy being, never did this. Ther efore, we should rejoice in 
his purity and try to follow his example by k eeping pure the three vows or three moralities: 
the vows of individual liberation, the bodhisa ttva vows, and the tantra vows. Atisha also 
possessed the three types of vows of individual li beration: the five lay precepts, the thirty-six 
novice vows, and the 253 vows of a fully-ordain e d  m o n k .  H e  a l s o  k e p t  a l l  o f  t h e m  w e l l .  
Whenever we transgress any of our vows, we should confess it immediately.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B1B-2B2B [Atisha’s ] accomplishments in the training in concentration 
1 Common 
His accomplishments in the training of concentration are twofold. Common 
concentration: he had achieved the servicea bility of the mind of calm abiding.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
23 2 Uncommon 
As regards uncommon concentration, he had the extreme stability of the 
generation stage. Furthermore, he comple ted the three or six years of conduct of 
yogic realization discipline.7 
 
There are common and uncommon concentrations . The common concentration is the union 
of calm abiding (samatha) and special insigh t (vipassana), which makes the body and mind 
serviceable. “Common” in this case means commo n to or shared by both sutra and tantra, or 
common to both Buddhists and non-Buddhists. They are common because calm abiding and 
special insight are also practi ced by the saddhus in the Hind u tradition for the purpose of 
achieving higher realizations su ch as clairvoyance. However, their calm abiding and special 
insight are not conjoined with the thought of definite emergence or renunciation.  
 Uncommon in this case refers to the context of tantra. In ta ntra there are the two stages, 
the generation stage and the completion stage. On e must first gain stability in the generation 
stage. In this stage, one carries death into th e path to the truth body, the intermediate state 
into the path to the enjoyment body, and birth into the path to the emanation body. In this 
way death is no longer an ordinary death, the intermediate state is no longer an ordinary 
intermediate state, and birth is no longer an ordinary birth; instead they become special due 
to the power of one’s meditation. When one’s  meditation on the inestimable mansion and 
the deities in it becomes stable, one is able to visualize them as no bigger than a tiny mustard 
seed. In short, the generation stage is the generation of death into the truth body, the 
intermediate state into the enjoyment body, and birth into the emanation body. When one 
does a self-generation or a sadhana and arises as a deity with one face and two arms, this is the 
practice of the generation stage. In the comple tion stage one purifies the channels, winds, and 
drops, whereby one can attain the actual concentration of the completion stage.  
 Atisha also performed three or six years of conduct of yogic realization discipline.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B1B-2B2C His accomplishments in the training of wisdom 
1 Common 
His accomplishments in the training of wisdom has two aspects. The common 
one: he had attained the concentration of special insight that is a union of calm 
abiding and special insight. 
 
2 Uncommon 
The uncommon one: he had attained the sp ecial concentration of the completion 
stage. 
 The common wisdom is from the point of view  of sutra; it refers to the meditative 
stabilization of special insight that is a union of calm abiding and special insight. This is 
common to both sutra and tantra. The unco mmon wisdom of tantra is the special 
concentration of the completion stage. The comp letion stage includes the isolation of body, 
isolation of speech, isolation of mind, metaphor ic clear light, impure illusory body, actual 
                                             
 
7 JN: rig pa brtul zhugs kyi spyod pa  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
24 clear light, and the union of the pure illusory bo dy and actual clear light,  that is, the union of 
the exalted body and exalted mind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B1B-3 The deeds he did for the sake of the teachings, having attained those positive qualities  
A Deeds  in India 
B Deeds in Tibet 
The deeds he did for the sake of the teachings  are of two [types]: his deeds in India 
and his deeds in Tibet. 
2B1B-3A Deeds  in India 
First: At the palace of great enlightenm ent in Bodhgaya he defeated three times 
the proponents of inferior non-Buddhist doctrines8 by means of the Dharma, thus 
maintaining the Buddha’s teachings. El iminating the taints of ignorance,9 
misconception, and doubt also in regard  to the teachings of his own upper and 
lower systems, he spread the teachings, so  that he was regarded as a crown jewel 
beyond partiality by [proponents of] all factions.  
 
This section describes Atisha’s deeds in India. Bodhgaya ( bodhi  meaning “mind”), called Vajra 
Seat ( rdo rje’i gdan ) in Tibetan, is the place where the Buddha attained enlightenment under a 
bodhi tree. It is said that in the evening he destroyed the maras or demons. While the 
Buddha was in meditation, the maras manifested very beautiful girls who danced in front of 
him, trying to disturb his mind by making hi m generate attachment. However, by the power 
of the Buddha’s meditation, they  were transformed into ugly ol d hag who, out of shame, then 
disappeared. The maras then set an army of so ldiers armed with bows and arrows who shot at 
the Buddha. However, when the arrows reached his body they became beautiful flowers that 
could not harm him. In this way he defeated  and destroyed the demons. Then at dawn, he 
achieved enlightenment, the actual clear ligh t, and became a buddha. Presently there is a 
stupa in Bodhgaya behind which is a bodhi tree that is a descendent of  the tree under which 
the Buddha attained enlightenment.  
 Sometimes people come to me and say that demons are disturbing their meditation and 
ask for my help. However, in general it is not that their minds are disturbed by outer demons, 
more often they are disturbed by the inner demons  of the afflictions. It  is these demons that 
we need to destroy. However, it can happen that when we are in particular trying to do good things that there arise interferences caused by external demons.   The Buddhist teachings describes four ty pes of maras or demons: the mara of the 
aggregates, the mara of the afflictions, the mara  of the Lord of Death, and the mara of the 
sons-of-the-gods. The sons-of-the-gods are a type of being included among the six types of gods 
o f  t h e  d e s i r e  r e a l m ,  k n o w n  a s  L o r d  o f  D e s i r e .  T h e y  a r e  s a i d  t o  s h o o t  f i v e  t y p e s  o f  a r r o w s  
related to the energies of attachment, hatred, ig norance, pride, and jealousy. When we are hit 
by one of these arrows, our mind is influenced by  that particular affliction right from the time 
                                             
 
8 JN: mu stegs kyi smra ba ngan pa , the evil Forder s or Tirthikas  
9 JN: ma rtogs , literally ‘non-realization’ 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
25 we wake up in the morning. This is a sign that we have been influenced by the negative energy 
of these beings. 
 Our inner mental afflictions are also consider ed to be a mara; in fact they are the main 
m a r a  o r  d e m o n .  D e a t h  i s  a l s o  c o n s i d e r e d  t o  b e  a  m a r a  b e c a u s e ,  e v e n  t h o u g h  w e  w a n t  t o  
remain alive, when death comes we have no choice but to die. The contaminated body 
aggregate is also considered to be a mara because it harms us due to being the base of many types of sufferings. Because this body needs f ood, clothing, shelter, and so forth, we work 
hard in the service of our body, yet in spite of this our body still becomes sick. Presently there 
are illnesses in the world such as AIDS and cancer  that did not exist in the past or were very 
rare, whereas nowadays they have become very  common. All of these sicknesses are based on 
the body. Thus, the body aggregat e is considered to be a mara because it prevents us from 
practicing Dharma and developing our inner qualities.   When the demon or mara of th e mental afflictions – attachme nt, hatred, ignorance, pride, 
afflicted doubt, wrong view, an d  s o  fo r t h – har m  u s , w e n eed  t o  keep o u r  m i n d  calm  an d 
relaxed. In the past in India there were many  demons, but perhaps nowadays there are even 
more! The Dharma as taught by the Buddha degene rated in India, as did some of the ancient 
Hindu schools such as the Samkya and Vaisheshika. In the past brahmins were careful not to 
eat black foods but I think that th ey now eat them in hiding. Simi larly, all the major religions, 
a l t h o u g h  t h e y  a p p e a r  t o  b e  g o o d ,  h a v e  i n  f a ct degenerated. This is because the time has 
worsened in the sense that our minds have wo rsened, given the fact that we have more 
afflictions such as jealousy and pride.   In short, due to Atisha holding the completely pure doctrine, all the different sects in India respected him as an elder.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B1B-3B Deeds in Tibet 
1 Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring the tradition 
2 Identifying the three causes of excellence in the composition of commentaries  
3 The ability to ascertain the Conqueror’s intentions due to these three causes 
4 The special qualities of his disciples 
2B1B-3B1 Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring the tradition 
Deeds in Tibet: Lha Lama10 {7} and his nephew sent th e two great translators Gya-
tson-seng and Nagtso Tsultrim Gyalwa to India one after the other. As they took 
great pains again and again to invite [Atish a], he came to Upper Ngari during [the 
reign of] Jangchub O11 and was requested to purify the Buddha’s teachings. 
Thereupon, he spread the teachings by composing the Lamp on the Path to 
Enlightenment , a text bringing together all the points of sutra and tantra and 
condensing them into applicable stages,12 as well as other texts. Thus, he spent 
three years in Ngari, nine years in Nyetha ng, and five years elsewhere in Tsang and 
Central Tibet teaching the fortunate all th e scriptures and instructions of sutra 
and tantra without exception. Thus, he rest ored the tradition of teachings that had 
                                              
10 King of Guge 
11 The nephew of Lha Lama 
12 JN: nyams su len pa’i rim pa , stages of practice  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
26 declined, made those that remained flourish, corrected13 those that had been 
soiled by the errors of misconception, en suring that the precious teachings were 
freed from all flaws. 
 
Part of the area of Ngari is now included in La dhak, India. In the past there lived in Ngari the 
son of a king called Lha La ma Yeshe O and his nephew Lh a Lama Jangchub O. It is 
recounted that Lha Lama Yeshe O set out to India to invite Atisha to come to Tibet but that 
at the border he was ca ught and imprisoned, due to which he could not complete his mission. 
Jangchub O made attempts to get him freed from  prison but the minister of the area agreed 
to free him only if Jangchub O were to bring him an amount of gold equal in size to the body of Yeshe O. Through a window in the pris on cell, Jangchub O told Yeshe O what the 
minister had agreed to, and told him that he had been able to find gold equal in size to Yeshe 
O’s body minus the size of his head. He reques ted Yeshe O to be patient while he found the 
rest and to continue to live. However, Yeshe O replied that he had no problem giving up his 
body for the Dharma, and asked Jangchub O to no t give the minister the gold but instead to 
go to India and invite Atis ha, while offering him the gold, to come to Tibet.  
 Jangchub O did this and Atisha’s abbot, Ra tnakara, upon receiving instructions from a 
naturally-occurring image of Tara on the Bodhga ya stupa to send Atisha to Tibet, granted 
Atisha permission to go to Tibet for not mo re than three years. Atisha brought the two 
translators Gya-tson-seng and Nagtso Tsultrim Gyalwa to the Ngari area of Tibet where he 
gave teachings and composed the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment . He also wrote a version of 
this text in Sanskrit and sent it back to his teacher, Ratnakara. When  Ratnakara read it, he 
thought if was extremely useful , being short and precise yet co ntaining all the practices of 
sutra and tantra without omission. He realized th at if he had not permitted Atisha to go to 
Tibet, Atisha would never have written this text. He then requested Atisha to write a 
commentary on the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment  and granted him permission to stay as 
long as he wanted in Tibet. Due to this, Atisha remained in  the Ngari area of upper Tibet 
(Toling) for three years, after which he went to Nyethang in Central Tibet. He liked this place 
very much and built a monastery called Nyetha ng Dewachen (Nyethang Sukavati Monastery). 
Beside it, he built a Tara temple and then staye d there for nine years. He also visited other 
places in Tibet over a five-year period. Ther efore, he remained in Tibet for a total of 
seventeen years before passing away, I think in Nyethang. His body was cremated and his ashes were put in a vase and kept in his mo nastery in Nyethang. When the Chinese invaded 
that area, they found the vase on which was in scribed Atisha’s name and place of origin due 
to which they returned the vase to Bangladesh in India. In Tibet there still remain small clay 
tsa-tsas (relieves of deities) and clay stupas made by Atisha. When I visited his monastery, I 
asked an old ex-monk who was taking care of the monastery to give some to me. He gave 
them to me but advised me to keep them hi dden as otherwise the Chinese military could 
cause problems. Atisha had made 100,000 tsa-tsas , which had been placed in a stupa that was 
later destroyed by the Chinese.   Atisha practiced both sutra and tantra. In  Tibet he restored the teachings that had 
degenerated due to differing ideas and wrong conceptions. In this way Atisha made the Buddha’s doctrine once again pure in Tibet.  
                                             
 
13 JN: legs par bsal , excellently clarified 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
27  Atisha had many disciples in Tibet but the main or best among them was Drom Tonpa, a 
lay vow-holder (upasika), who is said to have  been a manifestation of Avalokiteshvara. His 
appearance was that of an extremely poor be ggar and it is recounted that one day while 
traveling he met a rich man who asked him wher e he was going. When he said that he was 
going to a particular monastery, the rich man,  who was going to the sa me place, gave him a 
pair of shoes to carry for him. When they arri ved near the monastery, there were many monks 
waiting, playing music and holding banners. The rich man asked Drom Tonpa what was 
happening and Drom Tonpa told him that they were waiting for him! The rich man was very 
ashamed that he had made Drom Tonpa carr y his shoes and ran off without his shoes! 
 Drom Tonpa’s incarnation is Reting Rinpoche, who is said to be a manifestation of Four-
Arm Avalokiteshvara (Tib. Chenrezig) whereas Hi s Holiness the Dalai Lama is said to be a 
manifestation of Thousand-Arm Avalokiteshvara.  Although these aspects of Avalokiteshvara 
are different, the qualities of their mind is the same. A previous incarnation of Reting 
Rinpoche, Ngawang Choden, was a well-known, l ay lama of the Nyingma tradition who was a 
teacher of the V Dalai Lama, who wore his long hair tied  up at the back. One day when 
traveling with the V Dalai Lama, the Dalai Lama told him it would be better to cut off his hair. From this, he understood that in his next life he should take the aspect of a monk. In f a c t ,  i n  h i s  n e x t  l i f e  h e  b e c a m e  a  m o n k  a n d entered the Samlo Kangtsen (Geshe Tenzin 
Tenphel’s kangtsen) of Sera Je Monastery an d became the Ganden throne-holder and the 
tutor of the VII Dalai Lama.  
 His next incarnation, Reting Trichen Tenp a Rabgye was well known as he acted as the 
regent of Tibet. It is recounted that when th e XIII Dalai Lama went to  Reting Monastery with 
him by car, a lot of dust flew up into the air due to which he earned the nickname Tala Lung 
Karpo (White Ashes Blowing in the Wind). When the XIII Dalai Lama arrived at the 
monastery, he instructed the monks to set out two thrones of similar height and width and to 
offer himself and the regent a long life puja.  During the puja, the XIII Dalai Lama suddenly 
stood up and prostrated in front of Reting Ri npoche. He offered a mandala to him and asked 
him to act as his regent or substitute when he passed away. Reting Rinpoche agreed to do 
this. Later on, as the regent of Tibet, he se t out to find the XIV Dalai Lama. He visited 
Lhamo Lha Tso, a lake related to the female protector Palden Lhamo,  in which he had a 
vision of a house in Amdo and the first letters of the father’s and moth er’s names. When he 
returned to Lhasa, he found that in the mean time some members of the Tibetan government 
had recognized the son of the XIII Dalai Lama ’s brother as the incarnation of XIII Dalai 
L a m a .  T h e  n e x t  d a y  t h e y  w e r e  t o  o f f e r  t h i s  c h i l d  k a t a s  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  T o  s t o p  t h i s  f r o m  
happening, Reting Rinpoche wrote all Tibetan go vernment workers telling them to come to a 
meeting the next day at 9:00 AM and saying that if they did not come they would lose their 
positions. Due to this, no one went to the home  of XIII Dalai Lama’s brother, who waited in 
vain with his son for their arrival. Reting Ri npoche then sent some lamas together with 
members of the Tibetan government in search of  the XIII Dalai Lama’s incarnation to Amdo, 
some to Tsang, some to the south, and some to Kham. In this way Keutsang Rinpoche and 
his party arrived in Amdo. When they were abou t to go to the house that Reting Rinpoche 
had seen in the lake, Keutsang Rinpoche dre ssed himself as a servant, whereas his servant 
dressed himself in very fine clot hes. When they arrived at the house, a young boy, only four 
or five years old, immediately embraced Keutsang Rinpoche, greatly surprising this lama. The search party had a mala, bell, damaru, and othe r items that had belonged to the previous 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
28 Dalai Lama together with similar items that ha d not belonged to him. They set them all out 
on a table, whereupon the young body immediatel y took up all those that had belonged to the 
XIII Dalai Lama. Keutsang Rinpoche was comple tely convinced that the young boy was the 
XIV Dalai Lama. Before he could be taken to Lhasa, the Chinese aske d that the child be 
brought to them and asked that a payment of go ld and so forth be made to them in order 
that they grant permission to allow him to travel  to Lhasa. This was done and then, by horse, 
he was slowly taken to Lhasa. When they arrived in Ngagchu, near where my family lived, I 
went to meet him. I remember he was wearing a yellow hat. In this way, I met the Dalai Lama 
for the first time when I was about seven or eight years old. Everyone there was extremely 
happy to see the incarnation of the Dalai La ma, whom the Tibetans call Gyelwa Rinpoche 
(Precious Conqueror). Thus, mainly due to Re ting Rinpoche the incarnation of the XIII 
Dalai Lama was found.  
 In short, Drom Tonpa is the manifestat ion of Four-Armed Avalokiteshvara and his 
incarnation is called Reting Rinpoche. Nowadays  there are many political problems in Tibet 
in relation to him, about which books have  been written by some Western authors.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B1B-3B2 Identifying the three causes of excellence in the composition of commentaries 
There are three causes of excellence in the composition of a text clarifying the 
Muni’s intentions: (1) being learned in th e five areas of knowledge, (2) having 
received instructions for the applicatio n of their meaning, which transmit the 
i n s t r u c t i o n s  o f  t h e  p e r f e c t l y  c o m p l e t e  B u d d h a  i n  a n  u n b r o k e n  l i n e  o f  e x a l t e d  
[masters], and (3) having received the perm ission to teach through the vision of a 
protector deity.14 If a text can be composed with any one of these [causes of 
excellence], it will turn out greatly excell ent if all three are complete. This Great 
Master, [Atisha,] possessed all three. 
 Atisha possessed all three qualities needed to co mpose a text or scripture clarifying the Muni’s 
intentions. First of all he was learned in the five outer sciences or areas of knowledge – 
linguistics ( sgra rig pa ), medicine ( gso ba rig pa ), dialectics ( gtan tshig rig pa ), crafts ( bzo rig pa ), 
and valid cognition ( tshad ma rig pa ). He was also learned in the five inner sciences – the five 
texts studied in monasteries – Perfection ( Ornament for Clear Realizations, Abhisamayalamkara ), 
Supplement to the Middle Way  (Madhyamakavatara ), Treasury of Manifest Dharma  
(Abhidharmakosha ), Compendium of Valid Cognition  (Pramanavarttikakarika ), and Discipline 
(Vinaya ). Atisha wrote the lam-rim text Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment  and other texts. He 
also had experience of putting the instructions into practice and could teach them to others. 
He had received the uninterrupted lineage of these teachings passed down from Buddha 
Shakyamuni down through other holy beings to the present day. Holy beings give the oral 
transmission and explanation based on their ex perience. He had also received permission 
from his meditational deity, in this case Tara , to write the text. Ther efore, he had all three 
qualities complete.   
                                             
 
14 JN: yi dam gyi lha , meditational deity  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
29 Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B1B-3B3 The ability to ascertain th e Conqueror’s intentions due to [Atisha] possessing these three causes  
A The care of protector deities 
As for being cared for by the protector deities it says in the Praise : 
 
Of the glorious Hevajra, 
of the King of Array of Samayas, of heroic Lokeshvara, noble, venerable Tara, and so forth  you had visions and permissions, therefore, in dreams and directly 
you perpetually heard teachings
15 
both the ones profound and vast. 
 
Atisha received visions of Hevajra; the King of  Array of Samayas, a deity similar in aspect to 
Buddha Shakyamuni (the empowerment of which is included in the Rinchung Gyatsa ); heroic 
Lokeshvara (Avalokiteshvara);  and noble, venerable Tara. Jo mo , translated here as “noble,” is 
a title used to for nuns in some parts of Tibet.  Tara is the manifestation in the aspect of a 
deity of the enlightened activities of all th e buddhas. In other words, all the enlightened 
activities of all the buddhas of th e three times, all those that exist, are revealed in the aspect of 
a deity called “Tara.” There are many aspects of Ta ra, such as the twenty-one Taras. There is a 
prayer to Tara that says:  
Deity whom I have practiced in previous lives,  Enlightened activity of all the buddhas of the three times,  
Green, one-faced, two-armed, swift pacifier;  Mother who holds an utpa la, I prostrate to you. 
 Since every virtuous action that is created by anyo ne is called an “enlightened activity,” we are 
close to Tara who is the enlightened activity of  all the buddhas of the three times. For this 
reason, if we pray to her and ask her to help us , we will easily receive blessings from her and 
thereby be able to solve our problems. The story of  Tara is set out in a text by Taranatha that 
has been translated into English ( Origin of Tara Tantra , Library of Tibetan Works and 
Archives, Dharamsala, 1995). If you read this, yo u will understand things more clearly. There 
is a story related to her that happened more recently in a Theravadin monastery in south 
India. In this monastery there were many yo ung monks. Each night one disappeared due to 
having been captured and eaten by demons. Th e monks did not know what to do until one 
young monk reminded the others that the Maha yanists have a deity called Tara who protects 
them. He suggested that maybe they should ta ke refuge in her and recite her mantra. The 
other monks agreed to do this, even though th e practice came from the Mahayana tantras. 
They set an image of Tara in their temple and began to prayed to her. Due to this, the 
                                             
 
15 JN: dam chos , the holy Dharma 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
30 interferers went away and no other monks disa ppeared. This story shows that Tara has the 
power to help us.  
 
In short, whatever happens we should keep our mind quiet and relaxed, and not worry. Try 
to meditate a little bit. Do breathing meditation  while exhaling negative energy and inhaling 
all the positive energy of all the holy bein gs in the universe. Imagine that one becomes 
stronger, more relaxed, and more happy . Try to do this and do not worry!  
 
Wednesday afternoon, 19 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim:   
B How [Atisha’s ] lineage is uninterrupted 
[Atisha] held numerous lineages of master s such as the two lineages of the shared 
vehicle and of the great vehicle, with regard to which there are the two – the 
perfection and secret mantra [vehicles]. In the perfection vehicle he held three 
lineages: the lineages of the view and of conduct, the latte r of which has the 
lineage from Maitreya and the lineage from Manjugosha. In the secret mantra he 
had received five types of transmission16 as well as numerous lineages such as the 
lineage of teaching systems,17 the lineage of blessings, and the lineage of various 
instructions. The gurus from whom he hear d [instructions] directly are mentioned 
in the Praise : 
 
The gurus you always relied on were 
Shintipa, Serlingpa,  Bhadrabodhi, Jñanashri – 
many with high accomplishments. 
In particular you held the profound and vast instructions that were passed on from one to another, [all the way] from Nagarjuna. 
 
It is well known that he had twelve gu rus who had attained high accomplishments 
as well as many others. 
 
There is a lineage common to the Hinayana an d Mahayana. The lineage of the Mahayana has 
two: the perfection vehicle and the vajra vehicle.  In the perfection vehicle there is also two: 
the lineage of the view and the lineage of the conduct or the lineage of  the vast. One lineage 
was passed on from Buddha Shakyamuni to Mait reya, to Asanga, to Vasubandhu, to Arya 
Vimuktisena, and so forth. The other was pa ssed from Buddha Shakyamuni to Manjushri and 
so forth. In the secret mantra lineage there are fi ve lineages. There is also the lineage of tenets, 
the lineage of blessings, and the lineage of instructions.  
                                             
 
16 JN: brgyud pa lugs lnga , could also be translated as five lineage traditions 
17 JN: grub mtha’ , tenets 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
31  Atisha listened to teachings from many different gurus including Shintipa, Serlingpa, 
Bhadrabodhi, Jñanashri. Shintipa was also know n by the Sanskrit name  Ratnakara (Source of 
Jewels). Serlingpa, who was from Indonesia, is also known as Dharmakirti. Atisha also 
received teachings from Bhadrabodhi (Good En lightenment) and from Jñanashri (Glorious 
Wisdom). These lamas had attained the common and uncommon attainments (high 
accomplishment). Atisha also received th e special lineage that passed from Buddha 
Shakyamuni to Manjushri, to Nagarjuna, an d then to Buddhapalita and so forth. As 
Nagarjuna held the lineages of both the vast an d profound, Atisha also received teachings on 
the vast and profound. For example, Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom  is mainly on the 
profound, that is, on the subject of emptiness, his Precious Rosary contains both the profound 
and vast, and in other texts he mainly focuses on the vast – the five path s, the six perfections, 
and the ten grounds. It is renowned that Atisha  had twelve teachers with high attainments.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
C The fact that he was learned in the five areas of knowledge 
The fact that he was learned in the five  areas of knowledge has [already] been 
explained. For all these reasons this mast er was able to ascertain the Conqueror’s 
intentions skillfully. 
 
That Atisha was learned in the five sciences  or areas of knowledge was explained before. 
These five: linguistics, medicine, dialectics, craf ts, and valid cognition. Dialectics or logic 
involves the application of reasonings such as “H e is angry because his face is red” or “He is 
happy because he is smiling.” Likewise, it invo lves the deduction that someone possesses great 
compassion because of the person’s external as pect, that fire exists because there is the 
presence of smoke, and so fort h. For example, from someone’s external expression it can be 
deduced that he or she is happy, unhappy, nervous, and so forth.  
 Atisha had also studied the inner sciences, for example, the Vinaya , which explains how to 
subdue or discipline the mind. He had also studied the Supplement to the Middle Way , which 
teaches the middle way free from the extremes of permanence and annihilation. This text 
eliminates the extreme of permanence by the reasoning that ph enomena are empty of 
inherent existence because they are dependent- arisings and also eliminates the extreme of 
annihilation. This text also teaches that compassi on is like a mother because just as a mother 
gives birth to a child, compassion gives birth to the mind of enlighte nment from which come 
buddhas and bodhisattvas. We need to develop love and compassion for all sentient beings 
beginning with our friends, relatives, and the pe ople around us and then extending it to all 
sentient beings.  
 In addition, Atisha studied the Ornament for Clear Realizations  in which, for example, the 
mind generation (mind of enlightenment) is di vided into aspirational mind generation and 
engaging mind generation. It shows the different ways in which this mind can be generated by 
means of twenty-two analogies. For example, th e mind generation like the earth means that 
just as when a seed is sown in good earth it wi ll grow into a healthy plant, so to when this 
mind exists all other qualities will grow. This mind generation exists from the small level of 
the path of accumulation on up ward. Then the mind generation like refined gold is so-called 
b e c a u s e  j u s t  a s  g o l d c a n  b e  m a de  i n t o  r i n g s ,  e a r r i n g s ,  n e c k l a c e s ,  c u p s ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h  b u t  i t s  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
32 nature does not change and always remains gold , so too does this mind generation continue 
until enlightenment is attained without chan ging due to conditions. In this way, the 
Ornament for Clear Realizations  sets out the vast teachings.  
 Due to having studied these five fields of kn owledge, Atisha was able to understand all the 
intentions of the Buddha’s teachings. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B1B-3B4 The special qualities of his disciples 
A His disciples in India, Ngari and Tibet 
{9} The master who was like this had an in credible number of disciples in India, 
Kashmir, Oddiyana, Nepal, and Tibet, ho wever, the main ones were four great 
scholars in India who matched the master  himself in their knowledge: Pitopa, 
Dharma-akaramati, Madhyasinha, and Ksitig arbha. Some also add Mitraguhya as 
the fifth. In Ngari there were the great translators Rinchen Sangpo and Nagtso as 
well as the ordained King Jangchup O18; in the province of Tsang there were 
Gargewa and Gokugpa Lhaytsay; in Lhod rak there were Chagpa Trichog and 
Gewa Kyong; in Kham there were Naljorpa Chenpo, Gonpawa, Sherab Dorje and 
Chadar Tonpa; and in Central Tibet there were the three, Khu, Ngog, and Drom.  
 
India is called Gyakar ( rgya gar ) in Tibetan, perhaps because Indians generally wear white 
clothes, whereas when a member of the family dies they wear black to show they are in 
mourning. In India there were six great cities in  the past, together they were referred to as 
Gyakar. China is called Gyanag perhaps becaus e the Chinese generally wore black or blue 
clothes, whereas when a member of the family di es they wear white. This is the explanation 
that Tibetans commonly give regarding these two names.  
 Atisha had many disciples in India, Kashmir, Oddiyana (part of  Orissa), Nepal, and Tibet. 
However, his four main disciples were Pitopa, Dharma-akaramati, Madhyasinha, and 
Ksitigarbha. Dharma-akaramati means “Dharm a coming to the mind,” Madhyasinha means 
“middle way lion,” and Ksitigarbha means “essenc e of the earth.” In addition, Atisha had a 
fifth disciple called Mitraguhya.   Ngari is in the western part of Tibet wher e Mount Kailash is found. In Ngari Atisha’s 
disciples included the great translators Rinche n Sangpo and Nagtso, who invited Atisha to 
Tibet, and King Jangchub O, who was respon sible for Atisha coming to Tibet. Rinchen 
Sangpo was a famous translator of the 11
th century who translated many scriptures into a 
more modern Tibetan. His present incarnation is  no longer a monk and as a lay person he 
now works for the Tibetan gove rnment in Delhi. Jangchup O’s incarnation is known as 
Tatsun Rinpoche who is presently living in Se ra Me Monastery. His previous incarnation, 
who lived till he was 85 or 90 years old, gave  many empowerments during his lifetime. When 
the Chinese invaded Tibet, they put him in prison but a Nepalese  family offered to take care 
of him and the Nepalese government intervened  and asked that he be given to them. The 
Chinese agreed and the Nepalese family took ca re of him until he died. His next incarnation 
was then reborn in this family.  
                                              
18 JN: lha bla ma byang chub ‘od , Lha Lama Jangchub O 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
33  Naljorpa Chenpo was a great yogi. Gonpawa,  Sherab Dorje and Chadar Tonpa were all 
from the area of Pembo in Tibet. In this area there where there are many monasteries, 
especially Kadampa monasteries, where the mo nks were renowned for keeping such pure 
vows that they did not even look at a woman’ s face. Later on someth ing happened, perhaps 
karma, and all the Kadampa monasteries in Pembo became nunneries with good nuns! 
Perhaps this was because th e monks had not allowed any woman to even visit their 
monasteries.  
 Atisha’s three main disciples in Central Tibet were Khuton, Ngog or Dog, and Drom 
Tonpa.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
B The foremost disciple 
Again, among these it was the great lineage holder Drom Tonpa Gyelway 
Chungnay who had been prophesied by Tara and further spread the exalted 
activities of the master.  This was a summary description of the au thor’s greatness. You should come to 
understand it more extensively in  the great biographical texts.  
 Drom Tonpa spread the enlightened activities  of Atisha. He was ca lled Gyelway Chungnay 
(Source of Conquerors).   This is a short explanation of the greatn ess of the author, Atisha. A more extensive 
explanation is found in the great biographical texts, for example, in the text composed by 
Yongdzin Tsechog Ling Yeshe Gyal tsen in the context of the li neage lamas of the lam-rim.  
 Having set out the greatness of Atisha, the au thor, in order to gene rate respect for the 
teachings next their greatness is set out.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
Showing the greatness of the teachings 
for the sake of generating respect for the instructions 
2B2 Showing the greatness of the teachings 
A Identifying the teachings 
B Presentation [of this text] as the three: complete, easily applicable, and a particularly noble system C Presentation of the four greatnesses 
2B2A Identifying the teachings 
Second: As for the teachings, the source text of the present instructions is the 
Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment . 
2B2B Presentation [of this text] as the three: complete, easily applicable, and a particularly noble system 
Although Jowo [Atisha] composed numerous texts, the Lamp on the Path to 
Enlightenment  is their perfect completion, like a root. As it indicates all the points 
of both sutra and tantra in summary fashion,  it is complete in terms of content. As 
it makes the gradual taming of the mind it s main topic, it is easy to put into 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
34 practice. As it is ornamented by the inst ructions of the two masters {10} who were 
skilled in the systems of the two trail-blazers19, it is a particularly noble system 
compared to others.  
 
The Dharma of which the grea tness is shown here is the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment . 
Atisha composed this text that contains the th oroughly complete path of the small, middling, 
and great beings and in the end also sets out the subject of tantra. With respect to inferior or 
small beings, the root that is set out at the beginning is the relian ce on a teacher (guru 
devotion). Then we need to recognize that pr esently we have a precious human rebirth with 
the eighteen qualities but that in the future it  will be lost. This body is better than a wish-
fulfilling jewel because, even though such a jewel can give us as much wealth as we want, it 
cannot bring about inner realizations or a good rebirth in the next life. Only the precious 
human rebirth, endowed with an intelligent mind , that we have right now can fulfill our aim, 
whether small, middle, or great. The small aim i s  t o  t a k e  i n  o u r  n e x t  l i f e  a  g o o d  h u m a n  
rebirth possessing all necessary conditions such as a health body with intact sense powers, 
wealth, and so forth. A person with this aim has the intention to practice the Dharma in 
order to attain realizations through having unde rstood that it is more important to develop 
one’s good qualities rather than accumulate wealth.   The middle aim is to abandon the afflictions an d thereby attain the state of a foe-destroyer, 
whereby one will no longer be reborn in cyclic existence by the force of actions and afflictions. 
Instead one will be completely free from all sufferings and problems such as loneliness. One’s mind will be continually happy and always in meditation.   The great aim is to achieve buddhahood in  order to be able to emanate different 
emanations so as to be of help and benefit to other sentient beings. For example, if they need a bridge one will be able to manifest a bridge to enable them to cross to the other side of river, one will be able to manifest a ship in or der that they can travel, and so forth. Whatever 
is needed, a buddha can emanate. In the past  the Buddha emanated many seemingly strange 
things, but this was done only in order to be nefit other sentient beings. If they would not 
have been of benefit, he would not have ma nifested such things. Since a buddha can help 
s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  i n  d i f f e r e n t  w a y s ,  b y  a t t a i n i n g  b u d d h a h o o d  o n e  w i l l  b e  a b l e  t o  b e n e f i t  t h e  infinite sentient beings in the infinite worlds. One will be able to take an emanation body in 
order to help them. On the other hand, if it is  not possible to benefit particular beings in a 
particular place, a buddha will not emanate there because a buddha knows the dispositions 
and so forth of sentient beings.   Thus, there are the three paths of the three beings that bring three different results. In 
general this covers the sutra way. In tantra th ere are four classes: action tantra, performance 
tantra, yoga tantra, and highest yoga tantra. Th ese tantras involve different practices by means 
of which one can attain enlightenment.  
 In short, in this context th e Dharma, or the scripture contai ning these instructions, refers 
to the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment . We should try to read this  text which is very short, 
yet because it is precise and contains all the subject matter of sutra and tantra in a concise 
way, it is very precious. It is easy to understand in that one does not need to read many other texts in order to understand it. Since it cond enses the important points of all the sutra and 
                                             
 
19 i.e., Nagarjuna and Asanga 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
35 tantra teachings, it is complete. It is easy to  put it into practice and mainly enables us to 
subdue our mind. Our mind is like a crazy elephant  that is difficult to tame, but just as a crazy 
elephant can be tamed so too can our mind be  tamed through knowing what to do and what 
not to do.  
 Since the instructions are complete, this text  is like an ornament for other teachings or 
instructions. Therefore, it is said to  be an excellent and special text.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B2C Presentation of [this text ] as possessing the four greatnesses 
1 The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory 
2 The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings coming into view as useful instructions 
3 The greatness of allowing you easily to find the meaning intended by the Buddha 
4 The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself 
2B2C-1 The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory 
The greatness of the instructions of this text  has four [aspects]. The first of these is 
the greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory. 
A Identifying the teachings 
Everything the Conqueror said. 
 
Due to the instructions of this text, the doctrine or teachings ( bstan pa ) are realized as being 
without contradiction. This is because all th e Buddha’s teachings were given for the same 
purpose, that of subduing the minds of sentie nt beings, in particular subduing the minds of 
human beings. In other words, the Buddha gave  many different teachings – 101 volumes in 
Tibetan – for the one purpose of benefiting sentient beings through enabling them to 
eliminate the mental afflictions and achieve inne r happiness. For this reason, the teachings of 
the Buddha are not contradictory. However, from the point of view of tenets, different words 
were used due to which there may appear to be  contradictions. But in the end they are not 
contradictory as they were all given as instruct ions in order to benefit sentient beings with 
different mentalities so that they can elim inate obscurations and suffering and achieve 
happiness. Therefore, one should  not think that they are cont radictory, although the words 
may at times appear to contradictory. For example, the Buddha once said, “You who are a 
good son, father and mother are objects to be killed.” However, he said this to someone who 
was very depressed and filled with regret for ha ving killed his father. Due to what the Buddha 
said, his sadness was eliminated. He repeated this  line over and over again, contemplating its 
meaning. Later, he came to understand that  “father” and “mother” did not refer to the 
parents who had given birth to him but rather to the father who is the afflictions and the 
mother who is contaminated actions. These two are to be eliminated or abandoned, whereby 
one becomes pure. The Buddha said these seemingly unusual words, but his main purpose 
was that it be an instruction for this particular  person. Similarly, when we are sick a doctor 
may say not to eat meat or fatty foods but at an other time he may advise us to eat meat and 
fatty foods. There is a purpose to this, even th ough these two different pieces of advice may 
appear to be contradictory. The purpose is that in the case of certain sicknesses meat or fatty 
foods can make one even more sick, whereas when  one’s body is weak and the winds in one’s 
body are disturbed it is beneficial to one’s health to eat meat and fatty foods.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
36  
Thursday morning, 20 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim:   
B How all the teachings are recognized as non-contradictory 
They all come to be understood as one person’s path to buddhahood. That is to 
say some are primary points of the path, others are appropriate secondary points. 
 
Some of Buddha Shakyamuni’s teachings set out th e practice the main pa ths, whereas others 
set out the branches of the path . Although they have different subjects, the teachings are not 
contradictory. They were all given for the sa me purpose, that of subduing the different 
disciples.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
C How it is demonstrated through scripture and logic that it would be contradictory not to accept this 
In this regard, it is the bodhisattva’s wish  to work for the welfare of the world. For 
t h a t  p u r p o s e ,  i t  i s  a l s o  n e c e s s a r y  t o  care for all three types of disciples20 and 
therefore train in their respective paths.  This is because it is explained by 
Venerable Maitreya that the knower of path s of the three vehicles constitutes the 
means of realizing the bodhisattvas’ goals. 
 
The Buddha’s teachings are to benefit sent ient beings. There are three main lineage-
possessors: those who possess the lineage of hearer s, those who possess the lineage of solitary 
realizers, and those who possess the lineage of bodh isattvas. In order to take care of them, the 
Buddha gave different teachings. For example, for the hearers, selflessness refers to the lack of 
self-supporting substantial existence. This is their main object of meditation by means of 
which they abandon the afflictions. Another type  of selflessness is the non-duality of object 
and object-possessor (subject), that is, the empt iness of their being different entities. This 
assertion says that the object, for example, a form, and the object-possessor, the consciousness 
cognizing the form, are one enti ty; they are not different enti ties. Thus, they are empty of 
existing dually. This is the main object of medi tation of solitary realizers by means of which 
they abandon the coarse objects of knowledge.  For bodhisattvas all phenomena are empty of 
true existence, this selflessness or emptiness is their main object of meditation. By meditating 
on it, they abandon the obscurations to knowle dge. For this reason, the Buddha taught these 
three paths.  
 In the Ornament for Clear Realizations  three knowers – a knower of bases, a knower of paths, 
and a knower of all aspects – are set out. The verse of homage in this text says: 
 
By the knower of all, hearers seeking pacification are led to peace; By the knower of paths, those benefiting mi grating beings accomplish the welfare of the 
world; 
By the perfect possession of it, the subduers  teach the varieties possessing all aspects; 
                                             
 
20 JN: rigs chan sum ga , all three lineage-possessors 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
37 To these mothers of the buddh as, together with the host of  hearers and bodhisattvas – 
homage. 
 
For those who are seeking solitary  peace, the pacification of al l sufferings, the Buddha taught 
the path of a knower of all, also called a know er of bases, which realizes that the sixteen 
attributes of the four noble truths are empt y of self-supporting substantial existence.  
 Here the text says “the world,” referring to sentient beings. The Budd ha taught the knower 
of paths so that bodhisattvas would medita te on the emptiness of objects and object-
possessors being different substances so that th e y  w o u l d  b e  a b l e  t o  t a k e  c a r e  o f  s o l i t a r y  
realizers. The Buddha taught all phenomena as being empty of true existence for the sake of 
bodhisattvas. In short, Maitreya in his Ornament for Clear Realizations  says that a bodhisattva 
has to know all three paths in order to be able  to take care of the followers of the three 
vehicles.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
D Establishing that the teachings are non-contradictory 
In the Mahayana path there is the co mmon and the uncommon. The former are 
those that originate from the Hinayana coll ection of scriptures, except for some 
peculiarities that are not common to do with  the thought of aspiring to individual 
liberation21 and the like and to do with the pres cribed rules. Apart from that, it is 
not that faults are partially ceased and qu alities are partially completed in perfectly 
complete buddhahood, but rather all kinds of faults have been eliminated and all 
types of good qualities have been comple ted. Consequently, as the Mahayana that 
achieves this also brings about the cessation  of all faults and the development of all 
good qualities, the path of the Mahayana comprises all the various aspects of the 
good qualities of abandonment and realization of all other vehicles. {11} That is why the sections of the Mahayana pa th, which brings about buddhahood, 
comprise all the Buddha’s teachings, for th ere is no utterance of the Muni that 
does not cause the cessation of some fa ult or the development of some good 
quality, and because it is not the case that  all of this is not brought about by the 
Mahayana. 
 
All the Buddha’s teachings are established to not be contradictory because the Mahayana 
contains both a common and an uncommon path. The commo n path is that which is 
common to or shared by both the Hinayan a and Mahayana. The Hinayana also has a 
common and an uncommon path. The uncommon Hinayana path is the wish to achieve 
peace or liberation for oneself alone. It is uncommon because Mahayanists do not aspire to 
achieve liberation for themselves alone. In othe r words, because a bodhis attva never thinks to 
do this, it is uncommon or unique to Hin ayanists. A common Hinayana path, on the other 
hand, is the realization of the four noble trut hs and their sixteen attributes because this 
realization is common to both the Hinayana an d Mahayana. The four noble truths are true 
sufferings, true origins, true paths, and true ce ssations, each of which has four attributes. For 
                                             
 
21 JN: rang gcig bu zhi bde don gnyer , aspiring for one’s own peace and happiness alone 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
38 example, true sufferings have the four attribut es of being impermanent, suffering, empty, and 
selfless. Impermanence is further divided in to the coarse and subtle. We see coarse 
impermanence in our everyday life, for example, a broken cup. It is coarse because we directly 
s ee t he cha n ge fro m  an  un bro ken  t o  a broken  cup. Si m ilarly, w e can  direct ly s ee s o m eo n e  
who was alive and then died, such as our parents,  friends, and so forth. Subtle impermanence 
refers to momentarily changing. For example, during one day of twenty-four hours, in each short instant there is a change in the body and mind. The duration of a fingersnap is divided 
into 65 parts, each of these parts is called ‘subtle impermanence.’  There are different types of suffering: the su ffering of suffering, suffering of change, and 
pervasive suffering. The suffering of suffering re fers to, for example, the pains in our body 
which are the nature of suffering – a toothache, headache, and so forth.  
 The suffering of change is, for example, when  we eat an exaggerated amount of delicious 
food it is followed by a stomach ache. Orig inally we experienced happiness and then the 
experience changed into suffering. Also when we go to the beach at first there is the pleasure 
of the warmth of the hot sun but soon it turns to a feeling of burning and pain. Also we see in relationships that at the beginning a couple is very happy and enjoy being with each other. 
Then gradually they begin to argue and to fi ght, and then they eventually the end up 
separating due to both of them having become unhappy. Cyclic existence is like this; what is 
originally happiness eventually changes into suffering. This is the suffering of change. 
 Pervasive suffering means that in a nation, fo r example, everyone – from the person in the 
highest position, the presiden t, down to the lowest, a beggar who sleeps on the road – 
experiences suffering. From the point of view of our world, all people ex perience suffering. In 
other words, we are pervaded by suffering. Alternatively, it can be said that pervasive suffering means that from the crown of our head down to the soles of our feet there is the experience 
suffering if we are, for example, pricked with a thorn. Our entire body is pervaded by pain. The cause of this is the afflic tions, therefore we need to abandon them by applying their 
antidotes. This is not easy. If we  have a thorn in our finger we can pull it out, but we cannot 
do this with the afflictions. While we can wash  dirt away with soap and water, the afflictions 
cannot be washed away like this. Nor can th e Buddha transfer his realizations to us. 
Therefore, in order to eliminate the afflictions we need to apply their antidotes. By doing so, 
our inner qualities will grow and we wi ll become a buddha or a holy being.  
 A buddha is not one who has not yet abandoned sl ight faults or has not yet attained slight 
qualities, rather he has abandoned all faults and completed all the qualities of body, speech, 
and mind that exist. We should develop the wish to achieve this  state of having abandoned all 
faults and achieved all qualities. The Mahayana  teachings have the ability to eliminate all 
faults and to generate all good qualities in ou r continuum. While hearers and solitary realizers 
have abandoned some objects of abandonment,  they have not abandoned all faults and 
gained all good qualities. Because all good qu alities are included in  the Mahayana, it is 
supreme. For this reason, we need to study and practice the Mahayana. However, as the 
Hinayana teachings also have branches that are to be practiced by Mahayanists, we need to 
study the scriptures of hearers and solitary realizer s as well as those of bo dhisattvas, that is, we 
need to study both the scriptures of the Hinayana and Mahayana. Even one word of the 
Buddha’s teachings can eliminate some faults and can bring about the achievement of some 
qualities. In other words, there are no teachi ngs given by the Buddha that do not eliminate 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
39 some faults or bring about some qualities. Even  a single word can do this. Therefore, these 
teachings are excellent and not contradictory.  
 A Thub pa  in Tibetan or Muni  in Sanskrit is one who is able to destroy the non-virtues of 
body, speech, and mind. Such a person is also ab le to destroy the afflictions, our main enemy. 
Due to this a buddha is called a Muni. We often recite the name mantra of Buddha 
Shakyamuni: TAYATHA OM MUNI MUNI MAHA MUNIYE SVAHA. This mantra sets out 
the three paths: the first MUNI sets out the small path, the seco nd MUNI sets out the middle 
path, and MAHAMUNI sets out the great path.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
E Clearing up doubts 
If you think: “That may be true for the paramitayana, but not for those entering 
the vajrayana.” Although the way of tr aining in the paramitayana – in the 
countless clear distinctions that clarify gi ving etc. – is different from mantra, the 
behavioral basis22 – the generation of the mind23 – and the coarse form of the path 
of training in the six perfections, the behavior, is nevertheless approximately the 
same and therefore something shared by them. In Vajra Peak  it says: 
 
Not even to sustain one’s life, 
should the bodhi mind be abandoned. 
 
and: 
 
The practice of the six perfections, 
must not be abandoned ever. 
 
This is also taught in numerous other mantra texts.  
 
Someone thinks that since the practice of th e paramitayana or perfection vehicle leads to 
enlightenment, it not necessary to practice th e vajra vehicle. This kind of doubt must be 
eliminated. The perfection vehicle consists of ex tensive teachings on generosity and so forth, 
and sets them out in many different ways. On the other hand, these practices are not 
extensively explained in tantra. However, it is no t that if one engages in the perfection vehicle, 
it is not necessary to engage in the tantra vehi cle. The perfection vehicle or sutra teaching has 
many divisions, for example, the six perfection s which are each further divided into six for a 
total of thirty-six. They are not explained in vajra vehicle because it is not the case that one 
can avoid studying the perfection vehicle and i mmediately engage in tantra. The base of all 
the Buddha’s teachings is the mind of enlightenm ent, therefore it is necessary both in the 
perfection vehicle and the mantra  vehicle. Likewise, the practices of the six perfections are 
                                              
22 JN: spyod pa’i rtan , support of the conduct 
23 sems skyed , lit. mind-generate(d) is a very common ellipsis for " byang chub mchog tu sems skyed " "generation of a 
mind or mental attitude [aiming] fo r supreme enlightenment" or "generated  mind/mental attitude [aiming] for 
supreme enlightenment" 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
40 also necessary in tantra. Therefore, the mind of enlightenment and the practice of the six 
perfections are common to both sutra and tantra. In  other words, it is no t that one can think, 
“Now that I am a tantric practitioner I do not need to develop the mind of enlightenment or 
practice generosity, morality, patience, effort, co ncentration, and wisdom.” If one thinks like 
this, one will not gain the realizations of tantra . Similarly, in the past in Tibet there were 
scholars who mistakenly thought that if one were  to take the vows of individual liberation and 
then take the bodhisattva vows, that the vows of individual liberation would be given up. 
They also thought that if one were to then take the tantra vows, that the bodhisattva vows 
would also be given up, whereby one would posse ss only one type of vow. Others mistakenly 
thought that the individual liberation vows transformed into the bo dhisattva vows, and the 
bodhisattva vows into the tantra vows, implying  that the three vows are not three different 
entities. This would mean that when one engages in tantra, sutra is no longer necessary. 
However, this is not the case.   The mind of enlightenment is a primary mi nd wishing to attain enlightenment for the 
benefit of all sentient beings. This mind of en lightenment is of two types: aspirational mind 
of enlightenment and the engaging mind of  enlightenment. The engaging mind of 
enlightenment is the actual mind of enlightenm ent; with it one enga ges in the conduct or 
behavior of a bodhisattva, the six perfections and so forth. 
 The Vajra Peak Tantra  says that one should not give up the mind of enlightenment even at 
the cost of one’s life. The development of mi nd of enlightenment is fundamental to the 
Mahayana, both sutra and tantra. This text also says that the six perfections should never be 
given up, meaning that they must be practiced. Fr om the point of view of tantra, generosity is 
divided into four types, whereas in sutra there ar e only three types. This is because in tantra 
the giving of love is added to the three generosi ties of sutra: giving material things, giving 
Dharma, and giving protection. The generosity of gi ving love is to wish that all sentient beings 
have happiness and the causes of happiness and th en to try to make them happy by giving 
them happiness and the causes of happiness. This shows that the pr actice of generosity is also 
very important in tantra. In fact, many tant ra or mantra texts say that the mind of 
enlightenment, the six perfections, and so forth are essential. Therefore, one should not give 
them up, thinking that one is a tantric practiti oner. The practice of sutra is necessary as a 
basis for one’s practice of tantra. 
 Middle Lam-Rim:   
In many authentic sources for the mandala ritu al of highest yoga tantra, it says that 
a set of two vows must have been take n, a common and an uncommon one, and 
indeed the former refers to the bodhisattva vows
24. The precious teacher also said25: 
“My guru who knew how to accommodate a ll the teachings by means of the path 
[as if in] a square…” These words form  the basis of a major investigation. 
 
                                              
24 the implication being that in the mantra vehicle, too,  the rules of conduct binding upon bodhisattvas also 
apply 
25 i.e. Dromtönpa. This could also be rendered as "The precious Tonpa", the Tibetan word for "teacher" tönpa  
forming part of the name of Atisha's foremost disciple. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
41 The authentic sources for the mandala ritual of hi ghest yoga tantra say that one must take the 
common vows, the bodhisattva vows, as well as the uncommon vows, the tantra vows. To take 
the tantra vows, one must first have taken the bodhisattva vows.  “ T h e  p r e c i o u s  t e a c h e r ”  i s  
Drom Tonpa, whose guru was Atisha. He says th at Atisha was able to put all the teachings 
into practice without seeing any contradiction.  
 Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B2C-2 The  greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings coming into view as useful instructions  
Second, the greatness of all of the Buddha’ s teachings coming into view as useful 
instructions 
A The distinction of pure and impure manners of comprehension 
Whoever construing the great scriptures to be explanatory teachings that do not 
contain the points of prac tice and that the guidance26 indicating the meaning of 
the essential points of practice exists sepa rately from them, holds that even in the 
holy Dharma the explanatory and accomplishing teachings27 are found in two 
different places {12}, will create an obstacle for the arisal of deep respect towards the immaculate sutras and tantras as well as the treatises clarifying their intent. 
One should be aware that the karmic ob scuration of abandoning the Dharma is 
accumulated by despising them saying that  they only outline external knowledge 
without presenting the inner meaning. He nce, for those who want liberation, the 
infallible, supreme instructions are indeed the great scriptures. Nevertheless, it is 
possible that due to poor intelligence etc. one cannot reach certainty through 
relying only on these scriptures as supr eme instructions, whereby one should seek 
certainty with respect to them thinking “I will seek certainty regarding them by 
relying on the excellent [practical] guidan ce,” but one should not think that the 
great scriptures do not contain the heart of the matter because they only outline 
external knowledge while the practical guid ance is supreme because it presents the 
inner meaning. 
 All the Buddha’s teachings can be taken as inst ructions for oneself. Therefore, those who 
think that the great scriptures on philosophy are to be learne d and explained but are not to 
be practiced, are mistaken. It is also incorrect to think that the essential points to be practiced 
are to be found somewhere else. There is a story with respect to this id ea about a teacher from 
Drepung who was very learned and well known. He  had many disciples and taught more than 
a hundred monks every day. Then one day he disappeared. Where did he go? When even the 
Tibetan government took part in the search fo r the missing teacher, it was learned that he 
had gone to Choden Rinpoche’s hermitage to practice. At this place there was a monk who 
had studied very little philosophy but had st udied some lam-rim. The teacher was in the 
hermitage and was taking instructions from the monk who has studied very little philosophy. 
He stayed there for a year or two. Although he was very learned he thought that what he had 
                                             
 
26 JN: man ngag , could also be translated as advice 
27 JN: bshad pa dang sgrub pa’i chos , could also be translated as the Dharma of explanation and the Dharma of 
practice or accomplishment 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
42 studied was mere knowledge, like studying geography or history. He had not been able to see 
that the great texts were instructions to su bdue one’s own mind. Some monks requested the 
teacher to return to Drepung and take his geshe degree, but he refused saying that wanted to 
stay in the hermitage. Then the Tibetan govern ment sent a messenger by horse to tell him 
that the Dalai Lama wanted him to return to Drepung to take the geshe degree. He did this 
and came out the best in the cl ass. All this happened because he  had been unable to see that 
the great texts, the Ornament for Clear Realizations , Supplement to the Middle Way , Treasury of 
Manifest Dharma , Vinaya, and Valid Cognition , contained the objects to be practiced. This is 
similar to what is Lama Tsongkhapa means here. 
 In short, some people think there is a Dh arma to be explained and a Dharma to be 
practiced, however it is not like this. All the Dh arma is both, that is, it can both be explained 
and put into practice. Therefore, we should un derstand all the sutra and tantra teachings and 
their commentaries to be inst ructions for our practice.  
 Thinking that the great texts are mere dry word s is a great obstacle to  one’s practice. It is 
wrong to think that the great texts are only to  be understood intellectually and explained. 
Rather they are both to be understood and to  be put into practice. This doubt must be 
eliminated. If instead one thinks  that the great texts are just words and not for practice, one 
abandons the Dharma. To abandon the Dharma is th e heaviest negative action. It is said that 
even by practicing the Guhyasamaja Tantra, medi tating on the generation stage and attaining 
clear light, one cannot purify the negativity of  abandoning the Dharma. On the other hand, if 
one commits any of the five actions of immediat e retributions – killing one’s mother, killing 
one’s father, killing a foe-destroyer, drawing bl ood from a buddha, or causing a schism in the 
sangha, it can be purified by practicing the Guhyasamaja Tantra . This is mentioned in the 
Guhyasamaja Root Tantra . Therefore, the heaviest negative action is that of abandoning the 
Dharma in that it prevents one’s inner qualit ies and realizations from developing. On the 
other hand, having killed one’s mother, father, and so forth, if one later meditates one can still gain higher realizations.  
 Thus, if one desires to achieve liberation , one should see the great texts as supreme 
instructions. They are infallible or non-de ceptive. For example, if one studies the Ornament for 
Clear Realizations  one will see that everything in it is  to be practiced. Even the homage or 
prostration contains the entire path. Therefore, one should study the great texts and treatises.  
 On the other hand, those who have weak in telligence or whose minds are obscured or 
confused will not be able to understand that th e great texts are instructions. Such people need 
to study, contemplate, and meditate on the lam- rim. It is like having many ingredients to 
make food and then using only some to cook  some food and putting the rest away in a 
storeroom. The great texts are like a storeroom  of instructions. The lam-rim, on the other 
hand, is like pizza from Naples or spaghetti from Bologna in that it is easy to digest since it is 
already prepared.  
 Just the homage in the Treasury of Manifest Dharma , for example, says:  
 
To the one who has utterly destroyed the darkness with respect to all, 
Extricates migrating beings from th e mire of cyclic existence, and 
Teaches in accordance with  the meaning – homage.   [1.1abc] 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
43 If one tries to understand just this single vers e, it will eliminate some obscuration. Our mind 
is as if covered with ignorance, like a dark room. Just as a light illuminates the darkness and 
allows one to see what is in the room, the dark ness of ignorance that obscures our mind can 
be eliminated by understanding selflessness or the four noble truths. The main thing is to 
recognize sufferings as suffering and to recogniz e their causes or origins – the afflictions and 
contaminated actions of body, speech, and mi nd. There are ten non-virtuous actions: the 
three of body are killing, stealing, and sexual mi sconduct; the four of speech are lying, divisive 
speech, harsh words, and idle talk; and the thr ee of mind are covetousness, that thought “I 
want” that mentally grasping to something, malice or harmful mind , the thought to harm 
someone, and wrong view, the thought that the la w of cause and result does not exist, past 
and future lives do not exist, and so forth. Th ese ten non-virtues are the main cause of all our 
sufferings. When this cause ripens, it brings four  results: a fruitional result, an empowering or 
dominant result, and so forth. The fruitional result  of a non-virtuous action  is rebirth as a hell 
being, hungry ghost, or animal. The non-virt uous actions are motivated by afflictions.  
 When we take a good human rebirth in cyclic existence it is due to the causal motivation 
of ignorance and a virtuous motivation of time that brings about a contaminated action. Such 
actions bring about rebirth as a human, anti-god, or  god. However, it is still a rebirth in cyclic 
existence and therefore one will still experience suffering. We need to eliminate the causes of 
suffering. The main root or cause is ignoranc e, and another two causes are attachment and 
hatred. These three are called the “mental poison s.” They are the main causes of creating 
virtuous and non-virtuous actions. While one can create virtue moti vated by attachment, 
anger cannot motivate a virtuous action. The root  of all is ignorance, not knowing the nature 
of phenomena, the emptiness or selflessness that is the lack of  inherent existence. Having 
recognized the causes of suffering, we need to me ditate true paths. By doing this one will be 
able to eliminate the causes, afflictions an d contaminated actions, whereby the result, 
suffering, is also eliminated. This brings about tr ue cessations, the cessation of the afflictions, 
which are coarse and subtle. 
 In short, it is important to understand the four noble truths. This understand can be applied to our daily life. For example, when in  a family the members criticize each other and 
fight, this is a true suffering. The cause is one of the mental afflictions, anger, jealousy, pride 
and so forth. This is the true origin of the su ffering. Motivated by this mental affliction, we 
engage in verbal and physical actions, such as  talking badly to or beating the other person. 
These afflictions bring suffering. Therefore, we need to develop respect for each other, trust 
i n  e a c h  o t h e r ,  a n d  a  l o v i n g - k i n d  m i n d  f o r  e a c h  o t h e r .  T h i s  c a n  b e  l i k e n e d  t o  a  t r u e  p a t h .  Then the result, all the members of  the family living together in  harmony, can be likened to a 
true cessation, the cessation of fighting and disharmony.   However, the four noble truths are like an on ion, which can be peeled away in layers, as 
they can be understood on a more and more subtle level.  Thursday afternoon, 20 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim:   
B How all the Buddha’s teachings come into view as useful instructions  
The great yogi Jangchub Rinchen said: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
44  
Someone who has reached certainty concerning a handy little volume, 
cannot be said to know all the topics of practical guidance, this is said 
about someone who understands all of the Buddha’s teachings as 
instructions. 
 We need the kind of understanding Gr eat Jowo [Atisha]’s disciple Gompa 
Rinchen Lama expressed saying he had gr ound his body, speech and mind to dust 
in a single meditation session on Atis ha’s instructions and that thereby the 
understanding had now arisen in him th at all scriptures are instructions.  
 To fortunate beings all the Buddha’s teaching s appear as instructions. The great yogi 
Jangchub Rinchen was a Tibetan lama of the Kadam tradition. He said that the recognition 
or understanding that all the teachings are in structions for subduing one’s own mind does 
not come from studying a small volume.   Great Jowo is Atisha. His disciple Gompa Rinchen also said that all the Buddha’s teachings without exception are to be understood clearly as instructions. This is the best kind of 
understanding. If one does not understand this , then the great texts will appear to one as 
similar to texts on history or geography. In the Tibetan language there are 101 volumes of 
Buddha Shakyamuni’s teachings and more than 200 volumes of commentaries by the Indian 
pandits. Although they contain different ways of  teaching, in the end th ey are all instructions. 
An instruction is that which subdues the mind, th at is, it makes the mind, that was very hard, 
soft and smooth as well as joyful.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
 
In the words of the precious [Drom] Tönpa: 
 
If after studying the Dharma a lot yo u feel the need to search elsewhere 
for a way of applying the Dharma, you are mistaken. 
 
Likewise those who study the Dharma a lo t over a long period and, completely 
ignorant as to how to set about it, deve lop the wish to practice Dharma, do not 
understand and therefore err in  the manner described above.  
 Precious Tonpa or Tonpa Rinpoche is Drom Tonpa. He said that if one studies many 
scriptures and then, when about to practice, looks elsewhere, thinki ng that this is not 
explained in these scriptures, this is a mistake. In other words, if one studies many scriptures 
over a long time but still does not understand how to practice the Dharma, this would be very 
strange. Having studied the great texts, one should practice as they teach.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
45 {13} As it says in the Treasury28: 
 
The Buddha’s teachings have two aspects: 
their nature is scripture and realization. 
 In accordance with this dictum, the teachi ng is nothing apart from the scriptural 
teaching and the realizational teaching. 
 T h e  B u d d h a ’ s  t e a c h i n g  o r  d o c t r i n e  o r  i s  o f  t w o  t y p e s :  t h e  s c r i p t u r a l  d o c t r i n e  a n d  t h e  realizational doctrine. The scriptural doctrine  is that which shows us how to develop our 
inner qualities, whereas the inner qualities that  have been developed are the realizational or 
realized doctrine. The scriptures include the thr ee baskets, the twelve sets or categories of 
scriptures, and the 84,000 aggr egates or heaps of Dharma. However, all the others are 
included in the three baskets – the sutra, vi naya, and abhidharma baskets – that teach the 
higher trainings in morality, concentration, and wisdom. The purpose of the vinaya is to 
subdue the body and speech, that is, to elim inate bad speech and bad bodily movements. Due 
to studying the vinaya, we can change the be havior of our body and speech. For the mind, 
there are the two other trainings, those of concentration and wisdom. Concentration is a 
s t a b l e  m i n d  t h a t  i s  a b l e  t o  r e m a i n  s i n g l e - p o i n t e d l y  o n  i t s  o b j e c t .  O n  t h e  b a s i s  o f  t h i s  concentration, one engages in analytical meditation . It is also said that on the basis of having 
achieved calm abiding, one develops special insight. The mind having become stable, the 
wisdom knowing the different entities and obje cts of meditation can eliminate the mental 
afflictions. For this reason, first one needs to study the scriptures, then gain an understanding 
of the subject matter, and then put the knowledge gained into practice. In other words, first 
one should study, then think or contemplate, an d then meditate. In this way one will gain the 
wisdom arisen from hearing, the wisdom arisen  from thinking, and the wisdom arisen from 
meditation. Due to gaining these three kinds of wisdom one will realize one’s aim.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
 
The scriptural teaching is how the Dharma  should be practiced and establishes the 
manner of accomplishment, while the realiz ational teaching is what is [thus] 
established. Since one practices in accordance  with what is to be established, these 
two act as cause and effect. To give an analogy: when there is a horse race, the 
horse is first shown the course and afterwar ds, likewise, it runs there. It would be 
ridiculous to show it a course and then ha ve the race elsewhere. When it comes to 
attainments, how could it be appropriate to accomplish something after having 
determined something else through listenin g and reflecting? That is also expressed 
in the last volume of Stages of Meditation :  
 
Whatever has been realized by the wisdoms arising from listening and reflecting is precisely what should be  cultivated by means of the wisdom 
                                             
 
28 i.e. the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge - Abhidharmakosha  by Vasubandhu 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
46 arising from meditation, and not anothe r; just as a horse runs along the 
course it has been shown. 
 
When there is a horse race, first the trainer shows the horse the racecourse by leading it 
around it a couple of times so that it gets to know the track. After that when the horse races, 
it will be able to go quickly and easily due to already knowing the ro ad and not having any 
doubts. On the other hand, if this is not done, the horse may have doubts  that there is danger 
and will therefore not run as quickly.  
 Similarly, we should listen to teachings fr om our teacher, or discuss the Dharma with 
friends, or study on one’s own until one gain s an understanding of the meaning. Then one 
should think about the meaning and then meditate  on it. In this way, one will gain the three 
types of wisdom: wisdom arisen from hearing, wisdom arisen from thinking, and wisdom arisen from meditation. These three types of wi sdom are not direct realizations. Only later 
will the wisdom directly realizing emptiness ar ise whereby one will achieve the path of seeing. 
The path of seeing is so-called because for th e first time one directly sees the four noble 
truths. The continual meditation on them that follows that direct realization is called “the 
path of meditation.” After that  one attains the path of no-mor e-learning, at which point there 
is no longer a need to train or study.  
 The word “path” or “road” is marga  in Sanskrit and lam in Tibetan. An ordinary path or 
road is one that takes us to a certain destinat ion, there being small, middling, and big roads. 
In this context a path it what leads us to a realization. For example, when one attains an 
uncontrived thought of definite emergence or re nunciation one enters a path. This first path 
is the path of accumulation on which one accu mulates the hearing of many teachings as well 
as merit. Thereby, one develops more and more faith in the Buddha’s teachings. One 
gradually progresses through the small, middle, and great paths of accumulation. On the great 
path of accumulation one gains the concentration called “the stream of Dharma,” at which 
time one can receive teachings even from a stat ue of the Buddha. One sees statues as actual 
emanation bodies and can receive teachings from  them. Right now we cannot do this, but in 
the future we will be able to receive teachings in this way.  
 Having received many teachings and meditate d on them, one then achieves the path of 
preparation. This path is divided into four  levels: heat, peak, tolerance, and supreme 
mundane qualities. At the end of the supreme mu ndane qualities level, one achieves the path 
of seeing. The path of seeing is also divided in to three: a path of seeing that is meditative 
equipoise, a path of seeing that is subsequent a ttainment, and a path of seeing that is neither 
meditative equipoise or subsequent attainment . The path of seeing that is meditative 
equipoise is divided into sixteen divisions: th e eight forbearances whic h are paths of seeing 
that are antidotes, and the eigh t knowledges which are paths of seeing that are liberated. One 
first applies the antidotes to the acquired afflicti on that is the conception  of a self, after which 
one abandons the innate afflicti on that is the conception of true existence. The path of 
meditation is divided into nine rounds. This, in brief, is how one progresses on the path.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
47 C Indication of analytical meditation as a means of making all teachings appear as instructions 
Thus, through summarizing all the topics of the paths set ou t in the excellent 
teachings and commentaries – starting from how to rely on a spiritual teacher up 
to calm abiding and special insight, th ey are all condensed into the steps of 
practical application in terms of perf orming stabilizing meditation where 
stabilizing meditation is required, and an alyzing with the wisdom of individual 
investigation where analytical meditation is required. Thereby, these instructions 
guide one so that all the excellent teachi ngs present themselves as instructions. 
Then the certainty develops that they  s h o u l d  b e  u n d e r s t o o d  a s  s u p r e m e  
instructions, and the misconception that they should be understood as mere 
background [knowledge] for the Dharma rather  than as actual instructions {14} is 
completely reversed. 
 
The instructions begin with an explanation of how to rely on a spiritual teacher or lama and 
progress through to calm abiding and special insight. The Buddha’s teachings contain all 
these subjects in a complete way without anyt hing missing. For example, in the context of 
relying on a guru there is a discussion of the teacher’s qualities, the student’s qualities, and 
how to rely on a lama in thought and action. Fi rst of all, one should examine whether or not 
the teacher is valid as well as examining whether or not what he teaches is valid. One does not 
need to immediately take someone as one’s te acher. One can determine whether or not one 
will be able to rely on him completely by ex amining whether or not his teachings are valid in 
terms of, for example, the four types of validiti es set out in the Sakya tradition. One should 
also check whether the person who is teaching can be trusted or not. For example, some so-
called “teachers” have been know n to claim that they have realiz ations of clairvoyance and so 
f o r t h  w h e n  t h e y  d o  n o t .  T h i s  is their way to cheat others in order to gain something for 
themselves such as material things. That is not right. Even His Holiness the XIV Dalai Lama 
says that he does not have any realizations bu t is just a normal ordi nary monk. He does not 
say “I am THE DALAI LAMA!”, but instead sp eaks about himself and teaches in a very 
humble way.  
 It is usually said that the teacher should have  ten qualities from the point of view of sutra, 
another ten from the point of view of vinaya, another ten from the point of view of Mahayana, and another ten from th e point of view of tantra. The ten qualities that he should 
possess from the point of view of sutra are taught in the Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras . 
However, his mind and behavior should, in shor t, be subdued. One should rely on such a 
guru and one should put whatever he teaches into practice as much as possible, even if it is difficult. One should treat all his teachings as a means to subdue one’s minds, and to reduce 
one’s afflictions and wrong ideas. In this way one’s mind will improve.  
 Calm abiding is single-pointed meditation. It is achieved by means of nine stages of mental abiding, setting, continuous setting, resetting , close setting, and so forth. One chooses an 
object of meditation and sets the mind on it, tr ying to remain focused on it. In this way, one 
gradually progresses through the nine stages. Then , when one attains a special pliancy of body 
and mind that induces bliss, one attains calm abiding. On this basis one does analytical 
meditation. One analyses whether a table, for ex ample, is empty of inherent existence using 
the reasoning: the table is empty of inherent exis tence because it is a dependent-relation. It is 
a dependent-relation because it depends on part s, or it is a dependent-relation because it 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
48 depends on causes and conditions. By analyzing in this way, one will come to understand that 
it is not inherently existent or concrete, an d for this reason can be  destroyed. While all 
phenomena do not exist inherently, we see all ph enomena as if they exist from their own side 
or inherently. This is a mistake.  
 We also see all phenomena as if they were perm anent, for example, as if this hall were the 
same now as it was ten years ago. The hall is  not like that, yet we apprehend it to be 
permanent while in fact it is impermanent an d constantly changing. When one understands 
subtle impermanence, one will understand that th is hall is constantly changing. For example, 
if we check ourselves we will see that we gr ew taller and taller until one day we stopped 
growing, yet continued to get older and older. Every day, every month, we get older. In the 
past when we were children, we did not have wh ite hair or wrinkles, rather our skin was soft 
and nice. However, gradually our skin becomes wrinkled, our hair becomes white, our teeth begin to fall out… This is because we ar e impermanent and constantly changing.  
 When we have a toothache we can get out t ooth pulled. On the other hand, if teeth were 
permanent phenomena they could neither be remo ved nor cause pain. Likewise if they were 
inherently existent they could not be remove d or cause pain. One should do analytical 
meditation on this. Five great reasonings proving the lack of inherent existence are 
mentioned in the texts. For example, one set of reasonings is that the table is not produced 
from self, not from other, not from both self  and other, and not without causes. In other 
words, the table is not produced ultimately, in herently, or truly because it is not produced 
from self, from other, from both, or without caus es. In fact, the table is produced from causes 
and conditions and is therefore not produced in herently or truly. This kind of reasoning 
establishes that it does not exist either as an inherently existent cause or as an inherently 
existent result. It is not produced from self or  other or both. Neither is it produced without a 
cause. A thing cannot be produced without a ca use. Therefore, the ta ble is not produced 
inherently or truly.   Another reasoning is: the table is not truly exis tent because it is not a truly existent one or 
a truly existent many. It is not a truly existe nt one because it has parts. With parts and 
without parts are directly contradictory and part less phenomena do not ex ist. The table is not 
a truly existent many because it is not a trul y existent one. Many is dependent on one, 
therefore if one does not exist,  many cannot exist. Thus, all ph enomena are not truly existent 
because they do not exist either as a trul y existent one or a truly existent many.  
 Another reasoning is: the table does not exist inherently because it is a dependent-arising. 
All these reasonings are examples of analytical  meditation on emptiness. With wisdom one 
analyzes the nature of phenomena. Having do ne this, one does stabilizing meditation on 
emptiness. In this way one will be able to abandon the afflictions.  
 In this way, all the Buddha’s teachings wi ll arise as instructions for oneself.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B2C-3 The greatness of allowing you to easily discover the Conqueror’s intentions  
Third: The greatness of allowing you to ea sily discover the Conqueror’s intentions. 
A For beginners, the Conqueror’s intention is not easy to find without a guru’s oral instructions 
Although the great texts – the teachings along with their commentaries – form the 
supreme instructions, completely uneducat ed beginners cannot find the intended 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
49 meaning, even though delving into th em, without relying on excellent oral 
instructions, and even if they find it they  spend a lot of time and enormous effort. 
 
It is not easy to see the intention of the grea t texts even though one reads and studies them. 
Although these texts contain the supreme instruct ions, they are not easy to understand. Thus, 
even if one studies them for a long time, even spending many years reading them while 
undergoing many difficulties, it still remains di fficult to identify the instructions. For this 
reason, we need to rely on a lama, a holy being, who can explain how these texts are instructions.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
B [The Conqueror’s intention ] is found through a guru’s oral instructions 
I f  t h e y  r e l y  o n  a  g u r u ’ s  o r a l  i n s t r u c t i o n s  a n d  t h e  l i k e ,  i t  b e c o m e s  e a s y  t o  
understand. 
 
O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d ,  b y  m e a n s  o f  t h e  g u r u ’ s  o r a l  i n s t r u c t i o n s  o r  a d v i c e  o n e  c a n  c o m e  t o  understand the Conqueror’s intention quickly an d easily. For example, the lama identifies 
something as an instruction, and then one thin ks about it and puts it into meditational 
practice. If one does this, one will quickly and ea sily gain realizations. This is because having 
understood the instructions, one can easily practice them.   When we practice the Dharma, at times we experience difficulties. Why is this? It is 
because there arise many interferences and obstac les. For example, we have many afflictions; 
sometimes we are lazy, sometimes we are ti red, sometimes the mind becomes dark and 
confused. When we practice Dharma distractions tend to arise. For example, if while an older 
monk is doing retreat he has the responsibility  to delegate work to the younger monks in 
order to care for the monastery, when he does sessions instead of medita ting on the deity he 
may be thinking of the work that needs to be done. When one tries to meditate or do 
recitations, there often come thoughts of wh at one needs to do next. In addition, one 
remembers one’s dear friends and wishes to be with them and to enjoy their company. These 
thoughts disturb one’s mind. Many distractions ar ise, making it difficult to meditate. In spite 
of this, we need to try every day to put effort into meditation even just for a short time, as a 
long time may be difficult. In this way slowly our concentration will improve.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B2C-4 The  greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself 
Fourth: the greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself. 
A Showing the abandonment of the Dharma as the biggest misdeed 
As explained in the White Lotus [Sutra]  and the Chapter of the Truthful One , it 
amounts to abandoning the Dharma if yo u hold that some utterances of the 
Buddha are means of attaining buddhah ood while others are obstacles to 
buddhahood, dividing them into good and bad, appropriate and inappropriate, or 
Mahayana and Hinayana, and thereupon hold ing that a bodhisattva needs to train 
in some and not in others because you fail  to understand that all the words of the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
50 Buddha directly or indirectly teach th e means of attaining buddhahood. In the 
Sutra Gathering All the Threads  it says that the karmic obscuration due to 
abandoning the Dharma is so subtle that it is hard to recognize.  
 
Abandoning the Dharma is the greatest of faults. For example, while all the Buddha’s 
teachings either directly or indirectly show  the methods for attain ing buddhahood, if one 
does not understand this but instead thinks th at some teachings are to be abandoned because 
they are not instructions that are methods fo r attaining buddhahood but are rather obstacles 
to attaining buddhahood, one co mmits the negative action of  abandoning the Dharma. For 
example, if I were to say “I am a practitioner  of the Mahayana, therefore I do not need to 
study or practice the Hinayana scriptures bu t instead must abandon them,” I would commit 
the fault of abandoning the Dharma. This is a huge obstacle to our Dharma practice and a 
great mistake because all the Buddha’s teac hings, whether Hinayana or Mahayana, are 
methods for attaining enlightenment. For example,  we need to learn the subject matter of the 
Hinayana teachings and put them into practice be cause definite emergence or renunciation is 
the object of meditation that is the basis fo r entering a path. These teachings emphasize the 
four noble truths and their sixteen attributes , and we also need to meditate on them. 
therefore, thinking that we do not need to medi tate on them and that th ey are an obstacle to 
practicing the Dharma is a mistake and the faul t of abandoning the Dharma. It is important 
to understand from sutra what it means to aban don the Dharma as it would be a great fault.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
 
Concerning the grave disadvantages that ensue if you abandon the Dharma, it says 
in the King of Concentration Sutra : 
 
Someone here in Jambudvipa 
tears down all the stupas found, 
someone abandons a class of sutras; 
the latter’s misdeed is far more grave. 
 Someone even murders arhats as many as the sand grains in the Ganges, someone abandons a class of sutras; {15} the latter’s misdeed is far more grave. 
 Although there generally appear to be ma ny ways in which the Dharma might be 
abandoned, the one described previously se ems to be the greatest, which is why we 
should try hard to give it up. 
 If someone were to destroy all the stupas here  in the southern continent of Jambudvipa he 
would create a big negativity and big fault, but if  one were to abandon a su tra saying that it is 
not to be practiced, one would create a much greater and heavier negativity. If someone were 
to kill foe-destroyers equal in number to the ma ny sand grains of the Ganges River, he would 
create a big negativity that is an action of im mediate retribution, but a person who says that 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
51 one of the Buddha’s teachings is not to be studied or practiced or that it is an obstacle to the 
Mahayana creates a negativity that  is much greater and heavier than this. This is because the 
abandonment of the Dharma is the heaviest of ne gativities. Having recognized this, we should 
strive to not abandon the Dharma.  
 Although there are different doors or ways in which to abandon the Dharma, the heaviest 
of them all is to say, for example, that a Hi nayana sutra is not to be practiced and is an 
obstacle to the Mahayana and sh ould therefore be given up.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
B When there is a realization along the lines of the first two greatnesses, the misdeed stops by itself 
That is to say, since this is reversed si mply by gaining certainty regarding what was 
shown above, the misdeed stops by itself. 
 
There are four greatnesses. When one realizes the first two, then faults or bad behavior 
naturally cease. In other words, one does not n eed to apply any other antidote to cease them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
C You should come to realize such certainty from the White Lotus Sutra  and other texts 
This certainty should be sought by studying the Chapter of the  Truthful One  as well 
as the [Sutra of the] Excellent Dharma’s White Lotus . The other ways of abandoning 
the Dharma should be learnt from the Sutra Gathering All the Threads . 
 
By reading the two texts, the Chapter of the  Truthful One  and the Sutra of the Excellent Dharma’s 
White Lotus , one will come to understand how the Dh arma is abandoned and one will then be 
able to easily abandon engaging in this kind of  action. The other doors or ways of abandoning 
the Dharma can be understood from the Sutra Gathering All the Threads .  
 
I have tried to explain this subj ect as much as I am able in my  broken English. You can also 
discuss it and thereby slowly come to gain more and more understanding. Do not worry! Really, do not worry! Be very relaxed! Study in a very relaxed way. Keep your mind relaxed and also try to keep your body relaxed! Do not force or push yourself an d become tight. If one 
forces, one will come to think that  learning the Dharma is difficult. Per favore ! Please! Try to 
learn it all very slowly, while remaining happy and relaxed. Do not worry, thinking, “I cannot 
study. I cannot pass the exams.” DO NOT WORRY . I’ll tell you a story. There was once a 
monk called Dawa whose family lived in Lhasa. They were from a noble family and while his father had passed away, his mother remained in th e house with many servants to take care of 
her. She would go around each day, giving them orders. When Dawa came home to visit her, she would say, “You are a monk. You have an easy  and happy life. It is not a difficult life. You 
can sit on your cushion all day, reading books. It  is very easy.” Then one day he said to her, 
“Okay, mamma. Tomorrow it is your turn to not move. You just sit on this cushion and read 
these prayers while I bring you breakfast, lunch,  and dinner. I will also clean the house and 
make the offerings of water and butterlamps on  the alter. So tomorrow, please mamma, stay 
without moving.” She agreed and tried to do this, but soon beca me very tired as she was not 
used to sitting still. At the end of the day, she said that it had been very hard and difficult. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
52 Her son said to her, “Do you understand now that  it is not so easy?” And the mother said, “It 
is not so easy.” After that, he would go home from time to time, but his mother never again 
said that his life was easy. Instead she to ld him to sit while she brought him food!  
 
Friday morning, 21 January 2005  
I have been requested to give the oral transmission of the Guru Yoga of Lama Tsongkhapa . 
According to the Sera Je tradition, one should first go for refuge, then generate the mind of 
enlightenment, then do the continuous confe ssion, and then the four immeasurables. After 
that one should recite the verses of prostration or homage from Fundamental Wisdom , the 
Ornament for Clear Realizations , and Compendium of Valid Cognition . Then one should make 
requests to the holy beings to protect all sent ient beings, do the offering of ablution, and 
make a mandala offering. Only then should  one begin the actual  practice of the Guru Yoga of 
Lama Tsongkhapa . 
 This practice contains the seven limbs of prostration, offering, confession, rejoicing, 
exhorting to turn the wheel of Dharma, reques ting to not pass away, and dedication. First 
there is the invocation followed by the request to  r e m a i n  a s  l o n g  a s  c y c l i c  e x i s t e n c e  i s  n o t  
emptied and so forth. This practice also includ es the recitation of migtsema, whether in nine 
lines, six lines, five lines, or four lines.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
Explanation of how the Dharma possessing the two greatnesses 
should be listened to and explained 
2B3 How the Dharma possessing the two greatnesses should be listened to and explained 
A How to listen 
B How to explain 
C Generally, how to proceed at the end 
The third one has three points: how to list en, how to explain, and generally how to 
proceed at the end. 
2B3A How to listen 
1 Thinking about the advantages of listening to the Dharma  
2 Developing respect towards the Dharma and those who teach it 
3 The actual way to listen 
The first has three points: thinking about the advantages of listening29, developing 
respect towards the Dharma and who teaches it, and the actual way to listen. 
2B3A-1 Thinking about the advantages of listening 
First: from the Verses on Listening30:  
 
Through listening you come  to know the dharmas, 
                                              
29 The word "hear" ( thos pa ) includes reading texts. " thos pa mang po " lit.: "hear/having he ard a lot" means "well 
read", "educated" which is why, depending on the context " thos pa " may also be rendered as "study".  
30 Udanavarga 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
53 through listening misdeeds are turned away, 
through listening all trivia are abandoned, through listening nirvana is achieved. 
 
These four [lines] say that in dependence  on listening, an understanding of the 
points that should be adopted and abandoned gradually develops. From this knowledge arises the ethical discipline that counteracts wrongdoing. Then, once 
you have turned away from meaningless purs uits, the concentration that is a mind 
that can stay on a wholesome object as  long you wish arises. Then, through 
training in the wisdom realizing the such ness that is selflessn ess, the root of 
samsara’s fetters is cut and you attain liberation.  
 Now Lama Tsongkhapa sets out how to listen an d how to explain the Dharma and what to do 
at their conclusion. If one listens to the holy Dharma, there will arise many benefits. If one 
listens to the holy Dharma taug ht by the Buddha, one’s knowledge will increase. If one listens 
to or studies the Dharma, one will turn away fr om non-virtuous actions.  If one listens to or 
studies the Dharma, one will come to understa nd the meaning of the Buddha’s teachings and 
wisdom will arise in one’s mind . If one listens to and studies the Dharma, one will abandon 
bad and meaningless actions, whereby one will gradually come to achieve nirvana, the state 
beyond cyclic existence. Therefore, there are many  benefits of listening to the Dharma that we 
need to contemplate.   By listening to and studying the Dharma, on e will come to understand what is to be 
practiced or adopted and what is to be abandone d. In this way one will abandon negative or 
non-virtuous actions. One will understand what is meaningful and what is meaningless, and 
one will naturally give up the meaningless. If  one listens well, one will slowly generate 
concentration and wisdom and eventually achieve the state of liberation that is free from all 
suffering. With the wish to achieve concentratio n, one should set one’s mind single-pointedly 
on a virtuous object of meditation. If one is able to remain on the object, one will come to 
understand and then realize the thusness or se lflessness of persons or  phenomena. Thereby, 
one’s mind will have become trained in wisdom.   Therefore, first, based on understanding, on e trains in the base that is morality by 
abandoning non-virtuous actions. On this  base, one trains in the development of 
concentration. Then one engages in analyz ing the suchness of phenomena and persons, 
examining their lack of inherent existence or lack of self-suppo rting substantial existence. In 
this way, one can cut the root of cyclic existenc e and attain the state of liberation or nirvana. 
I n  s h o r t ,  w e  n e e d  t o  p u t  e f f o r t  i n t o  t r a i n i ng in the three higher trainings of morality, 
concentration, and wisdom, whereby we will become better and better.   
Middle Lam-Rim:   
 
In the Jataka Stories  it too says: 
 
He who through listening fills his mind with faith, 
{16} grows firm in rejoicing in that which is excellent.  
Wisdom is born and bewilderment vanishes; 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
54 this is well worth paying for with one’s own flesh. 
Listening is the lamp against mental darkness; the greatest wealth no robber can carry away; 
the weapon destroying the enemy – ignorance; 
the best of friends, giving guidance in skilful means, near and dear, if you are poor or not; inoffensive cure against ills of sorrow, 
the foremost army destroying an army of faults, 
it is the best fame, and treasure, and splendor as well. If you meet noble beings, the best of gifts; and, in assemblies, it is the delight of the wise. 
 as well as:  
Having listened, make the attainment the essence [of practice ], 
and you will be released from the stronghold of births with ease. 
 
Keep thinking again and again about these and other advantages of listening, and 
generate resolute faith
31 from the bottom of your heart. 
 
By listening to teachings one’s generates fait h in the Dharma and becomes very happy and 
joyful. Wisdom is generated, and ignorance or confusion is eliminated. Listening or hearing, 
like a lamp that illuminates the darkness of the world, brings about the wisdom arisen from hearing that can eliminate the ignorance or conf usion in our minds. This  type of quality is 
real wealth because if one has knowledge, it cannot be taken away by thieves or robbers. On 
the other hand, money, even a wish-fulfilling je wel, can be stolen by  thieves. Because our 
inner qualities, called “arya jewels” or “arya we alth,” cannot be taken away by anyone, they are 
the best wealth. Listening or hearing, specifical ly the wisdom arisen from hearing, destroys 
our inner enemy, ignorance. Therefore, we need  to generate the wealth of inner qualities – 
the seven jewels of arya beings – in our me ntal continuum, and then develop them. Then, 
even if we do not have any money, we will not have any problems! I have a photo in my house 
of a baby boy under which it says “No money. No  job. No girl. No problem”! I once knew an 
Indian pandit called Upadaya who said that ev en if one goes to another country without 
anything, if one can teach something to others one will be able to make money. On the other hand, if one has money but no knowledge and th en loses the money, one will not be able to 
gain it back. Upadaya shared this advice with th e students of the Tibeta n Institute of Higher 
Studies in Varanasi.   If one is rich, one will have many friends, bu t if one day one were to lose all one’s wealth 
and become as poor as a beggar, all those so -called friends would suddenly disappear. On the 
other hand, if we possess knowledge gained fr om hearing the Dharma, the wisdom arisen 
from hearing and the wisdom arisen from thinki ng, even if we become poor we will not lose 
it, just like the body is always  accompanied by its shadows. Ther efore, we need to study so as 
to develop our inner qualities as they will always be of help to us.  
                                             
 
31 JN: mos pa , could also be translated as admiration or aspiration 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
55  Listening to the Dharma is also like medici ne. When our body is sick, medicine can cures 
the illness without harming our body. Similarly,  knowledge always benefits us and does not 
harm our mind. Listening to or studying the Dhar ma is also like a powerful army that enables 
us to destroy our great faults. It also brings us fame, makes us supreme, and makes us into a 
t r e a s u r e  o f  k n o w l e d g e .  I t  f r e e s  u s  f r o m  w o r r y .  I t  a l s o  b r i n g s  a b o u t  a  g o o d  r e b i r t h  i n  c y c l i c  
existence. Cyclic existence, kor wa  in Tibetan (‘ khor ba ), means “to circle.” How do we circle? 
We are born and die, born an d die, born and die, continuo usly circling through the six 
realms – the three lower and three higher real ms. Sometimes we are born in the hell realm, 
sometimes in the hungry ghost realm, sometime s in the animal realm, and sometimes we are 
born in the happy migrations as a human being,  anti-god, or god. Up to now we have taken 
rebirth in every one of these realms. In fact, we  cannot say that there is a realm in which we 
have not been born. We have been born from  the lowest hell of Unrelenting Torment up 
through the Peak of Existence. All these rebirths were due to  afflictions and contaminated 
actions. Even now, once our virtuous actions have been exhausted, we will once again take 
rebirth in the lower realms. Everyday we create virtuous and non-virtuous  actions. A virtuous 
action acts as a projecting karma that brings rebirth in the upper realms, whereas a non-
virtuous actions acts as a projecting karma that  brings rebirth in the lower realms. Therefore, 
we need to check what kind of ac tions we create. This is not deceptive talk, it really works like 
this. If we create a very great negative action, it  is said that we can ev en experience the hell 
realm in this very life. There is a story about this regarding an Indian king. We need to understand this and to understand the benefits of listening to the Dharma. It is not enough 
to think about what one has heard just one time , one has to think about it again and again so 
as to keep it in one’s heart. Due to this one will develop the wish to practice more and more. 
To do this we need to li sten to many teachings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:   
2B3A-2 Developing respect towards the Dharma and those who teach it 
Second: from the Ksitigarbha Sutra : 
 
Listen filled with one-sided faith and respect, 
without any mockery or disrespect towards them, 
worship the exponents of the Dharma, producing the notion of them as resembling buddhas. 
 
In accordance with this quotation, you should view them as resembling a buddha, 
offer them service with things like lion th rones, worship them with gifts, and give 
up disrespect. In the Bodhisattva Levels  it says that you should be free from 
arrogance and disregard towards the teac hings and those who expound them, and 
that you should respect those two. And in the Jataka Stories  it says: 
 
Sit on a seat that is very low, 
develop the glory of discipline, 
see with eyes imbued with joy, while drinking the nectar of the words. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path   ILTK 17-21 January 2005 (01) 
 
56  
Bow down in respect and concentration, with a mind that is pure and free of stains 
like one who is ill {17} heeds the doctor’s words, 
respectfully listen to the Dharma. 
 How should we listen to teachings? We need to  develop faith and respect and then listen to 
the teachings with this attitude . One should also respect the teacher, and if possible also 
develop faith in him. At the very least, one sh ould not criticize him. If able to do so, one 
should think that of the Dhar ma teacher as being similar to  the Buddha. There are many 
buddhas but due to our karma we are unable to  see them directly. For this reason, they 
appear in a normal body of flesh and bones that like us belongs to the human race. One 
should think that buddhas manifest in this aspe ct in order to teach us and therefore respect 
the teacher as if he were an actual buddha.  
 One should set out a throne for the teacher su pported by four snowlions, representing the 
four fearlessnesses, or one can set out a high cu shion. Then one should request the teacher to 
give teachings, make offerings to him of food, tea, and so forth, and abandon disrespect.  
 Are there any doubts or questions? If not, okay!  I’ll stop here today so you can relax a bit 
more.  
 
Before I mentioned the Guru Yoga of Lama Tsongkhapa . There are many commentaries on this 
practice which you can read as the explanation is not difficult. This practice is also called the 
Hundred Deities of the Joyful Land . The Joyful Land is called Tushita in Sanskrit. Where is it? It 
is one of six levels of the gods of the desire realm. The first is the Fo ur Great Kings which is 
located mid-way up Mount Meru; the second is the Thirty-three, which is on top of Mount 
Meru; above that is Free from Combat; and above th at is Joyful Land or Tushita. The last two 
levels, Free from Combat and Joyful Land, ar e not based on the ground. Above them is 
Enjoying Emanations and above that is Cont rolling Others’ Emanations. Above these six 
desire realm gods are the seventeen levels of the form realm gods. In addition, there are the 
four formless realms. These are beings of our universe, even though we cannot see them.  
 
END 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
57 Monday afternoon, 23 January 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 17): 
2B3A-3 The actual way to listen 
A Indication of how to listen in general 
B The need to listen, having related this to one’s mind 
C How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments 
2B3A-3A Indication of how to listen in general 
1 Giving up the three faults of a vessel 
2 Relying on the six discriminations32
 
The third one has three [points]: Giving up the three faults of a vessel and relying 
on the six discriminations. 
2B3A-3A1 Giving up the three faults of a vessel 
First: If a vessel is turned upside down, or held the right way round but unclean, or 
clean but with the bottom leaking, then even if rain is made to fall by the gods on 
it, it cannot go in; or even if it does go  in, it will be polluted by the dirt and 
therefore will not fulfill the purpose of bein g drunk and the like; or  even if it is not 
spoiled by dirt, it will not stay but will leak  out. In the same way there will be no 
great purpose to hearing the Dharma, if you sit in a place where it is being 
explained, but do not listen well; or list en, but take it wrong or with a faulty 
motivation and the like; or even if these faults are not present, the words and the 
meaning you grasped at the time of hearing are not consolidated and get lost 
through forgetfulness, etc. Therefore, one should be free from these [faults]. The 
antidotes to these three are set forth in the sutras in three words: “Listen well, 
intensely, and keep it in mind!” And in the Bodhisattva Levels  we are told to listen 
with the desire to know everything, sing le-pointedness, attention, a humble mind, 
and the thought of all sentient beings.  
 
There are three types of inappropriat e vessels for Dharma teachings:  
1. an upside down vessel: similar to one who atte nds teachings but either does not listen to 
them or falls asleep, 
2. a dirty vessel, such that even when  nectar is put into it it can no longer be drunk: similar to 
one who listens to the teachings while looking for faults in them, and 
3. a vessel that is upright but has a hole in the bottom; similar to one wh o does not retain or 
remember the teachings but immediately fo rgets whatever he or she has heard.  
Someone who is free from these three faults is  an appropriate vessel to receive the Dharma 
teachings. Hence, we should list en to the Dharma carefully, with  attention, with respect, and 
with a good motivation wishing to understand more in order to develop our inner wisdom, and then try to remember or keep in mind what  we have heard without forgetfulness. On the 
other hand, if, for example, one has a good moti vation but forgets what was said there will 
not be any benefit. In order for the teachings to be of benefit, we should listen to them well 
and carefully and keep the teachings in  our mind. This is the main point. 
                                             
 
32 JN: the word ‘notion’ (‘du shes ) has been changed to ‘discrimination’ as it is a more familiar translation to the 
students at Lama Tzong Khapa Institute 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
58  The Bodhisattva Levels  says that one should listen atte ntively and without distraction. In 
other words, one should not listen to the Dhar ma while thinking of something else such as 
going shopping, for a picnic, or a trip to the mountains or the beach. One should concentrate 
and listen carefully.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3A-3A2 Relying on the six discriminations 
A Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient 
B Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the Dharma as a doctor 
C Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as medicine 
D Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure  
E Contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagata as an exalted being 
F Generating the discrimination of the Dharma tradition lasting long 
The second one has six points: contemplat ing the discrimination of oneself as a 
patient, of the one expounding the Dharma  as a doctor, subsequently generating 
the discrimination of what has been taug ht as medicine, the discrimination of 
persistent practice as the cure, contemplating the discri mination of the tathagatas 
as exalted beings, and generating the di scrimination of th e Dharma tradition 
lasting long. 
2B3A-3A2A Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient 
First: In the Guide33 it says: 
 
Even when stricken with ordinary illness 
{18} one has to follow the words of the doctor, how much more so, if a hundred ills like lust strike you down all the time! 
 As is mentioned here, owing to mental affl ictions like attachment, etc. we always 
suffer from diseases causing long-lasting and severe suffering that is difficult to cure. Therefore we first need to diagnose them as such. Kamawa said:   
If it is not in accord with the actu al situation, our meditation goes off 
in the wrong direction. We have been  stricken with a serious illness due 
to the three poisons, the illness is ve ry grave, yet we do not know that 
we are ill at all. 
 We should first think of or discriminate ourselve s as a sick person or patient, whereby we will 
recognize the need to depend on a doctor. The do ctor, having examined us, tells us what kind 
of treatment is necessary, that is, what kind of  medicine to take, for our illness. The Buddha 
is similar to such a doctor.  The Dharma, the teachings of th e Buddha, is like medicine. If we are sick with an ordinary 
illness, we need to take certain medicine and fo llow the instructions of the doctor to not eat 
certain foods and so forth. By doing so, we ca n be cured of the illness. Similarly, if we 
                                             
 
33 Guide to a Bodhisattva’s Way of Life  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
59 consider the Dharma to be an actual medicine an d put it into practice, it can heal the mental 
illness of the afflictions.  
 Thus, we need to discriminate the Buddha, who is a holy being, as being like a doctor, and 
to discriminate the Buddha’s te achings as the medicine that can cure us. Then, we should 
think, “How nice it would be if the Buddha’s  teachings were to last for many eons.” All 
sentient beings, just like us, are sick. Like us, they too will be cured by following the advice of 
the doctor as we all have the same mental sickness of cyclic existence. To cure this sickness we 
need to put effort into practicing what the Buddha taught, since even to cure an ordinary 
illness we need to follow the prescribed treatment of a doctor. Here Engaging in the Bodhisattva 
Deeds  is cited as saying “100 ills,” whereas us ually there are said to be 84,000 mental 
afflictions to which we need to  apply 84,000 antidotes. On the other hand, 400 illnesses are 
mentioned in the Tibetan medical texts (not 424 il lnesses as is translated by some translators 
– literally, the Tibetan reads “four sets of 100”) . There are said to be 100 illnesses caused by 
attachment (translated above as “lust”), 100 caused by hatred, 100 caused by ignorance, and 
100 caused by a combination of equal parts attachment, hatred, and ignorance.  
 People often say to me that they have lung. In fact 100 sicknesses are related to the inner 
winds ( lung), 100 to the bile, and so forth. However, the root of all these physical illness is the 
mental afflictions. For example, some particular  illnesses arise due to attachment to sweets. 
While many illnesses are difficult to cure, still they can be cured over varying periods of time. 
H o w e v e r ,  w h e n  s i c k n e s s  o c c u r s  d u e  t o  k a r m a ,  i t  i s  v e r y  d i f f i c u l t  t o  c u r e .  B u t  e v e n  m o r e  
difficult to cure is the illness of  the afflictions. This illness is not at all easy to cure. This is 
because even though we have this illness, we do  not appear to be sick, but consider ourselves 
to be very healthy. In fact, if someone were to say to us “You are crazy,” we would become 
angry. This is due to not recognizing that we are in fact “mentally ill.” Mental illnesses in 
general are very difficult to cure. Although ps ychologists and psychotherapists can help some 
people with mental illness, in general they ca nnot cure them. To cure our mental illness we 
need to apply the appropriate antidote. The r oot of all mental illness is ignorance – the 
conception of a self or the conception of a self -supporting substantially existent self. It is the 
thought “I.” This illness is not easy to cure because it is not easy to eliminate this idea. Yet 
when it is eliminated, both our physical an d mental illnesses are cured. We need to 
understand that if we are to meditate, we need to  do it in a correct and perfect way. If we do 
not meditate in the right way, instead of brin ging benefit the mind may become even more 
disturbed. In this way our meditation will not be able to cure our mental illnesses of attachment, hatred, and ignorance.   Therefore, we first need to recognize that ou r main sickness is the mental afflictions within 
us. It is not that someone external creates pr oblems for us. Please be careful, our main 
problem-maker is inside our mind. We need to recognize this, after which we can work to eliminate it. If we want to blame someone or something for our problems, we should blame our own mental attitude. We are sick but we  do not recognize ourselves as sick. While 
physically we are not ill, mentally we are ill:  sometimes due to attachment, sometimes due to 
hatred, and sometimes due to ignorance. Amon g these, the main mental problem-maker is 
attachment. Attachment can make us really craz y. Therefore, we need to take care of our 
mind and apply the antidote to our mental illne ss. The antidote is the Buddha’s teachings, in 
particular the teaching that all phenomena ar e empty of true existence. All phenomena do 
not exist truly, but exist as dependent-relations.  By meditating on dependent-relation, we can 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
60 eliminate our ignorance. If ignorance is eliminated , since it is the root of the other afflictions, 
they too will be eliminated. Thus, meditation is the real antidote.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3A-3A2B Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the Dharma as a doctor 
Second: If we are stricken with a serious illness like, for example, a wind or gall 
disease, we look for a specialist in medicine and, meeting one, we are extremely 
happy, listen to what he says, treat him with respect and acknowledge him. In the 
same way one looks for a spiritual guid e who teaches the Dharma and, having 
found one, accomplishes what he says, taking it not as a burden but as an 
ornament, and acts with respec t and reverence towards him. 
 
If we have wind disease ( lung) we need a doctor, mainly a psyc hiatrist or psychologist who will 
ask us for a lot of money per hour! Also if we have  a gall or bile disease, such as jaundice, we 
need to take a particular type of medicine and need to find someone who can cure our illness. 
In short, if we are sick we need a doctor. The Ti betans say that eating a lot of fatty foods such 
as butter is the cause of bile disease, whereas ea ting food that lacks fat or oil is the cause of 
wind disease. One monk from the Masters Progra m, for example, often said to me, “Geshe-la, 
I have lung.” I would tell him not to worry and to eat some meat with oil and nutmeg. This 
would help him to sleep.  
 The Tibetans say that all the illnesses of hu man beings are caused by food, whereas all the 
illnesses in horses are caused by their running t oo fast. It is 100% sure that all our illnesses 
are caused by food. Therefore, we need to take care of our body. Presently we have a precious 
human rebirth endowed with the eighteen qualit ies, therefore we should be careful not to 
waste it. Our mind is also intelligent and clea r and capable of understanding, therefore we 
need to use it to develop our wisdom and inner qualities. To do this, we need a health body and a healthy mind. Therefore, we need to take care of them. For this reason, we need a good 
doctor. When we find such a good doctor, we become very happy. Then we need to listen to him. Similarly, in terms of the Dharma, we shou ld generate respect for our teacher and try to 
serve him. The best service is trying to put into practice what he has taug ht. This is important.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3A-3A2C Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as medicine 
Just as a patient greatly appreciates the medicine put together by the doctor, one 
should regard the instructions and teac hings taught by someone expounding the 
Dharma as the most importan t thing, and then make an effort to hold t hem in  
respect and to not waste them th rough forgetfulness and the like. 
 
When a doctor or nurse gives us medicine, we should take care of the medicine and consume 
it. Similarly, whatever the teacher has taught us  and whatever instructions he has given us, we 
should think of them as important, and put effort  into taking care of them and not forgetting 
them. If, on the other hand, we forget them, the teachings will be a waste. Therefore, 
whatever teachings we receive we should try to  keep them in our mind without forgetting 
them. This is not easy but we need to try.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
61  Perhaps we do not forget the teachings but co me to think that we do not need them and 
therefore set them aside. Sometimes when we ha ve listened to many teaching there comes a 
point where we think, “That is enough. I don’t need to listen to anym ore teachings. I don’t 
need to practice anymore. The teachings have  not worked for me, therefore I should give 
them all up.” However, this is not right.  
 The practice of sutra is said to take a long  time, in fact by this means it takes three 
countless eons to achieve buddhahood. Due to th is, we may think that it is better not to 
practice sutra but to immediately enter tantra  whereby we can achieve buddhahood in this 
life, in the short period of thre e years and forty-five days. Howeve r, if we do this, we will not 
have the necessary basis for the practice of tant ra and our inner realizations will not grow. As 
a basis we need the lam-rim or the common path. Only when this basis is strong and stable 
can we really practice the higher teachings.  
 Someone from Vicenza last week said to me , “May I ask you a question?” I joked with him 
saying, “I will not reply!” Then he said, “Please,  only one word,” so I said “Okay, tell me.” 
This person had originally been a student of Geshe Yeshe Tobden but later on he became a 
Dzogchen practitioner. He said that he had heard that, according to the mahamudra 
teachings, it was not necessary to do meditation on emptiness, on the deity, or anything else, 
nor to do recitations or visualizations, that it  was enough to meditate on the mind alone. I 
asked him, “How does one meditate on the mi nd? How does one recognize the nature of the 
mind? There is a conventional nature of mind and an ultimate nature of mind. Which one should one meditate on?” He said, “It is enough to know the mind. That is all. This was said 
by Tilopa.” I asked him if he had met Tilopa, bu t he said that he had not. I said, “But you 
said that Tilopa said that.” He said that this  is what had been translated by the translator. 
Some people think that there is no work to do, that just by sitting still in meditation that 
realizations will spontaneously develop and one will be able to fly in the sky! However, I think 
that it is not like this. We need the pres ence of two mental factors, mindfulness and 
introspection, at all times, whatever practice we  are doing. If there is no mindfulness we will 
forget everything. Without mindfulness even if someone says something to us, as soon as we 
move our body to another position we will immediately forget what he said. We should not be like this, but should cherish and put effort  into whatever teachings we have received, 
thinking that we are a patient who has been to ld what medicine to take by the doctor. We 
should act in accordance with whatever instructions he has given us.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3A-3A2D Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure 
1 The contempt of striving for words without practicing them 
Fourth: An ill person sees that his illness cannot be alleviated if he does not take 
the medicine the doctor put together, an d takes it. Likewise, once you see that 
attachment etc. cannot be eliminated withou t practicing the instructions taught by 
the Dharma teacher, you should practice di ligently and not make a great effort at 
the words of various classifications and so forth without putting them into 
practice. As a matter of fact, what good would it be to a leper whose hands and legs are coming off to resort to a dose of medicine once or twice? {19} Likewise, for 
us who have been stricken since beginning less time by the wicked basis of illness 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
62 that is the mental afflictions, it is no t sufficient to practice the meaning of the 
instructions only a couple of times. This is why we shou ld examine all the 
complete parts of the path with discriminating wisdom34 and be as diligent as a 
flowing river. It is like it says in the Praise of Confessing : 
 
...That is to say our minds are always obscured, 
for long we have served the causes of our ills. How can a leper whose hands and feet have fallen off, and who takes his medicine but rarely, derive benefit? 
 Since we are a patient or a sick person, when a doctor prepares and gives us medicine we 
should think that if we do not take this medi cine our sickness will not be cured. Rather we 
should accept the medicine and then consume it. Similarly, if a Dharma teacher gives us 
teachings or instructions but we do not practice  them, we will be not be able to reduce or 
destroy our mental afflictions. Understanding this, we need to put effort into practice. This is 
important.  
 If someone does not practice what he has b een taught but instead s ays, “I have received 
numberless teachings from this-and-that lama an d from such-and such lama,” it just becomes 
meaningless talk that is of no benefit. There are people who say that they received lam-rim 
teachings from the Dalai Lama and from this-a nd-that lama, who name many lamas yet do not 
put effort into practice. They only put effort into talking about the te achings that they have 
received! This is of absolutely no benefit.  
 If someone with leprosy, who has lost his hands or feet, were to take medicine only once or 
twice, he would not be cured of his illness. In fact everyone is well aware that when one has a 
serious physical illness, one has to take medici ne for a long time, not just once or twice. 
Similarly, since we have been sick with the afflictions from beginningless time, we cannot be 
cured by receiving one or two teachings and doing a bit of practice. This is not enough to cure 
a sickness that is beginningless. Our rebirths  are beginningless and likewise our mental 
afflictions are beginningless, therefore they ca nnot be cured by merely receiving one or two 
instructions. Just hearing one or  two words and then putting th em into practice, it is not 
possible to be cured of our mental illness. We n eed to do analytical meditation that examines 
the different mental afflictions and the appropriat e antidotes that must be applied in order to 
stop them. One antidote cannot eliminate all th e mental afflictions, each one has its own 
specific antidote. For this reason, we need to practice the complete path.  
 We need to do analytical meditation and to  study like a flowing river, for example, the 
Ganges River, which flows continually without stopping. Similarly, our study and meditation 
should be continuous, never stopping. We sh ould not do it for a short time but then 
interrupt it, then again after some years do a bit more and then stop once  again. This will be a 
bit of benefit but it cannot eliminate or weaken our mental afflictions, the sickness of cyclic 
existence. To do this, we need to practice medi tation continually. For example, as an antidote 
to our attachment to a very beautiful object ther e is the meditation on ugliness. If we consider 
someone else’s body to be attractive, we should meditate on it as being repulsive, for example, 
as being a skeleton. If we think in this way our attachment will be reduced. On the other 
                                             
 
34 JN: so sor rtog pa’i shes rab , the wisdom of individual investigation 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
63 hand, if we have strong anger, we should apply the antidote of meditating  on love, that is, we 
should develop love for the object of our anger. Love is very important as it can reduce anger. 
While anger is a mental attitude wishing to harm  and cause suffering, love  is a mental attitude 
wishing to help or benefit and to make ha ppy. Therefore, these two are opposites.  
 Then there are people who have a lot of prid e. In this case we should also meditate, 
examining our body. Imagine if we were to cut our head in half would it be nice? If we were to 
cut our body open would it be nice? We would see that in fact we are very ugly. This will 
reduce the pride of thinking that we are beautifu l or the best in the world. If we check where 
it is that we are beautiful we will not be able to find the beautiful. There is a story regarding 
this about Saint Claire of Assisi. It is recounte d that when someone told  her that she had very 
beautiful eyes, she took out an eye and gave it to him! The eyeball in her hand was not at all 
beautiful! Therefore, we should check where is the beautiful. If we were to open our body, we 
would see that it looks like a sewer! Does it ha ve a good smell?! No, not at all. Therefore, we 
should try to reduce our pride, thinking that we are in fact not so beautiful after all, as we are 
unable to find any beauty.  
 In short, we need to practice as much as we can and continually. If we meditate, we need to 
d o  t h i s  c o n t i n u a l l y .  W e  s h o u l d  n o t  d o  i t  a t  times, and then not do it at other times. 
Sometimes we may be happy and so read a lot of texts, but at other times when we are 
unhappy we may stop completely. However, when it comes to meditation it is better not to 
stop, but to try every day to do even just a littl e bit. Many of us are busy, therefore we do not 
have much time to practice so this can be difficu lt. However, we have time to listen to a lot of 
gossip and to talk a lot! In fact , when engaging in meaningless talk, we can talk for three or 
four hours, even late into the evening. On the other hand, when it comes to practice, we 
either think that we have no ti me or that we will do it tomorro w as today we are too tired.  
 We should try to always have a mind of love  and compassion toward all sentient beings. If 
we cannot do this, we should at least try to  develop such minds toward our family and 
friends. Having done this, we can gradually exte nd this attitude to others, making it bigger 
and bigger. Everyone wishes for happiness and no one wants suffering. From this point of 
view we are all the same, whether learned or fool ish, rich or poor. All sentient beings are the 
same, even a cat wants to be happy and does not want suffering. However, animals cannot do 
much to take care of themselves. On the othe r hand, since we human beings are intelligent, 
we should try to be happy and to enjoy life, th inking that we have a good rebirth and a good 
family, have met the Buddha's teachings, and are able to study, to practice, and to meditate. 
We should think, “I am really very lucky.” We should be joyful and not depressed. We should 
not think we have problems. If we think we have problems, more and more problems will 
come. Because we have been born in cyclic existence, everyone has some problems and 
suffering. There is almost no one in this worl d who does not have some suffering. We have 
big sufferings and small sufferings, but thinking that we are suffering and unlucky is not useful. Instead we should think that we are ve ry lucky. We have a precious human rebirth 
with the eighteen qualities, ha ve met the Dharma, a virtuous spiritual friend, and friends with 
whom we can study and meditate. In this way we should relax!   Tuesday morning, 24 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim (Tibetan text page 19): 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
64 2 The importance of the discrimination of oneself as someone ill 
That being so, the discrimination of oneself as someone ill is very important. If it 
is present, the other ones also arise. However, if this remains merely words, 
without the meaning of the instructions  being accomplished for the sake of 
eliminating the mental afflictions you will only be a listener. You will resemble an 
ill person who is not rid of his illness but,  having sought a doctor, only cares about 
the medicinal composition and does not take the medicine. This is said in the King 
of Concentration [Sutra] . It also says: 
 
If, after I have explained the excellent Dharma, you do not apply it well, although you heard it, it is like with patients whose pouches are full of medicine, but who still cannot cure their own diseases. 
 
And in the Guide : 
 
These should be put into practice physically, 
what would be gained by uttering just the words? Would it be beneficial to the patients, if they just read how the medicine is meant to be used? 
 Here Lama Tsongkhapa sets out the importance of discriminating or recognizing oneself as being like a sick person. Thinking “I am sick,” we need to then rely on a good doctor, for 
example, a surgeon. Then we should try to fo llow whatever treatment he or she recommends 
a c c o r d i n g l y .  W e  a r e  s i c k  w i t h  t h e  a c t u a l  i l l n e s s  o f  c y c l i c  e x i s t e n c e .  T h e  D h a r m a  i s  l i k e  t h e  
medicine or treatment for this illness. In addi tion, we need someone who is like a doctor who 
can show us how to rely on the Dharma or ho w to take the medicine of the Dharma. Having 
received teachings on the Dharma, like receiv ing and taking medicine, we should put them 
into meditation practice. In this way our mental sickness, the illness of cy clic existence, can be 
cured. This is important.   On the other hand, if someone teaches us what to do but we do not put it into practice, it 
will not be very useful. If we understand the te achings but just listen to them as mere words, 
our afflictions cannot be eliminated. Therefore, we  need to practice care fully and to take care 
of ourselves. In this way, just as a patient or sick person can be cured and freed from his or her sickness by taking the medicine given to hi m or her by the doctor in accordance with his 
advice, so too if we practice the Dharma in accordance with the inst ructions given by the 
Buddha our mental illness can be cured and we ca n achieve the state of liberation or nirvana. 
We need to take care of ourselves because just as  if we do not take the medicine prescribed by 
the doctor we cannot be cured, similarly if havi ng received teachings we do not put them into 
practice our mental illness cannot be cured. 
 Here the King of Meditative Stabilizations  says that if someone, for example the Buddha, 
gives excellent and profound teachings and we listen to them but do not practice them 
perfectly, they cannot help us. Likewise, if a do ctor gives us many medicines but we just carry 
them around in a pouch without taking them, th ey cannot cure us. Therefore, we need to put 
effort into practice just as a sick person does whatever the doctor advises, even going so far as 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
65 to allow part of his body to be cut off in order to be cured. We need to put the Buddha’s 
teachings into practice in order to develop th e mind of enlightenment, love and compassion, 
and definite emergence in our minds. This is important.  
 If someone reads in a book that such-and-such a medicine can cure his illness, this reading 
alone will not cure him. He needs to take the medicine. Similarly, if one reads the lam-rim 
but does not practice it, it will not have any resu lt. Perhaps in this case it would be better to 
put effort into making money! For example, if  one learns how to make pizza, one can open a 
small restaurant and make money! If one just  reads books without doing any practice, the 
mind may become even more confused. I’m no t joking. We see people who ask for pujas, 
such as the Medicine Buddha Puja, when they are sick. Although this can help eliminate 
some external interferences, just reading medical texts cannot cure anyone’s illness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
3 The instruction to act [accordingly], having identified [the meaning of] “persistence” 
Therefore, the discrimination  that persistence eliminat es the disease should be 
developed. “Persistence” in this statement signifies putting into practice the topics 
of adopting and abandoning [of modes of  conduct] from the spiritual teacher’s 
instructions. {20} Now, to put them into practice you need to know them, and for 
that you need to listen and study. Again,  after studying and knowing, you need to 
practice, and therefore it is crucial to engage in the meaning of what has been 
studied to the best of one’s abilities. Othe rwise, at the time of death you will have 
regrets with regard to what you have not accomplished. You will resemble an actor 
imitating others or someone interested in sugar who eats only the cane. In 
Exhortation to the Supreme Intention35 it says: 
 
“I failed in my attainments, now what should I do?” 
that is how the childish wail while dying. 
They have not delved deep and the suffering is great; 
note that these are the faults of delighting in words. 
 
And: 
Like someone amidst the crowd observing a play, 
discussing the virtues of another hero, and failing with regard to his own persistence; note that these are the faults of delighting in words. 
 And: 
In the bark of sugarcane there is no essence,  the delightful flavor is inside; someone eating the bark is unable to find the delicious flavor of molasses.  
                                             
 
35 JN: lhag bsam skul ba , could also be translated as Exhortation to the Special Thought  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
66 Similarly, words are like the bark, 
the meaning of those words is like the taste. Consequently abandon delighting in words, 
always be conscientious, reflecting their meaning! 
 
We need to recognize what is important, for example, the medi cine of the Dharma teachings. 
Why is this important? It is important because ju st as in order to eliminate a physical sickness 
we need to take medicine and follow the treatme nt prescribed by the doctor, so too in order 
to eliminate our mental illness we need to put the Dharma into practice. To do so, we need 
to rely on a spiritual friend, a teacher, who te lls us what to abandon or discard and what to 
adopt or practice. Having been told this, we need  to understand what kind of actions of body, 
speech, and mind need to be abandoned, these be ing the non-virtuous acti ons of body such as 
k i l l i n g ,  t h e  n o n - v i r t u o u s  a c t i o n s  o f  s p e e c h  s u c h  a s  l y i n g ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  W e  a l s o  n e e d  t o  abandon bad behavior. We need to try to ab andon all these objects of abandonment. The 
objects to be practiced are the virtuous actions of not killing, not stealing, not engaging in 
sexual misconduct, not lying, and so forth. We  need to perform as many of these virtuous 
actions as we can, as in this way we will de velop the mind of enlightenment and correct view, 
whereby our inner qualities will develop and th e mental afflictions can be eliminated. For 
this, we need to put effort into the instructions that we have received or the knowledge that we have gained from reading texts such as th ose on the lam-rim. We should not read these 
texts as if they were books on history or geogra phy, this would not be ri ght. Rather we should 
read them and then put them into practice.  What is the purpose of listening to teachings?  Initially it is to gain knowledge. Having 
gained knowledge, what is the purpose of listen ing to teachings? It is to put effort into 
practicing whatever one has heard and understood. It is important to list en to teachings, to 
think about the meaning, and to put the meaning that has been understood into practice as 
m u c h  a s  o n e  c a n .  T h i s  i s  c o r r e c t .  I f  w e  d o  t h i s ,  a t  t h e  t i m e  o f  d e a t h  w e  w i l l  b e  f r e e  f r o m  regrets and sadness. We will be happy and joyf ul, like someone who having gone to another 
country returns home, happy to meet their fami ly and to once again stay with them. At the 
time of our death, the only thing that is of  any benefit is the Dharma. The non-virtuous 
actions that we have created will only bring us suffering and regret for what we have done. At 
the time of death, they may even cause us to have  a vision that we will go to the hell realm for 
example. We may see the Lord of Death in front of us, stacking up white stones for the virtue 
and black stones for the non-virtue that we di d, the black being much more than the white. 
Then, we may hear the Lord of Death telling us th at we must now go to the hell realm, to the 
hungry ghost realm, or to the animal realm. If  we are born in the hell realm we will not be 
happy. If we suddenly changed into a cat or a horse would we be happy?! There is a story 
about such an event. I won’t te ll it now. Or maybe I will! 
 In ancient times in India, a monk and a lay tantric practitioner were traveling together. 
One day the tantric practitioner asked the monk to go collect wood, as the monk was younger 
and stronger, while he remained behind. The mo nk suspected that he was plotting something 
but agreed and went off to get the wood. When  the monk had left, the tantric practitioner 
switched their pots of food and cooked and at e the monk’s food. Due to having eaten the 
monk’s food, the tantric practitioner was tran sformed into a horse. The monk returned, put 
his bags on the horse, and continued his journe y leading it behind him. When he arrived at 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
67 Mount Kailash, there were many saddhus there and he asked them if they had anything to 
transform the horse into a human. They made some dough balls, recited mantras on them, 
and fed them to the horse, which became a hu man being but with many sores on its back.  
 In  s ho rt , we n eed t o  be careful. We s ho u ld not wear a mask, like monks when they do 
ritual dances ( cham ) or like actors in a play, as there will be no benefit. Also we should not be 
like magicians who do tricks and make things  disappear. This means that we should not 
pretend to be a practitioner whil e in actuality not practicing.  
 We should take the essence or sweetness of ac tual sugar, which is inside the cane, rather 
than eating the outside cane or  bark, which has very little sweet ness. If one reads but does not 
practice or does not integrate one’s understandin g with one’s mind, it will be like eating the 
bark. We need to practice well and perfectly, putting it into our mind and not leaving it to be 
mere words on our lips. We need to extract the meaning in order to change our mind. It is 
important to do this.   In short, we need to extract the essence of  the Dharma. For example, the essence of the 
lam-rim consists of the three principal aspects of  the path to enlightenment: renunciation or 
definite emergence, the mind of enlightenment,  and correct view. These three are important. 
We need to try to develop the renunciation that is not just the wish to give up suffering, but is also the wish to give up the pleasures of cy clic existence, which appear to be happiness but 
in reality are the nature of suffering. In fact the more we enjoy the pleasures of cyclic existence, the more suffering and problems we will experience. For this reason, we need to 
think about the fact that these pleasures are essenceless and thereby give up the mundane 
happiness of this life and strive to achieve th e final happiness of nirvana or liberation. In 
other words, we need to develop the mind wi shing to attain either  nirvana or buddhahood 
that has renounced the pleasures of cyclic existe nce, wealth, name, and so forth. This is the 
meaning of renunciation or definite emergence put in a simple way.  The mind of enlightenment is the mind th at wishes to achieve enlightenment for the 
benefit of all sentient beings. We need to genera te this kind of mind. At first it will only be 
contrived, but gradually with familiarity it can become uncontrived. This mind is the cause of 
attaining buddhahood.   We also need correct view: the understand ing that all phenomena are empty of true 
existence or inherent existence. These three mind s are important. If one wishes to attain the 
state of nirvana and become a hearer or solita ry realizer foe-destroyer, one needs to have 
correct view. If one wishes to attain budd hahood, one needs the mind of enlightenment 
together with correct view. With the develo pment of these three minds, one can attain 
enlightenment and become free from cyclic ex istence and achieve the state of happiness. 
Practicing these three is like taki ng the essence of the sugarcane.  
 We also need to abandon talking too much, and to try to think more. We need to have 
conscientiousness at all times and to take care  of our own mind. This is mentioned in the 
lam-rim and is important in our daily life. Ha ving understood this, we need to develop a 
happy mind. In this way we can gain realizations.   Another example is an apple. If we eat the sk in there is not much ta ste, due to which we 
usually peel it, throw away the skin, and eat the fruit inside. We should practice the Dharma 
in a similar way, that is, we should take its essence. However, perhaps some people eat the 
skin and throw away the apple! But, as this wo uld not be intelligent, we should not do like 
this!  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
68  
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3A-3A2E Contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagata as exalted being 
The fifth: having brought to mind the teacher of the Dharma , the Bhagavan, one 
should develop respect. 
 
The Bhagavan is our teac her, Buddha Shakyamuni. Bhagavan  is a Sanskrit word, which is 
translated into Tibetan as chom den . Chom , meaning destroyed, indicates that he has destroyed 
the four maras, and den, meaning possess, indicates that he possesses the six qualities. I 
mentioned before that there are four maras or demons: the mara of the aggregates, the mara 
of the afflictions, the mara of the Lord of De ath, and the mara of th e sons-of-the-gods, the 
Lord of Desire. These are all demons in the sense that they harm us. Having taken this 
human body, when its relationship  with the mind is cut we die. Since this harms us, death is 
considered to be a demon.  
 The afflictions are demons because due to them we cannot achieve everlasting happiness 
and instead experience suffering. The aggregat es, especially the body, are demons because 
e v e r y  p a r t  o f  i t  c a n  b e c o m e  s i c k  o r  e x p e r i e n c e  p a i n  s u c h  t h a t  w e  h a v e  t o  g o  t o  a  h o s p i t a l ,  spend money, and so forth. The sons-of-the- gods are a type of god. Buddha Shakyamuni 
destroyed all these demons. He abandoned the afflictions and obscurations, abandoned the 
contaminated body and attained a wisdom or mental body, attained omniscient mind, and 
destroyed the root of the afflictions, due to wh ich he could no longer be overcome by death. 
He also destroyed the sons-of-the-gods because,  when he was sitting under the bodhi tree in 
meditation, the maras emanated beautiful wome n who danced around him and soldiers with 
weapons who shot arrows at him, yet he dest royed all of them. In this way the Buddha 
completely destroyed all four maras.   Buddha Shakyamuni came from a good family and had a son, Rahula, who later became a 
foe-destroyer. According to the Vinayasutra , he had everything, good knowledge, good 
wisdom, a good body, a good family, a good line age, and so forth. His body had the qualities 
of the 112 signs and exemplifications, his sp eech had the 64 melodious qualities, and his 
mind had the qualities of the 21 types of wisdom . These qualities, together with the cause of 
each of the signs and exemplifications, ar e explained in the ei ghth chapter of the Ornament for 
Clear Realizations .  
 I n  s h o r t ,  “ b h a g a v a n ”  r e f e r s  t o  B u d d h a  S h a k y a m u n i ,  w h o  i s  v e r y  k i n d  t o  u s  i n  t h a t  h e  taught the Dharma that we can put into practi ce. Thinking in this way and remembering his 
qualities, we should generate faith in him.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3A-3A2F Generating the discrimination of the Dharma tradition lasting long 
The sixth consists in the thought: “How ni ce it would be if, based on listening to 
such a Dharma, the Conqueror’ s teachings were to remain in the world for a long 
time.” 
 
Having listened to and practiced the Dharma, one should think “May the Buddha’s teachings 
abide for a long time in this world.” Having list ened to teachings, if one then teaches others 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
69 and then they teach others and so on and so on , the Buddha’s teachings will in fact last long. 
As it is important for this to happen, every day we should develop this wish.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3A-3B The way in which, having related this to one’s mind, it is necessary to listen 
Apart from that, if while explaining or li stening to the Dharma you keep your own 
mind to one side, the Dharma remaining sepa rate from it, then this will result in 
whatever is explained missing the point. Therefore, it is necessary to listen in order 
for one’s own continuum to reach certainty.  To illustrate this: {21} wanting to 
check whether or not there is dirt or some  other impurity on your face, one looks 
in a mirror and, understanding that there is dirt, removes it; likewise, when you 
hear the Dharma, your faulty behavior  appears in the mirror of the Dharma, 
whereupon you feel anguish thinking: “That is what my mind has come to.” Then, 
as you engage in eliminating faults and a ttaining qualities, you necessarily train in 
accordance with the Dhar ma. It is like in the Jataka Stories  [where] the son of 
Sutasa asks Prince Chandra for Dharma teachings in these terms:  
Beholding the forms of my bad conduct, in the dazzling mirror of Dharma, 
anguish arises forcefully in me, 
and I turn towards the Dharma. 
 Knowing this to be the thinking of a [s uitable] vessel for hearing the Dharma, the 
Bodhisattva gave him teachings. 
 We need to listen to teaching s, contemplate them, and then me ditate on them in order to 
integrate them with our own mind. This is important. If, on the other hand, we listen to teachings but do not apply them to our mind as an tidotes to our mental afflictions, it will be 
as if our mind is on one side and our Dharma on the other. It would be like buying a book in 
a shop and, without reading it, putting it on  a shelf! If the Dharma remains something 
external to us and unmixed with our mind, this would not be right. Whatever Dharma 
anyone teaches us, whatever Dharma we read in a book, or whatever Dharma we listen to on 
a tape recorder, video cassette, and so forth, we sh ould try to put it insi de our mind such that 
it becomes mixed with our mind. Just as milk put into tea mixes with the tea and it becomes 
milk tea, so too should we mix our mind and the Dharma in a similar way. In other words, we should not allow them to remain separate, like biscuits put into tea. If  we do this with the 
Dharma, it will not function well and will not b e  b e n e f i c i a l .  W e  s h o u l d  e n s u r e  t h a t  t h e  
instructions and our mind become inseparable. 
 We need to recognize the many mental af flictions that exist in our continuum. For 
example, if we have the affliction of laziness, we need to recognize it and apply its antidote. 
What is the antidote to laziness? It is joyous effort. On the othe r hand, if we see that there is 
miserliness in our mind, what antidote do we n eed to apply? We need to develop the mind of 
giving, the mind that wishes to give. We need to practice in this way.  
 In the morning when we first wake up, we look at our face in the mirror and, if we see that 
it is not clean, we clean it. If we see that our hair is messed, we comb it. Similarly, when our 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
70 faults appear in the mirror of Dharma, we n eed to clean them with wisdom. The Dharma 
mirror is wisdom. With wisdom, we can recognize our faults. When these faults appear in the 
Dharma mirror of wisdom, we should apply thei r antidotes. When we look in the Dharma 
mirror and see our many faults, it may bring us  mental suffering. What should we do then? 
We should determine to eliminate these faults. Seeing the qualities and benefits of the 
Dharma, we should put effort into practicing the Dharma. In this way our life will become 
useful. If we do not practice th e Dharma, it will not become usef ul but will be like the study 
of geography or history, which do not involve any practice. Acting in this way is not right. The 
Dharma of the lam-rim is the main tool for cleaning out our inner faults – our negative 
emotions, our bad behavior, and our bad actions. With it we can clean the three doors of our 
body, speech, and mind. Practicing in this way will benefit us as well as other people. This is very good. Therefore, we should try to do this.   In short, we need to study the lam-rim care fully, to read books about it, and to try to 
understand it. If we do not understand something, we should ask the people around us so as 
to eliminate our doubts. Virtuous friends are those who help each other to develop good 
attitudes, good actions, and a good mind, and to improve their practice of the Dharma. We 
should try in daily life to think, “I will help everyone as much as I can.” Even if we cannot 
help them, we can still develop the wish to help  them. In this way, our inner qualities will 
grow.   It is important to try as much as possible to  develop our inner qualities, mainly love and 
compassion. These two are important for everyone, for every living being. They are a universal 
Dharma or universal religion, whereas the diffe rent religions have different practices and 
different scriptures. There are also those wh o do not accept a religion, for example, 
Communists. However, if we mention love an d compassion to them, everyone will accept 
them. Love and compassion are a universal reli gion, no one will argue that we do not need 
them. Everyone knows that everyone needs love . Communists also have love and compassion, 
for example, they try to take care of the poor and to eliminate their poverty. They say this and 
wish to do this, however it is difficult to el iminate everyone’s poverty. But this shows that 
inside they have love and compassion. We also see that even mother cats, dogs, and birds try 
to take care of their offspring. Therefore, in daily life we should develop the minds of love 
and compassion.   We should also be more satisfied and have le ss desire for material things. We should think, 
“I have enough. I have all the necessary conditions.” If instead we think, “I already have a car but I want a better and more expensive one,” we will not be satisfied and will not be mentally 
happy. We need a satisfied and content mind, with less desire. On the other hand, we need 
more desire for inner attainments, for enligh tenment, and for Dharma practice. From the 
side of Dharma or from the side of developing inner qualities, we need more desire. We need a strong desire to attain enlightenment. We also  need dissatisfaction with what we have done 
so far. Dissatisfaction and more desire for mate rial things, on the other hand, is an obstacle 
and only brings suffering, therefore we need to give them up.   We also need to help others as much as possi ble. If we cannot benefit them at the very least 
we should try not to harm them. This is importan t. This is the main pr actice of Buddhism, it 
is the very basis. We also need to understand what pure Dharma is, to do this we need to study. This is not easy as we cannot understand  everything immediately, we need to put effort 
into gaining understanding. Therefore, we need  to eliminate the obstacle of laziness. There 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
71 are many types of laziness and we need to elim inate them all. We should not think, “Today I 
a m  t i r e d .  I  w o n ’ t  d o  i t  t o d a y ,  I ’ l l  d o  i t  tomorrow.” Then again tomorrow we think, “Not 
today, tomorrow.” Until we die, there will al ways be a tomorrow! For example, one of my 
students who is not well mentally often asks me, “Geshe-la, can I get better?” I say to him, 
“Maybe tomorrow you will be better!” I told him to  go to India or Nepal as he cannot work in 
Italy. He asked me if by going to India his ment al instability could be cured. I told him that 
this would depend on him. 
 W e  n e e d  t o  t a k e  c a r e  o f  o u r s e l v e s .  O t h e r s  c a n  h e l p  u s  f i n a n c i a l l y ,  b u t  i f  o u r  m i n d  i s  
unhappy they cannot help us. We need to apply the antidotes and develop our inner qualities. We need to apply the Dharma to our mind, as in this way we can eliminate faults. 
W e  s h o u l d  h a v e  a  g o o d  m i n d ,  a l w a y s  o n  t h e  s i d e  o f  t h e  D h a r m a .  I f  w e  d o  t h i s ,  w e  w i l l  become a vessel for listening to and contemplatin g the Dharma. In this case the bodhisattvas 
and buddhas will give us teachings. They know the mental attitudes of others.  
 In the past a man went to see a well-known guru in Tibet and asked him for instructions. 
The guru was busy with something else and said  to him “Get out” in the Indian language. 
The man thought that this was an instruction fo r him and that he should recite these words. 
Therefore, he continuously reci ted “Get out, get out, get out…” One day, thinking about the 
meaning of “Get out,” he came to understand th at he should get out of  cyclic existence. Due 
to this, he developed the wish to get out of cy clic existence, renuncia tion. In this way, he 
received an instruction, even though the gu ru had not had any intention to give him a 
teaching, he had just wanted him to leave!   There is another story about a lama who was a tantric practitioner. A man with many pock 
marks on his face and particularly on his no se went to see him and asked the lama for a 
mantra. This happened in upper Tibet near Ladhak. The lama said to him, “Your nose is like 
rudraksha ,” a large round seed with many protruding  bumps on it. The man, satisfied that he 
had received the transmission of a mantra, reti red to a cave and recited these words over and 
over again, like a mantra. He eventually beca me a healer and benefited many people. One day 
the lama became sick, his throat swollen and blocked. He saw many doctors and took many 
different types of medicine, but nothing cured hi s ailment. One day one of his attendants told 
him about the famous healer who lived in the ar ea and asked whether he could invite him to 
see the lama. The lama agreed. When the healer  arrived, the lama was lying down in great 
pain. The healer began to recite his “mantra, ” at which point the lama remembered saying 
this to him and burst out laughing. Due to this , an abscess filled with pus burst and he was 
cured! This shows that if there is  faith there will be benefit. If there is no faith, there will not. 
Therefore, when practicing the Dharma we need strong faith. This is important.  
 
Tuesday afternoon, 24 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 21):  
2B3A-3C How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments 
In short, thinking, “I sha ll attain buddhahood for the sa ke of all sentient beings. 
To attain that, I need to train in its caus es. Apparently for that it is necessary to 
listen to the Dharma, therefore I shall list en to the Dharma,” you should generate 
the mind of enlightenment, consider the be nefits of study, and listen with joy, 
abandoning the faults of a vessel. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
72  
In brief, we need to develop the mind wishin g to attain enlightenment or buddhahood. Then, 
in order to achieve buddhahood, it is necessary to train in its causes. Since a result cannot 
arise without its causes and conditions, we need to train in the necessary causes and 
conditions for enlightenment. For this, we need to listen to the Dharma in order to achieve 
buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings. In this way we should generate the mind of 
enlightenment. We should think about the many  advantages of hearing the Dharma, try to 
remember them, and listen to th e Dharma with joy. In this way, we will listen to the 
teachings, having abandoned the th ree faults of being like an upside down vessel, like a dirty 
vessel, and like a leaky vessel. Just as if one we re to pour water into an upside down vessel it 
cannot go inside, similarly if while listening to the Dharma we fall asleep, the teachings 
cannot go inside. Just as even nect ar that has been poured into a vessel that is dirty and smelly 
becomes undrinkable, similarly if we listen wh ile looking for faults in the teachings, the 
Dharma will not be of any benefit.  Just as when a vessel has a hole in it, whatever is put into it 
will leak out, similarly if we listen to teachings but forget what we heard as soon as they finish, 
that is, they go in one ear and out the other, this would not be useful. We should listen well 
and carefully, with a single-pointed mind. One wh o does this is the best vessel for the Dharma 
or the best disciple. In this way receiving teaching s will be of benefit. Similarly, if we forget 
what we have read as soon as we close the book, there will not be much result. On the other hand, if we remember what we have read of the Buddhas teachings, it will be of great benefit. By means of mindfulness we should try to keep  whatever we have heard or studied in our 
mind.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3B How to explain 
1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma 
2 Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings 
3 What kind of attitude and activities to explain with 
4 Distinction between who the explanations should and should not be given to 
The second one has four points: Consid ering the benefits of explaining the 
Dharma,. generating respect for the teac her and the teachings, what kind of 
attitude and activities to explain wi th, and the distinction between who the 
explanations should and should not be given to. 
2B3B-1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma 
First: In the Treasury36 it says: 
 
Giving Dharma free of mental afflictions, 
teach according to sutra and other true texts. 
 In its auto-commentary it says:  
                                             
 
36 cf. 10 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
73 Therefore, those who ex plain the Dharma incorrectly and those who 
explain it with an afflicted mind craving for material gain, respect, and 
fame, {22} corrupt their own great merits.  
 
Therefore, a pure motivation to teach the Dharma is extremely important, and just 
like past meditators said, “I have neve r explained the Dharma without meditating 
upon impermanence before the session,” it  is crucial to review it beforehand.  
 In Exhortation to the Superior Intention  two groups of 20 advantages of giving the 
gift of Dharma in the absence of material  things and the concern for gain, respect, 
and the like are set forth. Also, in Drag Shul Chan37 it says that the merit of a 
householder giving immeasurable material things is exceeded by an ordained 
person giving a single verse of Dharma. 
 There are many benefits of giving or explai ning the Dharma. Howeve r, the motivation for 
giving teachings should be that  of wishing to benefit, it sh ould not be motivated by the 
mental afflictions. We should think to offer teachings, without being attached to gaining 
material things, wishing to become famous, an d so forth. We should not teach with an 
afflicted mind, but should have a pure motivati on wishing to give teachings to benefit other 
sentient beings. With this motivation we should  teach sutra, such as the twelve branches of 
scripture, and so forth. This then will be perfect.   If we give a mistaken explanation this will also  not be of any benefit. In addition, if we are 
motivated by the wish to gain material things, this would not be correct. Also teaching in 
order to have others act as our servants is no t correct, nor is teaching  with the thought to 
become famous. All of these will only cause ou r previously accumulated merit to degenerate. 
Therefore, if we wish to give teachings it is im portant to do so with a pure motivation, not an 
afflicted motivation. An example of a pure moti vation is the mind of enlightenment, as well 
as compassion and love. If we give teachings with such a motivation, we will teach in an 
excellent way. On the other hand, if we teac h the Dharma or the scriptures with a mind 
afflicted by attachment, pride, and so forth, then it just becomes idle talk, which is non-
virtuous. In fact the Treasury of Manifest Dharma  says that if one teaches even the twelve 
branches of scriptures motivate d by attachment, pride, and so forth, although one’s speech 
will appear to be Dharma, in actuality it will be  idle talk, one of the ten non-virtuous actions. 
Therefore, when we teach the Dharma we should develop a g ood motivation thinking to 
benefit our listeners.   Some meditators of the past said that  they never teach wi thout meditating on 
impermanence in a previous session. This impl ies that they meditated on the certainty of 
death, the uncertainty of when death will come , and the fact that it cannot be turned away. 
We too can do a short meditation on impermanen ce before giving a teaching. We could also 
meditate on love, compassion, or emptiness, yet impermanence is the best. This is because if 
we remember death-impermanence, we will rememb er to practice the Dharma. Therefore, we 
need to keep in mind, “I am impermanent. I am changing momentarily. Now, even though it seems that I am healthy, when I lie down to  sleep I may not wake up tomorrow. I may die 
before then.” Recently someone called me to s ay that the evening before her partner had been 
                                             
 
37 Sutra Requested by  Drag Shul Chan  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
74 fine, but the next morning when she went to wa ke him, he did not move, he was dead. This 
happens because it is uncertain when death will come. 
 When we do recitations or prayers and make offerings, for example, of water, light, or 
flowers to the Buddha, we should first develop a good motivation, thinking to do so in order 
to benefit all sentient beings. In this way, we will create a lot of merit and all our actions will 
be successful and all interferences will be eliminated. Therefore, at the beginning our 
motivation is important. There are two types of motivation: causal motivation and time 
motivation. Of these, the most important is th e causal motivation. Then, if the motivation 
were also good at the time of the action that would be the best . However, if we are unable to 
generate a good motivation at that time, then  we should at least keep a neutral mind. For 
example, if one’s mother were to have a lot of  suffering and pain, out of love for her one may 
come to think, “It would be better for my mother  to die.” If one were to then kill her, while 
the causal motivation would be compassion an d love, the motivation at the time of the 
action, such as giving her poison, woul d be negative. This is taught in the Hundred Actions 
Sutra . On the other hand, to kill one’s mother ou t of anger or hatred is an action of 
immediate retribution.  If we give teachings without seeking wealth , respect, service, fame, and so forth, but 
instead, having completely abandoned these, give teachings out of love, this will be of benefit. 
This is the generosity of  giving the Dharma. The Exhortation to the Superior Intention  describes 
two sets of twenty advantages to  giving Dharma in this way.  
 Drag shul chan  means Wrathful Track. This text says th at if a lay person gives many material 
t h i n g s  s u c h  a s  f o o d ,  d r i n k ,  m o n e y ,  c l o t h i n g ,  a n y  k i n d  o f  g o o d  t h i n g ,  t h e r e  w i l l  b e  g r e a t  
benefit. However, if an ordained monk or nun gives teachings, even just one verse of Dharma, 
it is of much greater benefi t and creates more merit.  
 In short, if we teach Dharma with a good motivation, we will create a lot of merit. On the 
other hand, if we have an afflicted or faulty motivation, even though we teach the Dharma it 
does not become meritorious, rather it become s non-meritorious or non-virtuous. Therefore, 
we have to be careful how we give teachings. If with a good motivation we give even a few 
words of explanation it will be of great benefit, whereas if we teach a lot with an afflicted motivation it will not even be virtuous. In addi tion, if we work for a Dharma center such as 
Lama Tzong Khapa Institute with a good motivation, not minding whether it is hot or cold and so forth, we can purify non-virtuous action s and create merit. All of this depends on our 
motivation.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3B-2 Generating respect for the Teacher and the teachings 
Second: When uttering the Mother of the Buddhas,38 the Teacher39 himself arranged 
a seat and so on. Accordingly, since the Dharma is a field of veneration even for 
buddhas, one should bring to mind the positive qualities and kindness of the 
Dharma and the Teacher, and generate respect for them. 
 
                                              
38 A common epithet of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras 
39 i.e., the Buddha himself 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
75 We should have respect for the Teacher and the teachings. Even when Buddha Shakyamuni 
himself gave teachings, he began by arranging a pr oper seat and prostrating. He did this out of 
respect for the Dharma. The Mother of the Conquerors  refers to the Perfection of Wisdom 
Sutras, whether the Heart Sutra , or the Perfection of Wisdom  in 8,000, 25,000, or 100,000 
verses. They are called “mother” because, just as a mother gives birth to sons, these sutras, 
which contain explicit teachings on emptine ss and implicit teachings on the mind of 
enlightenment and so forth, are like mothers because they give rise to the Conqueror’s 
children, the bodhisattvas, and then these bodhisattvas give rise to buddhas.  
 Therefore, we too should pay respect to th e Dharma. For example, we should treat even 
Dharma texts with respect. We should not thro w them on the ground, sit on them, or walk 
o n  o r  o v e r  t h e m  a s  t h i s  w o u l d  b e  a  g r e a t  n e gativity. We should generate respect for the 
teachings through remembering their good qual ities, and generate respect for the Teacher 
through remembering the kindness of the Buddh a .  T h e n  w e  s h o u l d  d e v e l o p  t h e  m i n d  o f  
enlightenment or a good heart. In this way our practice of the Dharma will become excellent.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3B-3 What kind of attitude and activities to explain with 
A Attitude 
B Activities 
The third one has two points: attitude and activities.40 
2B3B-3A Attitude 
First, [the Sutra] Requested by Sagaramati  puts forward five discriminations – 
generating the discrimination of oneself as a doctor, of the Dharma as medicine, 
of the one listening to the Dharma as a pa tient, of the Tathagata as a holy being, 
and of the mode of the Dharma as abiding for a long time – as well as the 
development of loving kindness towards surrounding people. The envy [born from] anxiety that others are superior, the laziness of putting  things off, the 
disenchantment of fatigue due to explai ning things over and over again, the 
praising of oneself and chit-chatting abou t other people’s faults, the concealment 
of examples regarding the Dharma,
41 as well as concern for material things such as 
food and clothing, should be abandoned,  thinking, “Those very merits from 
teaching for the sake of my own and othe rs’ enlightenment are the provisions of 
my happiness.” 
 
W h a t  k i n d  o f  a t t i t u d e  d o  w e  n eed when teaching the Dharma? The Sutra Requested by 
Sagaramati  says that we need five discriminations:  
(1) the discrimination of onesel f, the teacher, as a doctor,  
(2) the discrimination of the teachi ngs that one gives as medicine,  
(3) the discrimination of the listeners as patients,  
(4) the discrimination of the Ta thagata as a holy being, and  
(5) the discrimination of the wish for the Buddha's teaching to last for a long time.  
                                              
40 JN: bsam pa dang sbyor ba , also translated as “thought and action” 
41 JN: chos la dpe mkhyud byed pa  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
76 In addition, we should also develop love for th e people around us. We should not be jealous 
or envious of people who are superior to us. We  should not be lazy, th inking to do something 
tomorrow. We should be tireless even when givi ng teachings again and again. We should not 
praise ourselves saying, “I am a good teacher. I am a marvelous person,” and so forth, while 
criticizing others. We should instead reveal ou r faults and praise ot hers’ excellences. We 
should not be like, for example, Berlusconi, th e Italian prime minister, and George W. Bush, 
the American president, who say that that th ey are compassionate men and good Christians! 
Although many people do this , we should not. When someon e says that we did something 
bad, it is not right to immediately get angry. Instead, when others point out our faults, we 
should accept that we have made a mistake,  promise not to do it again, and ask for 
forgiveness. 
 “The concealment of examples ” means that we should not be  miserly with the Dharma, for 
example, wanting to keep some meditation techniques to oursel ves. I have met some painters 
who know special painting techniques but do no t teach them to their disciples. We should 
not do this.  We should also not teach the Dharma out of a wish to gain material things such as food 
and clothing. So what kind of motivation shou ld we have? We should have the motivation 
wishing that oneself and others attain enlightenm ent. In this way, we will accumulate merit, 
which will bring about happiness for ourselves. This is the correct and perfect motivation.   When a doctor examines a patient, he should be motivated by the wish to cure the person 
through recognizing the sickness and prescribin g the right treatment. Likewise, the Buddha 
gave teachings motivated by the wish to eliminat e the afflictions of sentient beings. Therefore, 
these teachings are real medicine. If Buddha  Shakyamuni were to come here, we would 
g e n e r a t e  f a i t h  t h a t  h e  i s  a  h o l y  b e i n g ,  j u s t  as when the Pope visits a place, thousands of 
people, out of faith that he is a holy being, come together to listen to him with respect. 
Similarly, the Buddha is also a holy being, a ta thagata, therefore we should have faith in him. 
“Tathagata” means “thus gone.” Where has he gone? He has gone to a pure land or to 
buddhahood, that is, he has gone beyond cyclic existence. However, his teachings still remain 
in this world, Jambudvipa, the southern continent.   In addition, we should try to develop love  and compassion for the people around us, 
wishing to help them and to gi ve them happiness and the causes of happiness. In this way we 
will create only excellence. We should also not develop jealousy for those who have higher 
qualities than ourselves, like, for example, tw o beautiful girls who, looking at each other, 
become jealous of each other. We do not de velop jealousy toward poor people such as 
beggars, but develop it for those with power and beauty.  W e  s h o u l d  n o t  b e  l a z y ,  t h i n k i n g  “ I  w i l l  d o  i t  t o m o r r o w . ”  W e  s h o u l d  n o t  p r o c r a s t i n a t e .  When we give teachings, we shou ld not think, “I am tired. I will do it tomorrow.” Instead we 
should be tireless. We should also not think, “I  am a great teacher. I am the best meditator,” 
and then criticize others saying that they are not good meditators and so forth. Also, when 
someone asks us to teach something, we should  not say that we do not know this subject 
when in fact we do know it. We should not be  miserly with the Dharma . We should also not 
teach in order to gain food, clothing, and other material things. Nor should we teach to gain 
money. We should abandon teaching with an a fflicted motivation. Rather we should teach, 
thinking to do so in order that we ourselve s and all sentient beings may achieve buddhahood. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
77 If we teach with this motivation , we will create a lot of merit. With this merit, we will gain 
happiness and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3B-3B Activities 
{23} Second: Having washed and dressed in  immaculately clean clothes, you sit on 
a cushion on a Dharma throne in a clean and pleasant place. If you then chant a 
mantra for subjugating demons, demons an d the gods of the demonic category will 
not come closer to you than a perimeter of 100 yojanas42, and even if they do 
come, they will not be able to create  any obstacles, as it says in [the Sutra] Requested 
by Sagaramati.  Therefore, chant that mantra and,  with an extremely radiant facial 
complexion, give your explanations conjoined with the conditions for ascertaining 
their meaning – examples, proofs, and quotations. 
 When giving teachings, previously we should  have washed our body and dressed in clean 
clothes. The place where they will be given should also be clean and pleasant. We should place a Dharma throne there and si t on a cushion. Then the text says that we should recite a 
mantra for subjugating demons, however we usually recite the Heart Sutra  in order to 
eliminate interferences. The Sutra Requested by Sagaramati  says that due to reciting this mantra, 
demons and the gods of the cla ss of demons will not come clos er than 100 yojanas to us, and 
even if they do come near us they will be unable to harm us.    We should teach with a nice expression, a smiling face. We should also teach by setting 
out analogies, by giving reasonings, and by ci ting scriptures that clarify the meaning. An 
example of reasoning is the syllogism: a table is impermanent because it is produced by causes 
and conditions. For example, human beings ar e impermanent. Why? Because they change 
momentarily; their mind changes, their attitu de changes, and their body changes, even 
though we cannot see these changes which occu r in each instant. In this way, we are 
impermanent. Our body is also suffering; for exam ple, if due to suffering from the heat in a 
hot room we go out into the cold, we will expe rience the suffering of cold. This body is the 
nature of suffering. In addition, to giving analogies and reasonings, we can quote the Buddha's teachings or the texts of the Indian pand its. In this way our teachings will be easier 
for others to understand.   There was a famous Kadam lama from Pemb o called “Potowa,” who wrote a text called 
Precious Heap of Jewels of Analogies . In this text he gave a teachi ng and then set out an analogy 
to clarify it. He did this because analogies or examples make it easier for us to understand the meaning. However, at times examples can be an obstacle because we only remember the 
example and not the meaning!  In our everyday life we should develop love for others and remember impermanence. Because 
wealth is impermanent, at times we may be ri ch and other times we may lose everything and 
become extremely poor. Such things happen.  In the West there have been a lot of 
technological and scientific developments due to  which we presently have a high standard of 
                                             
 
42 one dpag tshad  (yojana in Sanskrit) is equivalent to ab out 4.5 miles (7.4 km) or 9 miles (14.8 km)  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
78 life, but everything can change. Things develo p and then degenerate. We were born a small 
baby, then grew into a youth who was healthy and strong both mentally and physically, and 
then things gradually began to worsen due to becoming old. When we are old, we may even 
become unable to sit down on a chair, go to the toilet alone, and so forth. Why is this? It is 
because of impermanence. Things change. If thin gs were permanent, or existed inherently or 
truly, they would not change, they would alw ays remain the same. Space, for example, is 
always empty, it never changes. Why? Becaus e it is permanent. While our world can be 
completely destroyed, empty space will still remain. That which is permanent remains, 
whereas the impermanent arises and disappears. For this reason, we need to meditate on 
death-impermanence. We should remember that everything is changing momentarily, even 
our own mind. For example, maybe we wish to do something, and then in the next instant change our mind. This is because we are impe rmanent and always chan ging. Therefore, we 
need to meditate on impermanence. We also need  to develop love and compassion as well as 
humility.  
 
Wednesday morning, 25 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 23): 
2B3B-4 Distinction between who the explanations should and should not be given to  
Fourth: In the Sutra on Discipline  it says: “Do not act without being asked to.” 
Accordingly, do not teach without having been asked, and even when someone 
asks, you should examine the vessel. Howeve r, knowing someone to be a vessel, it 
is acceptable to teach even without ha ving been asked, as it says in the King of 
Concentration [Sutra] . Further modes of conduct are set forth in the Sutra on 
Discipline . 
 
The Sutra on Discipline  (Vinayasutra ) says that one should not give teaching unless one has 
been specifically asked to do so. In other word s, in order for us to give teachings, someone 
should have requested us to do so. If, on the other hand, no one has made such a request, 
one should not teach. Then, when someone reques ts us to teach, we should examine whether 
or not he or she is a proper vessel for the teachi ngs. For example, just as in the past in India 
when someone wanted to enter a monastery an d receive vows, he had to live near the 
monastery for four months and do some work so that his behavior and discipline could be 
examined. Having received the first vows, the vows of a novice monk ( shramanera ), later on 
one can take the vows of full ordination. Simi larly, when someone re quests teachings, we 
should first examine whether he or she is a suit able person to receive these teachings. If we 
find that he or she is a proper vessel, we ca n then give him or her the teachings. However, 
there is an exception to this general rule. If we  already know that the person is an appropriate 
vessel, we can give teachings to him or her ev en if he or she does not ask for them. The Sutra 
on Discipline  explains the correct behavior of a teacher and that of a listener. For example, this 
text says that one should not teach someone who is  eating, for example, a piece of chocolate; 
one should not teach someone who is lying do wn or sleeping; one should not teach while 
oneself is standing and the disciple is lying do wn; and one should not te ach if oneself is lying 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
79 d o w n  a n d  t h e  d i s c i p l e  i s  s t a n d i n g .  T h i s  t e x t  s a y s  m a n y  t h i n g s  w i t h  r e g a r d  t o  p r o p e r  a n d  
improper behaviors.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B3C Generally, how to proceed at the end 
1 What to do afterwards – the actual things to do 
The roots of virtue of teaching and li stening in this way should be sealed43 by 
means of pure aspirational prayers such as the Prayer of Good Conduct . 
 
The roots of virtue created by explaining or li stening to the Dharma should be sealed with a 
prayer such as the Prayer of Good Conduct  (Prayer of Samantabhadra ). In other words, whenever 
we create virtuous actions, we should immediat ely dedicate that they become the cause of all 
sentient beings achieving enlightenment. In this way, our virtuous actions will not be 
exhausted until all sentient beings achieve enli ghtenment. For example, if we were to put a 
single drop of water into the ocea n, that drop of water will rema in as long as the ocean itself 
does not dry up. Likewise, when we practice, stud y, or do recitations, we should immediately 
say a prayer of dedication, whereby our virtuous  actions will not go to waste but will remain 
until enlightenment is achieved. The P r a y e r  o f  G o o d  C o n d u c t  i s  t h e  b e s t  o f  p r a y e r s ,  d u e  t o  
which it is also known as the King of Prayers  (or in Italian as the Queen of Prayers !).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2 The benefits of this 
There is no doubt that, if th e Dharma is explained and listened to in this manner, 
in just one session the advantages stated  above will arise. Due to the act of 
listening and explaining the Dharma hitting home, all the karmic obscurations 
accumulated previously of not respecting  the Dharma or the one expounding it, 
etc. are purified, and all the ones being newly accumulated are nipped in the bud.44 
 
There was a citation above that said that ther e is benefit from giving even one word of 
teachings and from listening to even one word . It is important that at the beginning of 
explaining or listening that our motivation is good. Even if one gives teachings or listens to 
teachings for just one session, there will be many benefits. It can be of help to other sentient 
beings. Therefore, when giving or  listening to teachings, the esse ntial point is to have a good 
motivation. At the beginning one should develop the mind of love, the mind of 
enlightenment, or a good heart, and then at th e end one should dedicate the virtuous actions 
that one has created. In this way, there will be great benefit. For example, if in other lives we 
did not respect the teacher or the teachings, the Dharma, due to which we created karmic 
obscurations, these can be purified and those that have been newly created will be stopped 
from increasing. In this way, giving or listening to teachings has much benefit.  
 In the past we created karmic obscurations that  need to be purified. For example, why is it 
that some people try to understand the teachi ngs and think a lot about them, but still cannot 
                                              
43 lit.: planted (to) thrive 
44 JN: ‘ phrod ‘chad , literally, “are stopped from increasing” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
80 understand them? Or why is it that some people  who wish to memorize them are unable to do 
so? It is due to their karmic obscurations. Thes e karmic obscurations are the main obstacle to 
developing inner knowledge, Dharma knowledge.  There are many types of obscurations, for 
example, karmic obscurations, fruitional obscurat ions, afflictive obscurations, obscurations to 
knowledge, and so forth. We have many obscur ations, some of which are heavier than others. 
Fruitional or maturation obscurations are, for ex ample, rebirth as a anim al such as a cat or 
dog. One’s body itself is a fruitional result and a fruitional obscuration because it is an 
obscuration that prevents one from understandin g the Dharma as well as  other things. As an 
animal one only knows how to eat, drink, and fight with each other. One remains stupid and 
has neither knowledge or culture, nor a religion.  
 Because we have karmic obscurations, we n eed to purify them. How can we do this? By 
applying the four opponent forces and reciting mantras, doing prostrations, making offerings, 
practicing generosity to animals and poor hu man beings, and so forth. However, the best 
method of purification is meditation on emptin ess, the lack of inhere nt existence. This is 
because the root of all the many  negative actions that we have created is ignorance or the 
conception of a self, and the main antidote to this ignorance is the wisdom realizing 
emptiness. For this reason, meditation on emptin ess is the best of all purification methods. 
However, one can also recite the Confession to the Thirty-Five Buddhas  or the hundred-syllable 
mantra of Vajrasattva, or do  the Samayavajra practice or th e burnt offering ritual of 
Vajradaka, which involves burning black sesame seeds in a fire. All of these practices purify 
our negativities. By doing them, we can become completely pure.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
3 The general mode of behavior of saints 
Due to the manner of listening hitting home, the instructions set forth bring 
benefit in the mind. Seeing this, all the earlier saints in general {24} were diligent 
in this, and especially the former gurus of  this instruction persevered at it with 
utmost diligence. 
 
If we listen correctly and perfec tly when someone gives us instruct ions, this will be of benefit. 
The past holy beings saw this and put them in to practice, therefore we too need to follow 
their example. We should check what they did,  and then emulate them. Like them, we should 
develop a good attitude and good behavior. Th e lamas or gurus of the past, understanding 
that it was very important, were very careful to do this. We too should try to follow the 
example of holy beings such as Buddha Sh akyamuni, Nagarjuna, Asanga, and the other 
Indian pandits, as well as Tibetan lamas such  as Lama Tsongkhapa, the founder of the Gelug 
tradition, and the founders of the other sects. We need to understand how they practiced and 
try to do the same.  
 In our daily life that which is of great benefi t and easy to practice is the lam-rim. Tantra 
may appear to be easy, but at times it can be of great benefit and at other times it can be 
dangerous, therefore we need to take care. For example, when practicing  action tantra (kriya 
tantra), it is important not to eat black food but to eat white food, to keep the body clean, 
and to practice in a clean place. When practi cing tantra, one takes pledges (samayas) that if 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
81 broken can cause one to fall into the hell realms ( naraks ) or the other lower realms. Therefore, 
we need to be careful.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
4 The advice to cherish them, since it is a great fault to turn away from them 
These are evidently great instructions. If one does not reach certainty about this 
and one’s attitude does not change, as is  often the case, no matter how much the 
Dharma, profound and vast, is explained, one will become like a god fallen to [the 
rank of] a demon, and that very Dharma will become an aid to the afflictions. 
Therefore, since it is like they say, “If yo u err on the first of the month, [you will 
do so] until the fifteenth,45” the wise strive at this method of transforming what 
has been heard and explained into the path, and make every opportunity to 
explain and listen into something worthwhi le. For this is the best preparation for 
teaching the instructions. 
 
If we practice in a way that is opposite to the instructions, we will accumulate many faults. 
Therefore, we need to take care of or cheris h the correct and perfect way of practicing. That 
the instructions appear to be great means that wh atever we practice we should try to do it in 
the correct way. We should not do the opposite as this would be dangerous. Therefore, these 
instructions are very great.   If we teach the vast, the six perfections an d so forth, or the profound, emptiness, to 
someone who does not understand the meanin g of the Dharma or whose mind quickly 
changes, first thinking “yes” and then “no,” ther e will not be any benefit, only danger. Here 
the text says that they will be like “a god wh o falls to a demon,” why is this? If we rely on 
mundane gods, they may be helpful for some time  but later on, if they become unhappy with 
us because of some mistake, they  may transform into demons that harm us. There is this risk. 
Our practice of Dharma is the antidote to the mental afflic tions and the antidote to the 
conditions for the generation of the mental a fflictions. While many people listen to the 
teachings and understand what is said, it can happen that their knowledge of Dharma 
becomes a condition for the generation of the afflictions. For example, they may develop 
pride, thinking that they are very knowledgea ble. Or they may teach out of attachment to 
material things or fame. In either case, teaching  becomes a cause for the afflictions to increase 
rather than to lessen. Since there is this danger, we need to be careful. Whatever 
understanding or knowledge we have, we should teach it to others motivated by love, and teach with humility, in a subdued way, withou t pride. This is what is meant here. For 
example, the Dalai Lama always reiterates that h e  i s  n o t  s p e c i a l ,  t h a t  h e  i s  j u s t  a  n o r m a l  
simple monk who is trying to practice bodhichi tta but does not yet have any realization of it. 
Just this shows us something. Hence, whatever knowledge we have, we sh ould humbly share it 
with others without pride. Our knowledge of the Dharma must become an antidote to our 
mental afflictions, it should not become a cond ition for our mental afflictions to grow! This 
would not be the right way to practice.  
                                             
 
45 i.e., full moon day 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
82  The text gives the example that beginning the month by thinking “Today is the first day of 
the month” when it is in fact the second, re sults in this mistake continuing until the full 
moon on the fifteenth. In other words, one begins with a mist ake and continues to think in 
this way until the full moon. Therefore, to avoi d mistakes, we should try to understand how 
to listen to and teach the Dharma. A good moti vation – the mind of enlightenment, love and 
compassion, renunciation, and so forth – are ne cessary for both listening and explaining. If 
we teach or listen with this motivation, our te aching or listening will become a condition for 
our inner spiritual path. In other words, we will come to achieve a path. A path is defined as: 
a clear knower conjoined with uncontrived renunc iation. A path is a road, and if it is good 
road we can travel in any kind of vehicle on it. Similarly, to get to buddhahood we need a 
good path or road. Whether listening or ex plaining we need intelligence and a good 
motivation. They will bring success in and benefit to listening and explaining, and this in turn 
will bring about a good result. Thus, a good mo tivation and good behavior are the necessary 
preparation for giving teachings and listening to teachings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 24): 
Explanation of the stages by which a student of  the actual instructions should be guided 
2B4 The stages by which a student should be  lead through the actual instructions 
A The root of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher 
B The stages of how to train the mind once you have relied 
The fourth one has two points: the root of  the path: how to rely on a spiritual 
teacher, and the stages of how to train the mind once you have relied. 
 
This section set out how to guide a disciple in the path. We first need to rely on a spiritual 
friend, a teacher. How should we rely on him, the root of the path? Be cause the generation of 
realizations in our mental continuum depends upon  a teacher, we need to rely on a teacher. 
However, this teacher must be qualified. If he is not qualified, we will not be able to develop 
inner realizations. In fact if we rely on a teac her with inferior qualities, our qualities will 
degenerate. If we rely on a te acher with equal qualities to ourselves, our qualities will not 
develop but will remain the same. If we rely on a teacher with superior qualities, our qualities 
and realizations will increase. Therefore, we need to rely on a virtuous spiritual friend or guru 
who is excellent.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B4A The root of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher 
1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty 
2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain it 
The first one has two points: the somewhat elaborate explanation for generating 
certainty and the condensed presen tation of how to sustain it. 
 
How should we rely on a guru? Having found a guru, we should train in relying on him. This 
is explained elaborately, and then how to sustain the certainty is briefly explained. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
83 2B4A-1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty 
A The need for relying on a spiritual master since all good qualities depend on him 
B The actual way to rely on him 
2B4A-1A The need for relying on a spiritual master since all good qualities depend on him 
First: As all goodness, starting off from th e development of a single positive quality 
and the decrease of a single fault in the mind of the disciple, has its root in the 
sublime friend, the way to rely on him is important in the beginning. 
 
Since all good qualities and knowledge develop in dependence upon relying on a teacher, 
right from the beginning we need a teacher. For example, in order to learn how to write or to 
draw or to paint, we first need a teacher to teach us this. By relying upon him, we come to 
gain such knowledge. Similarly, with respect to  the Dharma it is extr emely important to rely 
on a teacher. Why? Even a single quality that arises in the mind of disciples, those to be 
s u b d u e d ,  d o e s  s o  i n  d e p e n d e n c e  o n  a  t e a c h e r .  I n  s h o r t ,  t o  d e v e l o p  e v e n  o n e  s i n g l e  b i t  o f  
knowledge and to eliminate even one single fault, it is important in the beginning to rely on a 
teacher.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B4A-1B The actual way to rely on him 
1 Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous spiritual friend 
2 Characteristics of the one who relies, the disciple 
3 The way he relies on him 
4 The benefits of reliance 
5 The drawbacks of not relying 
6 Summary of the meaning 
In this regard there are six [points]: characteristics of the one to be relied on, the 
virtuous spiritual friend; characteristics of  the one who relies, the disciple; the way 
he relies on him; the benefits of reliance; the drawbacks of not relying; {25} and a 
summary of the meaning. 
2B4A-1B1 Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous spiritual friend 
A Identification of a “guru” 
B His characteristics 
2B4A-1B1A Identification of a “guru” 
First: Although, generally speaking, in terms of the individual vehicles, a lot is said 
[about this] in the [Buddha’s] excellent words along with the commentaries, here 
only a virtuous spiritual teacher who guid es one on the path to buddhahood, the 
Mahayana, by gradually guiding on the path of the three [types of] beings, will be 
presented. 
2B4A-1B1B His characteristics 
1 Highest characteristics 
2 Middling characteristics 
3 Minimum characteristics 
2B4A-1B1B-1 Highest characteristics 
A Good qualities he himself needs 
In the Ornament of the Sutras  it says that the disciple needs to rely on a spiritual 
teacher endowed with ten properties: 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
84 A spiritual teacher with discipline, calm, and complete peace, 
more qualities, with effort, rich in scriptures, who has thoroughly realized suchness, is eloquent, 
loving, and never disheartened – on that one rely! 
 
We need to rely on a qualified guru or virt uous spiritual friend, that is, one who possesses 
certain qualities or characteristics. In genera l in the Buddha’s teachings and commentaries it 
is said that different qualities are necessary for a Hinayana and for a Mahayana teacher. For 
example, ten qualities are set out in the Sutra of Discipline , another ten qualities are set out for 
a Mahayana teacher, and another ten qualities are set out for a tantra teacher. However, in general a teacher needs to possess the good qualit y of knowledge, that is, he should know the 
subject that he is teaching. If someone is calle d a teacher but does not know the subject, he 
will not be able to help or benefit others. Th erefore, it is important that a teacher possess 
good knowledge.  
 In this context, we are talking about the st ages of the path to enlightenment. Among the 
three vehicles, the great, middling, and small, we  are discussing a Mahayana teacher as in this 
context we are talking about the great path , the Mahayana, that wishes to achieve 
buddhahood. In order to follow this  path we need a qualified teacher. Here it says that there 
are three types of teachers, the superior, the mi ddling, and the inferior. A superior teacher is 
the best, a middling teacher is one who possesses half of the ten qualities, and an inferior 
teacher is one who possesses less than five of the qualities but still has a minimum of 
qualities. These will be explained later. 
 The verse cited here from the Ornament of the Sutras  is slightly different from the same verse 
that I memorized in the past. The teacher sh ould be subdued, pacified, and completely 
pacified. In addition, he should have more qualities than the disciple. He should have joyous 
effort in teaching, therefore some one who is lazy and lacking effo rt is not a qualified teacher. 
He should have a wealth of scriptures as an i nner quality. He should have realized suchness, 
or thusness, or emptiness, or the selflessness of persons and phenomena. He should also be 
skilled in teaching, that is, able to talk eloquently, as in this way people will want to listen to 
him. He should also have compassion, and not be teaching in order to gain money and so 
forth. He should also have the quality of being tireless with respect to teaching. He should not 
think, “I am tired today, therefore I cannot te ach.” He should have abandoned all fatigue in 
teaching. If a teacher possesses all ten of these qu alities, he is the best and most qualified of 
teachers.   “Subdued” or “with discipline” means that hi s mind is subdued by morality or ethical 
discipline. “Pacified” or “calm”  means that he has pacified distractions, that is, he has 
achieved calm abiding and his mind is able t o  r e m a i n  s i n g l e - p o i n t e d l y  o n  a n  o b j e c t .  
“Thoroughly pacified” or “great peace” means that he possesses the quality of wisdom. In 
other words, these three mean that he has achi eved the three higher trainings of morality, 
concentration, and wisdom.   Morality includes vows – the vows of individual  liberation, the bodhisattva vows in the case 
of the great vehicle, and the tantra vows in the ca se of the mantra vehicle. We must first try to 
eliminate or abandon external bad behavior and ba d conduct; this is the practice of morality. 
We should become very honest and stop cheating  other people. We need to train the mind in 
this. How to do this is taught in the vinaya.  The Buddha said that vows can be given with 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
85 respect to physical and verbal actions, as they  can be stopped by vows. Actions of the mind, 
on the other hand, cannot be stopped by vo ws or anything else. For example, if one 
constructs a dam in front of flowing water, the flow of water will come to a stop. Similarly, 
morality or vows are a type of form that stop negative actions of body and speech. There are 
many types of form, such as revelatory and non- revelatory form. External forms are colors and 
shapes, odors, sounds, tastes, and tangible object s, which include the elements of earth, water, 
fire, and wind. Inner non-revelatory forms are di fferent from these. They are a special form 
that cannot be seen by the eyes, but can stop us from engaging in non-virtuous actions of 
body and speech. Therefore, vows or morality st op our bad behavior and bad conduct. In this 
way, our mind becomes more subdued. This is the meaning of “subdued.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
 
Furthermore it says that someone who has not disciplined himself is not in a 
position to discipline someone else. A sp iritual master who disciplines others has 
to be someone who has first disciplined his own mind. You may wonder: “Well 
then, in what way must one discipline it?”  Having accomplished whatever occurs to 
you, to label it as a quality of realizatio n due to existing in the mind is of no 
benefit. This is why a system of mental  discipline compatible with the general 
teachings of the Conquerors is necessary. That has been ascertained as the three 
precious trainings, and therefore the three,  ethical discipline and so forth, have 
been set forth. In this regard “discipl ined” refers to the training in ethical 
discipline.  
 If our own mind is not subdued or disciplined bu t instead is as hard as a rock, we will not be 
able to subdue others’ minds. How can we subd ue our mind? If we accomplish many things 
even though they exist in our mind, they are not of much benefit. For example, if someone 
teaches us how to dance, how to  move the body and make the ri ght gestures and steps, some 
quality arises in our continuum. Although there is  some benefit, there is no benefit at all in 
terms of becoming enlightened. As here we  are mainly talking about how to go to 
enlightenment, we need something else. In ge neral if someone teaches us something and we 
learn it, it will be of some benefit, that is, it  will benefit this life but not the next. For this 
reason it is not of much benefit.   What kind of benefit is needed? In accord ance with the general teachings of the Buddha 
we should learn how to become more subdued.  The general teachings consist of the three 
higher trainings in morality, concentration, an d wisdom, which in Sanskrit are respectively 
adishila , adisamatha , and adiprajña . Shila literally means “cool”; morality is said to be 
“coolness” because due to it one experiences fres hness and lightness, rather than the pain or 
suffering of heat. If we are hot and feel a cool breeze, we experience joy. Morality is therefore 
called “coolness” as it is pleasant or refreshing to the mind, in that it does not bring suffering or pain. This is the meaning of morality. We need to understand this.   Wednesday afternoon, 25 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 25):  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
86  
In the Individual Liberation46 it says:  
 
Individual liberation is 
a bridle with a hundred sharp nails that accords with the horse of the mind hard to steer that always strays willfully away. 
 Just like someone skilled at breaking in wi ld horses tames them by means of a good 
bridle, someone trained in ethical discipli ne – which subjugates the sense powers 
that pursue wrong objects, like a wild  horse, {26} and the engagement in 
inappropriate activities, and which thro ugh many efforts makes one engage in 
what ought to be done – has tamed the horse of the mind. 
 “Calm” means having developed the trai ning of concentration where, based on 
mindfulness and introspection with regard to engaging in positive and counteracting unwholesome behavior, the mind abides in a state of inner calm. “Complete peace” means that, based on calm abiding of a serviceable mind, the training of wisdom has been developed th rough individual analysis of the correct 
meaning [of reality]. 
 
The Sutra of Individual Liberation , the root text of the vows of the individual liberation, says 
that our mind is as difficult to subdue as a wild horse. Our mind is also often likened in the 
scriptures to a crazed elephant that is difficult to control. Our mind is like this because when 
our eye sense power sees something attractive, thin king that it is good, the mind goes toward 
it; when we hear pleasant music, thinking that it is good, our mind goes toward it; when we 
s m e l l  a  g o o d  f r a g r a n c e ,  t h i n k i n g  t h a t  i t  i s  g o o d ,  o u r  m i n d  g o e s  t o w a r d  i t ;  w h e n  w e  t a s t e  delicious food or drink, such as alcohol, thinking that it is good, our mind goes toward, and so forth. In this way the five sense powers to gether with their respective minds follow their 
objects. For this reason, it is difficult to bring the mind under control. In fact, it is not easy. 
Thus, we need to put effort into stopping ourselves from engaging in bad actions. In other words, we need to apply strong effort to subduing our mind as we need to bring it to the side 
of enlightenment. If we train well in morality, our mind will be subdued. To be subdued  or to 
be disciplined , that is, to possess the higher training in morality, is the first quality of a virtuous 
spiritual friend.   The second quality of a virtuous spiritual friend is to be pacified  (“calm”) that is, his mind is 
pacified due to having eliminated distractio ns and laziness, and having developed single-
pointed concentration on the object of meditati on, that is, having achieved calm abiding. 
When obstacles to meditation arise we have to eliminate them by training in concentration. 
To achieve calm abiding we need many good conditions – an appropriate place, the right 
company, a healthy body, and so forth. If all th ese conditions are present, we will be able to 
meditate single-pointedly, whereby the mind will be pacified, that is, freed from distractions 
and laziness. To achieve this we need the ment al factors of mindfulness and introspection. 
Mindfulness keeps the object of meditation in mind without forgetfulness. When one part of 
                                             
 
46 Sutra on the Vows of Individual Liberation  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
87 the mind remains on the object but another part  is distracted outward, introspection notices 
this and brings the mind back to the object. These are the main two mental factors that are 
needed for the development of concentration or ca lm abiding. A mind that is pacified abides 
on its object without going outside. This is  the achievement of the higher training of 
concentration, – a single-pointed mind free from distraction and laziness.  
 The third quality of a virtuous spiritual friend is to be completely pacified  (“complete peace”). 
At this point one has achieved calm abid ing and one’s body and mind have become 
serviceable. The mind is easily  brought inside. Then, when medi tating on an object, one part 
of the mind is set on it and another part of th e mind examines its qualities. For example, if 
this cup is the object of meditation, one sh ould focus on the cup and with wisdom one 
should examine whether or not the cup is impermanent or permanent, suffering or 
happiness, pure or impure, and self-supporting substantially existent or selfless, that is, 
inherently existent or not. One should investigat e the cup in this way so as to differentiate its 
characteristics. When this wisd om makes the mind blissful, light, and pliant, one has achieved 
the higher training of wisdom.   
 These three higher trainings are important for practice and meditation. All the Buddha's 
teachings can be included in them. Morality ma kes the mind disciplined and eliminates faulty 
actions of body and speech, whereas concen tration and wisdom eliminate the mental 
afflictions. By means of these three combined , we can abandon all objects of abandonment 
and achieve all good qualities. Therefore, the hi gher trainings in morality, concentration, and 
wisdom ( adishila , adisamatha , and adiprajna ) are the main objects to be practiced.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (translated by Philip Quarcoo, ©FPMT 2005): 
 
However, it is not enough merely to have developed, by means of the three 
trainings in this manner, the qualities of realization that act to tame the mind. As 
the quality of scriptural knowledge is also needed, [the text says] “rich in 
scriptures,” meaning that the three collections47 and so forth have been studied 
extensively.  
 
Are the three qualities of the higher trainings su fficient for someone to be a qualified teacher? 
They are not. In addition, a qualified guru shou ld also possess the quality of being rich in the 
scriptures. This means that he should have memo rized at least parts of the vinaya basket, sutra 
basket, and abhidharma basket, and should ha ve a good understanding of the Buddha's 
teachings and their commentaries and be able to  explain them. Thus, the teacher should be 
rich in hearing, meaning that he should have heard many teachings from many teachers. To 
hear one time is not enough, he should have heard many teachings many times. In addition, 
he should have read and studied many texts. This is the quality of scriptural knowledge. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (translated by Philip Quarcoo, ©FPMT 2005): 
 
According to Geshe [Drom] Tonpa: 
 
                                              
47 the three collections or baskets or pitakas  of scripture, i.e., the su tra, vinaya, and abhidharma 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
88 For someone to be called a Mahayana guru, when he explains he must 
generate boundless understanding, and when he practices, he must 
show what is of benefit and direct si gnificance in the last days of the 
teachings. 
 
The virtuous spiritual friend Drom Tonpa, Atis ha’s main disciple, was a lay vow-holder, not 
an ordained monk. Although he had studied very well, he was extremely humble, and is 
considered to be a manifestation of Avalokit eshvara, the Buddha of Compassion. Here Drom 
Tonpa is cited as saying that a Mahayana guru should be able to give explanations in many 
ways, such that by listening to him a student ca n generate a complete understanding. He also 
says that a Mahayana guru should practice wh at he teaches. Nowadays, when the Buddha’s 
teachings are about to vanish, a guru should teach what is of benefit to his listeners, not 
necessarily philosophy. In this way, he will achi eve his aims and be of benefit. In other words, 
as we approach the end of the Buddha's doctrine , a lot of talk is not always useful, so a guru 
should limit himself to teaching what is of bene fit. He should teach people in different ways 
according to their needs, for example, teachi ng some extensively with many citations and 
reasonings, and teaching others in a very simp le and straightforward manner, which in certain 
cases can be of more benefit.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
 
“Having realized suchness” refers to the special training in wisdom – the 
realization of the selflessness of phenomena. Alternatively, it is mainly held to be 
manifest suchness. However, even if this is not present, it is said that this 
[criterion] is also fulfilled by a realization through scriptures and reasonings. 
 The teacher should have realized thusness or su chness, that is, he should have the wisdom 
realizing the selflessness of phenomena. He should have realized in general that all 
phenomena are empty of inherent existence, and should have realized in particular that the 
form aggregate, feeling aggregate, discriminati on aggregate, compositional factors aggregate, 
and consciousness aggregate are empty of inherent  existence. The best is that he possesses a 
direct realization of suchness. Alternatively he should have understood this subject well. An 
understanding of selflessness that is not yet direct is also considered to be a type of realization. 
Thus, if the teacher has not yet directly realized  the selflessness of phenomena, he should at 
least have understood emptiness well by means of scriptures and reasonings so that he is able 
to explain the emptiness of phenomena to the student.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
 
 That being so, even if he possesses script ural knowledge and realizations, it is not 
enough for them to be inferior or equal to those of the disciple, therefore someone 
with “more qualities” is needed. In the Verses
48 it says: 
 
                                              
48 cf. Note 12 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
89 People relying on someone inferior wither, 
those relying on one of their peers stay the same, those relying on leaders achieve excellence. 
Therefore, rely on those ahead of you 
 
endowed with discipline, perfect peace, and the most exalted wisdom; 
if you rely on any such a lord, 
{27} you even end up ahead of him. 
 
That is why Puchungpa said: “As I listen to the accounts
49 of the saints, I look up 
to them” and Tashi said: “I take the old men at Radreng as a model50.” 
Accordingly, we need someone with more qualities as a model to look up to.  
 Those six properties like this are qualitie s that you yourself attain [for your own 
welfare]. 
 It is important that the teacher be superior to the disciple in terms of his qualities. This is 
because if the disciple has superior realizations or superior knowledge to the teacher, although 
the teacher teaches him, his realizations will no t increase and they may even degenerate. Also 
if the teacher and disciple are similar in terms of  their knowledge, the di sciple’s qualities will 
not increase but will remain the same. But if we rely on a teacher with superior qualities, we 
will learn many things and our knowledge and wisdom will increase. Thus, we need such a 
teacher.   I will tell you a story. In Tibet, in the ar ea of Kham, there was a monk with very little 
knowledge who had not studied much philosophy  and mainly performed rituals in people’s 
homes. However, he had a disc iple who was a tulku, a reinca rnate lama, who would prostrate 
to him after which the teacher would tr ansmit the words of a text (give a lung). One day 
someone asked the tulku why he prostrated in fron t of the old monk as if he were his disciple, 
since the tulku was very intelligent whereas hi s teacher did not have much knowledge. The 
tulku responded saying that, even though the old monk did not have much knowledge, by 
going to him and listening to the transmissions his own memory became very stable whereby he would not forget what he had heard, an d his mind became more happy and joyful. 
Therefore, he said that he received a lot of benefit from this old monk who was his teacher. 
The other person thought this was very strange, however, I think that it was due to the tulku’s 
faith in the old monk.   With regard to the importance of faith, a st ory is often recounted of an old Tibetan woman 
whose son was going to India on business. She asked him to bring back  the tooth of a holy 
being so that she could make offerings to it. Th e son went to India but forgot about the tooth 
until he was almost back home. He decided that  he would have to lie to his mother. Nearby 
him, lying on the side of the street, was the corpse of a dog whose body had been half eaten 
by other animals. He took out on e of its teeth, cleaned it, and wrapped it in a piece of cloth. 
Arriving home, he gave the tooth to his mother saying that he had brought her an object of 
                                             
 
49 JN: lo rgyus , could also be translated as “biographies” 
50 lit. "eye support"- some thing to rest the eye on 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
90 veneration, the tooth of an Indian pandit wh o had passed away. The mother was very happy 
with the gift and set it on her altar. From th en onward, every day she would prostrate to it 
and made offerings of water, butterlamps, and so  forth in front of it . One day relics, small 
round pills which are considered to be very prec ious, came forth from the tooth. Although it 
was a dog’s tooth, due to her fait h in it, relics came from it. Th is shows that good things come 
f r o m  f a i t h .  O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d  i f  w e  l a c k  f a i t h ,  e v e n  i f  w e r e  t o  f i n d  o u r s e l v e s  i n  f r o n t  o f  
Buddha Shakyamuni it would not be of any benefit.  
 If we rely on a teacher who is superior to ourselves, we can attain higher realizations, 
subdue and pacify our mind, and attain higher  wisdom. Here the text mentions Puchungwa 
who was a Kadampa geshe from the Pembo area of Tibet. He said that listening to the 
biographies of holy beings, and thinking that they  were very inspiring, he looked up to them, 
wishing to emulate these beings. Similarly, wh en someone recounts the biographies of holy 
beings, we should aspire to attain their qualit ies and try to emulate them with the wish to 
become a holy being ourselves. 
 Tashi (literally, Four Extremes), another Kada mpa geshe, said that he looked at what the 
old men of Radreng were doing. Radreng is a well -known place in Tibet as the regent of this 
place was poisoned by the Tibetan government . However, because it was he who found the 
incarnation of the XIII Dalai Lama in Amdo, he was actually very kind to the Tibetans. This 
is recounted in several books that make it appe ar that Tibet was not a Buddhist country but a 
barbaric place in which lamas an d monks were killed. However, politics is similar everywhere, 
although perhaps things are a bit better nowadays  due to the existence of democracy in many 
countries.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 27):  
B Positive qualities necessary for the welfare of others 
The remaining ones are qualities for ta king care of others. As they say: 
 
The Capable Ones51 do not wash away evil with water, 
they do not remove the suffering of beings by hand, 
they do not graft their realizations on others; they liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature. 
 
As is expressed here, apart from taking care [of others] through teaching them the 
path in an unmistaken manner, nothing can be done such as washing away their 
negativities with water and the like. Amon g the four characteristics regarding this, 
“eloquent” means experienced with regard to  the stages of guidance and skilled in 
getting the meaning across to the minds of  those to be tamed. “Loving” means 
having a pure motivation to teach th e Dharma and teaching motivated by 
compassion without regard for material gain or respect. 
 
The Buddha said that negativities cannot be wa shed away with water since if this could be 
done they would be very easy to eliminate. He  said this because in some Hindu traditions 
                                             
 
51 "capable" as in the "muni" of Shakyamuni 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
91 there is the belief that by bath ing in and drinking the water of  the Ganges River negativities 
and non-virtues can be cleansed. Nor can suffer ings be removed with the hands. Nor can the 
realizations of the Buddha be transferred to ot hers’ continua. The best method to liberate 
sentient beings is to teach them thusness, emptiness, reality, or ultimate truth. This is because 
by meditating on emptiness, they can slowly ab andon the root of cyclic existence – ignorance 
or the conception of phenomena as inherently ex istent or truly existent. This ignorance is the 
root of all afflictions and all acti ons. Therefore, if this root is abandoned, all its branches will 
be eliminated. Therefore, the best solution is to meditate on emptiness or thusness or 
ultimate truth. Among the two truths, the conv entional and the ultimate, by meditating on 
the ultimate truth we can abandon the afflic tions in our mind and attain liberation.  
 Regarding the possibility of removing suffe ring with the hands there is story about 
Devadatta, the Buddha’s cousin, who, having ea ten something bad, was experiencing severe 
pain. He was lying on the bed groaning in ag ony but when the Buddha placed his hand on 
his head the pain was relieved. However, when he opened his eyes and saw that the Buddha 
had his hand on his head, he became angr y and asked the Buddha what he was doing 
touching him! Some people are like this, but th is story shows that just by the touch of the 
Buddha’s hand he was able to eliminate very strong pain. There are other stories to this 
regard but I will not tell them now. The Budd ha had completely abandoned all obstacles and 
all sufferings so no one could harm him, yet stil l there were people like Devadatta who wished 
to harm him.  
 In order to take care of sentient beings the Buddha taught a perfect and unmistaken path 
as washing and so forth cannot help them.   Previously six of the ten qualities were mentione d, therefore four remain. One of these is to 
be skilled in talking, that is, to be eloquent. A teacher should be able to talk very nicely so as to lead others into the path more easily and cause them to easily understand the subject. A 
teacher also needs to have mercy or compassi on (“loving”). If a teacher does not have 
compassion either he will not teach at all or will teach out of a wish to gain something for 
himself such as wealth, material things, or ho nor. Thus, without seekin g material things, and 
motivated by compassion and compassion, a teac her should teach others so that they can 
change their minds, gain wisdom, and develop love.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (translated by Philip Quarcoo, ©FPMT 2005): 
 
 We need someone like Potowa [who] said to Chenawa: “Son of Lima, however 
many explanations of the Dharma I have given, not once have I claimed the 
applause as my own. There is no migratin g being who is not pitiable.” “Energetic” 
means constantly delighting in the welf are of others. “Never disheartened” means 
not to become weary due to explaining thin gs over and over again, but rather to 
bear the hardships of explaining. 
 Geshe Potowa was a well-known la ma who wrote many texts on mind training. He spoke to 
Chenawa Lodro Gyaltsen calling him “Son of Li ma,” Lima perhaps being his family name. He 
gave teachings on mind training because sentient beings are pitiable or miserable, in order to 
help them subdue their minds.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
92  If with energy or perseverance a teacher takes care of other sentient beings, his mind will 
become happy and stable in enacting the welf are of others. Therefore, joyous effort in 
necessary for a teacher. He should also have abandoned weariness or tiredness when teaching 
others, instead he should be tireless. This mean s that even when he needs to teach the same 
thing again and again due to many people reques ting him to do so, he should not think, “I 
cannot do this now because I am tired.” Rather  a teacher needs to be tireless in giving 
teachings. This is an important quality. We t oo should bear the difficulties or hardships of 
teaching others.  
 Therefore, the best of teachers  possesses ten qualities. In the Ornament for the Sutras  
Maitreya says that one should rely on an exce llent teacher who possesses the ten qualities.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B4A-1B1B-2 Middling characteristics 
Potowa said: 
 
The three trainings, the realization of suchness, and a loving heart; 
these five are the main ones. My master Shangtsun is not very {28} learned in all and since he cannot be ar disenchantment either, he does 
not impress on his mind the kindness he received; however, as he has 
the above[-mentioned] five, whoever is in his presence benefits. Nyanton is by no means eloquent an d each time he makes a dedication 
the only thing he knows is that, ag ain, nobody understood anything, 
but as he has those five, those who are near him benefit. 
 If a teacher does not have all ten qualities it is sufficient for him to have five of them. Potowa said that the main ones are to possess (1-3 ) the three higher trainings in morality, 
concentration, and wisdom, (4) a realization or understanding of emptiness or the selflessness 
of phenomena, and (5) compassion for his disciple s. Therefore, if a teacher has these five, he 
is a qualified teacher having  middling characteristics.  
 Potowa’s words in Tibetan are difficult to understand. Potowa said that his master Shangtsun had not studied very much, was unable  to bear tiredness, and did not repay debts 
of kindness (i.e., he was not grateful). In othe r words, although he ha d trained in the three 
trainings, had some realization of suchness, and possessed compassion, he was not learned in 
the scriptures, was not able to bear difficulties,  and was not tireless in teaching. Thus, he did 
not possess all ten qualities, but because he po ssessed the five main ones those who listened 
to his teachings benefited. In addition, even wi thout teaching, he was of benefit to others due 
to the blessings.   
There was an Indian monk named Legpek arma who stayed together with Buddha 
Shakyamuni for about twenty years, yet still said that he had not seen any qualities, not even 
one, in the Buddha. He had memori zed and could recite the entire 100,000 Verse Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutra  but said that the Buddha was a trickste r who, when someone made offerings to 
him, would lie, predicting that in such-and-such a life this pers on would generate the mind of 
enlightenment and become enlightened. When Lekpekarma died he was reborn in the hell 
realm where he remembered criticizing his teache r, Gautama, and understood that this karma 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
93 had now ripened due to which he was experien cing suffering day and night for eons. This 
came to his mind but it was too late for him to do anything about it.  
 
Thursday morning, 26 January 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 28): 
2B4A-1B1B-3 Minimum characteristics 
A The actual minimum of characteristics 
Even if, due to the times, it is difficult to find someone who has a complete set of 
such characteristics, it is said that you should not rely  on anyone whose faults are 
greater or whose faults and positive qu alities are equal, but on someone whose 
positive qualities exceed his faults. 
 
This section sets out the minimum characteristic s of an inferior teacher who does not even 
have half of the ten char acteristics. Since due to this degene rated time it can be difficult to 
find a teacher who has all the necessary characteri stics, we should rely on someone who at the 
very least has more good qualities than faults . Thus, we should not rely on a teacher whose 
faults are greater than or equal to his good qualit ies. This is because if we were to rely on a 
teacher with more faults than qualities there would be no benefit and due to his influence we 
might even acquire the same faults ourselves. Likewise, if his faults and qualities are equal 
there will not be much benefit from relying on him. Thus, in the context of a Dharma teacher 
we will learn much more if we study with and rely upon a qualified teacher.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
B The expediency of association with the characteristics 
Such a spiritual master who brings about co mplete liberation is a perpetual root of 
aspiration. Therefore, those who wish to rely on a spiritual teacher should be 
aware of and make an effort to look fo r someone who possesses the characteristics. 
Those wishing to have disciples rely on th em should also strive to acquire these 
characteristics. 
 
One who wishes to achieve libera tion should rely on a lama or  spiritual teacher who is the 
root of aspiration. Therefore, we should seek a qualified teacher possessing as many of the ten 
characteristics as possible. On the other hand, if  someone wishes to benefit others by teaching 
them, he or she should either already possess the characteristics or else should put effort into 
attaining and completing them. This is importan t because then when one teaches, one will be 
of benefit to one’s disciples. In short, the di sciples should seek a qualified teacher and the 
teacher should try to develop th e necessary characteristics.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B4A-1B2 Characteristics of the one who relies, the disciple 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
94 A Faults of someone who does not have and benefits of someone who does have the five 
characteristics 
Second: From the Four Hundred52:  
 
One who is impartial, intelligent, and endeavors; 
thus is explained a vessel for teachings. Otherwise qualities of the teacher have no effect; in the listener, there will be no change. 
 As it says in the commentary: someone en dowed with the three characteristics is a 
suitable vessel for listening. If all three are complete, the positive qualities of the 
one expounding the Dharma appear as po sitive qualities and do not appear as 
faults. Not only that, the positive qualities of the listeners also appear as positive 
qualities to that person and do not appear as  faults. If the characteristics of a vessel 
are not complete, the listener, under the power of his faults, will classify even a perfectly pure and great spiritual teacher who expounds the Dharma among those who have faults, and perceive an exponent’s faults as qualities. 
 Here the qualities or characteristics that make one a suitable disciple are set out. We should 
examine whether or not we possess the three charac teristics. A suitable disciple is one who is 
impartial, intelligent, and has a sincere intere st in the teachings. We ourselves possess such 
qualities in that: (1) we are honest or impartial or unbiased;  (2) we are intelligent and possess wisdom and can therefore understa n d  w h a t  i s  t o  b e  
discarded or abandoned and what is to be adopted or practiced; and  (3) we possess the interest or aspiration or en deavor to achieve good qualities and wish to 
attain liberation or buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings.  These are the three main charac teristics that a disciple shou ld possess. If we possess these 
three qualities, when we listen to a teacher we wi ll not look at his or her faults but will look at 
his or her qualities. On the other hand, if we  do not possess these qualities we will wonder 
whether or not he is a good teacher and whet her or not the teachings are correct. We may 
come to think that he is not a skillful teacher, that he is not kind, and so forth. Such doubts 
will not bring us any benefit. Instead, it is better for a listener to see the one who is teaching as possessing qualities, whereby one will not see many faults.  The text says that if we are not impartial, ev en though from the teacher’s side he is pure, 
since from our own side our mind is not pure, there will not be any benefit. Instead we will engage in even more faulty behavior. On the other hand, if we see the teacher as possessing 
faults but think of the faults as qualities there wi ll be benefit. It should be noted that from the 
side of the teacher there is no benefit, it is fr om the disciple’s side that there will be benefit. 
Contrarily, if we think that the teacher is faul ty, then when we listen to Dharma teachings 
from him or her there will be no benefit. In other words, the teachings will not help our mind 
since we are continually looking at  the faults of the teacher.  
                                             
 
52 Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
95  The Compendium of Valid Cognition  also sets out the qualities and faults of a disciple, saying 
that one who possesses the faults is not qualifie d to be a disciple. For example, those who are 
attached to the mundane activities of daily life, as well as to wealth, and consequently always 
act in order to gain something, even going so far as to cheat others, are not suitable to be 
disciples. Also those who are always jealous or  envious of others’ qualities, wealth, and so 
forth are not suitable to be disciples because they  will not reap benefit from the teachings. In 
fact jealousy is included among the twenty se condary mental afflictions. Also those who are 
not intelligent and cannot understand what th ey are taught or what they study are not 
suitable to be disciples. With respect to this  the Tibetans have the expression: “Whether one 
puts a piece of gold or a stone in the ear of a donkey, there will be no difference!” While gold 
is generally considered good, for a stupid donk ey it makes no difference. Similarly, when 
someone is unintelligent, whether one teaches him or her the Dharma or merely talks gossip 
there will be no difference.  
 So who is the discip le described in the Compendium of Valid Cognition ? He or she should be 
one who does not cling to mundane activities, who is not jealous and is compassionate, and 
who possesses the intelligence that can understa n d  w h a t e v e r  h e  o r  s h e  i s  t a u g h t  j u s t  b y  
mentioning a little bit. Thus, this description is slightly different from that given here in the 
Middle Lam-Rim .  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
B Explaining the specifics of the [various] characteristics in detail 
{29} In this regard “impartial” means bein g without bias. If you have bias, it will 
make you obscured and you will not perceive  positive qualities, due to which the 
meaning of excellent explanations will not be found. It is just as it says in the 
Essence of the Middle Way :  
 
With a biased – thus anguished – mind,53  
peace can never be realized. 
 
To be biased means to be attached to one’s own approach and to hate others’ approach. Having examined for something like this in your own continuum, you 
should give it up. Is that by itself sufficient? Even though impartial, someone to whom good ways of explaining appear as faulty ones due to not having the 
intelligence to distinguish the two, is not a suitable vessel. Therefore, one needs have the intelligence that understands those two.  
 Are those two sufficient? Even if one has the two, [impartiality and intelligence ], 
someone who is just like the listener to th e Dharma in a [lifeless] picture is not a 
suitable vessel. Therefore, one [also] needs to have great endeavor. The 
commentary states that by adding the two – respect for the Dharma and the 
expounder of Dharma and an attentive mind, five [characteristics] are set forth. 
 
                                             
 
53 to be more precise: "with a mind in anguish due to bias" 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
96 To be biased ( phyogs lhung , literally, fallen to one side) means to be attached to one’s own side, 
thinking, for example, “ my friend,” and to have hatred for the other side. One makes a 
division between those on one’s own side and th ose on the other side, being attached to and 
thinking to take care of those on one’s side, and neglecting or abandoning those on the other 
side. This is an obstacle to receiving Dharma te achings and it is not a good quality because it 
obscures one from seeing others’ qualities and ca uses one to see only their faults. Due to this, 
even if someone gives an excellent explanation, due to being obscured by one’s bias one will 
not find anything good in it. The Essence of the Middle Way  by Acharya Bhavaviveka says that 
due to being biased, the mind will be tormen ted by suffering, whereby one will never realize 
peace, implying that instead one will be consta ntly disturbed and suffer. Therefore, we need 
to abandon this kind of attitude.  
 We should examine our own continuum, checking whether or not we have this bias that is 
attached to the people on our si de and hates those on the other si de. If we find that we have 
this attitude, we must give it up as otherwise we will not be able to gain any good qualities. 
However, is it enough to be impartial? It is not enough. What else do we need? If we are not intelligent, when someone explains a correct an d perfect path while so meone else engages in 
faulty speech that explains a wrong or imperf ect path, we will not be able to distinguish 
between the two paths. Therefore, only th ose who can distinguish these due to being 
intelligent are suitable to be disciples. Th ose who, on the other hand, are not able to 
distinguish them are not. In short, we need the intelligence that is able to distinguish qualities 
and faults.   If someone is impartial and inte lligent is that enough to be a disciple? It is not. One should 
also have the interest or aspiration or be en deavoring to attain inner qualities and for this 
reason listen to and study the Dharma. Someone wh o is a like a listener in a drawing is not a 
suitable disciple; one should wish to attain the path, develop inner qualities, and attain 
enlightenment.   Is it enough to possess these three qualities?  Here it is not specified what commentary is 
referred to, but perhaps it is the commentary on the Essence of the Middle Way . This text says 
that in addition the disciple should have re spect for the Dharma an d the one teaching the 
Dharma, and should listen to th e teachings with single-pointed attention. With the addition 
of these two qualities, there are five characterist ics that a disciple should have: (1) impartiality, 
(2) intelligence, (3) interest or endeavor, (4) respect for the Dharma an d the teacher, and (5) 
an attentive mind while listening to, studying, and meditating on the holy Dharma. A person 
who has these five characteristics is a qualifie d disciple. We should examine whether or not 
we also have them. If we have them, we can think of ourselves as  a good disciple. If we do not 
have all of them, for example, if we are biased or partial, we will not be a good disciple. I’m 
not joking.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
C Specifics of achieving the conducive conditions an d eliminating the adverse conditions to having the 
four characteristics 
That being so, there are four: (1) great ende avor with regard to the Dharma, (2) an 
excellently attentive mind while listening,  (3) great respect fo r the Dharma and the 
expounder of Dharma, and (4) holding to g ood explanations having rejected faulty 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
97 ones. Intelligence is a conducive circumst ance for those four, and impartiality is 
what eliminates adverse circumstances. 
 
There are four characteristics: (1) having great interest in or endeavoring in the Dharma, (2) 
listening attentively to the Dharma, (3) having respect for the holy Dharma and the teacher, 
and (4) having abandoned faulty explanatio ns and holding to excellent explanations. 
Intelligence is a conducive condition for th e previous four. Impartiality eliminates 
unfavorable conditions. A disciple needs these fo ur conducive conditions in order to receive 
t e a c h i n g s .  I n  a d d i t i o n ,  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  b e  intelligent, and to be impartial in order to 
abandon adverse conditions. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
D The need to strive for those characteristics 
You should examine whether all the attribut es that would make you suitable to be 
lead by a spiritual teacher are complete or not, and cultivate joy if they are 
complete. If they are not complete, you should strive henceforth in future [lives] in 
the causes for making them complete. 
 
In order to be led to enlightenment, all four  or five characteristics should be complete. 
Therefore, we should examine whether or not we have all of them. If th ese characteristics are 
complete, we should rejoice, thinking “I am very lucky. I am really very lucky.” If we find that they are not complete, we should try to make them complete in our future lives. In other 
words, if we cannot develop the four characteristics in this life, we need to create the causes to 
d e v e l o p  t h e m  i n  f u t u r e  l i v e s .  T h u s ,  w e  n e e d  t o  put effort into attaining a good life in the 
future with all the necessary conditions, and for this we need to create the causes. What are 
the causes? They are virtue, that is, we n eed virtuous projecting karma and virtuous 
actualizing karma. If, on the other hand, our pr ojecting karma is non-virtuous it will project 
or throw us into a bad rebirth. If both our pr ojecting and actualizing karmas are good, it is 
100% certain that we will take rebirth in the happy migrations, for example, as a human 
being and have all conducive circ umstances. In that life we will once again strive to achieve 
the four or five characteristics and therefore will be an excellent vessel for receiving the 
teachings of the Buddha. In this way, we will become better and better until we achieve 
buddhahood. No one can stop this from happenin g. If we ourselves practice, we can achieve 
this state. No one else can do this for us.   We can examine how people become successful politicians or wealthy businessmen. However, even if we study these methods well, it is not guaranteed that we will become, for 
example, a politician with a hi gher position, as our success ca n be blocked by other people. 
This is what happens from the side of the world. However, from the side of Dharma if we 
practice well, no one  can throw us into the hell realm, hungry ghost realm, or animal realm. 
We will only go up, that is, we will definitely a ttain a good rebirth. Therefore, we should try at 
all times to be honest or impart ial, to have perfect behavior, to develop our intelligence, and 
to endeavor to increase our inner qualities, whereby our mind will gradually become more 
and more happy.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
98  The Tibetan nomads, such as  my family, commonly say, “I f one does not make oneself 
happy, others will only make one suffer.” In other words, in order to be happy, we need to 
make our own mind happy. Others cannot make us happy, they can only make problems for 
us! And even if they do not make problems, we  will think that they are making problems. 
Therefore, from our own side we need to take  care of ourselves. This is important.  
 
If someone has financial problems and asks us for help or asks to borrow money from us, out 
of compassion, love, and generosity we can give or lend that person some money. We can give 
others material things. Some people do this to help others. Even if someone wants an eyeball, 
w e  c a n  g i v e  i t  t o  h i m  o r  h e r  j u s t  a s  A r y a d e v a  g a v e  o n e  o f  h i s  e y e s  t o  a  b l i n d  m a n .  I t  i s  recounted that the monks at Nalanda Monastery in India performed a puja during which they 
offered a torma to Mahakala. This torma contai ned an invitation to Aryadeva asking him to 
come to Nalanda Monastery to debate a non-Bu ddhist scholar who could not be defeated by 
any of the Buddhist scholars. The torma was put outside and a crow, a manifestation of 
Mahakala, came and ate the lette r contained in the torma. It flew to where Aryadeva was 
staying in a cave and gave him the letter. Aryadeva read the letter and asked his teacher Nagarjuna what to do. Nagarjuna told him that they should practice debating together in 
preparation for debating the non-Buddhist. Du ring their debate Nagarjuna held the Samkya 
point of view so well that Aryadeva forgot that  he was only pretending to be a Samkya. When 
Aryadeva finally defeated Nagarjuna, he picked up his shoes and circled them around Nagarjuna’s head to emphasize his victory. Naga rjuna told him that he would win the debate 
but that on his way to Nalanda he would expe rience some interference that could not be 
avoided because of Aryadeva’s inauspicious gest ure of circling his teacher’s head with his 
shoes! Because he had created this negative ka rma, he would have to experience its result. 
And so it happened that when Aryadeva was trav eling to Nalanda, he came across an old and 
blind Indian saddhu leaning on a staff. The old man asked Aryadeva for one of his eyes, 
whereupon Aryadeva immediately took one of his eyes out and gave it to him. Thus, minus 
an eye, Aryadeva arrived at Nalanda. When Aryadeva arrived at Nalanda, the gong was 
ringing and the monks were going into the temple. At the door Ashvagosha, the non-
Buddhist, waited with a stick that he used to tap each monk on the he ad in recognition as 
they entered. When Aryadeva arri ved at the door, he realized that another monk had arrived 
and said, “Where has this previously non-existe nt bald head come from?” Aryadeva replied, 
“It has come from the neck.” The non-Buddhist, left speechless, was unable to reply. Then, 
while standing on the doorsill, he said to Aryadeva, “Am I going inside or outside?” Aryadeva replied, “It depends on your motivation.” Again he was left speechless. Then, in front of the 
king, the ministers, the pandits, and so forth,  they debated on philosophical points. When 
Aryadeva asked him questions Ashvagosha was un able to reply, but when he asked Aryadeva 
questions Aryadeva immediately replied. Prior to the debate they had made an agreement that 
if Aryadeva won, Ashvagosha would become a Buddhist, whereas if  Ashvagosha won, 
Aryadeva would become a non-Buddhist. However, when Ashvagosha saw that he was sure to 
lose, he suddenly flew up into the sky, his long hair flowing behind him. Aryadeva followed behind him and when they had reached a certain height told Ashvagosha that he should not 
go any further as otherwise he would be cut to pieces. He advised Ashvagosha that, if he did 
not believe him, to throw his long hair up ab ove him. Ashvagosha did this and immediately 
his hair was cut off. Thus, they returned to  the ground where the Nalanda monks locked 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
99 Ashvagosha in the library. He began to read th e many texts contained in the library and came 
across one in which he read the Buddha’s prop hesy regarding his debate with Aryadeva. 
Seeing this, his mind changed and he develope d faith in the Buddhist teachings. He later 
became a well-known Buddhist pandit. While he wrote many texts, in order to purify his 
having criticized the Buddha he wrote the Life Stories  (Jatakamala), which recounts the 
previous lives of the Buddha. 
 Thursday afternoon, 26 January 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 29):  
2B4A-1B3 The way he relies on him 
A Explanation of the need to rely on someone with the characteristics 
B The actual manner of relying on someone who has the characteristics 
2B4A-1B3A Explanation of the need to rely on someone with the characteristics 
{30} Third: Thus someone endowed with [the characteristics of] a vessel should 
examine in the way explained above wh ether or not the guru possesses the 
characteristics, and if so, obtain th e kindness of the Dharma from him. 
 
If we possess the necessary characteristics for a disciple, we should examine whether or not 
the lama or guru has the characteristics needed to  act as a teacher. If we find that he has the 
necessary qualities or characteristics, we should  request him to kindly give us teachings or 
instructions. Thus, a qualified disciple who ha s found a qualified teacher should request him 
to bestow Dharma teaching s. If we do this, the lama will most likely accept our request! If he 
does not accept, saying that he is not qualified to teach, we may have to ask him several times 
u n t i l  h e  a c c e p t s .  H o w e v e r ,  o t h e r s  w i l l  a c c e p t  r i g h t  a w a y !  T h i s  i s  b e c a u s e  t e a c h e r s  h a v e  different kinds of personalities.  
Middle Lam-Rim:  
 2B4A-1B3B The actual manner of relying on someone who has the characteristics 
With regard to the manner of relying on a spiritual teacher from whom in general 
you obtain the kindness [of the Dharma ] and who, in particular, guides your mind 
well by means of perfectly complete instructions, there are two points: the manner 
of relying in thought and the ma nner of relying through actions. 
 
1 The manner of relying in thought 
2 The manner of relying through actions 
 
Having found a qualified teacher possessing  either the previously mentioned ten 
characteristics, or five of the ten characterist ics, or a minimum of tw o characteristics, we 
should rely on him. The best teacher is one wh o has all ten characteristics, a middling teacher 
is one who has five, and the lowest teacher is one who has two. Whicheve r kind of teacher we 
have found, we should rely on him or her. There is a difference between a teacher who gives 
us teachings in general and personal advice in pa rticular. If whatever instructions he gives us 
are for the purpose of guiding us to enlightenmen t, we can rely on him. How should we rely 
on him? We should rely on him in thou ght and rely on him through actions.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
100  
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B4A-1B3B-1 The manner of relying in thought 
A The root, training in confidence 
B Through remembering his kindness, developing respect 
The first has two points: the root, tr aining in confidence, and through 
remembering his kindness, developing respect. 
 
In terms of relying in thought we  need to train in developing the faith or confidence that this 
l a m a  c a n  h e l p  u s  b y  g i v i n g  u s  i n s t r u c t i o n s  o r  t e a c h i n g s  a n d  c a n  l e a d  u s  i n  a  c o r r e c t  p a t h .  
Having kindly acted to help us, we should re member his kindness and in this way generate 
respect for him. Therefore, the fi rst point is to generate faith in  the teacher and the second is 
to remember his kindness and thereby generate respect for him. We ca n show respect with 
our body and speech; for example, we should  be polite and humble when requesting 
teachings and not say “Give me teachi ngs!” This would not be right.  
 There was a classmate of mine who initially did not study but was rather a wild monk who 
was part of the group of monks referred to as dob-dobs. Such monks had long hair, put black 
coal around their eyes, and walked around very  arrogantly. One day he was told to study and 
threatened that, if he did not, his hair would be  cut off. Due to this he developed a respectful 
aspect and came to my teacher, Geshe Tashi Bu m, and said “Gen-la, teach me!” He did not 
come to teachings with a text but with paper, a pen made of bamboo, and a pot of ink, which 
he gave to Geshe Tashi Bum to write down some  teachings, as he himself could not write. 
Geshe Tashi Bum would write a few words, and every day the monk tried to read and study them. When most monks ask a lama for teaching s they make three prostrations and offer him 
a mandala, but this monk basically said, “Hey, teach me!” I remember him well. From then onward, he studied well and became a good debater, surprising the other monks. However, although the bad can become good, the good can once again become bad. This monk 
remained in Tibetan and, following the orders of the Chinese, beat other monks. He later 
disrobed, married, and had three or four children, forgetting all that he studied. Now he is old, almost eighty, and is very sad that he di d not escape with me to India and that he is 
unable to take good care of his children. Th ere are many people who disrobe but later on 
want to take ordination again, why is this? It  is due to following attachment. We need to 
understand that this fault is inside  us and strive to eliminate it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2B4A-1B3B-1A The root, training in confidence 
1 Explanation of confidence as the basis of all qualities 
First: In the Jewel Tala Dharani  it says: 
 
The preparatory practice of confiden ce, like a mother, gives birth to 
all positive qualities, protects  them, and makes them increase. 
 
This says that confidence gives birth to po sitive qualities that have not yet arisen, 
and once they have arisen it sustains and increases them.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
101 First we need the quality of faith or confidence ( dad pa ). Just as the ground is the basis in 
which all plants can grow, similarly faith is th e basis on which all inner qualities can grow. 
Faith is also likened to a mother who gives birth to a child in the sense that faith gives birth to 
all good qualities. Faith also does not allow th e good qualities we already have to degenerate 
but maintains or protects them, and faith also increases the good qualities that we already 
possess. Faith means, for example, faith in Bu ddha Shakyamuni, our teac her. With faith in 
him, we should try to follow his instructions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (translated by Philip Quarcoo, ©FPMT 2005): 
 
In the Ten Dharmas
54 it also says: 
 
That which guides to liberation,55 
the foremost yana is confidence. 
Therefore, the intelligent, rely on pursuing confidence.  In those who are without confidence 
wholesome qualities do not arise. 
Likewise, in seeds that were burnt by fire, no green sprout can germinate. 
 
In terms of forward and reverse pervasion,
56 c o n f i d e n c e  i s  s a i d  t o  b e  t h e  
foundation of all positive qualities. 
 
If we have faith, our good qualities will grow. I f  w e  d o  n o t  h a v e  f a i t h ,  t h e y  w i l l  n o t .  “ T h e  
foremost yana” refers to the great vehicle, the Mahayana. A “vehicle” is that which can carry a 
load; the great vehicle is that  which can carry us to libera tion and enlightenment. Human 
beings who are intelligent should rely on faith. Wh ite qualities, that is, vi rtues, do not grow or 
arise in people who do not have faith in the teacher and the Dharma. Virtuous qualities are 
called “white” because they bring a white or posi tive result. If a seed, for example, has been 
burnt by fire, even if it is planted in good soil it will not produce a sprout. Similarly, if we do 
not have faith, our continuum will be as if burned in the sense that qualities will not be 
produced in our mind. Although our intelligen ce can increase without faith, our Dharma 
qualities cannot.   I n  s h o r t ,  i f  w e  h a v e  f a i t h  o r  c o n f i d e n c e  in the Buddha’s teachings, white or virtuous 
qualities will be develop within us. Without fa ith, they cannot grow, only the opposite will 
happen. Because of this, faith is the basis of all good qualities. In this context “good qualities” 
refers to inner qualities – the path, the mind  of enlightenment, compassion, renunciation, 
and so forth. Since the basis of such qualities is  faith, we need faith. If we rely on someone 
with complete confidence, that person will th ink that he needs to help us. On the other 
                                             
 
54 Sutra of the Ten Dharmas  
55 JN: nges ‘byung , often translated as “definite emergence” or “renunciation” 
56 JN: rjes su ‘gro ldog  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
102 hand, if we ask someone for help but do not have confidence in that person, when he or she 
gives us advice we will not follow it. Then when  we once again ask that person for help in 
solving our problems, he will no t likely accept because he understands that we do not trust 
him. We can verify and understand this based on  our experiences in daily life. This is also 
true in terms of achieving enlightenment as th ere are causes and conditions that bring this 
about. Hence, we need to strive to develo p our good qualities and abandon our faults.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim:  
2 Identification of confidence 
Generally speaking there are many types of confidence: in the Jewels, actions and 
effects, and the four noble truths, however, here it is confidence in the spiritual master. 
 
What kind of faith or confidence is to be iden tified or understood in this context? There are 
different kinds of faith: faith or confidence in the Three Jewels, in the law of cause and effect, 
in the four noble truths, and so forth. However,  in this context faith refers to faith in the 
lama, the spiritual master. However, if we also lack faith in the existe nce of Three Jewels, the 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, or in the law of ca use and effect, or in the four noble truths, 
our inner qualities will not grow and our roots of vi rtue will be cut. We need to have faith in 
the Buddha, our teacher. In addition, we need faith in the Dharma, this mainly being true 
paths and true cessations. True cessations are ce ssations of afflictions and suffering that come 
about through meditating true paths. We also  need faith in the Sangha, those who have 
meditated true paths and actualized true cessati ons. A single person, whether man or woman, 
who has realized emptiness directly is an actu al Sangha Jewel. The conventional sangha, on 
the other hand, is a group of four fully-ordained monks or nuns.   The four noble truths also exist. In our da ily life we experience many sufferings. These 
sufferings come from afflictions and action s. These actions were created by our own 
continuum in previous lives. They come from  afflictions. However, some people do not 
accept this and think that karma, or actions and results, does not ex ist. They think that 
everything has been created by God. However, a God who creates suffering and problems could not exist, and those who teach this and th ose who follow this idea do so because they 
have not examined this well. According to Buddh ism, we, that is, our non-virtuous actions of 
body, speech, and mind, create our sufferings. Th erefore, we need to try to understand what 
is good and what is bad. For example, our body, which is contaminated matter made of flesh and bones, is a true suffering. It is caused by  actions, and the main cause of actions is the 
afflictions. We should try to understand that th ese four noble truths exist as in this way we 
will develop more faith in them.   We also need faith in the la ma, the guru. The Sanskrit word  “guru” is composed of two 
syllables, which when broken up are gun and rup. Gun means “qualities,” whereas rup means 
“heavy.” Therefore, a guru is “one who is heavy in qualities.”  In short, we should develop faith in the la ma, the Three Jewels, actions and results, and 
the four noble truths. We s hould also have fa ith in our father and mother as they too are 
objects of veneration.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
103 3 The need to discriminate a buddha with regard to the spiritual master 
Furthermore, as for how to see the spiritual master, it says in the Vajrapani 
Empowerment Tantra : 
 
Lord of Secrets, how should a disciple see the master? He should see 
him just like one would see the Buddha Bhagavan. 
 
{31} Similar statements can be found in th e collection of Mahayana sutras and in 
the vinaya. Their meaning is this. If you un derstand that someone is like a buddha, 
a mind conceiving faults in him will not arise, but rather a mind thinking about 
his positive qualities will arise. Likewise , with regard to a spiritual master, you 
should purposely abandon any concepts of fa ults in every respect while training in 
the mind conceiving positive qualities. 
 
Why do we need to discriminate the lama as a buddha? It is impo rtant as it will bring us many 
good qualities. Why is this? In the Vajrapani Empowerment Tantra , which sets out the 
empowerment of Vajrapani, the Buddha asks V ajrapani, “How should a disciple see the 
master?” Vajrapani replies, “One should see hi m in the same way that one sees the Buddha 
Bhagavan.”  
 The word “buddha” is sang gye  (sangs rgyas ) in Tibetan, whereas “bhagavan” is chom den de  
(bcom ldan ‘das ) Chom  means “destroyed” and indicates that  he has destroyed the four maras. 
Den means “to possess” and indicates that he po ssesses all the good qualities of body, speech, 
and mind. In Tibetan the syllable de is added to chom den  to make chom den de  because the 
term chom den  or bhagavan is also used by Hindus to refer to mundane gods such as Brahma, 
Vishnu, Ram, Mahadeva, and so forth. In fact, even Rajneesh or Osho was referred to by his 
disciples as Bhagavan Rajneesh,  perhaps because he sometimes claimed to be a buddha! The 
additional syllable de means “gone beyond” or “transcendent.”  
 It is also mentioned in the Mahayana sutras and in the vinaya that we should see the guru 
as a buddha. This is because if we think that  the teacher is a buddha, meaning one who has 
purified all faults and possesses all qualities, ther e will not arise a mind conceiving of faults in 
him. In other words, if it is clear to one’s mind that a buddha has abandoned all objects of 
abandonment and has attained all qualities, ther e will not arise the conception of faults in a 
buddha. Likewise, if we think that our lama is  a buddha, meaning that he has exhausted all 
faults and achieved all qualities, then we will  also abandon looking for faults in him and we 
will conceive of him as possessing all the qualitie s of a buddha. In this way, we will be able to 
train our mind in the right way. In our every day life, one should train in seeing the qualities 
of the teacher and refrain from seeking out his fa ults. We should rely on the teacher in this 
way. To do so, we need to develop faith or confidence in him.   
Middle Lam-Rim:  
4 The disadvantages of conceiving faults 
In addition, the above tantra says: 
 
Apprehend the master’s positive qualities, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
104 do not ever apprehend his faults. 
Apprehending his qualities you will gain siddhis, apprehending his faults they cannot be gained. 
 
You should act accordingly. Thus, if posi tive qualities predominate in a spiritual 
master but you think about him in terms of the few faults he has, this will become 
an obstacle to your own accomplishments.
57 Even if faults predominate, if you 
train in confidence from the perspective of  his positive qualities without thinking 
about him in terms of his faults, this wi ll become a cause for accomplishments to 
come about. Therefore, when it comes to  your own spiritual master, whether his 
faults are big or small, contemplate the disadvantages of thinking about him from 
that perspective, repeatedly generate a mind to abandon this, and make it stop. 
 
“The above tantra” refers to the Vajrapani Empowerment Tantra . This text says that we should 
recognize or apprehend the qualities of the lama  or master. On the other hand, we should not 
seek out his faults. If we apprehend his qual ities, we will attain siddhis or spiritual 
attainments. On the other hand, if we only seek out faults in our spiritual master, specifically 
in our tantric teacher, we will not attain any sp iritual attainments. In other words, realizations 
will not grow in our continuum. Therefore, this  tantra says that we should think about and 
understand this.  
 If our lama has more qualities than faults, but we  look only at his faults this will become an 
interference to achieving attainments, realizat ions, or inner qualities. When we see some 
faults in our lama, we should remember that he mostly has good qualities, whereby, by 
focusing on these good qualities, we will be ab le to attain the attain ments. If our lama has 
more faults than qualities, from our own side we  should not look at the side of the faults but 
should try to see his qualities, whereby, by trai ning in faith in him, th is will become a cause 
for us to attain the attainments or realizations. In short, whatever the faults of our lama or 
teacher, big or small, we should not focus on them but instead we should look at the other 
side. In this way, we should abandon the though t that our lama has faults, even slight ones. 
We should reject and try to stop this mind. Inst ead we should always try to see his qualities.  
 For example, if a child always sees his father or mother as being hard, as not taking care of 
him, as talking badly to him, and so forth, that is , if he always looks for faults in his father or 
mother, he will become more and more unhappy, will not trust his parents, and will think to 
escape from home. This is not a useful way to think. If a father or mother sometimes appear 
to be wrathful and use harsh words, it is in order to eliminate their child’s mistakes and to 
make him more humble. It shows that a father an d mother have real love  for their child. On 
the other hand, if day and night they are always kind and sweet to their children and let them 
do whatever they want, this will not be of any benefit. Sometimes parents need to be wrathful. 
Likewise, in Buddhism there are many wrathful deit ies. Why is this? It is because some people 
cannot be subdued by the other types of actions of pacification, increase, and control, due to 
which there is a need to manifest in a wrathf ul aspect. Sometimes parents also need to do 
this. When they yell at us, it should not make us  sad, instead we should understand that they 
                                              
57 JN: dngos grub , in Sanskrit siddhi , is also translated as “attainment,” “spiritual attainment,” “higher 
attainment,” etc. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 23-26 January 2005 (2) 
105 are trying to take care of us and are trying to eliminate our mistakes. For this reason, we 
should try to look at the qualities in our fa mily members and not look at their faults. We 
should also do the same with our friends.  
 
END
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
106  
Monday afternoon, 31 January 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 31) says:  
5 The way of restraining concepts of faults 
If concepts of faults arise due to carelessness,58 a lot of afflictions, and so forth, you 
should apply yourself to restraint through confession.59 If you accustom yourself in 
this manner, you may see that there are a few faults, but since your mind holds on 
to the side of positive qualities, it will not become an obstacle to your confidence. 
For instance, the great Jowo upheld the view of the Madhyamaka, while Serlingpa 
upheld the view of the True Aspectarian Chittamatra, which is why, in terms of 
view, one was higher than the other. Howeve r, as he discovered the general stages 
of the Mahayana path and the mind of en lightenment through relying on him, he 
regarded Serlingpa as unequalled among spiritual teachers. 
 
Due to non-conscientiousness, many affliction s, and so forth, we may see faults in our 
spiritual teacher. When this happe ns, we need to confess it in order to eliminate it by means 
of purification. Since we are ordinary beings, we  have many mental afflictions, due to which 
negative thoughts that see faults can arise. However, by looking at the side of the good 
qualities of the guru and familiarizing with this, when we see slight faults there will not arise 
non-faith, that is, we will be able to stop this  from happening. If we practice looking not at his 
faults of others but at his qualities, we will co me to see more and more good qualities. On the 
other hand, if we look at the side of faults an d do not look at his good qualities, this will 
become an obstacle for us and will create many mental problems for us.   If we think bad of someone, that person does not become bad. Likewise, if we think good of someone, that person does not become good. However, if we intentio nally seek the bad in 
him or her, we will only see faults, due to wh ich our mind will become more agitated and 
nervous, and we will experience more problems. Therefore, with respect to all beings we need 
to practice looking at the side of their good qualit ies, as in this way our life will become easier.  
 Atisha held the view of the Madhyamaka or  Middle Way tenet system, whereas his teacher, 
Serlingpa, held the view of the Chittamatra or  Mind-Only tenet system. Among these two, the 
view of the Madhyamaka is superior to that of the Chittamatra. In spite of holding a higher 
view than his teacher, Atisha ga ined many good qualities, in particular he generated the mind 
of enlightenment, by relying on  Serlingpa. While from the poin t of view of tenets Serlingpa 
was a Chittamatrin, he had generated the conventi onal mind of enlightenment, that is, out of 
great compassion he wished to attain highest enlightenment or buddhah ood for the benefit of 
all sentient beings. Thus, he possessed the two as pirations: the aspiration to benefit or take 
care of other sentient beings and the aspi ration to attain enlightenment. These two 
aspirations acted as the cause for him to de velop the complete mind of enlightenment, 
whereby his mind became very soft and good, unlike our minds which are rough. In short, 
                                             
 
58 JN: bag med , could also be translated as “non-conscientiousness” 
59 JN: bshags bsdam , could be translated as “to confession and restraint” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
107 why did Atisha regarded Serlingpa as the best  among his many gurus? It was because he 
developed the mind of enlightenmen t through relying on Serlingpa.  
 Hence, even though our teacher or guru may po ssess faults (given that as long as one is not 
a buddha one will have faults as even high bodhisattvas have some faults), we should look at 
him from the side of his good qualities, that is, at his positive side. We should cultivate the 
thought that he has qualities and should avoi d looking for faults, such as inappropriate 
behavior, in him. By looking only at the guru’s qualities, we will also train in blocking the 
arisal of bad thoughts toward other people.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-1B3B-1B Remembering the kindness and being respectful 
Second: {32}  
In the [ Sutra of the ] Ten Dharmas  it says: 
 
He looks for me who has roamed in cy clic existence for a long time; he 
awakes me from a long time of  obscuration and torpor due to 
ignorance; he pulls me out as I sink in the ocean of existence; he shows 
good paths to me who has entered ba d ones; he frees me who has been 
bound in the prison of existence; he  i s  a  d o c t o r  t o  m e  w h o  h a s  l o n g  
been tormented by illness; I should generate the discrimination of him 
as rainclouds pacifying me, who ha s been ablaze with the fire of 
passion60 and so on. 
 
We have been roaming or wandering in cyclic  existence since beginningless time. Even now 
we are still wandering in cyclic existence, howe ver we are now being sought by a guru who can 
free us from cyclic existence. We have been ob scured by ignorance and as though asleep for a 
long time, but now we have been awakened by the guru. Having found the Dharma and put it 
into practice, the guru shows us what to do , whereby we can eliminate the obscuration of 
ignorance, which is like darkness obscuring our mind.  
 We have been drowning or sinking in the ocean of cyclic existence, unable to get out, for a 
long time. The guru who teache s the Dharma enables us to become free from this ocean. 
Having taken a bad path, the gu ru shows us which path to ta ke, whereby we can travel the 
right path and avoid wrong path s. All of this depends on th e guru. When he shows us the 
good path, we should follow it. When we are traveling a wrong path, we should turn away 
from it.   We are bound in the prison of cyclic existence by the mental affliction s. It is the guru who 
unties the knots of cyclic existence, whereby we can become free from cyclic existence.  
 When we have been ill for a long time and our body is very weak, a doctor can tell us what kind of treatment to take, what kind of food to eat and what kind of food to avoid. If we follow his advice we can be cured of our illness.  Similarly, to us who have been sick with the 
mental sickness of cyclic existence for a long time, the guru gives the Dharma, which is like 
medicine. By practicing it, we can be cured of this illness.  
                                             
 
60 JN: ‘dod chags , “attachment" 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
108  The attachment, hatred, jealousy, and so forth in our mind are like burning fires. The guru 
who teaches us the Dharma comp letely extinguishes this fire. For example, when we have 
strong attachment, it is like a fire burning in  our mind, making us unhappy. If we are unable 
to obtain the object of our attachment, we be come completely unhappy, due to which we may 
even need to take medicine for mental illness, and, if it cannot be cured, we may even commit 
suicide. Our mental afflictions su ch as attachment are very strong , but they can be pacified by 
the guru, like a forest fire can be extinguishe d by strong rain. The Buddha’s teachings are 
likened to rain because, just as rain makes pl ants grow, keeps the dust down, and so forth, 
similarly by receiving the rain of Buddha’s teac hings our mind become more positive and the 
dust-like negativities are stopped. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The Array of Stalks61 [Sutra]  also says: 
 
“These are my spiritual friends, expounders of Dharma, 
Exhaustively teaching the qualities of all that is, Thoroughly teaching the conduct of bodhisattvas,” With these thoughts in mind, come here.  As they give birth to all th at, they are like my mother. 
As they give the milk of virtues, they are like nurses. They cleanse me completely by me ans of enlightenment’s branches. 
 Our spiritual friends who expound the Dharma te ach us the qualities of all phenomena or of 
all dharmas, that is, they th oroughly teach us the conduct of bodhisattvas. What is the 
bodhisattva conduct? It is the mind of enli ghtenment and the six or ten perfections: the 
perfections of generosity, morality or ethical di scipline, patience, joyous effort, concentration, 
wisdom, and so forth. A bodhisattva constantly ex erts effort to take care of other sentient 
beings and, to do this, examines what is the best way to help them. Sometimes bodhisattvas 
even manifest as a ship or a bridge in order to help sentient beings. They can also manifest as a house for those who do not have shelter and so forth. Bodhisattv as strive to benefit sentient 
beings in whatever way they can. Their only desire is to help others. Even to help just one single sentient being they are prepared to go to the hell realm and stay there for a long time in order to extract this being from the hell realm.  T h e y  c o n t i n u a l l y  s t r i v e  t o  h e l p  o t h e r s  a n d  
never think to harm or act against others.   Recognizing the behavior and qualities of bodh isattvas as being the very best and thinking 
that our teacher also possesses these qualities, we should generate the wish to develop them 
also. By thinking in this way, we will be able to eventually develop them.   The teacher is likened to a mother because, just  as a mother gives birth to a child, similarly 
due to the teacher good qualities are born in  our continuum. Then, even after a mother has 
given birth to her child, she does not abandon it but continues to nourish it with her milk 
and so forth so that it grows better and better.  Similarly a Dharma teacher nourishes our good 
                                             
 
61 Gandavyuha  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
109 qualities of the mind of enlightenment, love, compassion, the mind of safeguarding, patience, 
joyous effort, concentration, and wisdom, and helps them grow, whereby our mind becomes 
better and better.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
These spiritual friends completely exorcise harm. 
They are like doctors releasing from death and aging. Showering a rain of nectar, they are like Indra, the lord of the gods. 
 The teacher, by teaching us the Dharma, turns away or elimin ates harm. For example, by 
teaching us how to develop the mind of enligh tenment, even if someone wants to harm us 
they will not be able to do so.   The teacher, like a doctor, teaches us the Dh arma, which is like medicine. When a doctor 
g i v e s  u s  m e d i c i n e  i t  c a n  s a v e  o u r  l i f e  a n d  prevent us from dying. While aging cannot be 
avoided, death can be turned away for a while.   The teacher who sends down a rain of nectar of Dharma is like Indra, who causes rain to fall from the clouds upon the earth. Indra is th e king of the Realm of the Thirty-Three. It was 
he together with Brahma who first asked Buddh a Shakyamuni to turn the wheel of Dharma 
i n  t h e  w o r l d .  F o r  t h i s  r e a s o n ,  I n d r a  i s  c o n s i d e r e d  t o  b e  D h a r m a  k i n g  w h o  f o l l o w s  t h e  Buddha’s teachings. Because he made the reques t, “Buddha, now that you are enlightened, 
please turn the wheel of Dharma,” Buddha Shak yamuni let fall a rain of Dharma teachings. 
Present at this first teaching, the wheel of Dharma of the four  noble truths, were five human 
beings, who became Buddha’s main disciples, as  well as among the gods  Brahma and Indra, 
and nagas and anti-gods. Although these beings were present at the teaching, they could not 
be seen by the human beings.   It is recounted that once when Buddha Shakya muni was teaching, a na ga came in the form 
of a king surrounded by his many ministers. However, seeing this, the Buddha told him to 
come to teachings the next day in his real form. Thus, the next day a huge five-headed snake 
came to the teachings, creating fear in everyo ne. They wondered why a snake had come to the 
teachings and Buddha Shakyamuni  explained that the elegant maharaja who had come to the 
teachings the previous day was in fact this same king of the nagas. He to ld his disciples not to 
worry as even though his body was that of a sn ake, the naga king unde rstood the Dharma and 
had generated the mind of enlightenment. For this reason, it is said that one with a naga body 
can generate the mind of enlighte nment, this being an exception to the general rule that it is 
not possible to generate the mind of enlightenm ent on the basis of an animal body. Nagas are 
included in the animal realm because they ar e not gods or anti-gods or human beings or 
hungry ghosts or hell beings. Thus, in the anim al realm there are some beings, for example, 
nagas, who have sharp an d intelligent minds.  
 In fact it was the nagas who invited Nagarj una to their land, where the Perfection of 
W i s d o m  S u t r a s  h a d  b e e n  t a k e n .  N a g a r j u n a ,  h a v i n g  b e e n  u n a b l e  t o  f i n d  t h e  P e r f e c t i o n  o f  W i s d o m  S u t r a s  i n  I n d i a ,  w e n t  t o  N e p a l  w h e r e he visited the naga land. At the back of 
Swayambunath stupa there is a building in whic h there is a door through which Nagarjuna is 
said to have gone to the naga land and then  returned back to the human realm with these 
texts. One of the texts that Nagarjuna brought back  with him can still be seen in Nepal. It is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
110 kept locked up in a special place because some one once stole some pages and sold them. This 
text is written in the lentsa  letters of the Sanskrit language. I once saw this text; the paper is 
black and the letters are written in gold. Therefore,  the Dharma also exists  in the naga lands.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Like the full moon they flou rish with white qualities. 
They show the direction of peace, like bright sunlight. 
Regarding friends and foes they are like mountains. They have minds as un disturbed as the sea. 
They give perfect support, some say: “like boatmen.” With this in mind, Sudhana, come here. 
 
The full moon, being completely white, fills the sk y with white light. The teacher is likened to 
the moon in that he makes the white dharmas or  virtuous qualities increase in our mind. An 
example of a white or virtuous dharma is not ki lling, whereas killing is a black or non-virtuous 
dharma.  
 The teacher is also likened to sunlight, fo r example, the autumn sun which is clear and 
bright, not hot but rather cool, due to the sky no t being hazy or foggy as it is in summertime. 
 The teacher is also likened to a mountain. Just as a mountain cannot be moved by enemies or friends, but treats everyone the same without difference, similarly, the teacher is stable like 
a mountain in that he does not look to friends and enemies.  
 The mind of the teacher is like an ocean, in that just as an ocean cannot easily be disturbed 
even though boats travel on its surface and fi sh swim in its depths, likewise, his mind is 
undisturbed, being similar to the mind s of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.  
 The teacher thoroughly supports or nourishes us , like a boatman, one who drives a boat. It 
is said that there are three type s of mind of enlightenment: th e mind of enlightenment like a 
king, the mind of enlightenment like a boa tman, and the mind of enlightenment like a 
shepherd. Just as a shepherd first puts his anim als in their stalls and only then goes home, 
similarly someone with this mind of enlightenmen t wishes to first set all other sentient beings 
in buddhahood and then attain buddhahood himsel f. Just as a boatman travels together with 
the people in his ship, similarly someone with this mind of enlightenment thinks to travel 
together with all other sentient beings to enligh tenment, that is, he do es not think to go to 
enlightenment first and then to bring them to  enlightenment, nor does he think to bring 
them to enlightenment first and then at the en d to attain enlightenment himself. Just as a 
king thinks to become king in order to take ca re of his subjects (or someone thinks to become 
president in order to take care of the populati on), someone with this mind of enlightenment 
thinks to attain enlightenment first in order to then set all sentient beings in enlightenment.  
 Tuesday morning, 1 February 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 32) says: 
 
“Bodhisattvas bring forth my understanding. 
Buddha’s children cause enlightenment. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
111 These friends of mine are praised by the Buddha”; 
With such wholesome thoughts in mind, come here. 
 
That the Buddha’s children or th e bodhisattvas cause enlightenmen t means that they strive to 
help their disciples to generate the mind of enlightenment so that they themselves become 
children of the Buddha and achieve buddhahood. It is usually said that the Buddha gave 
teachings, and that, by studying them, his disc iples generate the mind of definite emergence 
or renunciation, the mind of enlightenment,  and the perfect view realizing emptiness, 
whereby they come to be called “bodhisattvas” or “children of the Buddha.” Thus, if we too 
practice in this way we will become bodhisa ttvas. The three principal aspects of the path – 
renunciation, the mind of enlightenment, and co rrect view – are the main causes of ordinary 
bodhisattvas. Even though they are not yet un contrived renunciation, an uncontrived mind 
of enlightenment, and uncontrived correct view, they are the causes th at make one enter the 
path. Then, having generated an uncontrived mind  of enlightenment, for example, one enters 
the Mahayana path and becomes a child of th e Buddha, whereby we will come to achieve 
enlightenment or buddhahood. The “wholesome thoughts”, that is , the virtuous thoughts, of 
this context refers to the mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
“As they save the world,  they are like heroes. 
They have become the captains , protectors, and refuges.  
They are {33} the eye bestowing happiness on me,” 
With thoughts like these ho nor your spiritual friends. 
 [The thoughts] expressed here should be remembered through a tune to go with 
the verses, substituting oneself for “Sudhana.” 
 The spiritual friends or teachers are also hero es who protect worldly beings. They are also 
captains, protectors, and refuges, as well as eyes  bestowing happiness. What kind of eye is it 
that bestows happiness? It is the wisdom eye, sinc e it is wisdom that enables us to understand 
everything. Therefore, we need to venerate or honor our virtuous spiritual friends.  
 We should memorize or remember these verses  and chant them with a pleasant tune while 
remembering the kindness of our teacher. “S udhana” is the Sanskrit for the Tibetan nor bzang , 
meaning “fine wealth.” We should su bstitute his name with our own.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-1B3B-2 The manner of relying through actions 
A The need for reliance through actions 
B Condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing him 
C The extensive explanation of those three 
 
Now the text sets out how to rely on the guru th rough actions. However, first the need to rely 
on him through actions is explained.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
112 2B4A-1B3B-2A The need for reliance through actions 
The second: 
In the Fifty [Verses About the] Guru  it says: 
 
What need is there to say a lot of words here? 
Do everything62 to make your guru happy. 
Give up anything that does not please him. 
Apply yourself to that. Examine that! 
 
“Spiritual attainments follow from the guru”; This was said by Vajradhara himself. Aware of this, use anything there is, and 
Make your guru totally, [utterly] happy. 
 
In brief, try hard to please him and to give up whatever he does not like. 
 
Ashvagosha’s Fifty Verses on the Guru  says that there is no need to  say a lot here. In short, we 
should try to act in such a way that the guru will be happy with us. On the other hand, if 
some action we do does not make him happy, we should abandon it. We should put effort 
into this and examine what kinds of actions make the guru happy or delighted and what 
kinds of actions make him unhappy. We should use our wisdom to analyze this, and then we 
should put effort into accomp lishing the actions that make him happy and abandoning the 
actions that do not please him. Thus, what is meant by relying on the guru through action is 
to abandon that which does not please him and to do that which pleases him. 
 That all spiritual attainments (siddhis) are ge nerated in dependence on the guru or master 
was said by Vajradhara himself. Having underst ood this, we should try to do whatever makes 
the guru happy and try to avoid whatever make s him unhappy. If we are unable to make him 
happy, we should at least avoid bad actions and do only neutral actions. For example, 
sometimes no matter what we do, our parents ar e not happy! Still we should try as much as 
possible to act in accordance with  that taught by the Buddha.  
 In brief, we should put effort into doing th at which pleases the guru and abandoning that 
which does not please him. We need to put st rong effort into this. We need to encourage 
ourselves and feel strong and able to do this. We should not get depressed. If our body and 
mind are strong, we will be able to do much. On the other hand, if our body is not strong 
and our mind is weak and lacking in courage, we will not be able to do anything. We will constantly think, “I cannot do it.” People sometimes ask me what they to do when this 
happens, but as I do not know I tell them to eat well and sleep well, whereby their energy may 
return. We can also do the breathing meditation , imagining that all our negative energy of 
body, speech, and mind, all our sadness, depression , and so forth, are exhaled in the aspect of 
black smoke. As we inhale, we should imagine th at all the qualities, knowledge, and positive 
energy of the buddhas and of the entire world en ter into us in the aspe ct of white light. Our 
body becomes clean and clear, as transparent as  crystal, and our mind becomes clear and able 
to understand everything. This breathing medi tation is not difficult, therefore we should 
                                             
 
62 lit. “everything should be done” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
113 concentrate on the breath whil e sending out all negative energy and inhaling all positive 
energy. In this way our mind will become more relaxed.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-1B3B-2B Condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing him 
The three means of pleasing [the guru] ar e (1) offering him material things, (2) 
serving him and paying respect to him with  body and speech, and (3) practicing in 
accordance with his advice. In this regard, it says in the Ornament of the Sutras : 
 
Through homage and pure offerings and service 
and practice, you should rely on a spiritual friend. 
 
There are three ways of pleasing the guru:  
making offerings of material things to him, serving him in whatever way he needs, and putting into practice whatever he has taught. Among the three, the latter is the best way of relying on him by means of actions. Maitreya’s 
Ornament of the Sutras  says that we should rely on a spir itual friend by means of offering him 
material things, serving him and paying resp ect to him with our body and speech, and 
practicing. “Serving him with our body” includes  cleaning the guru’s room, putting his things 
in order, and so forth. “Serving him with our sp eech” is, for example, if the guru asks us to 
give someone a message we pass it on to that  person, thereby substituting his speech. In 
addition, we should put whatever the guru has ta ught us into practice. The latter is the best 
way to rely on the guru, the main point of relyin g on a guru being to practice whatever he has 
taught us as purely as possible. However, we need please him in all three ways. These three 
will now be explained extensively.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-1B3B-2C The extensive explanation of those three 
1 Offering him ma terial things 
As regards the first, it says in the Fifty [Verses] : 
 
Through things not normally gi ven – your son and your wife, 
And through your life, you should forever rely 
On the master of your sacred commitments; Needless to say, through fickle possessions [as well]. 
 
And: 
 
Giving is what amounts to always Offering gifts to all the buddhas. Offering is what accumulates merit, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
114 Which turns into the highest attainments63. 
 
We should give to the guru even the things th at we would not generally give to others. For 
example, if the guru wants our son, we should  give him our son; if he wants our wife, we 
should give him our wife; if he wants our husband, we should give him our husband, and so 
forth. We should even be prepared to offer our life to our guru. In addition, we should 
mentally  offer whatever possessions we own to our gu ru, there being no need to actually give 
them to him. Just by mentally offering them to him, we will accumulate merit. Thus, we can 
also imagine all the forests, lakes, and so fort h in the world and then mentally offer them to 
the guru or to the Three Jewels  or to the entire merit fiel d. This will bring about the 
accumulation of a great collection of merit or virtue that will be very strong and stable. To 
give our life to the guru means to spend our life  in serving him, like, for example, Ven. Roger 
who constantly serves Lama Zo pa Rinpoche and accompanies hi m wherever he goes. Perhaps 
we can assume that he has also given his life to his guru. To follow the guru like a shadow, 
constantly trying to help him, is what it mean s “to offer our life to the guru.” It does not 
mean to give him our life in the sense of sacrificing our life and dying for his sake. Rather it means to dedicate our life to serving him, gi ving him whatever possessions we have, and so 
forth. If we offer these things to the guru, it is like offering them to the buddhas of the ten 
directions. In this fortunate eons  1,000 buddhas will visit this wo rld; if we make offerings to 
the guru we will gain the same amount of  merit as offering to the 1,000 buddhas.  
 To offer all our material things to all th e buddhas always means to offer them in the 
morning, at midday, in the even ing, and at night. Offering in  this way we will accumulate 
many merits, due to which we will eventually ac hieve spiritual attainments or realizations, that 
is, buddhahood or, from the point of view of ta ntra, the state of Vajradhara. For this reason, 
we should offer material things to the guru.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Serving and paying respect to him with body and speech 
The second [involves] bathing him, massaging him, cleaning him, nursing him 
when he is ill, etc., and talkin g about his positive qualities. 
 
We can serve the guru by bathing him, massag ing his body, cleaning him by anointing him 
with oils, and nursing and serving him when he is  ill. We should serve the guru in this way 
when he is not well and unable to move.  
 We should also express the guru’s qualities wi th our speech, saying, for example, that he is 
excellent, possesses all ten qualities or fi ve of them or the minimum two mentioned 
previously, that he is compassionate and tr ies to help his disciples, and has certain 
knowledges, for example, that he knows how to paint, how to work with computers, how to 
build houses, and so forth. This advice refers  not only to Dharma teachers but to all our 
normal worldly teachers. We should praise all of them as we have gained knowledge from their teachings, and try to help them. We should  praise them by revealing their good qualities 
and refrain from pointing out their faults. For ex ample, we should not say that on the outside 
our teacher appears to be good but in reality he or she cheats others and so forth. Atisha said 
                                             
 
63 lit. “this accumulation turns into the highest attainments” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
115 to Jangchub O, “Do not expose others’ faults, but conceal them. Talk about others’ qualities 
and hide your own qualities. Reveal your own fa ults.” This means that even if we are unable 
to point out others’ qualities, we should at least refrain from pointing out their faults. We too 
need to act like this in our daily life.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Practicing in accordance with his advice 
The third [consists in] {34} to practice wi thout contradicting the instructions, this 
being the main one. In the Jataka Stories  it says: 
 
The offering to be made in return for his help 
Is to practice in accordance with his instructions. 
 We should practice whatever the guru has taug ht us without contradicting his instructions, 
that is, we should not do the opposite to what he has advised us to do. This is the main thing 
to be done in the context of relying on the guru. The Jataka  or Life Stories  say that in order to 
repay the benefit we have received from our guru , we should practice in accordance with what 
he has advised, doing what he ha s said to do and avoiding what he has said not to do. This is 
the best of offerings. Thus, whatever advice we have been given, we should try to do as we 
have been told and to not do the opposite. This is the best way of relying on the guru, and is 
very useful for our practice.  
 This subject is explained in much more detail in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Great Exposition of the 
Stages of the Path . However, in short, we should do what the guru says to do and avoid doing 
w h a t  h e  s a y s  s h o u l d  n o t  b e  d o n e .  T h i s  i s  s i m i l a r ,  f o r  e x a m p l e ,  t o  t h e  f a c t  t h a t  i t  i s  g o o d ,  
whether from the Dharma point of view or the wo rldly point of view, to follow the advice of 
our grandparents and parents and to try not to go against their advice but to respect them. Likewise, whether we are in a Dharma center, sch ool, or university we should try to abide by 
the rules set out by the director or principle. This is correct according to both the world and 
the Dharma as it will result in good behavior . On the other hand, by not abiding by these 
rules, our behavior will become bad and negative  and may harm our society, the center, or the 
school.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-1B4 The benefits of reliance 
A Benefits such as approaching the state of a buddha 
Fourth:  
It says [in the scriptures] that you will approach the state of  a buddha, that the 
Conquerors will rejoice, that you will not be  deprived of virtuous spiritual friends, 
that you will not fall to the lower realms, and that you will not easily succumb to 
bad karma and afflictions. Since yo u will not transgress the conduct of 
bodhisattvas and will be mindful of it, yo ur accumulation of good qualities will 
grow higher and higher and all your temporary and ultimate goals will be 
accomplished. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
116 By relying on a guru in the right and perfect way, we will come closer to buddhahood. In 
addition, all the conquerors will be delighted, an d in our future lives we will not be bereft of 
teachers, that is, we will always find virtuous sp iritual friends. We will also not fall into the 
lower realms – the hell realm, hungry ghost realm,  or animal realm. Instead we will be reborn 
as a human being in a good family with all our sense powers complete and an intelligent 
mind. In addition, we will not be easily overco me by bad actions and afflictions, that is, we 
will not be defeated by them. These are some of  the benefits of correctly relying on a guru.  
 Also we will not transgress the conduct of bodh isattvas, that is, we will not do actions that 
are opposite to them. We will also possess mi ndfulness, whereby our collection of good 
qualities will grow higher and higher. Temporally  we will achieve happiness and finally we will 
achieve the state of enlightenment.  
 In short, we will come closer to buddhahood, the conquerors will be delighted with us, we 
will not be deprived of gurus in the future, and so forth. If, on the other hand, we do the opposite of what the guru advises, we will become more distant from the state of a buddha, 
the conquerors will be unhappy with us, we will be  bereft of virtuous spir itual friends, we will 
fall into the hell realm, hungry ghost realm, or animal realm, we will be overcome or defeated 
by evil actions and the mental afflictions, we  will transgress and degenerate the bodhisattva 
conduct, we will have forgetfulness instead of mindfulness, and our bad qualities will increase 
instead of our good qualities, as a result of which temporally we will experience problems and 
unhappiness and finally we will be reborn in the hells.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Bad karma is exhausted and [the benefit] exceeds even that of offerings to numerous buddhas 
Furthermore, through serving and paying respect to the spiritual teacher, the 
karmas for experiencing the lower realms are exhausted directly in this lifetime 
t h r o u g h  e x p e r i e n c i n g  o n l y  s l i g h t  h a r m  t o  b o d y  a n d  m i n d  o r  e l s e  t h r o u g h  b e i n g  
experienced in dreams. It is said that th ere are enormous benefits that outshine 
the roots of virtue of making offeri ngs, etc. to innumerable buddhas.  
 
Through making offerings to all the buddhas,  our negative or non-virtuous actions are 
exhausted and a great amount of merit is accu mulated. However, through serving the guru 
and making him happy with offerings and so fort h, instead of experiencing the suffering of 
the lower realms for which we had created the cause, we will  either experience a slight 
physical sickness or mental unhappiness in this li fe or even just some suffering in a dream. 
For example, we might dream that we have been reborn in the hell, hungry ghost, or animal 
realm and in the dream experience their resp ective sufferings. In the hell realm one 
experiences the suffering of heat and cold, in  the hungry ghost realm one experiences the 
suffering of hunger and thirst, and in the animal realm one experiences the suffering of being 
stupid, of eating one another, and so forth. Inst ead of actually experiencing these sufferings in 
the future, we will experience them in a drea m. In this way, our negative actions are 
completely exhausted by serving the guru.  
 If we make offerings of material things to  immeasurable buddhas, we accumulate a lot of 
virtue, it is of great benefit. However by serv ing and respecting the guru we accumulate even 
more, that is, the benefit is greater. Therefore, we need to practice what the guru teaches.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
117 In our every day life we need to develop a good heart toward all sentient beings and try to 
b e n e f i t  a n d  h e l p  t h e m .  I f  w e  c a n n o t  h e l p  t h em, at least we should  not harm them. This 
should be our main practice in daily life, since it is quite easy.  
 
Tuesday afternoon, 1 February 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 34) says: 
2B4A-1B5 The drawbacks of not relying 
A The way it ruins this  life and future ones 
Fifth: If you take someone as your spir itual teacher and then back off in your 
reliance on him, a lot of illnesses and negative forces64 will harm you in this life, 
and in future lives you will have to experience the immeasurable sufferings of the 
lower realms.  
 We should try our very best to rely on the gu ru. To initially think that someone is our guru 
but then later on to act against him or br eak the relationship with him would be a 
transgression and not right. As a result of not relying properly on him, we will experience 
many illnesses, both physical and mental, as well as harm from evil spirits in this life. Then in 
future lives we will be reborn in the bad migrat ions where we will experience infinite types of 
sufferings. This is mentioned below in the Fifty Verses on the Guru . Thus, we need to try to rely 
on the guru properly and not transgress his advice or instructions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In the Fifty [Verses]  it says:  
 
Do not ever agitate the minds 
Of your masters – not in any way. If you do so due to some delusion You will necessarily roast in hell.  
It has been explained authentically, 
That all those who slander their masters Will come to dwell in the horrific hells, Such as the Avici, that were taught. 
 We should never do actions that disturb the guru ’s mind. This is because if, out of ignorance, 
we commit actions that disturb his mind we will  burn in a hell realm, for example, being 
boiled in molten iron, unable to  do anything to avoid this suffering. The worst of the hells is 
Avici or Unrelenting Torment where the suffering does not stop even fo r an instant and lasts 
for eons. As we could take rebirth there, we mu st be very careful not to disturb the mind of 
the guru or the minds of other holy beings, su ch as bodhisattvas and foe-destroyers, or the 
                                             
 
64 JN: gdon, could also be translated as “evil spirits” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
118 minds of our parents. Since all of them are obje cts of veneration, if we disturb their minds we 
will later experience the sufferings of the he ll realms. In fact th e fourth chapter of Treasury of 
Manifest Dharma  says that, among human beings, our pa rents are very precious because they 
gave us this precious human rebirth endowed with  the eighteen qualities.  Therefore, we also 
need to respect them and to be careful with respect to them. 
 The Buddha explained that the hells are fearfu l, horrific places, and that one reason for 
being reborn there is criticizing or slandering our guru. Since this  explanation is not faulty, we 
must be careful to avoid committing such actions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
{35} In a passage from the Commentary on the Difficult Points of the Black Opponent [of 
Yama]  it also says: 
 
Whoever hears a single verse [of Dharma ], 
And does not perceive the spiritual teacher
65, 
Will be born among dogs a hundred times, 
And afterwards as someone of low cast.66 
 
It needs to be clarified that if we just hear a single verse of Dharma from someone, it is not necessary to take him or her as our teacher. We can, for example, listen to a Dharma teaching 
while thinking that we are merely listening to  a lecture, independent of whether the person 
teaching is a monk, nun, or lay person. In othe r words, we can just treat the teaching as a 
general talk, due to which this person does no t become our teacher. For someone to become 
our teacher we have to think that  we want to take him as our te acher, that is, we must have 
this specific motivation. However,  having taken him as our spiritua l teacher, if we then listen 
to teachings from him but lack respect for hi m, we will be reborn a hundred times among 
dogs and even when we are reborn as a human bein g we will be born in a lower caste, such as 
that of butchers. In Nepal th e butchers who kill animals and sell the meat are all women, 
whereas in India they are all men.   In short, if with the motivati on that is the thought to listen to a Dharma teaching from our 
teacher, we listen to even a single verse but later on deprecate our teacher, the consequence 
will be to be reborn again and again as a do g one hundred times, and then eventually when 
we are once again born as a human being to be a butcher who kills other beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B No positive qualities are attained and earlier ones deteriorate 
Apart from that, positive qualities that have  not arisen do not arise, and those that 
have arisen, deteriorate and vanish. 
 
                                              
65 gang gis bla mar mi ’dzin pa  – lit. “and does not hold/understand/apprehend as a spiritual teacher” 
66 JN: sme sha can , butcher 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
119 If we break our relationship with our guru we will not attain any good qualities that have not 
yet been generated, and whatever good qualitie s we already have will degenerate. Our mind 
will become disturbed, due to which we will  not remember our commitments with our guru. 
As a result of this, any good qualities we deve loped in the past will degenerate and we will not 
generate any new qualities because of lack of interest and so forth. This is the danger of not 
relying properly on our guru.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C The disadvantages of relying on unwholesome spiritual friends and bad companions 
If you rely on unwholesome spiritual friends and bad companions, again your 
positive qualities will diminish and your faults will increase, whereby there will be 
undesirable results. Therefore, it was taug ht that this should be avoided in every 
way. 
 
If we rely on an improper or non-virtuous teacher or on bad companions or negative friends, 
there will arise many shortcomings similar to th e previous ones. In other words, the qualities 
that we generated in the past will degenerate  and our faults will increase, due to which the 
undesirable will occur. Hence, we must strive to abandon the actions of relying on non-virtuous teachers and negative friends. For exam ple, we see children who were originally well 
behaved but then, having become friends with ne gative boys or girls, began to use marijuana 
and other drugs. They then slowly became habitu ated to taking stronger and stronger drugs, 
such as heroine, began to steal money even  from their own families, and sold their 
possessions and so forth. This is all due to nega tive friends who cause our behavior to change 
from good to bad. A similar thing can happen due to following negative teachers. There exist 
such teachers in the world, for example, thos e who teach black magic, who teach others how 
to steal, and so forth. If we follow them and practice what they  teach, we too will engage in 
these negative actions. Thus , what is meant by non-virt uous teachers and negative 
companions is those who lead us to engage in negativities. We should give up or abandon such teachers and friends.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-1B6 Summary of the meaning of these [points] 
A The importance of proper reliance on the root of perpetual striving67
 
Sixth: That being so, the instructions wide ly known as “guru yoga” should also be 
understood according to what has been ex plained before, it not being enough to 
do the visualizations in just one medi tation session. When you do one Dharma 
p r a c t i c e  f r o m  t h e  b o t t o m  o f  y o u r  h e a r t ,  y o u  s h o u l d  l o n g  r e l y  o n  o n e  s p i r i t u a l  
teacher who guides you unmistakenly.  
 When doing guru yoga, having been given inst ructions as mentioned previously, it is not 
enough to do just one meditation session. Instea d we must try to understand the instructions 
given by the teacher and do the visualizations ag ain and again in many sessions. In this way, 
                                             
 
67 JN: gtan gyi mdun ma’i rtsa ba , could also be translated as “the root of lasting aims” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
120 we should try to put them into practice every day. If from the depths of our heart we wish to 
practice the Dharma, we must rely for a long time  on a virtuous spiritual friend who guides us 
unmistakenly to enlightenment. Al though in general it is not en ough to rely on a guru for a 
short time in order to become enlightened, there are some people who created a lot of 
potential in their past lives due to which they  can quickly attain enlightenment. However, 
such people are exceptions; in general we need to rely on a guru for many years. 
 An example of guru yoga is the Hundred Deities of the Joyous Land  (Ganden Lha Gyema ), 
which is also called the G u r u  Y o g a  o f  L a m a  T s o n g k h a p a . In addition, there is the Guru Puja  
(Lama Chopa ), the Six-Session Guru Yoga , and so forth. Thus, there are many types of guru yoga. 
However, in each case, it is not enough to do su ch visualizations just one time, rather we must 
do them over and over again. Similarly, we must rely on a guru for a long time. If we rely on 
him for a short time and then abandon him, we will experience many interferences and will not gain any realizations.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
As Chekawa also said about that time sp an: “When you rely on a guru, there will 
be doubtful questions whether to give him up.” Accordingly, since there will only 
be loss without profit if you do not know how to rely on him, it becomes evident 
that the cycles of teachings about relying on a spiritual teacher are more important 
than any other ones and the root of perpetual striving.
68 
 
Geshe Chekawa wrote the Seven Point Mind Training , a well-known text on mind training. He 
said that if we rely for on a guru a short ti me, there may arise the doubt that wonders whether 
to give him up. For this reason, we need to understand how to rely on a guru. If we do not 
know how to rely on him, there will not be any profit and only loss. Therefore, we must think 
a lot about relying on a guru. Because the root of all the good things of this life, all our good 
q u a l i t i e s ,  i s  t h e  g u r u ,  w e  n e e d  t o  r e l y  o n  h i m  p r o p e r l y .  T o  d o  t h i s ,  w e  n e e d  t o  s t u d y  t h i s  subject well so as to first understand the qualities that a guru should possess. Having 
understood this, we should study how to rely on him in thought – th rough developing faith 
in him and through remembering his kindness de veloping respect for him – and then how to 
rely on him by means of actions. Thus, we need  to spend time learning the points of guru 
devotion, then trying to understand them, an d then doing the visualizations in order to 
develop faith and confidence in him, thinking that, like a mother who gives birth to a child 
and nourishes it, whatever qualities and knowle dge we generate depend on and are nourished 
b y  h i m .  W e  s h o u l d  a l s o  u n d e r s t a n d  t h a t  i f  w e  d o  n o t  r e l y  o n  h i m  p r o p e r l y ,  m a n y  disadvantages will arise, such as not finding a virtuous spiritual friend in the future, being 
overcome by bad actions and afflictions, bein g harmed by sickness and demons, and in the 
next life taking rebirth in the lower realms an d experiencing infinite suffering there. On the 
o t h e r  h a n d ,  i f  w e  r e l y  o n  a  g u r u ,  a d v a n t a g e s  w i l l  a r i s e ,  s u c h  a s  b e c o m i n g  c l o s e r  t o  buddhahood, the conquerors being delighted with us, not being deprived of virtuous spiritual 
friends in the future, not falling into the lower re alms, and the arisal of all virtuous qualities. 
                                             
 
68 JN: gtan gyi mdun ma’i rtsa ba , could also be translated as “the root of your lasting aims” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
121 We should think about the disadvantages of  not relying properly on a guru and the 
advantages of relying properly on a him.  We should study this subject well.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The need for confession and a vow because, if that proper reliance does not come about, it is a great 
fault 
With our coarse mental afflictions – not knowing how to rely or knowing how to 
but not doing so – we have often allowed many faults69 of reliance on a spiritual 
teacher to occur in regard to listening to  the Dharma. Since it is difficult for an 
awareness of that to develop through conf ession and a vow, having understood the 
advantages and {36} disadvantages as explained previously, sincerely confess any 
occurrences that are not in accordance with proper reliance and develop many 
resolute minds. 
 If we do not rely on our teacher, that is, if we break the relationship with him, many faults 
will arise. For example, if there were four do ors open, one on each side of a room, dogs and 
cats as well as thieves could enter, dust would come in with the wind, and so forth. Similarly, 
if we have a lot of afflictions, are non-conscienti ous, are ignorant, and lack respect, we will not 
rely on the guru properly. Also if we do not know how to rely on him, or know how to rely on him but do not do it, when we listen to him teach,  negativities will arise. In this case, we need 
to do confession and make a vow to not do allo w this to happen again in the future. In other 
words, we should regret what we have done in  the past and make a vow or promise not to do 
it again in the future. In order to do so, we n eed to remember the benefits of relying on the 
guru and the faults of not relying on him corre ctly, which were mentioned previously. Then if 
we do not rely on him correctly, we should confess this from our heart and promise or resolve not to do it again. To confess our negativities thoroughly, we need to apply the four opponent 
powers: (1) the opponent force of the base – going for refuge to the Three Jewels, the Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha, and generating  the mind of enlightenment,  
(2) the opponent force of regret – developing regret for negative actions committed, (3) the opponent force of determination – th e thought or mental promise not to do the 
negative action again, and (4) the opponent force of applying an anti dote, for example, reciting mantras, doing 
prostrations, making images of buddhas such as tsa-tsas, offering water bowls, and reciting the 
Confession to the Thirty-Five Buddhas , the mantra of Vajrasattva, or sutras. However, the best 
means of purification is to meditate on the empt iness of inherent existence, thinking that the 
negative action, the creator of th e negative action, and the recipi ent of the negative action are 
empty of inherent existence.   Thus, at the beginning of confession, we sh ould recite the refuge formula three times 
together with the generation of the mind of enlightenment as we do before teachings saying:  
 
I go for refuge until I am enlightened  To the Buddha, Dharma, and Supreme Assembly.  
                                             
 
69 JN: kha na mo tho ba , could also be translated as “misdeed” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
122 By my merit from practicing generosity and the other perfections,  
May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings. 
 
Then we should develop sincere regret for our negative actions, thinking that we did them 
out of ignorance, and then determine not to re peat them again in the future. Then we could 
recite the hundred-syllable mantra of Vajrasattv a or his short mantra or do any of the other 
antidotes. At the end of the confession, we  should think that we have succeeded in 
completely purifying our negative actions and then  dedicate all the virtue  that we created to 
the enlightenment of all sentient beings. If we do this everyday before going to sleep, it would 
be excellent and will bring a good result. Therefore, we should try to do this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How, if you act in that manner, the realization of reliance is not far away 
If you act in that manner, before long  you will become like the bodhisattva 
Sadaprarudita and the young Sudhana who was insatiable in his quest for a 
spiritual teacher.  
 If we act in this way, we will quickly find a qualified teacher and thereby quickly achieve our 
aims, such as buddhahood. There are many st ories about the two, Sadaprarudita (Always 
Crying) and Sudhana. It is recounted, for ex ample, that Sadaprarudita set out on a long 
search for a mahayana teacher who could teach him the perfection of wisdom. Having heard 
that the guru Dharmodgata, who was living in  the east, could teach him the perfection of 
wisdom, he set out to find him. During his journey, Sadaprarudita developed the wish to 
make an offering to this in order to create merit. However as he did not have any money or 
possessions and was living like a beggar, he though t to sell his body in the marketplace and to 
buy offerings with the money earned. Sakra, the ki ng of the gods, in order to test his resolve, 
manifested as a young man who offered to buy his heart, blood, and marrow. Overjoyed, Sadaprarudita used a sharp sword to pierce his flesh to make the blood flow. He also cut off 
the flesh from his thigh and prepared to break the bone to extract th e marrow. However, the 
daughter of a merchant, seeing what was happeni ng, offered to give him whatever he needed 
and to accompany him to meet Dharmodgata. They  went together to the city of Ghandavati 
where Dharmodgata was teaching the perfection  of wisdom. They made offerings to him, 
received teachings on the perfection of wisdom, and then Dharmodgata entered into 
concentration for a period of seven years. Toward  the end of this period, having been told by 
a voice that Dharmodgata would soon rise from  his concentration, Sa daprarudita prepared a 
throne for his teacher. Unable to find water to settle the dust around the throne, he again 
pierced his body in order to cause his blood to drip to the ground and settle the dust. This is 
an example of perfect guru devotion that  is recounted in the last chapter of Eight Thousand 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  (see The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines  translated by 
Edward Conze, Sri Satguru Publications, Delhi, 1973).   Try to relax. Do not worry. Slowly, slowly you wi ll come to understand all these things. In the 
meantime, try not to worry. Think instead, “I will understand. It is not difficult. It is easy to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
123 understand. There is no problem.” Thinking in this  way, try in your daily life to be happy, to 
not be agitated, to not get nervous, to be very relaxed, and to enjoy yourselves with delight! 
 
Wednesday morning, 2 February 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 36) says: 
2B4A-2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain it 
A The actual way to sustain it 
B The reason why it needs to be sustained by means of two modes of sustaining 
The second one has two points: the actual way to sustain it and the reason why it 
needs to be sustained by means of two modes of sustaining. 
 
These are actual outlines by Lama Tsongkhapa , whereas those written in smaller print were 
added later on by Trijang Rinpoche as notes. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A The actual way to sustain it 
1 What to do during the meditation session itself 
2 What to do during the periods between sessions 
The first one has two points: what to do during the meditation session itself and 
what to do during the periods between sessions. 
2B4A-2A1 What to do during the meditation session itself 
A What to do in preparation 
B What to do during the actual [meditation session ] 
C What to do at the end 
The first one has three points: what to do in preparation, during the actual, and at 
the end. 
2B4A-2A1A What to do in preparation 
1 [Cleaning your dwelling and setting up re presentations of body , speech, and mind] 
2 [Laying out offerings] 
3 [Sitting posture and mental attitude] 
4 [Visualization of the merit field] 
5 [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities] 
6 [Mandala offering and request for blessings] 
First: There are six preparatory practices. 
2B4A-2A1A-1 [Cleaning your dwe lling and setting up representati ons of body, speech, and mind] 
Following the life story of Serlingpa, you should clean your dwelling and arrange 
representations of the exalted body, speech, and mind. 
 
We should first clean our meditation place and then set out a statue, text, and stupa 
representing the body, speech, and mind of the Buddha on an altar.  
 While we externally clean our room with a broom or a vacuum cleaner, internally we 
should have the motivation thinking to clean ou t the dirt of our mental afflictions, such as 
attachment, with the broom of  wisdom. Thus, while sweeping the floor, for example, we 
should be wishing to clean our mind of th e mental poisons, attachment, hatred, and 
ignorance. While doing so, we ca n recite, “Get rid of the dust. Purify the stains” (in Tibetan, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
124 “Dul pang. Dri ma dag .”). When we say “Get rid of the dust ,” it does not refer to the external 
dust in the room but to the internal dust in our mind of the mental afflictions – attachment, 
hatred, and ignorance. While cleaning our room, we should think that we are simultaneously 
abandoning these mental afflictions. Then, “Purify the stains” means to clean out the 
imprints left by attachment, hatred, and ignoranc e. Thinking in this way, cleaning our room 
becomes a practice of purification.  
 At the time of the Buddha ther e was a practitioner called “S mall Path,” who initially was 
unable to remember even a single word of Dh arma. Therefore, the Buddha told him to clean 
the temple while reciting “Get rid of the dust . Purify the stains.” But by the time he had 
cleaned one side of the temple, the other was du sty again and he could never finish cleaning 
it. At first when he recited these two phrases, by  the time he got to “Purify the stains,” he had 
forgotten the words “Get rid of the dust,” and by the time he  had recited “Get rid of the 
dust,” he had forgotten the words “Purify the stains .” This went on for a long time as he tried 
to memorize the phrases. However he persevered  and one day came to realize that “dust” did 
not refer to the external dust bu t to the internal dust of the a fflictions, and that “stains” did 
not refer to external dirt but to the imprints le f t  b y  t h e  a f f l i c t i o n s .  H e  r e a l i z e d  t h a t  i t  w a s  
these that needed to be cleaned. He then slow ly came to understand that the broom he was 
using to clean the dust represented the wisdom realizing the emptiness of inherent existence 
of all phenomena. In this way, one day whil e cleaning the temple, he directly realized 
emptiness or the four noble truths and became an arya being. If we clean in the same way 
with a good motivation, we too can become noble or arya beings!  
 There are different ways of cleaning: we can do so with a small motivation, with a middling 
motivation, or with a great motivation. If we  clean our room while thinking to clean our 
mind of the negative karma that will bring rebi rth in the lower realms and thinking that the 
next life is more important than this, we ha ve the small motivation. If we clean our room 
while thinking that if we continue to take re birth in cyclic existence there will always be 
suffering and generate the wish to clean the contaminated actions and the afflictions that 
motivate them in order to achieve the stat e of a foe-destroyer, we have the middling 
motivation. If we clean our room while thinking  to clean all the obscurations in general and 
the obscuration of the self-cheri shing mind in particular by me ans of method and wisdom, we 
have the motivation of the maha yana or great vehicle. If we are practicing tantra, while 
cleaning our room we should thin k that we are cleaning the main obstacle to deity yoga – the 
appearance of and adherence to ordinariness – so that whatever we see a ppears as the body of 
the deity, whatever we hear appears as the sp eech of the deity, and whatever thought arises 
appears as the mind of the deity, whereby we hold the clear appearance and divine pride of 
being the deity. 
 With one of these motivations we should clea n our meditation room as well as our sitting 
room, bedroom, bathroom, and so forth.   Here Lama Tsongkhapa says that we should clean as did Serlingpa, whose actual name is 
Dharmakirti. He is called Serlingpa by Tibeta ns because he came from Serling (Island of 
Gold), which is the Tibetan for Sumatra, Indonesia.   In short, with a good motiva tion we should try to clean ou r room of external dirt while 
also cleaning our internal mental dirt.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
125 2B4A-2A1A-2 [Laying out offerings] 
Beautifully lay out an arrangement of offerings that were honestly acquired. 
 
Having cleaned the meditation place, we should  set out a pleasing and beautiful arrangement 
of offerings. These offerings should be unde ceiving. This is mentioned because sometimes 
when we make offerings we are motivated by  the eight worldly dharmas or eight worldly 
concerns, for example, the though t: “Today my benefactor will come to visit me, so I must 
have a nice altar.” This is not right. Also of ferings obtained by cheating or deceiving other 
people are not correct objects to be offered as they are not pure. Also sacrificial offerings of 
dead animals or their blood are not correct offerings. We should only offer beautiful things.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-3 [Sitting posture and mental attitude] 
On a comfortable seat straighten up your body. Assume a suitable position in 
cross-legged or half cross-legged posture, and make sure that your mind is fused 
with going for refuge and bodhicitta. 
 
We should sit on a comfortable seat, our bottom slig htly raised so that our back is straight as 
this straightens the right and left channels and makes meditation easier. If possible we can sit 
in the complete vajra position with the legs cro ssed or in half vajra position. We should sit in 
the seven-point posture of Vair ochana as this leaves imprints to achieve buddhahood.  
 Place the right hand, palm upward, on the le ft palm, representing the union of method 
(male energy) and wisdom (female energy). Put the tips of the thumbs together, forming a 
triangle that represents the fire of inner heat  (tummo). This posture deposits a potential to 
ignite the fire of inner heat that melts the wh ite drop, the nature of water, at the crown, 
which then descends in the central channel to th e navel and secret place, producing joy, with 
which one realizes emptiness. Th is is from the point of view of tantra, therefore this hand 
position has great significance.  Your eyes should be directed toward the ti p of the nose. They should not be completely 
closed as this can cause mental sinking, laxity, and they should not be too wide open as this 
can cause excitement. Since laxity and exciteme nt are the two main obstacles to meditative 
stabilization, the eyes should be  half open and directed toward  the tip of the nose. However, 
there may be other traditions regarding this. For example, I have a friend, a lama of the Kagyu 
tradition, who is perhaps 80 years old now. We stayed in the refugee camp in Buxa together 
many years ago. Once he came to my room, sa t on the bed beside me, and told me that he 
had done the three-year retreat six times. Ba sed on this experience, he advised me not 
meditate with the eyes closed, but rather to ti lt the head slightly backward with the eyes 
looking up into space. I asked him why and he said that this position helps stop the mind 
from wandering. I mentioned to him that the texts, including the Kagyu lam-rim ( Ornament of 
Liberation ), do not say this. He said that this is an instruction based on his, Lama Ugyen’s, 
personal experience that if the eyes are almo st closed, sleep will come due to which one 
cannot meditate. Perhaps because there are differe nt mentalities, there need to be different 
meditation techniques.   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
126 Having sat down in the correct position, we shou ld mentally go for refuge to the Three Jewels, 
the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, and generate the mind of enlightenm ent that wishes to 
attain enlightenment for the benefit of all se ntient beings. We need to develop such an 
attitude and then recite the prayer of refuge: 
 
I go for refuge to the Guru.   ( lama la kyab su chi o ) 
I go for refuge to the Buddha.   ( sang gye la kyab su chi o ) 
I go for refuge to the Dharma.   ( cho la kyab su chi o ) 
I go for the refuge to the Sangha.  ( ge dun la kyab su chi o ) 
 
Alternatively, we can recite the short version:  
I go for refuge to the guru, the meditational deities, and the Three Jewels. ( lama 
yidam kon chog sum la kyab su chi o ) 
 There is a verse of refuge in the Nyingma tradit ion that instead goes for refuge to the lama, 
the root of blessing; the meditati onal deities, the root of attain ments; and the viras, dakinis, 
and Dharma protectors, the root of enlightened activities.  We should also generate the mind of enlightenment saying:  
I go for refuge until I am enlightened  To the Buddha, Dharma, and Supreme Assembly. By my merit from practicing generosity and the other perfections, May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all migrating beings. 
 We need to generate the causes to go for refuge . The first cause for going for refuge is fear of 
the suffering of the lower realms, while the second  is faith or confidence in the Three Jewels, 
the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, based on the un derstanding that they can actually help us. 
These are the general causes of going for refuge , whereas the special cause of Mahayana refuge 
is fear of the self-cherishing mind. Seeing that this attitude harms us, we generate the wish to 
give it up and to develop the mind that cher ishes others. Thus, we ask the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha to bless us to be able to do this. Wi th this cause, which should be very strong, we 
go for refuge from the depths of our heart to the Three Jewels.   There are different ways of going for refuge. For example, we can think that the Buddha is 
similar to a doctor, the Dharma is similar to medicine, and the Sangha are similar to nurses, 
while we ourselves are like sick people who stay in  the hospital of cyclic  existence. The doctor 
examines us, identifies our illness, and prescribes the treatment. The nurses help us by giving us injections and so forth. By taking the medi cine, we can be cured and leave the hospital. In 
a similar way, to we who are presently sick in th e hospital of cyclic ex istence, the Buddha gives 
teachings, the Dharma. If we practice it and inte grate it with our mind, purify our negativities 
and accumulate merit with the help of the Sa ngha, our merit and wisdom will increase and 
our mental sickness of the afflictions will dimi nish and gradually be abandoned. Thereby we 
w i l l  b e  c u r e d  a n d  w e  w i l l  l e a v e  c y c l i c  e x i s t e n c e  a n d  g o  t o  n i r v a n a ,  t h e  c i t y  o f  l i b e r a t i o n .  Therefore, wishing to get out of  cyclic existence we should pu t effort into our practice. We 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
127 should not be like someone in hospital who, instead of taking the medicine given by the 
doctor, hides it in a drawer or puts it unde r the mattress! For example, when our venerable 
kind guru, Geshe Yeshe Tobden, was here in  Italy he was given many medicines for 
tuberculosis, but after he left for India I saw that he had put all these medicines under his 
mattress. Doing this, he could not be cured of his illness. If we are sick, we need to follow the 
doctor’s advice and take the medicine he pres cribes. I myself was in hospital for two years 
after I arrived in India in 1959. Whatever medici nes or injections were given me, I took them, 
whereby I was cured. Of course, a complete cure is not always possible as long as we possess a 
contaminated body and have not yet attained a mental body. However, we need to take the 
proper medicine at the right time as advised by  a doctor. Dharma practice is similar in that 
going for refuge protects us from suffering. Th erefore, we need to recognize the Buddha as 
the doctor, the Dharma as the medici ne, and the Sangha as the nurses.  
 Another analogy is to think of the Buddha as being like a university professor, the Dharma 
as being like the subject matter that one studies,  and the Sangha as being like classmates who 
help us study. If we study whatever the profe ssor teaches us and put it into practice, we can 
pass the exams and eventually become a universi ty professor with a Ph.D. Similarly, if we 
practice the Dharma we too will become a buddh a in the future. We should not think that it 
is impossible to achieve buddhahood. Just as by studying well in university we can become a 
qualified professor, so too can we become a buddh a. Thinking in this way, we should go for 
refuge to the Three Jewels.  
 In addition, we should generate the mind of enlightenment that wishes to benefit all 
sentient beings. We can generate  any of the different kinds of mind of enlightenment, either 
that like a king, that like a captain, or that li ke a shepherd or cowboy! Just as a shepherd puts 
all his animals in their stalls and only then goes home himself, similarly someone with the 
mind of enlightenment like a shepherd thinks to set all sentient beings in buddhahood and 
then attain enlightenment himself. Just as a captain or boatman travels across the ocean 
together with all the other people in the boat (it not being that they go first and then he 
f o l l o w s ,  o r  t h a t  h e  g o e s  f i r s t  a n d  t h e n  t h ey go), similarly someone with the mind of 
enlightenment like a captain thinks to attain en lightenment together with all sentient beings. 
Just as one first becomes a king or president in order to make one’s subjects happy, similarly someone with the mind of enlightenment like a king thinks to first attain enlightenment 
himself after which he takes care of all sentie nt beings by leading them to buddhahood. We 
should generate whichever type of mind generation is more comfortable for us.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-4 [Visualisation of the merit field] 
In the space in front of you imagine that  there abide the line age lamas of vast 
conduct and profound view and countles s buddhas, bodhisattvas, arya hearers and 
solitary realizers along with their attend ants; [thus,] visualising the merit field. 
 
Next we should visualize the merit field. There are two types of merit fields, one with Buddha Shakyamuni in the center and one with Lama Ts ongkhapa in the center. In this context we 
should visualize Buddha Shakyamuni surroun ded by the lineage lamas of the vast and 
profound to either side of him as well as the lineage lamas of the blessing behind him. We 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
128 should try to make this visualization clear, su ch that we see each guru with his respective 
mudra, implements, and so forth.  
 In terms of “buddhas,” we can visualize the thirty-five buddhas of confession and the eight 
medicine buddhas, given that it is difficult to visualize all 1,000 buddhas. In terms of 
“bodhisattvas,” there are the eight bodhisattvas  who were the close di sciples of the Buddha 
such as Manjushri, Vajrapani, Kshitigarbha, and so forth. Then there are the sixteen elders or 
foe-destroyers who show the aspect of hearers, although they are not he arers, and the twelve 
solitary realizers. In addition, there are Dh arma protectors such as Mahakala, Kalarupa, 
Shridevi (Palden Lhamo), Vaishravana, and so fo rth. All the Dharma protectors included in 
the merit field are supramundane beings. Those that are mundane beings, such as the Tibetan 
g o v e r n m e n t  o r a c l e  N e c h u n g ,  s h o u l d  n o t  b e  visualized in the merit field. Nechung is 
considered to be a mundane being because he enters others’ bodies and then leaves them 
once again, after which the medium appears to be in a faint. In fact he even refers to himself 
as a spirit. On the other hand, Khadroma, anot her oracle who came to the Institute some 
months ago, who is also called Tsering Che Nga (Five Long Life Sisters), appears as a normal 
human being when she gives predictions. Sh e does not appear to be someone who is 
possessed by a spirit as is the case when Ne chung enters someone’s body, whereupon that 
person foams at the mouth, shakes, and bares his teeth.  
 In short, the Dharma protecto rs in the merit field are supramundane. After visualizing the 
merit field, we should make offerings to it.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5 [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities] 
A The reason why it is necessary to accumulate [merit] and purify [negativities] 
B Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail 
C Categorization of the individual [elements] 
2B4A-2A1A-5A The reason why it is necessary to accumulate [merit] and purify [negativities]  
It is exceedingly difficult for paths to ar ise if the favourable conditions for their 
arisal in your continuum, the accumula tions, have not been accumulated, and 
their adverse conditions, the obscurations , have not been purified. Therefore you 
should purify the mind by means of the seven-limb70 practice that brings together 
the key points of accumulation and purification. 
 
We need to purify our negativities and accu mulate merit. We can accumulate merit by 
meditating, doing prostrations, making offerings of water bowls, food, ablution, garments, perfume, and so forth. We can purify our ma ny negative actions by remembering them and 
confessing them. The Tibetan word jang (sbyang ) means to purify, that is, to purify negativities, 
and the word sag (bsag) means to accumulate, that is, accumulate merit.  
 After this we should offer a mandala and make the request:   
I pray that all mistaken attitudes towards the spiritual teacher such as disrespect 
may cease and that all the non-mistaken  attitudes towards him may come about 
                                             
 
70 JN: yan lag , “branch” has been changed to “limb” just be cause this term is more familiar at ILTK 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
129 with ease, and I request blessings for a complete pacification of all outer and inner 
obstacles. 
 
We ask that all obstacles or adverse conditions , both the outer and inner, be pacified or 
eliminated, and that all qualities be generate d in our continuum. This will be explained in 
more detail later on.  
 
Wednesday afternoon, 2 February 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail 
1 The actual detailed explanation 
2 The need to take the meaning of the words to heart 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1 The actual detailed explanation 
A [The limb of prostration] 
B [Offerings] 
C [Confession of evil deeds] D [Rejoicing] 
E [Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned] 
F [Supplication] G [Dedication] 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A [The limb of prostration] 
1 [Prostration combining the three doors] 
2 [Prostrations of the three individual doors] 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-1 [Prostration combining the three doors] 
{37} With regard to the limb of prostr ation, the prostration combining the three 
doors71 is [set out in] the single stanza “Whoever...” This is not [prostration ] to the 
realms of the world of one direction an d to the buddhas of one time. Rather, 
focusing on all the Conquerors residing in the ten directions and three times, you 
prostrate body, speech and mind to them  with respect and from the bottom of 
your heart. 
 We prostrate with the body by completely ex tending the body on the ground in a “long” 
prostration, by touching the five points to the ground (knees, hands, and forehead) in a 
“short” prostration, or by just putting the two hands together in prayer. We prostrate with the 
speech by verbally praising the qualities of the holy beings, the merit field, and so forth, for 
example, saying “I prostrate to tathagata…” We prostrate with th e mind by developing respect. 
This is explained in detail in relati on to the verse cited above from the King of Prayers  
(translated by Jesse Fenton) which says:  
You lions among humans, Gone to freedom in the present, past and future In the worlds of ten directions, To all of you, with body, speech, and sincere mind, I bow down.  
Ji nye su dag chog chü jig ten na 
                                             
 
71 JN: sgo, this has been changed from “gate” to “door” only because this is a more familiar translation at ILTK 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
130 Dü sum sheg pa mi yi seng ge kün 
Dag gi ma lü de dag tam che la Lü dang ngag yi dang we chag gyi o 
 
We should not prostrate to buddhas of the worl ds in just one direction but to the buddha of 
all the worlds in the ten directions. Likewise, we should not prostrate to the buddha of one 
time alone, for example, Buddha Shakyamuni, but to all the buddhas of the three times – 
past, present, and future. For example, we shou ld not prostrate to the buddhas in Tuscany or 
to those in Milan alone! Instead we should pr ostrate to all the buddhas residing in the ten 
directions – those in the east, south, west, nort h, southeast, northeast,  northwest, southwest, 
above, and below. From the bottom of our heart we should recite “To all of you, with body, 
speech, and sincere mind, I bow down,” generating  respect for the conquerors residing in the 
ten directions and three times. In this way, we prostrate resp ectfully with our body, speech, 
and mind.  
 The Tibetan word chag tsel  (phyag ‘tshal ), usually translated as “prostrate” or “ homage,” in 
this context means “I desire to attain all the qualities of knowledge, compassion, and energy 
possessed by all the buddhas of the three times. Therefore, please bestow the qualities of your 
exalted body, speech, and mind upon me.” The qualities of a buddha’s body, speech, and 
mind as well as the quality of a buddha’s enli ghtened activities are set out in the eighth 
chapter of the Ornament for Clear Realizations . Since the buddhas have these qualities and we 
wish to attain them, we request that they be bestowed on us. This is the meaning of 
“prostration” ( chag tsel ).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-2 [Prostrations of the three individual doors] 
As regards the prostrations of the three individual doors, there are three points: 
 
A [Physical prostration] 
Physical prostration [is set out in ] the single stanza “Excellent behaviour...” Focus 
on all the Conquerors belonging to the dire ctions and times as the objects of your 
mind, as though you directly perceive  them. Emanating your own body in 
manifestations as numerous as fine particles, you should prostrate. Furthermore, 
having generated the power of confidence in the excellent conduct of the objects, 
be motivated by that. 
 
The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
With the energy of aspiration for the bodhisattva way, 
With a sense of deep respect, And with as many bodies as atoms of the world, To all you buddhas visualized as real, I bow down.  
Zang po chö pe mön lam tob dag gi 
Gyel wa tam che yi kyi ngön sum du Zhing gi dül nye lü rab tü pa yi 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
131 Gyel wa kün la rab tu chag tsel lo 
 
We should imagine all the buddhas of the thr ee times – the past, present, and future – and 
the ten directions as if seeing them directly. Th en emanate infinite bodies equal in number to 
the fine particles of the earth. We imagine our bo dy to be huge and prostrate it on the ground 
while imagining that all the manifestations also prostrate with very stro ng faith. In this way 
huge benefit will come to us even though we ourselves only performed one prostration. Thus, 
by the power of our mind, we create infinite me rit by touching our five points, the legs, arms, 
and head, to the ground. Imagining that our body  covers the particles below us down to the 
golden base of this world system, will also  bring about a great collection of merit.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B [Mental prostration] 
Mental prostration [is set out in ] the single stanza “On one fine particle...” On top 
of each minute particle, buddhas as innume rable as dust particles reside encircled 
by bodhisattvas. Generate the resolute faith72 that recollects their positive qualities. 
 
Mentally imagine that on the top of each an d every subtle particle reside many buddhas 
surrounded by numberless bodhisattvas. Reme mbering the qualities of the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas and wishing to attain them, genera te strong faith in them and recite the verse 
cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton): 
 
On every atom are buddhas numberless as atoms, Each amidst a host of bodhisattvas, And I am confident the sphere of all phenomena Is entirely filled with buddhas in this way.  
Dül chig teng na dü l nye sang gye nam 
Sang gye se kyi ü na zhug pa dag 
De tar chö kyi ying nam ma lü pa 
Tam che gyel wa dag gi gang war mö 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C [Verbal prostration] 
Verbal prostration [is set out in ] the single stanza “Praising those...” From each of 
the bodies innumerable heads emanate and also from each of the heads emanate 
innumerable tongues that sing inexhausti ble praises of the objects’ positive 
qualities to sweet melodies. Here “melodies”  are praises, and their “branches,” that 
is, their causes, are the tongues. The word “oceans” refers to a lot. 
 
The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
                                              
72 JN: mos pa , often translated as “aspiration” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
132 With infinite oceans of praise for you, 
And oceans of sound from the aspects of my voice, I sing the breathtaking excellence of buddhas, 
And celebrate all of you gone to bliss. 
 
De dag ngag pa mi ze gya tso nam 
Yang kyi yen lag gya tsö dra kün gyi Gyel wa kün gyi yön ten rab jö ching De war sheg pa tam che dag gi tö 
 Remember all the qualities of the infinite buddha s and bodhisattvas and recite this verse from 
the King of Prayers . While doing so, we should emanate infinite bodies, each of which has 
infinite heads, and each of which has many tongues, all of which recite praise with a 
melodious tune.   By prostrating in this we way, we create hu ge amount of merit with our body, speech, and 
mind, whereby our qualities and realizations wi ll increase. Also by collecting merit, our 
negative or non-virtuous energy diminishes.   “Branch” can mean “cause” in some contexts, as  it does here. In this case, the cause is the 
tongues, by means of which we offer melodious praises. In this context the word “oceans” 
means “many,” it does not refer to the oceans made of water.   In short, we prostrate with our body, speec h, and mind to all the buddhas of the three 
times who abide in the ten directions, while gene rating faith in them and praising them. In 
such a way, we create a lot of merit.  This is the limb of prostration.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B [Offerings]  
1 [Surpassable offerings] 
2 [Unsurpassable offerings] 
 
There are two types of offering s: the surpassable and the unsu rpassable. While surpassable 
offerings are good offerings, they can be su rpassed by something that is even better.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-1 [Surpassable offerings] 
Surpassable offerings [are set out in ] the two stanzas “The best flowers...” The 
“best flowers” {38} are marvellous specimens of divine and human flowers. 
“Garlands” are many different kinds of flowers mixed and strung together. Both 
together are all actual and imaginary flowers.  
 “Cymbals”73 are the sounds of traditional instruments and the like. “Scented 
unguent”74 is a mixture of fragrant perfumes. “Sublime parasols” are the finest of 
parasols. “Butter lamps” are fragrant, radian t lights of butter or incense as well as 
                                              
73 JN: sil snyan , translated by Jesse Fenton in the verse below as “sweet music” 
74 JN: mar me , translated by Jesse Fenton in the verse below as “sparkling lights” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
133 radiant jewel lights. “Incense” refers to co mbinations of fragrant substances and to 
a single one.  
 
The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
Beautiful flowers and regal garlands, 
Sweet music, scented oils, and parasols, 
Sparkling lights and sublime incense, 
I offer to you victorious ones.  
Me tog dam pa treng wa dam pa dang 
Sil nyen nam dang jug pa dug chog dang Mar me chog dang dug pö dam pa yi Gyel wa de dag la ni chö par gyi 
 While reciting this verse, we imagine offering beautiful or supreme flowers, for example, in 
the form of flower petals scattered about. We can offer all the flowers of this world, these 
being a type of contaminated offering. We also offer flower garlands, that is, flowers strung 
together on a string that can be hung around  the neck. In India we also see women with 
garlands tied in their hair. We imagine offering  a garland of flowers to each of the infinite 
buddhas in the ten directions. We can offer bo th actual and imaginary flowers, as well as 
artificial flowers made of cloth or plastic.   We can also offer music made with cymbals. In the case of the Vajrayogini practice, for example, there are many different offerings of music. In the West there are many different 
types of musical instruments and Tibetans also have drums, horns, guitars, and cymbals of 
various sizes and shapes. We offer all this musi c to the buddhas of the three times and the ten 
directions, as well as all the bodhisattvas and holy beings, who are delighted and as a result 
generate wisdom in their minds.   We offer unguents, oil, or ointments for the body that are made from fragrant flowers and 
so forth combined with water or oil. In India,  women anoint their chil d’s body with fragrant 
oil and then rub it off, whereby the remaining oi l blocks the pores of the body, this being said 
to make the body healthy.   We also offer the best of parasols or umbr ellas adorned with ornaments and jewels, with a 
staff made from a precious tree, and so fort h. We should not offer normal umbrellas!  
 We offer butter lamps made with melted butte r combined with a fragrance that when lit 
makes light and emits a pleasant fragrance. Ho wever, nowadays there are not many lights 
made from butter! Instead we can offer the ligh t from oil lamps or electric lamps, which are 
less dirty and messy than butterlamps which can also make an unpleasant smell. However, 
because butter is the essence of milk and we ar e nourished by our mother’s milk when we are 
y o u n g ,  b u t t e r  i s  s t i l l  c o n s i d e r e d  t o  b e  a  g o o d  o f f e r i n g .  W e  c a n  a l s o  o f f e r  t h e  l i g h t  f r o m  sparkling jewels, it being said that some part icular jewels can illuminate a dark room.  
 There is a story about such a jewel. In Indi a in the past there was a king who had a wish-
fulfilling jewel that he kept hidden away. Howe ver, one day one of his ministers advised him 
to put the jewel on the top of a hill so that its strong light would illuminate the area and 
people, seeing this, would be amazed whereby he would become even more famous. The king 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
134 agreed to this and the minister took the jewel, but instead of pu tting it on top of the hill he 
put a big block of ice in its plac e. When the sun shone, the ice sparkled, lighting up the sky. 
The king, seeing this, was pleased with his jewe l. However, with the heat of the sun the ice 
slowly melted and the light disa ppeared. The king then sent hi s minister to check what had 
happened. The minister returned and told him, “Your jewel has urinated and escaped! If you 
do not believe me, go and check it out for yourse lf.” In this way he cheated the king of his 
jewel. It is easy to cheat th ose who want to become famous! 
 We also offer incense, that is, the smoke of burning incense. The incense can be made 
from sandalwood, different kinds of herbs, differe nt types of flowers, and so forth, which are 
crushed into a powder and then made into ince nse. Nowadays there are many different types 
of Tibetan incense as well as incense from Chin a, India, and so forth. There is also incense 
that comes from Lawdo (Mountain Stone), Lama Zopa Rinpoche’s birthplace in Nepal where 
in his previous life he meditated in a cave for thirty years. In that life he was a layman who 
told his wife and child that, having done a lot of meditation, he had dedicated all the virtue 
he had created so that in his next life he wo uld be able to make the Buddha-Dharma flourish 
in the world, particularly in the West. In that  life he had been called “Lama Yeshe,” and in 
this life his teacher was “Lama Yeshe.” The La wdo incense, when burned, can stop pollutions 
such as epidemics like SARS. At the time of th is epidemic all this incense was bought by the 
Chinese, such that not a stic k could be found in Lhasa.  
 Incense can also be made of just one subs tance such as sandalwood, which when crushed 
and burnt makes a pleasant smell. However, it can harm those with high blood pressure. Also 
other kinds of incense made from flowers make a pleasant fragrance when burnt.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
“Sublime garments” are the finest of clot hes. A “supreme scent” is water and the 
like pervaded by a scent that fills the billion world systems with a fragrant aroma. 
“Vessels of powder”75 are packaged powders of fragrant incense suitable for 
scattering and burning, or the colored-sa nd powder of a mandala, in multiple 
layers as wide and as high as Mount Meru. “Arrangement,” joined at the end to all 
the above, [means] a lot, decorated, and variegated.  
 
The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
Fine dress and fragrant perfumes, 
Sandalwood powder heaped high as Mount Meru, 
All wondrous offerings in spectacular array, 
I offer to you victorious ones.  
Na za dam pa nam dang dri chog dang 
Che ma pur ma ri rab nyam pa dang Kö pa kye par pag pe chog kün gyi Gyel wa de dag la ni chö par gyi 
                                             
 
75 JN: phye ma , translated by Jesse Fenton in the verse below as “sandalwood powder” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
135  
We offer superb or magnificent garments made of  expensive cloth, such as silk, that is soft, 
light, comfortable, and so fort h. Perhaps the Tibetan nomads would offer clothing made of 
sheepskin as this it what keeps them warm and is considered to be very good quality clothing! 
Here in Italy women wear fur coats and consid er themselves to be very elegant. While 
Tibetans turn the fur inside, Westerners wear the fur on the outside. In Russia and other cold 
p l a c e s ,  p e o p l e  w e a r  h a t s  m a d e  o f  f u r .  W e  s h ould mentally imagine and offer whatever is 
considered to be of good quality clothing in all the different countries to each of the buddhas in the ten directions. For example, we can offe r cloaks, like those worn by Tibetans, or the 
gowns worn by the pope and other clerics compos ed of different colors. Imagine offering such 
things to the holy beings, who are delighted.   “Supreme scents” or “fragrant perfumes” refers to scented water. “Vessels of powder” refers 
to fragrant powdered incenses that come in sm all packets and can, for example, be thrown up 
into the sky, one for each of the buddhas of th e ten directions. We can also offer the colored 
sand used to make sand mandalas, imagining it to be piled as high and wide as Mount Meru. 
The sand mandala is a representation of the in estimable mansion of a buddha, complete with 
the four doorways, eleven-layered archways, and so forth.   Thursday morning, 3 February 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-2 [Unsurpassable offerings] 
A Actual [offerings] 
Unsurpassable offerings [are set out in ] the single stanza “Whatever offering...” 
Since surpassable ones are the offerings of worldly beings, this here is everything 
good that is emanated by powerful beings such as bodhisattvas.  
 
The first two lines of the verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) 
says: 
 
With transcendent offerings peerless and vast, With profound admiration for all the buddhas,  
Chö pa gang nam la me gya che wa 
De dag gyel wa tam che la yang mö 
 With this single stanza we offer unsurpassable offerings. These offerings mainly consist of the 
offerings emanated by Buddha Shakyamuni when  h e  s h o w e d  m a n y  m i r a c l e s  i n  I n d i a  f o r  
fifteen days after the new year in order to defe at six well-known Indian teachers of the non-
Buddhist Tirthika school. We can also offer all that  is mentally created such as the earth filled 
with jewels, the eight auspicious signs, the seve n royal emblems, the five objects of the senses, 
and so forth. We can imagine the whole earth as  filled with these offerings and then offer 
them.   We usually put offerings of water, flowers, wh ether real or artificial , and so forth on the 
alter. These offerings are good but the best offe ring is to offer our virtues transformed into 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
136 jewels and so forth to the buddhas, bodhisattvas , and holy beings of the ten directions, due to 
which they are delighted. Other types of offe rings such as food, cakes, and so forth are 
mundane or worldly offerings. The offering s of bodhisattvas are better than these 
contaminated material things.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The motivation for prostrations and offerings 
The last two lines are to be joined to all the previous [sets of] two in order to 
complete them. They indicate  the motivation for prostrations and offerings as well 
as their objects. 
 
The last two lines of this verse from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) say: 
 
With strength of conviction in the bodhisattva way,76 
I offer and bow down to all victorious ones. 
 
Zang po chö la de pe tob dag gi 
Gyel wa kün la chag  tsel chö par gyi 
 In short, we make offerings to all the holy be ings, the conquerors, who exist in all the billion 
world systems. Thus, the object of offering is the conquerors and so fo rth. The motivation for 
prostrating and making offering to them is the wi sh to benefit other sentient beings such that 
their minds change and they develop love, co mpassion, and the mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1C [Confession of negative actions] 
The confession of negative actions [is set out in ] the one stanza “Desire...” In 
dependence on the cause, the three poison s, and by means of the three bases, the 
body etc., their nature is that I have done them (that is, that I have actually created 
them), that I have made others create them, and that I {39} rejoiced in those 
created by others; all of which are gene rally subsumed under “whatever I have 
done.” If through recollecting their faul ts, you regret those done previously and 
sincerely confess them with a mind of re straining from them in the future, the 
increase of deeds done earlier and the continuity of future occurrences will be 
severed. 
 
The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
Every harmful action I have done 
With my body, speech, and mind 
Overwhelmed by attachment, anger, and confusion, 
All these I openly lay bare before you. 
                                              
76 JN: bzang po spyod pa , literally, “good conduct” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
137  
Dö chag zhe dang ti mug wang gi ni 
Lü dang ngag dang de  zhin yi kyi kyang 
Dig pa dag gi gyi pa chi chi pa 
De dag tam che dag gi so sor shag 
 
We should confess whatever actions of body, sp eech, and mind that we created motivated by 
attachment, hatred, and ignorance. In addition to  confessing those that we ourselves created, 
we should also confess the negative actions that others created due to us ordering them to do 
them. Out of attachment, for example, we actual ly create negative actions but we can also 
cause others to create them. An example of th is is, out of attachment to meat, to ask a 
butcher to kill a particular animal. Although the butcher does the actu al act of killing the 
animal, it is we who ordered him to do so. Anot her example is that of war, for example, the 
war in Iraq in which the American military has killed many people. While an individual 
soldier kills a certain number of people, Pres ident Bush, who gave the order to kill them, 
creates the action of killing all the people who have been killed by the American army in Iraq. 
In fact the Treasury of Manifest Dharma  says that when one country is at war with another one, 
the whole population, even though  they do not all actually figh t and kill, is involved in the 
war due to wishing that their country win and th e other lose. This action of ordering others 
to kill and so forth is very bad negative karma. Therefore, we need to confess all the actions of 
body, speech, and mind motivated by attachme nt, hatred, and ignorance that we ordered 
others to do.   We also need to confess the negative actions of body that we have done out of hatred. For 
example, out of anger we may also have appropriated others belongings, raped their wives, a n d  s o  f o r t h .  W e  h a v e  a l s o  d o n e  n e g a t i v e  a c t i o n s  o f  b o d y  o u t  o f  i g n o r a n c e .  W e  h a v e  a l s o  created negative actions of speech such as lying, ordering others to lie, and so forth. We have also created negative actions of mind, however, these can only be created by ourselves alone as 
we cannot order others to develop covetousness,  malice, or wrong views. In short, we can 
order others to commit negative actions of bo dy and speech, but we cannot order them to 
commit those of mind.   In addition, when others killed many people, we  may have rejoiced in this action, thinking 
t h a t  i t  i s  v e r y  g o o d  t h a t  o u r  e n e m i e s  h a v e  b e e n  k i l l e d .  B y  d o i n g  s o ,  w e  c r e a t e d  n e g a t i v e  actions. On the other hand, if we rejoice in th e good things others do, we create virtue.  
 We need to confess whatever negative acti ons we have created by means of our body, 
speech, and mind. We should remember them, re collect their many disadvantages and faults, 
and develop regret for having done them. Then we should determine to try not to do them 
again in the future. We should develop this re solve from the depths of our heart. Then, we 
should apply a virtuous antidote such as medita tion on love, compassion, a deity, emptiness, 
the selflessness of persons, the selflessness of phenomena, and so forth. We can also recite 
mantras such as OM MANI PADME HUM or the names of holy beings. Physically we can do prostrations or other actions. In this way th e negative karma that we have created can be 
purified and stopped from increasing, and gradually we will be able to stop creating more negative actions.   When we lack conscientiousness and mindfuln ess, we create many non-virtuous actions 
and do not even remember that we did them! Therefore, we should do purification every 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
138 evening before going to bed. As a minimum we should meditate for ten minutes, trying to 
place the mind single-pointedly on this practice . Mentally we should regret whatever negative 
actions we did that day, determine not to do  t h e m  a g a i n ,  g o  f o r  r e f u g e  t o  t h e  B u d d h a ,  
Dharma, and Sangha, generate the mind of enli ghtenment, and recite some mantras and so 
forth. Then at the end we should dedicate. If we do this, we will be able to purify the negative 
karma that we create every day, and, even if we  cannot purify it completely, we will be able to 
stop it from increasing. In this way our virtuo us energy will increase, and our non-virtuous 
energy will decrease.   Attachment, hatred, and ignorance are called “the three mental poisons.” Just as regular 
poison when consumed takes our life, similarly due to our mind being filled with the three 
poisons of attachment, hatred, and ignorance we experience many problems and the of 
liberation is cut.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1D [Rejoicing] 
Rejoicing [is set out in ] the single stanza “The Conquerors of the ten directions...” 
As you recall the benefits of the five persons’ virtue, develop joy. 
 
The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
I lift up my heart and rejoice in all positive potential 
Of the buddhas and bodhisattvas in ten directions, 
Of solitary realizers, hearers still training and those beyond, 
And of all ordinary beings.  
Chog chü gyel wa kün dang sang gye se 
Rang gyel nam dang lob dang mi lob dang Dro wa kün gyi sö nam gang la yang 
De dag kün gyi je su dag yi rang 
 
We rejoice in the virtue of all the conquerors and their children, the bodhisattvas, abiding in 
the ten directions. We also rejoice in the virtue of  solitary realizers, as well as the virtue of 
hearer learners and no-more-learners. Thus, we rejoice in the virtues of these five types of 
persons in particular, and in the virtues of all ordinary beings in gene ral. While doing so, our 
mind should be happy and joyful, thinking that  their actions are very good and wishing to 
emulate them even though we are not yet able to do so.  
 The five persons are: (1) the buddhas or the conquerors, (2) th eir spiritual children or sons, 
the bodhisattvas, (3) the solitary  realizers, (4) the hearer lear ners, and (5) the hearer no-more-
learners. In addition, we rejoice in the virtue of ordinary sentient beings. In short, we should rejoice in whatever good things others do, and should not be jealous of their good actions. 
Jealousy arises in different ways, but it always disturbs our mind. Theref ore, it is not right. 
Instead we should try to rejoice. For example,  if someone cleans the meditation hall well and 
makes nice offerings on the altar, we should th ink “How wonderful,” and rejoice. In this way, 
we too will create virtue or merit. If we thin k, on the other hand, “He did that because it is 
his job and he must do it,” this  would not be good, although it is what we tend to think.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
139  We should rejoice in whatever good things others do, and should not rejoice in their bad 
actions but instead plead with them not to do such actions again in the future. If we talk 
pleasantly and humbly to them, they may listen  to our advice. However, some people’s ears 
are as if made of rock, nothing goes inside! The Tibetans nomads say that some people are 
like rocks in that, even though a rock is cons tantly immersed in water, it does not become 
soft, and similarly some people who supposedly pr actice the Dharma, stay in a place such as a 
monastery and do recitations and so forth, but their minds remain hard. In other words, even 
though they try to practice th e Dharma they are unable to subdue their mind, which remains 
hard. This is due to not practicing in the right way. Such people are also likened to a leather 
pouch which, even though it is used to hold butte r, is not softened by th e butter. In short, we 
should reduce our afflictions and develop our inner qualities, especially the mind of 
enlightenment, love and compassion, and cherishing others.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1E [Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned] 
Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned [is set out in ] the single stanza 
“In the ten directions...” You exhort those who have awoken to complete 
buddhahood in the fields of the ten dire ctions, who are detached and have found 
unobstructed exalted knowledge, to te ach the Dharma through emanating that 
same number of bodies for a long time. 
 
The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
You who are the bright lights of worlds in ten directions, 
Who have attained a buddha’s omniscienc e through the stages of awakening, 
All you who are my guides, Please turn the supreme wheel of Dharma.  
Gang nam chog chü jig ten drön ma dag 
Jang chub rim par sang gye ma chag nye Gön po de dag dag gi tam che la Kor lo la na me pa kor war kül 
 The fifth limb is to request the buddhas to turn  the wheel of Dharma. More precisely, we ask 
the enlightened buddhas abiding in the pure lands of the ten directions, who are without 
obscurations and have achieved omniscience, to  turn the wheel of Dh arma since they know 
the mentalities of the different sentient beings  and whether or not they are ripe, and whether 
they are ripe but are not yet liberated. In short,  we ask them to turn the wheel of Dharma in 
different ways to suit the needs of these differe nt sentient beings. We ask them to manifest 
many emanation bodies in order to appear to the different sentient beings in the different 
worlds and give them different teachings.   It is said that Buddha Shakyamuni turned the wheel of Dharma for the first time in 
Sarnath where he taught the four noble truths, he turned the second wheel on Vulture Peak 
Mountain where he taught the Perfection of Wisdom according to the Middle Way, and he 
turned the third wheel in Vaishali. This presen tation is from the point of view of sutra, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
140 however from the point of view of tantra he al so appeared in other places in other forms in 
order to teach the various tantras.  
 At the end of the first teachi ng on the four noble truths, due to the power of the Buddha, 
the five ascetics spontaneously achieved ordination and simultaneously achieved the path of 
seeing, that is, they realized true paths. When Prince Siddhartha first left the palace and went 
to meditate by the Narayana River, he spent six years in meditation and strict ascetic practices 
in the company of five other ascetics. However, as a result of this he became very weak and 
eventually when a young woman offered him yo gurt and fruit he ate it, whereby his body 
regained its strength. Seeing this, the five ascetics thought that his determination had 
weakened and, leaving him behind, they went from Bodhgaya to Sarnath, where they stayed 
in a kind of cave under an overhanging rock. After Buddha Shakyamuni had attained 
enlightenment under the bodhi tree, he remained in meditation for a further forty-nine days. 
He t hen  t rav eled fro m  Bo dhgay a t o  Sarn ath. When the five ascetics saw him coming, they 
agreed among themselves not to stand up as a sign of respect when he approached, even 
though one of them protested saying that sinc e Siddhartha was the son of a king they should 
stand up, even though he had not attained hi gher realizations. However, when the Buddha 
arrived nearby, they immediately stood up desp ite themselves. He spoke with them for a bit 
and then they went together to Deer Park, to  the spot where there is now a stupa. As the 
Buddha was willing to teach, the ascetics built him a kind of throne out of rocks. There, 
Brahma of the Thirty-three and Indra of the First Concentration requested the Buddha to 
turn the wheel of Dharma. He chose a special day to teach and on that particular day gave the 
teaching on the four noble truths. Thus, the Buddh a first taught true sufferings, then the true 
origins of suffering, the true cessations of suff ering, and the true path s to the cessation of 
sufferings. For example, with re spect to true sufferings he ta ught the four attributes of 
impermanence, suffering, empty, and selfless. Du e to this, some of his listeners realized 
selflessness, some realized empty (not the emptin ess of inherent existence), and some realized 
impermanence, that things ch ange momentarily. An example of impermanence is that 
sometimes we are born in the Peak of Exis tence and sometimes in the lowest hell of 
Unrelenting Torment, that is, we go up and do wn, up and down. This is  the very nature of 
cyclic existence. It is impermanent, always changing. In terms of suffering, there is the 
suffering of suffering, the suffering of change , and pervasive suffering. Due to the Buddha’s 
teaching on true sufferings, some of his listen ers recognized sufferings as sufferings. He then 
taught their cause, this being true origins – th e two, actions and afflictions. Since the root 
cause is the afflictions, we need to abandon th em. By doing so, we can achieve true cessations. 
How can we do this? By meditating true paths, fo r example, meditating on selflessness. In this 
way the root of cyclic existence, ignorance or the view of the transitory collection of I and 
mine, can be eliminated. The Buddha gave this as  his first teaching in this world, and we too 
can still study and realize it.  
 The second wheel of Dharma was that of the perfection of  wisdom, in which the Buddha 
taught the emptiness of true existence or inherent existenc e of the 108 phenomena ranging 
from form through a knower of all aspects. Being empty of true  existence, they do not exist 
independently or concretely. Rather, they exist dependently because they are dependent-relations. This is the teaching in which the Bu ddha explicitly set out emptiness and implicitly 
set out the activities of bodhisa ttvas, the five paths, ten grounds,  the eight categories of clear 
realizations, and so forth. In this way, taught the profound explicitly and the vast implicitly. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
141 This teaching, from the point of view of te nets, is according to the Madhyamika (Middle 
Way) school.  
 The Buddha taught the third wheel of Dharma  from the point of view of the Chittamatra 
tenets, mainly the emptiness of duality of ob jects and object-possessors. This was for the 
purpose of leading disciples who, from the point of view of their tenets , were Chittamatrins. 
This school belongs to Mahayan a whereas the Vaibhashika and Sa utrantika schools belong to 
the Hinayana. Although from the point of view  of tenets someone is a Hinayanist, that 
person can still develop the mind of enlightenm ent. Likewise, there are people who from the 
point of view of tenets are Mahayanists but th ey develop renunciation and do not develop the 
mind of enlightenment, whereby they become hearers.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1F [Supplication] 
Supplication [is set out in ] the single stanza “Showing the passage into nirvana...” 
You supplicate those who show how to pass be yond sorrow in the fields of the ten 
directions to stay, not passing into nirvan a for as many eons as there are particles 
of dust in the universe in order to bring about the benefit and happiness of 
migrating beings. 
 The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
With palms together I earnestly request: 
You who may actualize parinirvana, Please stay with us for eons numberless as atoms of the world, For the happiness and well-being of all wanderers in samsara  
Nya ngen da tön gang zhe de dag la 
Dro wa kün la pen zhing de we chir 
Kel pa zhing gi dül nye zhug par yang 
Dag gi tel mo rab jar söl war gyi 
 We request all the holy beings, the buddhas and so forth, who abide in the ten directions to 
not show the aspect of passing beyond sorrow, th at is, of entering nirvana, but to remain in 
this world for the happiness and benefit of all mi grating beings. In short, we plead with them 
saying, “Please, please do not pass beyond cycl ic existence into nirvana, but remain for eons 
equal to the particles of dust of the universe.” In other words, we request them to not die but to remain here with us. While “nirvana” refe rs to the state of complete abandonment of 
suffering, in normal everyday language to ask so meone to not pass into  nirvana is to say, 
“Please do not die. Please remain here.” For example, we can request our parents, the pope, 
and so forth to not die but to continue to live. However, here we specifically request the holy 
beings to remain for a long time in order to benefit sentient beings. Here we are not talking 
about the holy beings of Buddhism, Christiani ty, Islam, and so forth, we are requesting 
whatever holy beings exist to remain. Thus, we request all the people with good qualities to 
remain, that is, to not pass away. Similarly, as an auspicious gesture when our teacher is sick, 
we ask him to remain for eons, even though in fact no one can live for eons!  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
142  
Thursday afternoon, 3 February 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1G [Dedication] 
The limb of dedication [is set out in ] the single stanza “Prostrations and...” All the 
roots of virtue represented by the virt ues of the previous six limbs are made 
common [property] of all sentient beings an d never come to an end since they have 
been dedicated with strong determin ation to complete enlightenment. 
 
The verse cited above from the King of Prayers  (translated by Jesse Fenton) says: 
 
Whatever slight positive po tential I may have created, 
By paying homage, offering, and acknowledging my faults, 
Rejoicing, and requesting that  the buddhas stay and teach, 
I now dedicate all this for full awakening.  
Chag tsel wa dang chö ching shag pa dang 
Je su yi rang kül zhing söl wa yi Ge wa chung ze dag gi chi sag pa Tam che dag gi jang chub chir ngo o 
 By means of the first six limbs of prostration, offering, confession, rejoicing, the exhortation 
to turn the wheel of Dharma, and the request or supplication to remain, we have created 
virtue. In addition, we have created virtues from  beginningless time in cy clic existence. All of 
these we now dedicate that they may become the cause for all sentient beings to attain 
buddhahood. This is the right way to dedicate our virtue.   There are three possibilities regarding that whic h is a dedication and that which is a prayer:  
1. that which is a prayer but not a dedication, 
2. that which is both a prayer and a dedication, and 
3. that which is neither a prayer nor a dedication.  
This is because when we say a prayer it is not necessary to have accumulated virtue. We 
merely make a request to be bestowed blessings,  for obstacles to be eliminated, and so forth. 
Such requests are prayers but not dedications since there is no substance (virtue) that has 
been created and is dedicated for a particular purpose. Thus, in order for it to become a dedication there must exist a substance, that is , virtue, that can be dedicated. When someone 
makes an offering for a puja, for example, and we  dedicate for their success and so forth, this 
is both a dedication and a prayer. There is no dedication that is not a prayer, however there 
are prayers that are not dedications, for exam ple the prayer “May all sentient beings achieve 
enlightenment.”  When we dedicate our virtue to enlightenment, the virtue will not be exhausted as long as all sentient beings have not attained enlighte nment. In other words, when we make such a 
dedication the virtue is never exhausted but continues to remain. For this reason, with a 
strong motivation or aspiration we should dedi cate whatever virtuous actions we create that 
all sentient beings may achieve buddhahood.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
143  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4A-2A1A-5B2 The need to take the meaning of the words to heart 
If you thus develop an understanding of the meaning of these words and gently do 
as was taught without allowing your mind  to wander, you will hold immeasurable 
heaps of merit. 
 
We should understand the me aning of the words of the King of Prayers  from the depths of our 
heart and keep that meaning in mind without fo rgetting it. Thus, with an undistracted mind 
we should quietly and slowly try to recall the meaning of the words while reading and reciting 
them. When doing prostrations, remember the ob jects to whom we are prostrating, the merit 
field; when making offerings, remember to offer both the surpassable and unsurpassable 
offerings; when confessing, remember to puri fy one’s actions of body, speech, and mind 
created out of attachment, hatred, and ignora nce; when rejoicing, remember the virtues 
created by others; when requesting to turn th e wheel of Dharma and supplicating to remain 
in the world and not pass into nirvana, but to remain as long as cyclic existence lasts, 
remember the meaning of these verses; and then dedicate the merit or virtue accumulated by 
doing the previous six limbs. In this way, reci te all the words slowly while remembering their 
meaning.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-5C Categorization of the individual [elements] 
Accordingly the five limbs of prostrating,  offering, requesting, {40} supplicating, 
and rejoicing constitute the collection of  accumulations. Confessing purifies 
obscurations. One aspect of rejoicing, th e cultivation of joy in one’s own virtue, 
multiplies the virtue. By means of dedicati ng, the virtues of collecting, purifying, 
and multiplying, however small, are multip lied manifold, and what would come to 
an end after producing a temporary effect is  made inexhaustible. In brief, there are 
the three: (1) accumulation, (2) purifica tion, and (3) multiplication and making 
inexhaustible.  
 
The limbs of prostrating, offering, rejoicing, requesting, and supplicating are the collection of 
merit. The limb of confession purifies obscurat ions. Rejoicing in the virtues that we created, 
thinking “I did good,” as well as in those created by others, multiplies our virtue. Dedication increases our virtue and makes it inexhaustible, th at is, makes it such that it will not come to 
an end but will continue to remain as long  as all sentient beings have not attained 
enlightenment, that is, as long as cyclic existence is not emptied.  
 In brief, by means of the seven limbs we colle ct or accumulate virtues, purify, and increase 
our virtues such that they cannot be exhausted. In fact, whenever we engage in any virtuous 
activity we should dedicate the virtue created as this causes ou r virtue to not be exhausted, 
that is, to not be stolen by the thieves of an ger and wrong view. Thus, when we dedicate our 
virtue for the benefit of all sentient beings, it is like putting money in the bank in order to 
protect it from being stolen by thieves.   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
144 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1A-6 [Mandala offering and request for blessings] 
Then, with a clear visualisation of the ob jects, offer a mandala and with strong 
aspiration supplicate many times: “I pray that all mistaken attitudes towards the 
spiritual teacher such as disrespect m ay cease and that all the non-mistaken 
attitudes towards him may come about with ease, and I request blessings for a 
complete pacification of all outer and inner obstacles.” 
 The object of the mandala offering is the merit field of the lam-rim, th e stages of the path, 
which was visualized previously. We should visual ize this merit field clearly. In the center is 
Buddha Shakyamuni surrounded by the lamas, medi tational deities, buddhas, bodhisattvas, 
solitary realizers, hearer foe-destroyers, daka s and dakinis, and Dharma protectors. Try to 
imagine all of them in front of you. You can think of the merit field as being like a busy 
market filled with people in which someone is standing on a table selling things! This is 
because Buddha Shakyamuni is on a throne that is higher than  the others and is surrounded 
by the other holy beings of the merit field. We  should try to imagine all of them, but if we 
cannot do that we can just visualize Buddha Shak yamuni, thinking that he is the embodiment 
of the lamas, meditational deities, sangha, dakas and dakinis, and Dharma protectors. We 
should visualize the image of Buddh a Shakyamuni very clearly, not like a statue but as a living 
buddha. Then we should offer a mandala.  There are many different mandala offerings. The short mandala offering consists of the 
seven which are located on the foundation: Mo unt Meru, the four cont inents, the sun, and 
the moon. We should visualize them and offe r them to the merit field with the verse: 
 
This ground anointed with perfume and strewn with flowers,  Adorned with Mount Meru, the four continents, sun, and moon,  I offer, visualized as a buddha field.  May all beings enjoy this completely pure realm.  
Sa zhi pö kyi jug shing me tog tram 
Ri rab ling zhi nyi de gyen pa di Sang gye zhing du mig te ul war gyi Dro kun nam dag zhing la chö par shog 
 We dedicate this offering that all migrating beings may achieve a pure land. Then we offer the 
mandala with: IDAM GURU RATNA MANDALAKAM NIRYATAYAMI.  In order to actually do a mandala offering, take  up the mandala base in the left hand while 
holding a bit of rice. With the right hand, put a small heap of rice in the center of the base 
and then rub it in a clockwise circle three time s with the inside of the wrist. When rubbing 
the base the first time, think that you are cleani ng your negative actions of body, killing and 
so forth, motivated by the three mental poisons.  When rubbing it the second time, think that 
you are cleaning your negative actions of speec h, lying and so forth, motivated by the three 
mental poisons. When rubbing it the third time , think that you are cleaning your negative 
actions of mind, covetousness and so forth, motivated by the three mental poisons.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
145  Then do the opposite. Clean the base three ti mes while rubbing it in anticlockwise circles, 
meanwhile thinking that you respectively attain  the virtuous actions of body, not killing and 
so forth; the virtuous actions of speech, not ly ing and so forth; and the virtuous actions of 
mind, non-covetousness and so forth, motiva ted by non-attachment, non-hatred, and non-
ignorance. Then put the larger ring on the gold en base, representing the iron fence. As you 
recite the long or short mandala offering, pile up heaps of rice representing the various 
offerings. For example, when doing the long mandal a, put a pile in each of the four directions 
for the continents, then put a pile to each side  of the continents for the sub-continents, then 
put a pile on top of the continents for the qualit ies of the four continents, and so forth. I will 
not go into detail about this now. In short, we should try to imagine offering the entire 
mandala on the base.   Then, if you do not have a proper base, you can merely make the mudra of offering a mandala, with the fingers representing Mount Me ru and the four continents, as we usually do 
during pujas. The word “mandala” means “taking the essence,” that is, taking the essence of 
the Dharma.   After the mandala offering, make the request:  “I pray that all mistaken attitudes towards 
the spiritual teacher such as disrespect may cease and that all the non-mistaken attitudes 
towards him may come about with ease, and I requ est blessings for a complete pacification of 
all outer and inner obstacles.” We should re cite this request many times with fervent 
aspiration. In this way, we ask that all the mistak en attitudes, such as disrespect, that arise in 
our mind toward the spiritual friend may cease,  that is, that they may completely stop. We 
should always generate respect in our mind for our virtuous spiritual friends, our mother and 
father, and sick people. Then we request blessi ngs that all interferences inner and outer may 
be pacified. This last request is general.   Those who, having received an empowerment,  practice tantra must offer a mandala three 
times during the day and three times at ni ght. This can be done by reciting the Six Session 
Guru Yoga  three times in the morning and three times in the evening (that is, in the morning, 
at midday, in the afternoon, at evening, at nigh t, and before dawn). However, because this is 
difficult to do, we can just do it three times in the morning and three times in the evening. 
Alternatively, those who are very busy can do all six times together. This is just my idea, I have 
not heard it from anyone else. I think this w ay because our modern life is very busy. We 
always have something that needs to be done and,  if we do not do it, we will not be able to 
buy food or clothing and may even die of hunger!   
Previously the Middle Lam-Rim said “In Exhortation to the Superior Intention  two groups of 
twenty advantages of giving the Dharma in th e absence of worldly things and the concern for 
gain, respect, and the like are set forth.” I want to return to this subject as I found the twenty 
in the Great Exposition of th e Stages of the Path  (Snow Lion Publications , Ithaca, 2000, page 63) 
which says: 
 
For, as the Exhortation to Wholehearted Resolve  says:  
 
Maitreya, there are twenty benefits of the generosity with which you 
give a gift of the teaching without co ncern for material things, profit, or 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
146 honor. What are the twenty? They are as follows. You will come to 
have: 1) recollection, 
2)intelligence, 
3) understanding, 
4) stability, 5) wisdom, 
6) supramundane wisdom, 
7) little desire, 8) little hatred, and 9) little ignorance. Also, 10) demons will not find an opportunity to harm you; 11) the bhagavan buddhas will think of you as precious, only child; 
12) non-humans will guard you; 
13) deities will bestow charisma and power on you; 14) enemies will find no opportunity to harm you; 
15) friends will remain steadfast; 16) your words will be trusted; 17) you will attain fearlessness; 18) you will have abundant happiness; 19) you will be praised by the wise; and 20) you will gift of the teaching will be worthy of remembrance.  
 When we teach we should abandon doing so fo r fame, wealth, and so forth and instead we 
should have the motivation wishing to benefit other beings. In this way we will acquire these 
twenty qualities. For example, we will come to  recollect or remember everything, that is, we 
will possess mindfulness. We will be intelligent, that is, we will be able to discriminate what 
we should do and what we should not do, whereb y we will be able to do what is important 
and abandon the unimportant. In addition, we will have less attachment, less hatred, and less 
ignorance, this being the opposi te of their increase. These tw enty qualities are important. 
 I also wanted to say something more about the nine attitudes necessary for relying on a guru 
which are mentioned in the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path  (see Snow Lion 
Publications, Ithaca, 2000, page 79). These nine are: 1. the attitude which is like a dutiful child, 
2. the attitude which is like diamond, 
3. the attitude which is like the earth, 
4. the attitude which is like foothills,  
5. the attitude which is like a worldly servant, 
6. the attitude which is like a sweeper, 
7. the attitude which is like a foundation, 
8. the attitude which is like a dog, and 
9. the attitude which is like a ferry.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 31 January-3 February 2005 (03) 
147 A diamond or vajra has the characteristic of not changing. We, like a diamond or vajra, 
should be able to bear whatever the guru give s us to do. The earth ha s the characteristic of 
not complaining no matter what we do to it. We too should be like this. A dog has the 
characteristic of still following us even after we beat it. We too should be like this, that is, if 
the teacher beats us we should escape for a bit and then return! You can read this section in 
the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path .  
 
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
148 Tuesday morning, 22 February 2005 
 (No teachings 7-21 February 2005 due to th e annual Losar break and group retreat) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 40) says: 
2B4A-2A1B What to do during the main part 
1 How to sustain [meditation] in general 
2 How to sustain [the meditation] of this context 
The second one has two points: how to sust ain [meditation] in general and in this 
context. 
2B4A-2A1B-1 How to sustain [meditation] in general 
A Identification of and need for meditation 
First: Meditation on the path as it will be  explained serves to make you fit to make 
use of any virtuous object you wish.  
 
First of all we should choose an object of medi tation that is virtuous, that is, one that by 
meditating single-pointedly on it, we will deve lop more virtuous energy and our mind will 
become stronger in the practice of virtuous ac tivities. This what is meant by identifying the 
object of meditation.  
 Meditation on the path will be explained la ter on. There are different types of paths such 
as the five: the path of accumula tion, path of preparation, path of seeing, path of meditation, 
and path of no-more-learning. There is also the pa th of a being of small capacity, the path of a 
being of middling capacity, and the path of a bein g of great capacity. In the context of the text 
we are studying, “meditation on the path ” mainly refers to the latter three.  
 When meditating the path of a being of small capacity, we first need to recognize that this 
human rebirth endowed with the eighteen qualities is precious, that we have presently 
obtained such a rebirth, and that it is very us eful. We should identify each of the eighteen 
qualities, the eight freedoms and ten endowments , with respect to ourselves, whereby we will 
become very happy thinking, “I am very fortunat e. I can achieve whatever I desire.” However, 
while we have presently found this precious hu man rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities, 
i t  w i l l  b e  d i f f i c u l t  t o  f i n d  s u c h  a  r e b i r t h  a g a i n .  F o r  e x a m p l e ,  e v e n  t h o u g h  t h e r e  a r e  m a n y  
human beings in this world, those who have a precious human rebirth are very few. And 
among them, those who are interested in the next life are even fewer, as most people are only 
interested in obtaining the happinesses of th is life, wealth, fame, and so forth. Out of 
attachment to such things, we constantly strive to obtain them but due to interferences we do 
not always manage to attain them, whereby we become sad and even mad. Some people even 
jump to their death from a bridge into a river or from the upper window of a high building. 
This is caused by dissatisfaction. Therefore, we need to try to have less thought for this life, 
and to think more of the future life. To do th is we need to prove the existence of past and 
future lives by thinking, for example, about the fact that this flower comes from a seed, which 
came from a flower, which came from a seed, and so forth. Without the seed, the flower 
could not have grown. We need to practice vi rtuous actions that will bring the result of 
happiness.  
 So what is the object of meditation? We shou ld examine this. In our daily life, even if our 
practice is not perfect due to ou r mental afflictions, we should to try to place our mind single-
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
149 pointedly on our object of practice. For example, when reciting a prayer, sadhana, or mantra, 
we should try to focus our mind on it, without thinking about other things. This in general is 
important but in our case when we try to medita te or visualize, one part of our mind has the 
tendency to be thinking, “I need to do this. I fo rgo t t o do  t hat .” This  is  n o t s o  goo d. We 
should give up such thoughts.  
 
B The faults of bad meditation 
Moreover, if you attend to this and that  object, thinking to take merely this 
number of virtuous objects and in any orde r you wish, nothing will come of it and 
having gone wrong from the beginning, your spiritual practice77 will continue to be 
faulty throughout your life.  
C How to sustain good meditation 
Therefore, you should first of all deve lop certainty concerning the number and 
order of objects to be sustained. Then, you should unleash {41} a strong driving 
force that does not allow thoughts to aris e other than what has been ascertained, 
and sustain with mindfulness and alertness78 what has been ascertained without 
addition or omission. 
 When we meditate, first we need to recognize th e objects to be meditated, and then ascertain 
the number of objects to be meditated and th e order in which they are to be meditated. 
Having completely understood and remembering this, we should think to do a particular 
meditation or practice without allowing our mind  to go to other objects. At the beginning we 
should make a strong determination or develop a strong motivation thinking, for example, “I 
will only think of this precious human rebirth. I will focus on this alone. I will not allow my 
mind to go to other objects.”   Two mental factors are necessary for medita tion, one is mindfulness and the other is 
introspection. We need to try to have both of them present in our mind at all times. Instead 
when forgetfulness, distraction, and so forth arise, we should st op them. In this way we will be 
able to do whatever we need to do.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1B-2 How to sustain [the meditation] of this context 
A By thinking about the benefits of reliance and about the faults of non-reliance 
Second:  
You should first think about the benefits of reliance and about the faults of non-
reliance. 
                                              
77 JN: dge sbyor , could also be translated as “application in virtue” 
78 JN: dran shes , mindfulness and introspection 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
150 B How to train in faith by means of thinking about his positive qualities 
Then, repeatedly resolve never to allow your  mind to get lost in conceiving faults 
in the guru and think of the qualities like  discipline and meditative stabilization79 
that you yourself have perceived in him, cu ltivating the faith that is a mind having 
the aspect of faith until it arises.  
 
If you rely on a guru there will be benefits or good results, and if you do not rely on him, for example, on Buddha Shakyamuni, there will be faults or bad results. We should think about this and then contemplate the benefits of re lying on a guru, for example, the gaining of 
knowledge. Whether we rely on a Dharma teac her or on a mundane teacher who teaches us, 
for example, how a particular machine is made, how to use a computer, how electricity works, 
and so forth, we can gain knowledge. Thus, by relying on a teacher we can gain knowledge, which we can then use to achieve our financia l aims, fame, and so forth. Alternatively by 
relying on a Dharma teacher and thereby de veloping the mind of enlightenment or 
compassion, we can continue in future lives to benefit others by means of the virtue we have 
accumulated. Therefore, reliance on a teacher brings benefit. If, on the other hand, without 
relying on a teacher we try to learn things alon e, most likely many mistakes will occur.  
 I n  s h o r t ,  w e  n e e d  t o  t h i n k ,  i n  t h i s  p a r t i c ular context, of the qu alities of the guru. The 
Sanskrit word guru is composed of two syllables: gun, which means good qualities, and rup, 
which means heavy. Therefore the word guru means “heavy in good qualities.” By relying on 
s u c h  a  g u r u ,  w e  t o o  w i l l  b e  a b l e  t o  g a i n  t h e  s a m e  g o o d  q u a l i t i e s .  T h e r e f o r e ,  w e  n e e d  t o  develop faith and confidence in the guru, un derstanding that what he teaches us is 
unmistaken and that, by acting in accordance wi th what he says, we too will develop similar 
qualities.   On the other hand, we should not look for faults and mistakes in the guru. Instead we 
should look at his positive side and not chec k his negative side, thinking, for example, “He 
has such-and-such a fault. He does not meditate perfectly. He acts badly. He takes care of 
some people and not others.” It is best not to do this. Instead we should think that the guru 
has good qualities such as morality, concentrat ion, and wisdom. In other words, he possesses 
the three higher trainings in morality, concentr ation, and wisdom. The base of the latter two 
is morality or ethical discipline. Morality in Sanskrit is shila, which means coolness . The name 
indicates that by practicing morality it brin g coolness, that is, freedom from mental and 
physical suffering. The practice of morality me ans to discipline or subdue ourselves. Even 
politicians talk about the need for morality. It  should be the main basis of our practice. 
Morality implies a natural rule, not a set of rules created by someone. We need to have 
respect for such natural rules.  Concentration means to set our mind single-p ointedly on whatever we are doing, whether 
it is working or meditating. If we set our mind  on what we are doing, we will do it well, 
whereas if we are distracted we will make many  mistakes. Thus, concentr ation is helpful at all 
times. We need to understand that the guru  possesses the quality of concentration. Then, 
wishing to develop it in our ow n continuum, we should follow hi s advice and meditate on the 
                                             
 
79 JN: Due to familiarity with certain term inology here at ILTK the translation of ting nge ‘dzin  has been 
changed from “concentration” to “meditative stabilization,” and the translation of bsam gtan  as “meditative 
stabilization” has been changed to “concentration” throughout this text 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
151 stages of the path. Thinking about his qualities,  we should make them clearly appear to our 
mind and then develop faith or confidence in him. We should do continuous meditation on 
this until we develop this faith. For exampl e, we can meditate on Buddha Shakyamuni as 
being our teacher who, since he gave us the teac hings that we are now trying to follow, is a 
perfect guru. We should try to understand his qualities of body, speech, and mind and 
develop faith or confidence that he can lead us to enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Training in the respect that remembers kindness 
Then you should consider, in accordance with the above quotations from the sutra 
collection, the [instances of] beneficial kindness that you received and are still 
receiving and sincerely cultivate respect until it arises. 
 
We should remember the kindness of the gu ru and thereby develop respect for him by 
thinking that he has benefited us in the past, is  benefiting us now, and will benefit us in the 
future, due to which he is very kind. Similarly, our mother has been kind to us in the past, is 
kind to us now, and will be kind to us in th e future. We should remember this kindness, not 
thinking that she is bad and against us and th erefore not wanting to see her. This is a bad 
attitude and a fault. Our mother has benefited us , is benefiting us, and will benefit us. She is 
constantly thinking of her son or daughter. Howe ver, because she is also an ordinary being, 
sometimes she may get angry and talk badly to us or beat us a bit. But even so it would not 
right to think that she is bad. If she says bad words to us it is becaus e she wants to teach us 
how to change our attitude. Therefore, we should  think of her words as instructions. This is 
important in our daily life.   Buddhism teaches that all sentient beings ha ve been our mothers in the past. This is 
because having taken rebirth from beginningless time until now, for example, having been 
born infinite times as human beings, in each of these rebirths we needed a mother. Therefore, there is no one whom  we can point to and say that  he or she has not been our 
mother. Thus, all sentient beings have been our mother. At that time th ey were very kind to 
us. In addition, even when they were not our mo ther they were very kind to us. We should 
remember their kindness and then develop the wish  to repay it. In a similar way, our teacher 
has been kind to us, therefore we need to de velop respect for him and the wish to repay his 
kindness by helping him with our body and speech. This is good to do.  
 We should think about the previous citation s from sutras and meditate continually on 
them until respect arises in our mind throug h remembering the kindness of the guru. It is 
said that the best offering to the guru is ou r practice or meditation. Offering him money, 
food, clothing, and so forth is an offering, but the best is to try to practice and meditate as he 
has explained. We can imagine that our virtues are transformed into precious wish-fulfilling 
gems and then offer them to the guru.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1C What to do at the end 
1 What should actually be done at the end 
2 Times and duration of meditation 
2B4A-2A1C-1 What should actually be done at the end 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
152 Third: By means of the Prayer of Good Behaviour  and the Seventy Aspirations  the 
accumulated virtue should be dedicate d with strong determination to the 
temporary and ultimate aspirations. 
 
When we begin to do a practice we should genera te a good motivation and at the end of it we 
should dedicate the virtue accumulated. Th e dedication can be done by reciting the Prayer of 
Good Behavior , also called the Samantabhadra Prayer  and the King of Prayers , or the Seventy 
Aspirations , a prayer written by an Indian that ha s seventy verses. There are also short 
dedication prayers like:  
Just as the brave Manjushri and Samantabhadra, too, Realized things as they are, I, too, dedicate all these merits in the best way, 
That I may follow their perfect example.  I dedicate all these roots of virtue With the dedication praised as the best By the victorious ones thus gone of the three times, So I might perform good works. 
 It is necessary to make such dedications because by dedicating the virtue  that we have created 
to become the cause for all sentient beings to achieve buddhahood, then later on, even if 
hatred or anger arise in our mind, they will not be able to destroy this virtue. Instead, by dedicating our virtue for this cause, it will re main until all sentient be ings achieve nirvana or 
enlightenment. Therefore, it is very good to  dedicate. If, on the other hand, we do not 
dedicate our virtue, when we get angry our ange r will destroy our virtues such that they no 
longer exist. Anger is likened to a fire. Even the tiny fire at the end of a burning cigarette butt 
can burn down thousands of acres of fields and forests and many buildings. It burns whatever 
it comes into contact with. Similarly, anger is like  fire in that even one single instant of anger 
can destroy a great amount of virtue. Just as a good seed that has been burnt by fire will not 
bring the result of a sprout, similarly anger bu rns our virtues such that they cannot bring a 
result. For this reason, we need to immediately dedicate our virtue. However, if we cannot do 
that, then in order to purify negativities comm itted during that day, we should before going 
to bed set aside ten or twenty minutes (or even just five minutes) to recite, for example, OM 
MANI PADME HUM or OM TARE TUTTARE  TURE SVAHA seven times, or OM 
VAJRASATTVA HUM twenty-one times, combined  with the determination to not do those 
negativities again and the dedication of our virt ue. If we do this, it will definitely bring the 
result of happiness. When, I don’t know! However, it will really bring happiness.   For example, it is like having two bags, one filled with our black negativities that is very heavy to carry and the other that is very light as it contains only a few virtues. There is a story 
of a meditator who put a heap of black stones and a heap of white stones in front of him. When a non-virtuous mind arose,  he would set aside a black st one and when a virtuous mind 
arose, a white stone. At first there were many  black stones and few white stones, but then 
gradually he became able to set aside more wh ite stones until they were equal to the black 
stones, and then by continuing to practice he  eventually came to have many more white 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
153 stones than black stones. We too in our every day life need to generate a good motivation 
when we get up, thinking that whatever we do  that day we will do for the benefit of all 
sentient beings, that is, in the service of all other human beings. In other words we will work 
for them even if we do not receive a salary for doing this! If whatever we do is done with a 
motivation thinking of others, then even whil e we are at work we will create virtue.  
 Two things are said to be important, one at  the beginning and one at the end. It is the 
motivation that is important at the beginning. Our motivation should be that of a mind of 
enlightenment, compassion, and renunciation or definite emergence. At the end it is 
important to dedicate. Whatever we do, whethe r practice or work, we should dedicate the 
virtue that has been created. Even when cleaning , if we do so with the motivation to clean our 
mental afflictions, we will create virtue. Th ere is a story about a monk who joined my 
kangtsen in Sera some two hundred years ago. It  is said that he did not study but spent his 
time cleaning the area outside the monks’ ho uses where the monks would go to urinate. 
When he became old, he returned to his birt h place, which was called Manghi, and built a 
small house where he meditated and did retrea t for some years. He eventually passed away 
and when he was cremated there appeared a stat ue of Chakrasamvara, about a meter high, in 
the ashes! After that, he was called him “M anghi Dorje Chang” (Vajradhara of Manghi). 
Although he had never studied but had only cl eaned day and night, having returned home, 
done retreat, and died, he came to be calle d Manghi Dorje Chang. When his incarnation 
died, there also appeared a perfect statue, perhap s of Kalachakra, as if it had been made by 
someone. One of his later incarnations came to Sera when I was a young boy. I remember 
him as a very tall man who in th e evening would recite texts in a loud booming voice. He later 
returned to his birthplace but was caught by the Chinese, beaten badly, and imprisoned. He 
died and was cremated and again there arose a sp ecial small image in the ashes. Such stories 
show that we cannot tell from the outer appear ance who is a practitioner and who is not.  
 In short, even when we clean, work, and so forth we should have a good motivation. This 
is important in our daily life.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A1C-2 Time and duration of meditation 
A Indication of the time of meditation 
Thus you should meditate in four sessi ons – at dawn, in the morning, in the 
afternoon, and in the evening.  
 
We should do four sessions of meditation every day. The time to meditate is at dawn, in the 
morning, in the afternoon, and in the evening.  On the other hand, we should not begin to 
meditate at midday, midnight, sunset, and sunrise as at these times interferences to our 
meditation can arise. Dawn is when the sky be comes clear; morning is 9:00, 10:00, or 11:00 
AM; afternoon is 1:00, 2:00, 3:00, or 4:00 PM; an d evening is when it begins to get dark, at 
the moment about 6:00 PM.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
154 B How to meditate in the beginning 
Moreover, if [your sessions are] long in the beginning it is easy to fall under the 
power of laxity and excitement. As it is di fficult to correct this state of mind once 
you have got used to it, you should do many short sessions. If you break off the 
session when there is still a desire to meditate, you will really want to enter 
meditation the next time too. They say that otherwise you will be overcome by 
nausea at the sight of your practice place. 
 
In initially we should not do very long session s. This is because if the sessions are too long, 
laxity and excitement, which are the main obstacles to meditation , will arise. If we meditate 
too long the mind becomes tired and laxity or mental sinking can easily occur. Or if we 
meditate too long we may begin to think of th ings we need to do, remember meeting such 
and such a person, and so forth. In this way the meditation will not go well. Also if laxity and 
excitement arise and overwhelm our mind, it becomes difficult to change the mind. Therefore, at the beginning we should do short sessions of meditation, for example, one hour 
followed by a break, or even just twenty or thirty minutes followed by a break. In fact we 
should stop meditating when we still want to me ditate because it will then be easy for us to 
face and do the next session. On  the other hand, if we become very tired during meditation, 
d u e  t o  w h i c h  o u r  m i n d  b e c o m e s  u n h a p p y  o r  d i s c o u r a g e d ,  i t  w i l l  b e  d i f f i c u l t  t o  e n g a g e  i n  meditation in the next session. Just thinking about meditation, the mind will once again feel 
tired. Here the text says that when just by s eeing our meditation cushion we will feel nauseous 
and will not want to go there. Perhaps this happens to some pe ople. I myself get nauseous and 
sometimes even vomit when traveling by car, an d then the next time I need to travel I get 
nauseous just by seeing the car!   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How to sustain [the meditation] once it has stabilized a bit and adv ice on how to avoid exhaustion 
When it has stabilized a bit, you should prolong the sessions, sustaining them all 
{42} free from the faults of being excessi vely tense or relaxed. Thereby, small 
obstacles as well as over-exhaustion and drowsiness will be pacified. 
 
Having trained in meditation, we will come to be able to meditate for six or seven hours 
without our mind being disturbed by laxity an d excitement. Instead the mind will remain 
clear and able to abide single-pointedly on th e  o b j e c t .  A t  t h i s  p o i n t  w e  c a n  d o  v e r y  l o n g  
meditation sessions, whereas at the beginni ng we should keep our sessions short.  
 However, when our meditation first begins to  become a little bit more stable, we should 
make the session only a little bit longer, not much  longer. If we put very strong energy into 
our meditation or are too relaxed, faults can ar ise. We need to do the middle way, whereby 
there will be less interferences, less tiredness, and less dullness or sinking mind. When we meditate and become tired, laxity tends to aris e. At first the object becomes unclear yet we 
can still see it. Then, gradually more darkness arises until we can no longer see the object of 
meditation. This is the main interference to or fault of meditation. It needs to be eliminated. For this reason, it is important to do medita tion at the right time and without too much 
pushing. By keeping the mind quiet and calm, it will be easier to meditate and it will be easier for the mind to engage in meditation the next time.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
155  Although when we try to meditate we tend to  fall asleep, when we watch a movie, a show, 
dancing, and so forth we do not fall asleep bu t instead are able to watch the whole thing with 
wide-open eyes. On the other hand, when we try to do something virtuous, we become sleepy. 
We can verify this based on our own experience . Therefore, we should meditate for the right 
amount of time, neither too short nor too long, trying to stabilize the mind, and then 
gradually prolong the session but not by much.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A2 What to do during the periods between sessions 
A General practices enhancing the object [of meditation] 
B The causes of calm abiding and special insight 
2B4A-2A2A General practices enhancing the object [of meditation] 
Generally speaking, there are numerous pr actices enhancing the object such as 
prostrations, circumambulation, and recita tion, however, the main point is that, 
having made an effort at the essence of the session, if, during the intervals where 
you leave the session, you let go carelessly without relying on mindfulness and 
introspection with respect to the observed object and aspect – which is the cause of 
sustaining [the meditation], the outcome wi ll be very little. Therefore, in between 
sessions you should also be concerned wi th the Dharma [texts] that teach that 
[object], and recall it again and again. By  various means you should accumulate the 
collection of conditions favour able to the arisal of positi ve qualities, and by various 
means purify the adverse conditions – th e obscurations. Your determination with 
respect to the discipline you have accept ed, the basis of everything, should be 
reaffirmed a lot. 
 Between sessions, that is, after the meditation sessions, we should try to keep our mind in 
virtue. In general it is said to do prostrat ions, circumambulate stupas, recite one’s daily 
commitments, and so forth between sessions. We should also try to remember the object of 
meditation again and again, bringing it to mi nd and not allowing the mind to roam about. 
With mindfulness and introspection, we should  read Dharma texts on the object of our 
meditation. Since we meditate in order to gain hi gher qualities, we also need to collect merit 
in different ways and we need to purify unfavora ble conditions. In this way, our mind will on 
one side collect merit and on the other side purify negativities and non-virtues, whereby 
unfavorable conditions will be purified.   “The basis of everything” is morality, in this  context the taking of vows, for example, those 
of a monk, nun, or the layperson, the bodhisa ttva vows, and so forth. We need to keep and 
safeguard the vows that we have taken. This is important in our daily life. To do so, we need 
to close the five doors of our senses as they are the cause of many faults. Why is that? We 
should examine this subject. For example, if we look at everything around us, we will see 
attractive objects toward which attachment will  arise as well as ugly objects toward which 
anger will arise. If we hear pleasant music or  singing, attachment wi ll arise. On the other 
h a n d ,  i f  w e  h e a r  s o m e o n e  m a k i n g  a  l o t  o f  u n p l e a s a n t  n o i s e ,  a n g e r  w i l l  a r i s e .  I n  t h i s  w a y ,  different object produce attachment, hatred, and ignorance. Therefore, we need to close or 
bind our sense doors, like covering them with our hands!  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
156 Tuesday afternoon, 22 February 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A2B The causes of calm abiding and special insight 
Apart from that, train in the collection of four causes for the easy arisal of the 
paths of calm abiding and special insight. 
 
Here there is a discussion of calm abiding (s hi ne) and special insigh t. Shi means to have 
pacified the distractions and to abide single-p ointedly on the object. Special insight (lhag 
tong) means to achieve the concen tration on the basis of which ar ises special insight. First one 
does analytical meditation whereby we can achi eve calm abiding and then special insight. We 
need the causes for these, the four accumulation s or collections, in order to quickly generate 
calm abiding and special insight in our mind . We need to train in the four causes.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A2B-1 Controlling the sense doors 
In this regard, when the six consciousn esses arise in dependence upon their 
objects and sense powers, after that attach ment and aversion arise toward the six 
pleasant and the six unpleasant objects of mental consciousness. [Controlling the 
sense doors ] guards against that arisal. 
 
The first of the four causes of calm abiding and special insight is  to restrain the doors of the 
senses. In order for a consciousness to arise, an observed object condition, an empowering 
condition, and an immediately preceding conditio n are necessary. For example, in the case of 
attachment, a pleasant object and a physical se nse power, which is lucid form, are necessary 
whereby a consciousness arises. That consciousness,  for example, an eye consciousness, acts as 
the immediate preceding condition for the arisal of a mental consciousness.   When we see an attractive object, attachme nt arises. When we see a repulsive or ugly 
object, hatred or anger arises. Therefore, we need to protect our mind from the arisal of 
attachment and hatred by controlling the ey e sense power through not looking around too 
much. We should also not listen to too many sounds, smell too many odors, taste too many 
tastes, or touch too many tangible objects. In order for some consciousnesses to arise, their 
object needs to come into contact with their se nse power, whereas, in the case of the eye, 
objects at a great distance from the eye sense power can be seen. Sound, on the other hand, 
must be a bit closer in order to be heard. Od ors must actually contac t the nose although the 
source of the odor can be at a distance from  the nose. Tastes, whether sweet, sour, and so 
forth, must come into actual contact with ou r tongue. Likewise, tangible objects must come 
into contact with our body in order to be ex perienced. If these objects are pleasant they 
produce attachment in our mind. If they are un pleasant, they produce anger. Therefore, we 
should try to avoid generating attachment and hatred by closing our sense doors.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A2B-2 Vigilant behavior 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
157 Vigilant behavior: in  Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour80 it says:  
 
To examine time and time again, 
The situation of one’s mind and body; Put concisely, that and only that is 
The sign of protective vigilance.
81 
 
Following this, whenever the body etc. engages in such and such an action, 
through understanding whether or not it should be done, behave accordingly. 
 In addition, we need introspective or vigilant  behavior. Introspection, like a policeman who 
checks what drivers are doing on the road and so  forth, constantly examines the situation of 
our body and mind as to what they are doing.  We need to examine them again and again, 
asking, for example, “What is my  body doing?” There is a Tibetan expression that says that 
when we are alone in someone else’s house we need to check what our hands are doing, that 
is, we need to make sure that they are not taking  what does not belong to us. As there is this 
risk, we need to constantly check the situatio n of our body. We should also check our mind, 
looking at how is it thinking. Is it thinking in a good or bad way? What kind of objects is it 
going to? We should examine whether the mind  is going to an object that generates 
attachment, or to one that generates anger, or ig norance, or pride, or doubt, or afflicted view. 
This is important.   The Tibetan expression says that when we are alone we should check our body, and when 
we are together with many people we should check our mouth. In other words, we should 
check what we are saying, whether it is good or ba d, whether it is lying, divisive speech, and so 
forth. Thus, when we are in the company of many people we should check our mouth. In addition, we should at all times check our mind . In this way we should constantly examine 
the three doors of body, speech, and mind, and when we see with introspection that one of 
them is engaging in a negative action we should immediately stop it.   In short, when our body engages in an action  we should check whether it is a good action 
or a bad action. If it is good, we should do it. If it is not, we should stop it. For example, if we 
are doing prostrations, this is good, no? If we are beating someone, that is not good! Here the words “the body etc.” include the mind.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2A2B-3 Knowing the right measure of food 
Knowing the right measure of food means to give up eating too much or too little 
food and to eat only the amount that does not do damage to one’s virtuous 
activities. Furthermore, having meditated upon the drawbacks of craving for food, 
you should also remember what is said in the scriptures about eating, thinking that 
it should be without mental afflictions, th at it should be of benefit to the giver, 
{43} that while you now bring together th e micro-organisms of your body by means 
                                              
80 by Shantideva, better known as Guide to a Bodhisattva’s Way of Life   
81 JN: shes bzhin , also translated as “introspection” and “alertness” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
158 of material things, in the future you wi ll bring them together by means of the 
Dharma, and that you will bring about th e welfare of all sentient beings.  
 
The third cause of calm abiding and special insi ght is to know the right measure of food. We 
need to eat the right amount of food, that is, to  not eat either too much or too little. To eat 
too little is not good as it causes our body to become thin and weak. It causes the energy in 
our body to lessen, whereby we easily fall si ck. Our stomach also gradually becomes smaller 
and smaller until it is no longer able to accept  food, whereby this can even lead to death. On 
the other hand, by eating too much we will become sleepy wh en, for example, we try to 
meditate. Therefore, neither too much food or too little is good for us. We need to eat the 
right amount.  
 We should also not be attached  to good food. This is a fault as it causes strong attachment 
to arise for food due to which we eat too much and constantly think of eating food. Since it 
can bring about the arisal of faults, we should  contemplate the disadvantages of attachment. 
Although attachment appears to be a close friend , it only makes problems for us. Just as when 
we have a very close friend we do not recognize his or her faults, similarly we do not recognize 
the faults of attachment. For this reason, we need to put effort into thinking about the 
disadvantages of attachment to good food. In fact no one has attachment to bad food! We 
can see that if the Institute’s c ook makes bad food for us, we turn up our nose and do not eat 
it whereas if we consider it to be good we  generate attachment to it and eat a lot!  
 In short, when we eat we should do so wi thout an afflicted mind. When someone gives us 
food we should think to eat in order to benefit that person and generate love for him or her. 
We should also think to eat for the sake of the many tiny micro-organisms in our body, who 
also need to consume food in order to survive.  We should think that while we now give them 
material things, we will give them Dharma te achings in the future when they take human 
form. In this way we should eat with the wish to be able to benefit sentient beings through 
having a strong and healthy body as if our body  is not strong we will not be able to help 
others. Thinking like this, we should eat out of generosity, not out of the wish to fill our 
stomachs. Thus, we eat while giving food to th e micro-organisms in our body, thinking that 
now we give them food but that  when they die and are reborn we will give them the Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In the Letter to a Friend  it also says: 
 
Reasoning that foodstuffs are like medicine, 
Depend on them without attachment or hatred.  
They are not meant for conceit nor for arrogance, 
They are not meant to fatten you; but just to keep you going82.” 
 
Food can be considered to be like medicine since it cures the suffering of hunger and thirst. 
We should depend on it without attachment or  hatred. For example, we should not become 
angry when we do not receive good food. Nor should we should not eat out of haughtiness 
                                              
82 lus gnas ’ba’ zhig phyir  – lit. “just for the body to endure” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
159 (rgyags ) or conceit ( bsnyems pa ) ,  w h i c h  a r e  a  b i t  d i f f e r e n t  f r o m  p r i d e .  N o r  s h o u l d  w e  e a t  i n  
order to have unwrinkled and firm flesh. Why should we eat? We should do so only in order 
to remain alive. In short, we should eat food thinking of it as a medicine that can cure illness; for example, certain foods can cure illnesses related to the inner winds. We should not 
generate attachment or anger in relation to food.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4A-2A2B-4 Exerting oneself in yoga without sleeping, and what to do when lying down to sleep 
A What to do when lying down to sleep 
B How to apply [all this] to the intervals between all the meditations 
Exerting oneself in yoga without sleeping,  and what to do when lying down to 
sleep.  
2B4A-2A2B-4A What to do when lying down to sleep 
1 The time to lie down 
In the Letter to a Friend  it says:  
 
Sensible one, great being, after all the day’s sessions, 
As well as the first and last ones of the night, 
Also sleep with mindfulness in between these 
So that during sleep, too, fruit will not be absent.83 
 
The essence of the sessions of both the enti re day and the first and last parts of the 
night as well as what should be done in between sessions is explained. Therefore, 
having walked about and sat down, you shou ld completely purify your mind of the 
five obscurations, and thus make [whatever you do] meaningful. 
 The fourth cause of calm abiding and special insi ght is the yoga of sleep . What is the yoga of 
sleep? It means to sleep in a good way and includ es when to lie down an d so forth. We should 
not sleep during the entire day, and at night we should not sleep during the early and later 
parts of the three parts of the ni ght, that is, we should only sleep in the middle part of the 
three parts of the night.  This is mentioned in Letter to a Friend  saying that if one does not 
sleep during these times the there will be a good result. In short, this implies that we should 
only sleep for three or four hours in the middle  of the night. Why? Because at other times we 
should meditate.   We should walk about a bit and then sit on our meditation cushion and try to purify the 
mind of the five obscurations, which are not set out here. The five obscurations are: (1) 
excitement and regret, (2) malice , (3) longing desire, (4) doubt, and (5) lethargy and sleep. We 
need to try to recognize them and to elimin ate them. Then we should act meaningfully 
between sessions.  
                                             
 
83 JN: An alternative translation is: 
 Learned one, the entire day and the first and 
 Last periods of the night having passed, 
 That even the time of sleep not be fruitless, 
 Sleep mindfully between them. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
160  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The behavior of sleep 
As the behavior of sleep occurs between sessions, it should also not be wasted 
meaninglessly. In this regard, the conduc t of the body consists in lying down, 
during the middle part of the three parts of  the night, on your right side, placing 
the left leg on top of the right one, and sleeping like a lion. 
 
Between sessions we should do the yoga of sleep  whereby we will not allow sleep to become 
meaningless. What is the correct conduct of the bo dy? It is to lie down on our right side, with 
the left leg placed on top of the right, and th e right hand against the right cheek. We should 
sleep like a lion which, unafraid of other anim als, sleeps relaxed and comfortably. It is also 
advised to block the right nostril with the tip of the right finger as this stops the flow of wind 
related to attachment, whereby our sleep can be come more virtuous. In the teachings on the 
S t a g e s  o f  t h e  P a t h  i t  s a y s  t h a t  w h e n  w e  g o  t o  s l e e p  w e  s h o u l d  g e n e r a t e  t h e  m i n d  o f  enlightenment, thinking to attain enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. We can 
also generate the thought “How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings had happiness 
and the causes of happiness. May they have them . I will make them have them.” We can also 
think that all phenomena are empty of inhere nt existence (the obje ct clear light), and 
meditate on this whereby we go to sleep in th is clear light. In this way we will practice 
Dharma or create virtue during the entire duration of sleep.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Mindfulness 
As for mindfulness, you should rely on the fact that, until you fall asleep, it 
pursues the predominant virtuous action th at you have cultivated during the day. 
Therefore, you can sustain your spiritual pr actice, such as meditative stabilization, 
even while asleep, similar to when you are not asleep. 
 
In our every day life, remembering the virtuous activities that we have cultivated during the day, we should go to sleep. In this way, our sleep is certain not to become either non-virtuous 
or neutral. Instead, while we sleep, we will stil l be meditating, that is, still doing a virtuous 
action due to which our sleep will become mean ingful and serve to increase our virtuous 
qualities. Therefore, when going to sleep, reca ll the virtues with which you have familiarized 
and generate a good motivation thinking to bene fit all sentient beings. In this way, we will 
practice meditative stabilization even while sleep ing, whereby the virtuous energy or potential 
in our continuum will increase and the negati ve energy or potential will diminish. By 
increasing our positive potential and reducing our negative potential, we can gradually come 
to create only virtue and thereby realize our final aim.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
161 4 Vigilance84
 
Vigilance: If any mental affliction aris es while you cultivate mindfulness, {44} 
having become aware of it, rather than grasping it, eagerly abandon it. 
 
If any one of the different mental afflictions aris es, it is necessary to understand or recognize 
it and then try to abandon it. This implies that we need to examine with introspection 
whether or not an affliction has arisen. If we find that one of them has arisen, we should 
immediately try to eliminate or abandon it. So metimes attachment arises, sometimes anger or 
hatred arises, sometimes ignorance arises, sometimes pride arises, sometimes doubt arises, and 
sometimes one of the afflicted views arises. If an y of the six root afflictions arises, we should 
immediately apply its antidote in order to stop it. At other times, there arise belligerence, at 
times laziness, at times jealousy, at times ha ughtiness, and so forth, as there are many 
afflictions that are mental factors. Therefore, we  need to check what kind of mental afflictions 
arise in our mind and immediately try to put a stop to them. For example, if having left a 
door to a room open, dogs, cats, and so forth en ter, we need to send them out and close the 
door as otherwise they will make a mess in the room. Similarly, with mindfulness and introspection we should examine whether attachment, anger, and so forth arise and, if they 
have arisen, immediately try to abandon them. We should not accept the presence of, for example, attachment, thinking that it is nice or that it can bring us pleasure. If we allow 
attachment to remain without sto pping it, it will only become stronger. Therefore, we need to 
try to stop it immediately.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
5 The discrimination of getting up 
The discrimination of getting up consists in  projecting the thought “I will get up at 
this and that time.” 
 
Before we go to sleep we should make a dete rmination to wake up at a certain time, for 
example, at dawn. If we do this, we will be able to wake up at that time. In other words, in 
o r d e r  t o  g e t  u p  a t  5 : 0 0  A M  i n  o r d e r  t o  p r a c tice meditation, do prostrations, or do any 
virtuous activity whatsoever, we need to ha ve made a strong determination the previous 
evening to get up early the next morning.   In our every day life we should generate th e mind of enlightenment, do some meditation 
on the breath combined with taking-and-giving, or do the Six Yogas of Naropa, the six magical 
wheels. We should also try to be relaxed, t hinking that we are very lucky, that we have no problems. If we think that something is a pr oblem, then many problems will arise and our 
mind will become disturbed. This is not of any benefit whatsoever.  
 
Wednesday morning, 23 February 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 44) says: 
2B4A-2A2B-4B How to apply this to the intervals between all meditations 
                                              
84 JN: shes bzhin , “introspection” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
162 That being so, apart from the uncommon ways  of sustaining meditation during the 
actual meditation, [these indications as to ] what should be done in preparation, 
during the actual meditation, at the en d, and in between sessions should be 
applied to all observed objects and aspects being sustained from here up to special 
insight. 
 
In order to meditate we need to do the preparation, the actual meditation, and the 
conclusion. In fact every action has a preparat ion, an actual action, and a conclusion. For 
example, to cook food and put it on a plat e, set out the cutlery, and so forth are the 
preparatory actions; eating the food is the actual  action; and to wash the dishes and put things 
away are the concluding actions.   When we do the meditations ranging from re lying on a guru through to special insight, 
that is, when we do the meditations of beings of  lower, middling, and great capacities, in each 
case there should be a preparation, an actual meditation, and a conclusion. Thus, we need to 
recall that first we need to do this, then we need to do that, and so on. When we do any 
analytical meditation we should briefly rememb er all the preceding meditations. In all cases 
we should focus our mind on a virtuous object and then try to single-pointedly do analytical meditation on it.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2B The reason why [meditation] needs to be sustained by means of two modes of sustaining 
1 [The two modes of sustaining] 
2 Refutation of the misconception that although ther e are both analytical and placement meditations, 
one single person does not practice them 
3 Refutation of the misconception that asserts that all conceptions apprehend signs 4 Refutation of the misconception that asserts that if a lot of analytical meditation is done prior to the 
arisal of meditative stabiliz ation it becomes an obstacle  
2B4A-2B1 [The two modes of sustaining] 
A The reason why both analysis and placement are necessary for meditation 
Second: In Ornament of the Sutras  it says:  
 
Here, first of all, proper mental attention85 arises in dependence on 
study,86 and from proper mental attention, again, the exalted wisdom 
with the meaning of pure reality87 as its object arises. 
 
That is to say that from proper mental attention, by means of the wisdom arisen 
from reflecting on the meaning of what ha s been studied, the wisdom arisen from 
meditation directly realizing the meaning of pure reality arises.  
 We need to do both analytical meditation and placement meditation as they are both 
important. First we should do analytical medita tion. However, before this we need to listen 
properly to many teachings or read many books in order to develop understanding such that 
                                             
 
85 JN: yid byed  
86 JN: tos, “hearing” or “listening” 
87 JN: yang dag don , “perfect meaning” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
163 the wisdom arisen from hearing arises. Then we  need to think about what we have heard or 
read, that is, the mind needs to engage the obje ct. In this way we can slowly come to realize 
the meaning of emptiness and achieve the path of seeing.  
 On the path of accumulation we accumulate  merit and the hearing of many teachings. 
Then we think about their meaning, whereby we  achieve the wisdom arisen from thinking 
and attain the path of preparation. Then, when  we realize the meaning of emptiness directly, 
we achieve the arya path, the supramundane path , the path of seeing. Through familiarizing 
with this on the path of meditation, we even tually attain the path of no-more-learning.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In the Ornament of Direct Realization , too, it says:  
 
For the four aspects of ascertainment,88  
The paths of seeing and meditation,  
Repeated reflection, assessment, and 
Certainty are the path of meditation.89 
 
That is to say there are [types of] repe ated reflection, assessment, and certain 
understanding (“certainty”) that constitu te the path of meditation of mahayana 
aryas. 
 
There are four branches of definite discrimina tion or the four branches of the path of 
preparation are heat, peak, tolerance, and su preme mundane qualities. After the supreme 
mundane qualities level, upon seeing emptiness di rectly one achieves the path of seeing. Then 
one meditates on the emptiness that has bee s een again and again, whereby one achieves the 
path of meditation.   There are ten grounds of arya bodhisattvas. Th e first ground is divided into two parts, the 
first part being included in the path of seeing and the second part being included in the path 
of meditation. The second through the tenth grounds are all included in the path of 
meditation. Because the object of abandonment, the conception of true existence, is divided 
into nine (the great of the grea t, middle of the great, small of the great, great of the middle, 
middle of the middle, small of th e middle, great of the small, middle of the small, and small 
of the small), so too is the path of meditation , their antidote, divided into nine rounds that 
abandon the nine degrees of the conception of  true existence. The vajra-like meditative 
stabilization is the final antidote and the last un interrupted path of the path of meditation. In 
the very next instant one attains th e buddha ground or enlightenment.  
 
                                             
 
88 JN: nges ‘byed yan lag , branches of definite discrimination 
89 JN: An alternative translation is: 
 The path of meditation is that which  
 Repeatedly reflects, assesses, and definitely investigates  
 That on the branches of definite discrimination, 
 The path of seeing, and the path of meditation itself. [4.53] 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
164 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 In the Compendium [of Trainings ] it also says: 
 
Thus, you should practice meditation, continuously giving away, 
guarding, purifying, and increasing your body, possessions, and merit in 
all kinds of ways. 
 With regard to the meditations that should  be done according to the statement for 
all four activities – giving away, guarding , purifying, and increasing – with respect 
to each of the three – body, possessions,  and roots of virtue, there are both 
analytical meditations, which are sust ained through analysis by means of 
discriminating wisdom,
90 and placement meditations,  which are to place [the 
mind] single-pointedly without analysis. 
 
There are two texts known by the abbreviated title of Compendium  (bslab btus ), one by Asanga 
and one by Shantideva. Here Compendium  probably refers to the text by Shantideva, the 
Compendium of Trainings . This text says that we should meditate on continuously giving away, 
safeguarding, purifying, and increasing our body, possessions, and merit.  
 If we give our body away we will die! So how can we give it away? We can give away parts of it, such as our legs, our kidneys, or our ey eballs, to others. To give away our possessions 
means to practice generosity by  g i v i n g  t h e m  t o  o t h e r s .  f o r  e x a m p l e ,  w e  c a n  d o  l i k e  S a i n t  
Francis who gave away all his possessions and went  to meditate in a cave. To give away our 
merit means to dedicate it for the sake of other sentient beings.  
 We can also safeguard or take care of our body. Likewise, we can purify it by washing it and so forth, both externally and internally. In  this way the body becomes stronger. Here 
“increasing the body” must refer to increasing the energy of the body, since the body itself 
cannot be increased. Although when we are youn g the body increases in size, when we get old 
it decreases!  We can also guard our possessions. In addition, we can purify them, meaning that we should not obtain them by means of any of the five wrong livelihoods, that is, by cheating 
others, stealing them, and so forth. We should not act like the Italian Mafia whose wealth is 
made up of “dirty money,” due to which they have to keep it hidden! We should increase our possessions or wealth, for example, by investing our money, or by putting it in a good bank 
whereby the interest causes it to incr ease, or by doing business with it.  
 We should guard our merit by dedicating it, as soon as it is created, that it may become the 
cause for all sentient beings to achieve enligh tenment. We should keep our merit pure by 
ensuring that it does not become contaminated by the mental afflictions. In other words, we 
should not allow it to become mixed with no n-virtue but keep it completely white and 
virtuous. That which is completely white or vi rtuous definitely brings a white or pleasant 
result, whereas if we create merit that is mixed with afflictions it will not be completely pure. 
We should also increase our merit by generati ng a good motivation. The motivation at the 
time of the preparation for an action should be  virtuous, the motivation at the time of the 
                                             
 
90 JN: so sor rtog pa’i shes rab , “wisdom of individual investigation” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
165 actual action should be virtuous, and the motiva tion at the time of the conclusion should be 
virtuous. In this way our merit will increase. Just  as a tiny seed, for example, an apple seed, 
when sowed in a fertile field ca n bring a tree with many branches laden with fruit, so to can 
our inner virtuous energy increase.  
 There is a type of meditation in which we think about and analyze an object, this being 
called “analytical meditation.” Then, there is another type of meditation in which we place 
the mind on an object, this being called “placement meditation.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B Identification of analytical and placement meditation  
{45} Now if you ask what are the paths that  are analytical meditation and what are 
the paths that are placement meditation: fo r meditations such as the cultivation of 
confidence in the spiritual teacher, the great meaning of the freedoms and 
endowments and the difficulty of find them, death-imperman ence, karma and its 
effect, the faults of cyclic existence, an d the cultivation of bodhicitta, analytical 
meditation is necessary. For each of them , minds of great strength and the ability 
to subdue the mind for a long time are ne cessary, because, if they are absent, their 
counterparts, disrespect and the like cannot be prevented, and because the 
generation of these minds depends on no thing but the meditation analyzing them 
by means of investigating them individually time and again.  
 How are analytical meditation and placement me ditation to be done? First we should do 
analytical meditation and then placement medita tion. For example, in order to develop faith 
or confidence in the virtuous spiritual friend it  is necessary to do analytical meditation that 
analyzes the qualities that he possesses. We shou ld not do this analysis for just one or two 
days, rather we may need to analyze him for many years. In this way, we will come to be able 
to rely on him with complete faith and confid ence. Similarly with respect to the precious 
human rebirth endowed with the eighteen qualities, we should analyze its great meaningfulness and the difficulty of find it again. Then, we need to analyze the fact that, having found it, we will definitely lose it be cause of the certainty of  death-impermanence.  
 Then we also need to analyze actions and their results. For example, among the four results, the main one is the fruitional or matura tion result, that is, due to a negative action 
one will be reborn in the hell, animal, or hung ry ghost realm. Due to the action being black 
or non-virtuous, the result will definitely be  black or suffering. On the other hand, the 
fruitional result of a white or virtuous action  that is not mixed with non-virtue or the 
afflictions is to be reborn as a human being, an anti-god, or a god. There are six realms and 
when we die we will necessarily be reborn  in one of them. Whic h one depends on our 
a c t i o n s .  I f  w e  c r e a t e  v i r t u o u s  a c t i o n s  w e  c a n ,  f o r  e x a m p l e ,  b e  r e b o r n  a s  a  h u m a n  b e i n g .  
However, even among human beings there are those who have a precious human rebirth and 
those who do not have such a rebirth. The latte r are human beings but they lack Dharma and 
the possibility of developing wisdom and a g ood-heart. Thus, even among human beings there 
are different types of rebirths. There are also different types of anti-gods, and among gods there are the six types of gods of the desire re alm, the seventeen of the form realm, and the 
four of the formless realm. To take rebirth as a human being, anti-god, or god it is necessary 
to have created virtuous or meritorious actions. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
166  We should also analyze the disadvantages or sh ortcomings of cyclic existence. For example, 
there are many disadvantages of a human rebirt h since human beings experience the three, 
six, and eight types of sufferings. Thus, even  b e i n g s  w h o  h a v e  b e e n  b o r n  i n  t h e  h a p p y  
migrations experience suffering; we can see this in our daily life. We experience the suffering 
of suffering, suffering of change, and pervasive su ffering. We should analyz e this. To analyze it 
means to check whether or not it is so. 
 When cultivating the mind of enlightenmen t, one meditates in or der to generate the 
conventional mind of enlightenment. There are two lineages for developing the conventional 
mind of enlightenment, one of which is “the  six causes and one result,” which was passed 
down from Buddha Shakyamuni to Maitreya, to Asanga, and so on down to us. In this 
context we do analytical meditation that analyzes  the fact that all sentient beings have been 
our mother, just like our mother of this life. Wh y is this? Because we have been taking rebirth 
since beginningless time and whenever we were  born as, for example, a human being we 
needed a mother. Therefore, our mothers are infinite. In this way, we do analytical 
meditation that applies the reas oning that when we were born as a human being we needed a 
mother. Because we have had so many rebirths, even one sentient being has been our mother 
countless times. Since they have  also been our father, grandfat her, grandmother, uncle, aunt, 
and so forth, why do we emphasize the fact that  they have been our mother? This is because 
we have the closest relationship with our mother  due to the fact that she carried us in her 
womb for 39 or 40 weeks. During this entire  time our body was connected to her body, 
whereas this is not the case for the father. For this reason , in Buddhism the mother is 
emphasized. Also while we were in her womb she took care of us, and when we were born she 
continued to take care of us. However, perhap s there are some exceptions as some mothers 
even abandon their children in a garbage can! There is a story that even in ancient times a 
mother seeing the placenta and not recognizing that it contained a ba by threw the placenta 
into a field. However, due to a crow (an mani festation of Six-Armed Ma hakala) pecking at it, 
a beautiful baby was revealed. Someone then took care of the baby and when he grew up he became a famous spiritual master.  
 After recognizing that all sentient beings ha ve been our mother, we need to remember the 
their kindness based on the many reasonings re lated to this. Then we need to develop the 
thought to repay their kindness. How can we  d o  t h i s ?  W e  n e e d  t o  d e v e l o p  l o v e  a n d  
compassion for them, followed by the extraordinary thought that is  determined to take care of 
them – to eliminate their suffering and set them in the state of happiness. However, realizing 
that we are not yet able to actually do this, we should analyze who can do this, whereby we 
come to understand that only a buddha can do this. We then generate the mind of 
enlightenment. This is of two types: an aspira tional mind of enlightenment and an engaging 
mind of enlightenment. We should analyze all these points.  
 Alternatively, in order to generate the mi nd of enlightenment we can think about the 
many disadvantages of the self-cherishing mind . Then we can think about the advantages of 
cherishing others. Based on this, we generate th e attitude wishing to exchange ourselves with 
others, and in order to do this we meditate on  taking-and-giving. This meditation is called 
tong-len  in Tibetan, literally giving-and-taking, howe ver we first take the sufferings of sentient 
beings upon ourselves in combination with th e inhalation of the breath. We visualize all 
sentient beings in front of us in the aspect of human beings, and, motivated by compassion, 
take all their sufferings upon ourselves. We imag ine that from their right nostrils come their 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
167 sufferings, non-virtuous actions, and mental affl ictions in the aspect of black smoke, which we 
inhale through our left nostril. The black smoke descends to our heart where we have 
visualized a heap of black dust in the center of  the central channel, whic h is the nature of our 
self-cherishing mind. The black smoke touches the heap of black dust and completely destroys 
it. In this way our self-cherishing mind is de stroyed and all other sentient beings are freed 
from their suffering. Then, we do the meditation  on giving. Motivated by love, we generate 
the wish to give others our virtues and merit,  our precious human rebirth, our possessions, 
that is, every good thing that we  possess. We imagine that they take the aspect of white light 
which leaves through our right nostril and enters  the left nostrils of the sentient beings 
visualized in front of us. They achieve everythi ng they want and are de lighted. The meditation 
on taking-and-giving is a way of developing the mind of enlightenment by means of 
exchanging ourselves with others. In this way, we do analytical meditation on the mind of 
enlightenment.   We should do analytical meditation with a st rong motivation and for a long time until our 
mind moves. If this does not happen, the opposi te may occur, that is, interferences may arise. 
These interferences can be the self-cherishing mi nd, the thought that we  cannot generate love 
for some beings because they act ag ainst us, a lack of respect, and so forth. It is said that we 
need, for example, to respect human rights, howe ver some people are convinced that there are 
certain people who must be tortured. If we do  not generate love, compassion, and the mind 
of enlightenment continually and strongly for other people, there is the danger that such 
thought may arise. For this reason, we need to  do analytical meditation again and again.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
For example, just as intense attachment ar ises if you meditate on an object of 
attachment a lot while exaggerating its pl easant features, in the same way intense 
aversion arises if you think of many unplea sant features with regard to an enemy. 
Hence, in regard to meditating these path s, these processes are similar whether or 
not the aspect of the object appears clearl y, but the mode of apprehension of the 
mind must be intense and long-lasting, which is why you should do analytical 
meditation. In the context of practicing calm abiding, which enables one to place 
[the mind] on whatever single object  one wishes, since someone whose mind 
cannot stay on a single object will not be fit for mental quiescence
91 if he analyses 
again and again, it is necessary to pr actice placement meditation on that. 
 
When a man or woman is our object of attachme nt, we think over and over again that he or 
she is very nice, exaggerating the niceness than  actually exists. In this way such strong 
attachment arises that it may even prevent us fr om sleeping and eating. If we cannot meet that 
person, we continuously think about him or he r, whereby the attachment becomes stronger 
and stronger. If we are unable to enter a relati onship with that person, we experience many 
difficulties – we cannot sleep, cannot eat, cannot concentrate, cannot work…   Similarly, in the case of our enemy we exa ggerate the unpleasant aspects of that person, 
due to which strong anger or hatred arises that  wishes to harm or destroy him or her. Our 
                                             
 
91 JN: sems gnas  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
168 mind is continually disturbed by  this anger or hatred, whereby our mind will not be able to 
relax, will not be quiet and peaceful, and will not be happy. Instead the mind will constantly 
be unhappy. When this happens, we need to meditate continually and strongly on love and 
compassion. 
 On the other hand, if we have attachment  for someone, we should meditate on the 
ugliness of the object. In  the eighth chapter of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  Shantideva 
sets out the fact that the body is composed of th irty-six impure substances and is therefore like 
a sack of filth. If a sack of filth were placed in front of us, we would hold our nose and 
immediately try to get rid of it! However, we think that our own and others’ bodies, which are 
composed of impure substances, are pleasant. We  can also meditate on skeletons in order to 
overcome attachment, this medi tation being set out in the Treasury of Manifest Dharma . The 
Vinayasutra  also sets out nine antidotes of various types of ugliness to counteract attachment. 
Thinking in this way, we can reduce our attachment.  
 When meditating, whether the observed object  and its aspect appear clearly or not, we 
should try to hold the object very strongly. Fo r example, we should continually do analytical 
meditation on the precious human rebirth and th e difficulty of finding it again. We should 
also meditate on the fact that this rebirth will  s o o n  b e lo s t  d u e to  d eat h, w hi c h i s  cer t ai n , 
whereas the time of death is uncertain, and that  at the time of death, our body, possessions, 
and relatives will not be able to help us, we will have to go on alone.  
 However, at other times we should not do analysis, rather we should do calm abiding 
meditation. In this case, without analyzing we should set our mind single-pointedly on its 
object. In this way, we do placement meditation.  
 There is calm abiding and special insight. Calm abiding  in Tibetan is shi-ne  (zhi gnas ), shi 
meaning the pacification of distractions, and ne meaning to abide on the object. Special insight  
in Tibetan is lhag-tong  (lhag mthong ), literally supreme or higher s eeing. First we need to achieve 
calm abiding, after which we develop special insigh t. This is according to sutra, that is, they 
are developed sequentially, first calm abiding an d then special insight. However, according to 
tantra, calm abiding and special insight can be developed simultaneously. This is because in 
those with higher realizations, special insigh t (vipassana) can actually induce calm abiding 
(samatha).  
 We should first do analytical meditation in  order to understand the nature of phenomena 
– the nature of our body, feelings, discrimination s, and so forth. We have five aggregates: the 
form aggregate, feeling aggregate, discriminati on aggregate, compositional factors aggregate, 
and the consciousness aggregate. We can do analytical meditation on the body, asking 
ourselves, “What is this body? What is its natu re?” We should try to meditate in this way. 
Externally the body is covered with skin, wherea s inside it are muscles, bones, organs, nerves, 
and so forth. We can ask ourselves, “Is this body  pure or impure in nature? It is permanent or 
impermanent in nature? Is it suffering or happiness in nature? Is it self-supporting 
substantially existent self or empty of self-suppo rting substantially existent self in nature?” We 
should do analytical meditation with respect to the body in this  way. We should also analyze 
how our body depends on its different parts, the two arms, two legs, the head, the internal 
organs, and so forth, for its existence. The entirety of parts is what is called “a human body.” Therefore, does it exist independently from its ow n side? It does not; it exists in dependence 
on its parts. Thus, the body is empty of in herent existence because it does not exist 
independently or from its own side. We should  analyze the emptiness or selflessness of the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
169 body, its impermanence, its nature of suffering, and its impurity in this way. Like this, we 
should try to do analytical meditation on  the body and the othe r four aggregates.  
 
Wednesday afternoon, 23 February 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4A-2B2 Refutation of the misconception that although there are both analytical and placement meditations, 
one single person does not practice them 
Although some who do not know this appr oach claim that if you are a scholar you 
should only do analytical meditation while saddhus should only do placement 
meditation, this is not so because it is nece ssary to do the two, one by one. This is 
because the learned, too, need to achieve calm abiding, and saddhus, too, need to 
achieve strong confidence in the spiritual teacher {46} and the like. Therefore, the 
understanding that repeated analysis by means of discriminating wisdom belongs 
to the context of listening and reflecting , and not to the context of practice, is 
inadmissible. 
 
There are those who think that a single person does not practice both placement meditation 
and analytical meditation, however this is a misc onception that must be refuted. Such people 
think that well-studied scholars should only do analytical meditation, whereas kusali  
(translated above as “saddhus”) should only do placement meditation. This is not correct 
because scholars who have studied much philosop hy also need to do placement meditation at 
times, and kusali or saddhus also need to do an alytical meditation at times. Because scholars 
also need to achieve calm abiding, they need to do placement meditation. The kusali, on the 
other hand, need to do analytical meditation be cause they need, for example, to develop faith 
in the virtuous spiritual friend. To do this, th ey must determine whether or not someone is a 
qualified teacher by examining wh ether he or she possesses all ten qualities, or the five of the 
ten that are necessary in this degenerate ti me, or the minimum of two (that he has more 
understanding than the disciple and wishes to be nefit the disciple). In other words, the kusali 
also need to examine whether a person possesses these qualities before accepting him or her 
as their teacher.   It is also a mistaken conception that the wi sdom of individual investigation, which checks 
again and again, belongs to the occasions of list ening and thinking but not to that of practice. 
This is because in order to practice correctly, we need to develop all three wisdoms: the wisdom arisen from hearing, the wisdom arisen  from thinking, and the wisdom arisen from 
meditation. First we need to listen to or hear many teachings, then we need to contemplate or 
think about their meaning, and then we need to  meditate single pointedly on the meaning. 
Therefore, both scholars and kusali need anal ytical meditation and placement meditation.  
 “Kusali” is a title given to someone who ea ts, defecates and urinates, and sleeps. Perhaps 
this word has been translated here as “saddhu”  because it appears that saddhus only do these 
things. However, although someone may show this aspect, he may actually possess high 
realizations, for example, Shantideva. It is re counted that the monks of Nalanda Monastery in 
India thought that all Shantideva did was eat, defecate, and sleep. Thus it was that when it 
came his turn to teach in a nearby nunnery  on the day of sojong, the nuns, under the 
direction of the monks, set up a very high thro ne without any stairs in order to mock him. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
170 When Shantideva arrived in the temple, he pr ostrated in front of the throne and then, 
without anyone seeing how it happened, he suddenly appeared sitting on the throne. The 
audience was very surprised. Shantideva then asked them whether he should teach something 
that had already been taught or something new,  and the answer was that he should give a new 
teaching. He said that while there did not exist a teaching that had not already been taught by 
the holy beings of the past and that he was no t learned in grammar and poetry, he would try. 
He then taught the text Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  to an audience that included foe-
destroyers with clairvoyance, retentions (dharani s), and so forth. As he  was teaching, he began 
to float upward until he went out through a wi ndow in the roof and flew to the south of 
India. Everyone present deeply regretted how they had treated him due to being ignorant of 
his qualities. The same can happen to us nowad ays as we do not know what qualities others 
possess. A kusali is thus someone who does not reveal his or her inner qualities.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4A-2B3 Refutation of the misconception that asserts that all conceptions apprehend signs 
The understanding that all conceptions apprehend signs92 and therefore create 
obstacles to enlightenment has the fault of not discriminating between improper 
mental attention, the conc eption of true existence,93 and proper mental attention, 
the conception of the perfect.94 
 
There are those who think that all conceptions a pprehend signs, that is, the sign of inherent 
existence or true existence. Su ch people think that all concep tions are meaning generalities 
and are objects of abandonment because they cr eate obstacles to attaining enlightenment. 
This view mostly stems from Chinese scholars  called Hashang who me ditated in order to 
abandon all conceptualization. For this reason th ey tried to stop the mind from engaging in 
objects. However, if it were like this, tabl es and trees would also meditate and attain 
enlightenment since they do not conceptualize. Thus, this is a wrong view.   While the mind of enlightenment, compassion, love, and so forth in the minds of ordinary 
beings are conceptions, they are good concep tions that are not objects of abandonment. 
Likewise, the realization of emptiness on th e path of accumulation and the path of 
preparation is a conception, since it is not yet a di rect perceiver, but it is not an object to be 
abandoned. It is recounted that King Trisong De tsen of Tibet invited Kamalashila to debate a 
Chinese Hashang who propounded that all conc eptions are to be abandoned. Prior to the 
debate, Kamalashila and Hashang made an agreem ent that the one who lost the debate would 
become a follower of the winner. During the de bate Hashang was unable to respond to the 
points raised by Kamalashila and, because he  did not want to become his follower, he 
escaped, leaving behind one of his shoes. This fact was taken to be sign that the Hashang’s 
view would continue to remain in Tibet. However,  this view that both the conception of true 
existence and the conception of emptiness ar e to be abandoned is not right. The three 
principal aspects of the path – renunciation , conventional mind of enlightenment, and 
                                             
 
92 JN: mtshan mar ‘dzin pa  
93 JN: bden ‘dzin gyi rtog pa  
94 JN: yang dag pa’i rtog pa  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
171 correct view – are all conceptions that need to be developed. Right now we should strive to 
develop at least a contrived or fabricated form  of renunciation, the conventional mind of 
enlightenment, and the understanding of the la ck of inherent existence of all phenomena. 
These are objects to be practiced, not to be aban doned. This is because in order to attain the 
small enlightenment of the Hinayana, renunciati on is necessary on th e side of method and 
the correct view of emptiness is necessary on  the side of wisdom, while to attain the 
enlightenment of the Mahayana, the mind of enlightenment is necessary on the side of 
method and the correct view of emptiness is ne cessary on the side of view. Therefore, since 
the correct view of emptiness is necessary  to achieve the small, middle, and great 
enlightenment, it is not that concepti ons are obstacles to enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4A-2B4 Refutation of the misconception that asserts that if a lot of analytical meditation is done prior to the 
arisal of meditative stabiliz ation it becomes an obstacle 
The idea “It is necessary to achieve a non-conceptual meditative stabilization 
capable of placing the mind on  a single object in whatever  way it pleases, whereas, 
if you do a lot of analytical meditation be fore, it will become an obstacle to the 
arisal of that meditative stabilization,” is not upheld in the present instructions. 
For example, when a smith burns gold or si lver in the fire and washes it in water 
again and again, all the impurities are removed and it becomes very supple and 
workable, whereby it can subsequently be made into any jewellery like earrings at 
will. Likewise, just as at first the mental afflictions, the secondary afflictions, and 
faulty conduct emerge on the occasion of  meditating on black actions and their 
results and the disadvantages of cyclic  existence, by meditating on such 
disadvantages again and again with the wisdom of individual investigation, the mind will become completely tormented or disenchanted; therefore it is like burning gold in a fire. Similarly, just as  the mind turning away from the black side 
and the defilements being purified emerges on the occasion of [meditating on ] the 
positive qualities of the spiritual frie nd, the great meaning of the freedoms and 
endowments, the positive qualities of th e Three Jewels, white actions and their 
results, and {47} the benefits of the mind of enlightenment, by meditating on these 
positive qualities again and again with the wisdom of individual investigation, the 
mental attention of the mind becomes moistened or sincere, whereby it is like washing gold with water. Through the mind approaching the white side and 
delighting in it, the mind is moistened by virtuous dharmas. When it has been 
transformed in this way, whatever you wi sh to achieve, whether calm abiding or 
special insight, will be achieved without difficulty when the mind is focused on it. 
That is why such an analytical meditati on is the best means of achieving a non-
conceptual meditative stabilization.  
 There are people who have the mi sconception that analytical me ditation is an obstacle to 
achieving calm abiding. However, this is not correct since analytical meditation is not an 
interference to the generation of calm abiding.  For example, a smith wh o makes gold or silver 
ornaments first puts the gold or silver in the fire and washes it again and again in order to 
remove the impurities. The more he does this, the better the qual ity of the earrings, bracelets, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
172 necklaces, and so forth that he will make as by this process the gold or silver is completely 
purified. The pure gold or silver can also be us ed to make offering bowls, butterlamps, and so 
forth. Similarly, by doing analytical medita tion again and again, our root and secondary 
afflictions will more easily be removed or puri fied. There are six root afflictions: attachment, 
anger, ignorance, pride, doubt, and afflicted view, the latter being further divided into five. 
There are twenty secondary afflictions that in clude belligerence, resentment, spite, and so 
forth. All these afflictions exist in our mind. We are therefore rich in mental afflictions, 
whereas we are poor in the virtuous mental fact ors. By thinking about this with analytical 
meditation, we can purify our afflictions.  
 By means of analytical meditation we will also come to see that black or non-virtuous 
actions bring a black or bad result, that of suffe ring, and that cyclic existence is filled with 
f a u l t s  o r  d i s a d v a n t a g e s .  I n  t h i s  w a y ,  i t  w i l l  b e come easy to give negative actions and cyclic 
existence up. We need to contemplate these faul ts again and again by means of the wisdom of 
individual investigation. In this way our mind will become tormented or disenchanted and we 
will develop the wish to turn away from cyclic existence. Just as if we put gold into the fire, although it initially seems to be burnt, in realit y the fire cleans it, similarly by thinking of the 
disadvantages of cyclic existence we can purify the impurities of the mind and turn away from 
the black side.   We should also analyze the positive qual ities of the virtuous spiritual friend, the 
meaningfulness of a precious human rebirth posse ssing the eighteen qualities, the positive 
qualities of the Three Jewels, wh ite actions and their results, an d the benefits of the mind of 
enlightenment. For example, if the mind ba sed on this body generates the mind of 
e n l i g h t e n m e n t ,  w e  w i l l  b e c o m e  a n  o b j e c t  o f  veneration of humans and gods, because even 
though the body did not change the mind did.  The mind of enlightenment brings infinite 
b e n e f i t s  i n  t h a t  d u e  t o  i t  w e  c a n  a c h i e v e  b u d d h a h o o d  a n d  b e  a b l e  t o  l e a d  o t h e r  s e n t i e n t  beings into nirvana or enlightenment.   We should think in this way and do analytical  meditation regarding wh at is good and what 
i s  b a d .  I f  w e  d o  n o t  d o  a n a l y t i c a l  m e d i t a t i o n  w e  w i l l  n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  u n d e r s t a n d  t h i s .  
Therefore, analytical meditation is important, it  is vital. Also in order to develop the wisdom 
of individual investigation we need to medita te again and again, meditating once is not 
enough. If we do this, our mind will be moistene d by the mind of enlightenment, that is, our 
hard mind will become softer or moister, no longer as hard as a stone. Our mind will also 
become more clear, like putting gold in the fi re and washing it with water whereby the gold 
becomes more flexible. Similarly, we should always turn our mind toward the white or 
virtuous side, or the side of enlightenment, or  the side of complete purity, and should avoid 
the black or thoroughly afflicte d side. In this way, our mind will become happier and more 
virtuous, no longer hard or bad. By meditati ng, we can transform our mind in this way.  
 If we want to achieve calm abiding (samatha ) or special insight (vipassana), we need to 
focus our mind on it as in this way we will ea sily achieve it. This means that by meditating 
every day, we will be able attain them. On th e other hand, if we do a bit of meditation and 
then stop for some time and later on start again, this will not happen. We need to do 
meditation continually, without in terruption. In this way we ca n bring about a change in our 
mind and we will easily achieve realizations. Th us, first we should do analytical meditation 
again and again in order to recognize the faults , whereby it will become easy to do single-
pointed meditation and achieve calm abiding.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
173  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
That is how Arya Asanga also put it: 
  
By way of analogy, when a smith or hi s skillful apprentice burns gold or 
silver in a fire and washes it with water a couple of times in order to 
discard all impurities and slag, it becomes supple and workable for this and that ornament, this being dire ctly perceived. In this regard, 
through the know-how that accords with  this of the smith or his skilful 
apprentice, any manner of ornament desired is then made with their smith’s tools. Likewise, when a yogi does not turn toward impurities and slag such as covetousness and so forth, he thereby becomes disenchanted and turns away from unhappy afflicted minds, and 
approaches manifest joy in the virtuous side, thereby becoming 
manifestly joyful. In that case, that yogi definitely trains his mind in either the side of calm abiding or the side of special insight, such that it 
is thoroughly applied to this and th at, rests in its natural state, is 
immovable and unwavering, and {48}  also moves for the sake of 
perfectly achieving whatever purpose he has contemplated. 
 
When a smith burns gold or silver in a fire and then washes it with wate r, the gold or silver 
becomes more flexible and can be easily made in to whatever kind of ornament he wants, such 
as earrings, amulets, bracelets, anklets, and so fo rth. They can also be ma de into studs that are 
to be put into the lip, the brea st, the navel, and so forth! In a similar way, a yogi purifies 
covetousness, malice, and wrong view – the non-virtuous actions of mind.  
 When an affliction arises in our mind it functions to bring unhappiness and never brings 
happiness. However, some people think that if they did not have attachment they would be 
missing out on some type of useful energy. Such  thoughts are not right. We need to increase 
our positive energy and diminish our negative energy. In our everyday life we should try to 
practice virtue more and more precisely and avoi d engaging in non-virtuous actions, that is, 
we need to try to reduce non-virtue and increase virtue. It is possible to change our mind, our behavior, and our habits, whereby we can improve more and more.   When our mind is manifestly joyful, we will think about what we wish  to achieve, whether 
calm abiding or special insight, and will be able to quickly achieve these qualities. Due to this, 
our mind will remain stable on its object and wi ll not move to other objects as it does at the 
moment. We will be able to perfectly achiev e our purpose and our mind will improve more 
and more.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Furthermore, the main adverse conditions to the mind staying on an object of 
meditation continuously are twofold: laxi ty and excitement. If you have a strong 
and constant awareness that sees the positive  qualities of the Three Jewels, etc., it is 
quite easy to overcome laxity, for many va lid sources say that its antidote is to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
174 uplift the mind by looking at positive qual ities. If you have a strong and constant 
awareness that sees the disadvantages of impermanence, suffering, and so forth, it 
is quite easy to overcome excitement, be cause, since excitement is a distracted 
mind belonging to the category of attachme nt, many texts praise disillusionment as 
its antidote.  
 
The two main interferences or adverse conditio ns to achieving calm abiding are laxity and 
excitement. Laxity ( bying ba ) literally means sinking , like an object dropped into a cup of tea 
sinks to the bottom of the cup. Excitement (rgod pa ) is a mind that goes out to objects of 
attachment. These two mental factors are the main  obstacles to our meditation, especially to 
the achievement of calm abiding. When we try to  meditate single-pointedly on or visualize the 
Buddha’s body or face, Tara’s face, and so forth, we should try to get a clear image of its aspect and then focus the mind on this. However,  we will notice that after some time that 
image no longer appears to our mind, but has been replaced by something else, perhaps the 
face of our lover! In fact the VI Dalai Lama wrote in one of his poems that when he tried to meditate on his guru’s face it did not appear clearly to him, bu t that even without meditating 
on his lover’s face it clearly appeared to him! We are like this, although it was probably not true in his case. Similarly, when we meditate on  a deity or do a sadhana, we remember all the 
worldly activities that we need to do. This is distraction. We need to eliminate it. By seeing 
the qualities of the Three Jewels and developing strong faith or confidence in them and meditating on them for a long time, we can cut off the sinking mind due to clearly seeing the 
eight qualities each of the Buddha, Dhar ma, and Sangha, which are taught in the Sublime 
Continuum  (Uttaratantra ). The more we understand these qualities, the more faith we will 
develop in the Three Jewels that  they are able to protect us from all the different types of 
sufferings. While the Three Jewels can protect us  from all sufferings, mundane beings such as 
gods and powerful human beings such as kings,  judges, and so forth cannot. Seeing this, we 
should develop strong faith in them, believing th at they can help us. In this way our mind will 
be lifted up and freed from laxity.  On the other hand, if excitement arises in ou r mind, for example, due to being attached to 
a past lover we think of him or her and wish to be with him or her, at this time we need to 
meditate on death-impermanence or suffering. We can think about the fact that we will 
definitely die, that the time of death is unce rtain, and that at the time of death our body, 
possessions and wealth, as well as our friends and rela tives, will not be able to help us, as only 
our Dharma practice will be of help. Thinking in  this way, we should try to remember that we 
are impermanent and therefore could die tomorro w, that those who are our friends today can 
change and tomorrow become our enemies, and so forth. Due to impermanence, things are 
always changing. In fact in cyclic existence th ere is nothing that is stable, everything is 
constantly changing, moving, and deceptive. By th inking in this way, our mind will not go to 
objects of attachment and will therefore not generate excitement.   Alternatively to counteract excitement we can think about suffering. For example, we can 
think about the fact that if we were to be reborn in our next life in the hell realm, in one of the eight hot hells, eight cold hells, four neighb oring hells, or the occasional hells, we would 
experience intense suffering. We can also think ab out what it would be like to be reborn in 
the hungry ghost realm unable to find food, or i f  a b l e  t o  f i n d  i t  w h e n  e a t e n  i t  b u r n s  o u r  
stomach. Similarly, if we were to find somethin g to drink, it would become molten iron that 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
175 burns our throat and stomach. If we were to see a tree laden with delicious fruit, when we 
arrive close to it we would no longer see the fruit but only dry leafless branches. If we were to 
see a river in the distance, when we got close to it, we would see only a dry riverbed. The 
hungry ghosts have such karma. Could we oursel ves bear to be reborn there? Since we could 
not bear it, we must avoid crea ting non-virtuous actions.  
 Similarly, if we were to be reborn as an an imal while it might be a little better, since some 
animals are taken care of by human beings, many others kill and eat each other, many are 
used as beasts of burden, and so forth. Therefore, even if we were to be reborn as an animal 
we would experience suffering. Thinking abou t such suffering, we will generate a strong 
determination to continue to meditate will be able to easily cut off excitement.   H e r e  L a m a  T s o n g k h a p a  s a y s  t h a t  e x c i t e m e n t  i s  d i s t r a c t e d  m i n d  t h a t  i s  a  f a c t o r  o f  attachment. The best antidote to it is renunciation or disillusion ment with cyclic existence.  
 Thursday morning, 24 February 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B The stages of how to train the mind once you have relied 
1 The basis of leisure – an exhortation to take its essence 
2 How to take the essence 
The second has two points: with regard to the basis of leisure – an exhortation to 
take its essence and how to take the essence. 
 
We are first exhorted to take the essence of this precious hu man rebirth with the eighteen 
qualities and then it is explained how to do so. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-1 The basis of leisure – an exhortation to take its essence 
A Identification of the leisures and endowments 
B Considering their great value 
C Considering the difficulty in finding them 
The first has three points: identificati on of the leisures and endowments, 
considering their great value, and cons idering the difficulty in finding them. 
 
In order to take the essence of  this precious human rebirth we first need to recognize the 
eight leisures and ten endowments. Then we should think about their great meaning or 
usefulness and the difficulty of finding them. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-1A Identification of the leisures and endowments 
1 Leisures 
2 Endowments 
The first one has two points: leisures and endowments. 
 
There are eight leisures and ten endowments. Am ong the eight leisures, four are related to 
human beings and four to non-human beings.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
176 2B4B-1A1 Leisures 
A Identification of the leisures 
First: In the Summary95 it says: 
 
Through rules the entity of the many worlds of animals 
And eight unfree states are renoun ced; thus leisure won forever. 
 Accordingly, the leisures consist in freedom from the eight unfree states.  
B The eight unfree states: 
(1) [Living in] a border remote country where the four types of followers [of the 
Buddha] do not roam, (2) being stupid or dumb and having incomplete faculties – 
missing a limb, an ear etc., (3) holding wr ong views that regard past and future 
lives, actions and their effects, and the Three Jewels as non-existent, (4) being 
without the word of a conqueror, with no  buddha having appear ed [in the world], 
are the four unfree states of humans. {49}  (1-3) The three bad migrations and (4) 
being a long-lived god are the non-human un free states. As for the long-lived gods, 
the Commentary on the Letter to a Friend  discusses two types: discriminationless ones 
and formless ones. The former live in on e region of the fourth concentration, 
Great Result, as if in a solitary place fa r away from a village. The latter are ordinary 
beings born in the formless realm. In Discourse on the Ei ght Unfree States  gods of the 
desire realm who are constantly distracted by  activities of desire are explained to be 
long-lived gods. 
 
The four non-leisures as a human being are: 
1. to be born as a human being in a barbar ic land without religion and culture, 
2. to be born as a human being who is stupid, that is, with a mind that is unable to 
understand, or to be deaf and dumb, that is ,  u n a b l e  t o  s p e a k ,  o r  t o  b e  b o r n  w i t h  
incomplete faculties or limbs, 
3. to be born as a human being but to hold wrong views thinking that past and future lives, 
the law of actions and results, or  the Three Jewels do not exist; 
4. to be born as a human being in a dark eon when no buddha has come to the world due to 
which the Dharma does not exis t. Such a period is called “dark” because due to lacking 
the Dharma there is no light of wisdom. 
The four non-leisures as a non-human are: 1. to be born as a hell being, 
2. to be born as a hungry ghost, 
3. to be born as an animal, and 
4. to be born as a long-lived god. 
Long-lived gods are the gods called “Without Di scrimination” who are born in a part of the 
fourth concentration called Great Result. Great Result can be likened to Vatican City, which 
is located inside the city of Ro me. Such gods only discriminate that they have been born in 
this state, thinking “Now I have been born,”  and then they remain for eons without any 
discrimination until the time of death when th ey discriminate, “Now I will die.” In between 
                                             
 
95 Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in 80,000 Verses  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
177 their birth and death their faculties do not fu nction and they do not have any manifest 
minds, due to which it is impossible for them to  practice Dharma. They are also said to be 
“mindless,” meaning that they do not have any ma nifest minds, that is, although they have a 
mind they do not have any manifest minds.  
 The Commentary on the Letter to a Friend  also says that ordinary beings born in the formless 
realm in general cannot practice the Dharma as  they cannot hear teachings. However, there 
are also arya beings, called non-returners, who can be born in Infinite Space through the Peak 
of Existence, who can practice Dharma in the formless realm. 
 The Discourse on the Eight Unfree States  also considers gods of the desire realm to be long-
lived gods. They cannot practice the Dharma  because they are distracted by the many 
enjoyments of the desire realm and therefor e do not think to practice the Dharma.  
 According to the Christian religion wh en someone transgresses any of the Ten 
Commandments, he or she after death will be bo rn in the hell realm and will remain there 
forever. Why do Christians say this? Probably because one remains in the hell realm for so 
many eons that it appears as if one will never get out.  
 There are animals such as some insects that only  live for one day, others that only live for a 
few days, and others that live for a long time. Hungry ghosts live up to 500 years and during 
this time mostly suffer, due to which they are unable to practice the Dharma. However, there 
are some exceptions to the general rule that animals and hungry ghosts cannot practice the 
Dharma. Among nagas, who are included in the an imal realm, some are said to practice the 
Dharma, and some hungry ghosts are said in sutra to be able to practice the Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-1A2 Endowments 
A The five personal endowments 
The second one has two points of which the five personal endowments are said to 
be:  
 Human nature, birth in a central region, complete faculties,  
No extremely perverted deeds, and faith in the foundation. 
 Here “birth in a central region” is to be born in a place where the fourfold 
followers roam. “Complete faculties” cons ist in not being stupid and dumb and 
h a v i n g  c o m p l e t e  l i m b s ,  m i n o r  b o d y  p a r t s ,  a n d  e y e s ,  e a r s ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  “ N o  extremely perverted deeds” implies not having committed or caused to commit an action of immediate retribution. “Faith  in the foundation” is faith in the 
foundation from which all the mundan e and supramundane white dharmas are 
born – discipline. Here “discipline” should be applied to all three collections [of scriptures]. 
 As those five are brought together in one’s own mental continuum and 
constitute circumstances for the accompli shment of the Dharma, they are called 
“personal endowments.” 
 There are five endowments that are personal and five that are related to the society. The five 
personal endowments are: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
178 1. to be born as a human being, 
2. to be born in a central land where the Dharma  teachings exist (in some contexts “center” 
refers to Bodhgaya, which is the center of Indi a, but here it refers to a place in which the 
Dharma exists); 
3. to have all faculties, the mental faculty and the five sense faculties, complete without any 
defect, 
4. to not have committed any of the five action s of immediate retribution – killing one’s 
father, killing one’s mother, killing a foe-de stroyer, drawing blood from a buddha, or 
creating a schism in the Sangha, the result of which ripens immediately after this life; 
5. having faith in the foundation or basis of  white or virtuous qualities – discipline. 
“Discipline” (‘ dul ba ) refers to a pacified mind, or to  the three scriptural baskets or 
collections by means of which we can subdue our mind. By morality our coarse actions of 
body and speech are subdued, by concentratio n our distracted mind is subdued, and by 
wisdom the root of cyclic exis tence – the view of the transito ry collection or the ignorance 
holding all phenomena to be inherently or truly existent – is subdued and uprooted. 
Thus, by means of these three our body, speech,  and mind are subdued, and we can attain 
calm abiding, the basis, and then special insi ght, on the basis of wh ich we can achieve all 
higher realizations and attain buddhahood.  
Since these five endowments are included in our own continuum and enable us to practice 
the Dharma, they are called “personal endowments.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The five endowments conditioned by others 
The five endowments conditioned by others are said to be: 
 
The arrival of a buddha, the holy  Dharma having been taught,  
The teachings abiding and being followed,  
As well as hearts of mercy for others. 
 Here the “arrival or the arisal of a bu ddha” means that, after accumulating the 
collections for three countless eons, he manifestly attained complete buddhahood. 
“The holy Dharma having been taught” means that a buddha or  his hearers have 
taught the Dharma. “The Dharma teaching s abiding” means that the Dharma that 
is accomplished by means of actualizin g the Dharma of the ultimate from the 
Buddha and the Dharma teachings up to no t passing into nirvana {50} have not 
degenerated. “The Dharma teachings th at abide being followed” means that 
through that very realization of the Dharma  there is an awareness that beings have 
the power to directly perceive the holy  Dharma and then there are those who 
follow the teachings in accordance with th at realization. “A heart of mercy for 
others” means that there are alms-givers and benefactors who grant monastic robes 
and the like.   As these five are present in the mental continua of others and constitute circumstances for the accomplishment  of the Dharma, they are called 
“endowments conditioned by others.” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
179  
The five circumstantial endowments are: 1. a buddha has visited the world, 
2. he has taught the Dharma,  
3. his teachings remain in the world, 
4. there are those who follow or practice his teachings, 
5. there are those who out of mercy or compassi on support practitioners by offering them 
food, clothing, and so forth. A fully-ordained monk, a bhikshu, is one who begs for alms. 
The Tibetan translation of bhikshu as gelong ( dge slong ) literally means “virtue-beggar,” 
that is, one who, carrying a bowl, begs for al ms without directly asking for food whereby 
whoever gives him food creates virtue.  
According to sutra, we must accumulate merit for three countless eons in order to become a 
buddha. During this fortunate eon, 1,000 buddhas will visit this world. Among them, 
Buddha Shakyamuni is the fourth. When his teac hings no longer exist, Buddha Maitreya will 
come to this world and teach. For this reason , we need to practice the teachings of Buddha 
Shakyamuni and study the Five Treatise s of Buddha Maitreya, such as the Ornament for Clear 
Realizations  and so fort h. In  t his way, even i f we do not achieve enlightenment in this life, 
when Buddha Maitreya comes to this world we will be among his foremost disciples and will 
definitely attain enlightenment. This promise was made by Buddha Maitreya himself. In fact, 
the reason that Lama Zopa Rinpoche wants to make an enormous statue of Buddha Maitreya 
is to create the cause that Maitreya arrive in th is world, without any delay whatsoever, as soon 
as the teachings of Buddha Shakyamuni disappear. By establishing a connection with Maitreya in this life, we will be born in his retinue and will attain enlightenment.   Buddha Shakyamuni gave teachings and then sh owed the aspect of passing away. However, 
his teachings were memorized and then writte n down by his disciples such as Venerable 
Kashyapa, whereby they were preserved so th at even now there are those who teach the 
Dharma and those who listen to it. Because th ese teachings were transmitted down to us 
without interruption, the Buddha’s doctrine stil l remains in this world. Since the scriptures, 
both sutra and tantra, still remain in their entire ty, it is still possible to achieve their result, 
nirvana and buddhahood.  
 In addition, there exist in the world those who follow the teachings and strive to realize 
them. There exists the Dharma of scripture an d the Dharma of realiz ation. By means of 
hearing and thinking about the Dh arma of scripture it is possible to achieve the Dharma of 
realization, that is, a direct realization of th e four noble truths and their sixteen attributes. 
The four noble truths are true sufferings, true or igins, true cessations, an d true paths, each of 
which has four attributes. True sufferings have the four attributes of being impermanent, 
suffering, empty, and selfless. True origins have  the four attributes of being cause, origin, 
strong producer, and condition. True cessations have the four attributes of being cessation, 
peace, auspicious highness, and definite emerge nce. True paths have the four attributes of 
being path, suitable, achievement, and definite deliverance. Buddha Sh akyamuni gave his first 
teaching on the subject of the four noble trut hs at Sarnath in India. These teachings still 
remain in that we can still hear teachings on this subject, think about them, and meditate on 
them. Some people think that all phenomena ar e created by the mind of Ishvara or by God 
and so forth. However, since this would mean that God also created suffering and problems, 
he could not be compassionate. This is the main point of difference between Buddhism and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
180 other religions. There are also different points  of view regarding self lessness. One view or 
tenet is that there is no self-suppo rting substantially existent self.  
 Attachment, for example, is a cause. Since it brings many results, it is an origin. A cause 
produces a result. For example, an action is an origin or source that gives rise to a result. 
When human beings work, this functions as a cause or origin of money. Without working, 
money does not fall from the sky! If a farmer does not sow any seeds, there will not be the 
result of crops. Therefore, first we need a ca use or origin, the seed, from which can come the 
result, crops, that can be used as food and so forth. The farmer needs to work in order to 
experience the result. Without an action, a result will not arise.   Attachment is also a strong producer that give s rise to a result – mental pain and suffering. 
It also brings the result of babies!   Attachment is also a condition. For example, when we sow a rice seed in field, the seed 
itself is the main cause of a rice seedling, wher eas the condition for the rice seedling is water, 
sunshine, and so forth. If there is the cause but not the necessary conditions, the result will 
not be produced. Attachment ca n also act as a condition.  
 A true cessation is the cessation of the affl ictions and sufferings. How can they cease? By 
meditating true paths and applying their antidote s. By eliminating the cause, the afflictions, 
the result, suffering, will cease. If there is no cause, a result will not arise. For example, if we do not want a tree in our garden but only cut off its branches it will continue to grow. As long as the roots are not dug up, it will continue to  bring a result. Likewise, even if we stop 
engaging in negative actions of body and speech, as long as we do not uproot the view of the transitory collection they will continue to bring results. If we eliminate the afflictions, we will 
have peace and have auspicious highness. Thus, the root is eliminated by means of true paths.  
 We have a negative side and a positive side wi thin our mind. We need to try to increase the 
strength of the positive side an d diminish the strength  of the negative side and thereby slowly 
eliminate it. In this way, the positive side will  increase like the waxing moon and the negative 
side will decrease like the waning moon. The Kalachakra Tantra  calls the waxing lunar phase 
from the first to the fifteenth of the month the white side, and the waning phase from the 
sixteenth to the thirtieth, the black side. In sh ort, we need to understand that black actions 
produce the result of suffering, difficulties, and problems. On the other hand, white actions 
bring the result of happiness and enjoyment, a lack of problems, and success in everything we 
do. Therefore, we need to put effort into eliminating our ne gative emotions, and, if we 
cannot eliminate them, we should at least try to  reduce them. We can do this. Everyone can 
do this. We should keep our mind happy.   The Buddha’s teachings remain in the world and there also exist people who help and 
support practitioners. The doctrine is that of  scriptures and realization. We have some 
knowledge of scriptures and some knowledge of realizations. For example, if we practice the 
ten virtuous actions by safeguarding morality, this  is also called a realization. A realization is 
not necessarily the ability to fly! Someone once  asked me whether the ability to fly indicates 
clairvoyance. I said that it did not, as birds ca n fly yet they are not clairvoyant. They can fly 
due to the power of their karma. Human beings cannot fly because they do not have wings!  
 Thus, the scriptures and realizations exist in the world, followers of the teachings exist, and 
those who help practitioners motivated by compa ssion also exist. The latter have the wish to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
181 give, that is, they have a mind of generosity, due to which they give food, clothing, and so 
forth to Dharma practitioners.  
 These are the five endowments from the side  o f  o t h e r s  i n  t h a t  t h e y  e x i s t  i n  o t h e r s ’  
continua. Therefore, we presently have all eight een qualities, both the eight leisures and ten 
endowments. We are extremely lucky. With these we can practice the Dharma. We can 
achieve higher realizations in this life, or, if we  cannot do so in this life, we will be able to 
leave imprints on our mind that will ripen in our next life so that we will once again be able 
to practice strongly and achieve higher and high er realizations. In this way we will continually 
go upward. 
 We should try to generate more compassion in ou r mind and to relax, relax, relax, and to not 
worry but to be more relaxed. In this way it will be easier to understand the teachings. Slowly we will be able to understand more, whereby more knowledge will arise in our mind. This will be helpful for ourselves and others, our family members and so forth. In our society we need 
t o  hav e a go o d-hear t  fo r  each o t her , t o  hel p eac h o t her , an d t o  li v e i n  har m o n y w i t h eac h  
other. We should have a subdued mind and resp ect for others. We need to try to do this.  
 Thursday afternoon, 24 February 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 50) says:  
2B4B-1B Considering their great value 
1 Considering the inappropriateness of someone with this special base acting like an animal 
Second: If no practice of the completely  p u r e  D h a r m a  f o r  t h e  s a k e  o f  l a s t i n g  
happiness comes about at all, you are like an  animal despite your birth in a higher 
realm,96 since animals also endeavor merely  to attain happiness and eliminate 
suffering until they die. 
 
Since we presently have this special body or base , it would not be correct to act like an animal. 
However, if we think only of this life (of obta ining things like food, clothing, and so forth) 
and do not do anything for our future lives, th at is, do not practice Dharma, even though we 
have the aspect of a human being, we would be like animals since they too strive to eliminate 
suffering and obtain happiness. In other words, although we are born as a human being, by 
behaving in this way we would be not different from an animal. To walk upright like a human being but to behave like a dog or cat, thin king only to obtain temporal happiness and 
eliminate suffering, would not be right. For exam ple, even animals instinctively act to protect 
their babies from harm. If we, who have been born as human beings, were to act like them it would not be good. We should do something more than animals. Since we have a human 
b o d y  w e  s h o u l d  m a k e  o u r  l i f e  m e a n i n g f u l  b y  w o r k i n g  f o r  t h e  s a k e  o f  o u r  f u t u r e  l i v e s .  W e  should not have a meaningless li fe like that of animals.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
                                             
 
96 JN: bde ‘gro , literally “happy migration” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
182 2 How a body of leisures and endowments is the best 
For the accomplishment of the Mahayana path a base like the one explained 
earlier is necessary. In the Letter to a Disciple  it says: 
 
The base of the path of those gone to  bliss, the tool for leading beings, 
That very strong mind, a strength that human beings have gained,  
That path has not been found by go ds or nagas, nor by anti-gods, 
Not by garudas, vidyadharas, kinnaras, or snakes. 
 
Furthermore, although some gods of th e desire realm with strong habitual 
tendencies97 f r o m  h a v i n g  p r e v i o u s l y  t r a i n e d  o n  t h e  p a t h  o n  a  h u m a n  b a s i s ,  a r e  
suitable as a basis for seeing the truths for the first time, it is impossible to attain 
the arya path for the first time on an upper realm98 basis. However, as explained 
before, the desire realm gods are said to  mostly be an unfree state and therefore 
this is not the best as a basis for atta ining the path for the first time. Again, 
inhabitants of the continent of Uttaraku ru are unsuitable as a basis for vows, 
which is why the bases of [the other] three continents are praised; and among 
them, [especially] the inhabitants of Jambudvipa. 
 
We have presently obtained a precious human rebirth possessing the eight leisures and ten 
endowments. This body is the best of bodies  because on this basis we can achieve the 
mahayana path. In other words, this body can act as the basis of a mind that generates the 
mind of enlightenment, the ma hayana path of seeing, and so forth. The human body is the 
best basis for this and, among human beings, those of the southern continent, Jambudvipa, 
have the very best of human bodies. Since we  have the eight leisures and ten endowments 
that were explained before, we need to  use them to go to higher states.  
 Nagarjuna composed the text cited here, Letter to a Disciple . He says, in short, that we have 
a human body that can act as the base or suppo rt of a path. We also have a powerful mind, 
therefore we can achieve a path more easily th an other beings. Gods, nagas, and anti-gods do 
not have a body that is the su pport of the mahayana path. Whil e some of these beings have 
bodies that are larger and stronger than ours, our mind is stronger an d more powerful than 
theirs in terms of accomplishing the path. Fo r example, the desire realm gods have much 
taller bodies than ours, and those of the form realm gods are even taller, but their minds are 
not as powerful. Also nagas can be very large, thei r body is not suitable as a basis or support of 
the mahayana path. Likewise, the bodies of an ti-gods, garudas, vidh yadharas, kinnaras, and 
snakes are not suitable supports.   Due to having trained in the path in the pr evious life as a human being, when someone 
takes rebirth in the next life as a desire realm god, he can come to directly see the four noble 
truths or directly realize emptiness due to th e latencies he deposited earlier on as a human 
being. However, in general gods of the desire realm cannot come to see emptiness directly. In 
addition, the gods of the form realm, although th ey have a large body, have achieved an actual 
                                             
 
97 JN: bag chags , also translated as “latencies” and “imprints” 
98 i.e., form and formless realms – as opposed to “higher realm” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
183 concentration, and possess clairvoyance and other qualities, cannot generate the path of 
seeing for the first time.   Thus, it is mainly human beings of the desire  realm who can achieve the path of seeing for 
the first time, and among all human beings those of the southern continent have the very best 
of conditions. The human beings of the sout hern, eastern, and western continents can 
generate the mind of enlightenment, and ca n enter the path of accumulation, path of 
preparation, and path of seeing. However, th e human beings of the northern continent, 
Unpleasant Sound, are not a suitable basis even for the vows of individual liberation. Why is 
the support of a human being of the southern  continent best? Because a buddha has visited 
this world and because the time of our death is not fixed, given that some humans die in the 
womb, some soon after they are born, some as young children, some as adolescents, and so 
forth. Our lifespan is so uncertain that a gran dfather or grandmother can still be alive while 
his or her grandchild has already died. Since th e lifespan of human beings in Jambudvipa is 
not fixed, it is easier to generate renunciati on or definite emergence, due to which it is 
possible to quickly achieve a path. In addition, the support of a human being of the southern 
continent is the best because the Buddha, in the form of a supreme emanation body, visited 
this world and in the aspect of a human being, a fully-ordained monk, gave teachings. He did so because in this way it was easier to subdue beings and bring about a result.  
 On the other hand, the human beings of the ea stern continent, Tall Body, have a lifespan 
that is fixed, thus they do not die at variou s ages like the human be ings of the southern 
continent. Also the human beings of the wester n continent have a fixed lifespan. Here “west” 
does not refer to Europe and so forth as our whole world, according to Buddhist cosmology, 
is included in the “southern continent.” Theref ore, the eastern continent and so forth that 
are mentioned in the Buddhist scriptures refer to places that are not included in our world, the planet Earth. All the human beings of th e southern continent can practice the Dharma, 
generate renunciation, enter a path, and achieve the state of a foe-destroyer, bodhisattva, or 
b u d d h a .  T h e r e  i s  n o  o n e  a b o u t  w h o m  i t  c a n  b e  s a i d  t h a t  h e  o r  s h e  c a n n o t  a t t a i n  buddhahood. We cannot see the inner qualities of  others, therefore it is not the case that 
because the outer body is beautiful, the person also has many qualities inside. Someone’s body can be beautiful while his or her mind can be very hard, or filled with attachment, 
anger, pride, and so forth. On the other hand, someone can have a very ugly body but inside have a mind that is very good and kind. Nor can it be said that because someone has a tall and good-looking body that he has a lot of knowledge. We cannot measure inner knowledge 
by the size or beauty of the body.  The human beings of the northern continent, Unpleasant Sound, have  a fixed lifespan of 
1,000 years. They cannot die before this, that is , there is no untimely death. Also they are 
naturally all well-off, easily obtain crops withou t need to sow seeds, and do not need to do 
business. Because they easily obtain whatever th ey need, they are very happy. For this reason 
they do not think about Dharma and do no t feel a need for Dharma. Their minds are 
distracted by their happiness. Similarly, we see people who always listen to music in order to 
distract their mind and make themselves happy. Maybe some of them also drink a bit at the 
same time in order to relax even more!   In short, our human body is the best, best , best. We have obtained this body now, 
therefore it is necessary to utilize it to practi ce Dharma, to develop our inner qualities so that 
our realizations will grow. This is  our job! We need to try to do  this. We should not just think 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
184 about how to make money and how to do busi ness, trying one way and then another and 
thinking only of the financial concerns of this life wishing to increase our wealth and 
possessions. This is not our main job! We n eed to do some work because we need food, 
clothing, a house, bedding, and so forth. Wi thout working, money does not spontaneously 
arise. Therefore, we do need to work but at  the same time we should put effort into 
developing our inner qualities.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim says:  
3 How to train in the wish to take the essence, having brought to mind those [two] objectives  
“Consequently, why would I act in such a way that an excellent base like this one I 
have gained {51} does not have a result ? If I do not make it meaningful, could 
there be a greater self-betrayal and a bi gger stupidity? Having passed through the 
many perilous places of unfreedom, such as  the bad migrations, again and again, if 
I were to go back to those places, forsaking this one-off liberation as meaningless, it 
would be like turning mindless as though stupefied by a magic spell99.” By way of 
thoughts like these you should meditate again and again. In Engaging in Bodhisattva 
Behaviour it says: 
 
Having found this kind of leisure, 
Not to cultivate what is virtuous, No betrayal could be a greater, 
Nothing more deluded than that. 
 
And: 
Having found this place so rare, 
Hard to find and beneficial, 
If I, well aware of it, Were to be taken to that hell again 
 
As if deluded by magic spells, Has my mind here wasted away?  Through what delusion I do not know either What has become of my mind, my feelings? 
 Since we have presently found this precious huma n rebirth, we should not waste it. If we do 
not put effort into takings its essence, it will be come meaningless, in the sense that it will not 
bring a result. In this way we will only cheat ours elves, no one else will cheat us. It would be a 
big delusion, done out of ignorance. Because we are intelligent we sometimes try to cheat 
others by not acting honestly and with a good he art, but in reality by not treating others well 
we only end up cheating ourselves.  We should not do like this.  
 If having traveled a very narrow and perilous  road, we have now achieved this precious 
human rebirth we must use it well. Right now we have escaped from the non-leisures, rebirth 
                                             
 
99 JN: rig sngags , literally “knowledge-mantra” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK 22-24 February 2005 (04) 
185 in the hell realm, hungry ghost realm, and animal realm, and have just this one time been 
born as a human being. Therefore, we need to  think about its usefulness and not waste it. For 
example, if wishing to buy jewels or nice thin gs in a certain place we go there but return 
empty-handed, this would be very foolish. We  would be like someone under the power of 
black magic or black mantras, which make us as though unconsciousness or intoxicated. 
Sometimes when traveling in India people are offe red an orange to eat and, having eating it, 
f a l l  i n t o  a  k i n d  o f  t r a n c e  i n  w h i c h  t h e y  c a n see that the other person is stealing their 
belongings but they are as though petrified an d cannot do anything to stop them. We should 
not act like this! There were two monks wh o went to Assam from Buxa. One was Geshe 
Tsering, Lama Yeshe’s half-brother who lives in Tushita, Dharamsala. The other is an old 
monk, now maybe 89 or 90 years old, who lives in Sera. When traveling to Assam they were 
offered an orange to eat, became intoxicated,  and everything, including all their documents, 
were stolen from them. However, later on the documents were given to the police who 
returned them to them.  
 
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
186 Monday afternoon, 28 February 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 51) says: 
4 The inappropriateness of returning empty-handed given that not only ultimate but also temporary 
objectives are easily accomplished 
Thus you should also consider the method  that allows you to easily attain the 
causes of an excellent higher realm body100, resources, and a retinue, which are not 
only greatly meaningful from an ultimate but also from a temporary point of view, 
by means of the basis: giving, ethical disc ipline, patience, and so on. If you do not 
apply yourself day and night to the causes  of those two by me ans of this greatly 
meaningful basis, it would seem to be like returning empty-handed from an island of precious jewels. 
 We should not be like someone who returns empty-handed from an island where wish-
fulfilling gems can be found. Now that we have obtained th is precious human rebirth we 
need to take its essence so as to obtain our final or ultimate objectives or aims as well as all our temporal aims. To do this, we need to practi ce generosity and so forth in order to obtain 
a body of high status, plenty of resources, and to be surrounded by good people. In short, we 
need to practice generosity, safeguard morality, and develop patience as these three are important in order to attain a good human bo dy. Monks and nuns who have less work than 
lay people should study and meditate more so as to also develop concentration and wisdom. 
Everyone, whether lay or ordained, needs effort  in order to achieve their aims. In other 
words, we all need to eliminate laziness and develop joyous effort.   Generosity is the cause of wealth. Thus, if we want to have all the conditions that are 
needed in order to study and meditate in the futu re, we should practice generosity. If we want 
a human rebirth in the future, we should practi ce morality by abandoning killing, stealing, 
sexual misconduct, lying, divisive speech, harsh words which hurt others’ minds, and idle talk 
or gossip. We also need to try mentally to ab andon covetousness, malice, and wrong views. In 
other words, we need to eliminate the ten non- virtuous actions and practice their opposites, 
the ten virtuous actions. Morality is the wish to abandon negative actions, that is, it is a mind 
of abandonment. Alternatively, it is the wish to abandon bad behavior, bad attitudes, and bad 
habits. Morality is also a mind of safeguarding, that is, the wish to guard or protect virtuous 
actions of body, speech, and mind. It includes ta king vows, such as the five lay precepts, the 
vows of novice monks and nuns, and so forth. Ha ving taken these vows, we need to safeguard 
them.   In addition, we need to practice the diff erent types of patience. For example, when 
someone says something bad to us  we should try not to respond with bad words or actions. 
We should not retaliate, but instead ask to be  forgiven for any mistakes we have made. We 
will not lose anything by doing this. We also need patience when studying and meditating on 
the Dharma. In particularity, we need the patience with respect to understanding and 
meditating on emptiness. We also need the pa tience of voluntarily accepting suffering that 
thinks, for example, “This negative karma has ripe ned upon me now, therefore it will come to 
an end and afterward I will be happy.” 
                                             
 
100 JN: mngon mtho’i lus , “body of high status” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
187  We also need joyous effort, that is, we n eed to develop effort and eliminate laziness. 
Sometimes we tend to think “I am tired today, I will do it tomorrow,” and then again the next 
day we think, “I will do it tomorrow.” Until we  die there will always be a tomorrow. We need 
to eliminate this attitude as well as the othe r kinds of laziness. Even when, due to having 
worked hard, the body is tired, we should thin k that this tiredness is but a small suffering, 
and that if we do not practice the Dharma we will  continue to create negative actions that will 
bring rebirth in the lower realms where there wi ll be much greater suffering. Therefore, why 
are we not able to bear some small suffering now? We should try to do bear it. 
 Concentration can be difficult as we have ma ny distractions. However, we should try to 
meditate every day even for five minutes, or even  one, two, or three minutes, or a bit longer 
on an object; it does not matter which one. In  this way our mind will gradually become a bit 
more stable on the object. We can also do anal ytical meditation. Previously it was said that 
analytical meditation is very important when  we meditate on the stages of the path. 
 In this way we should practice the six perfections, the main causes of achieving 
enlightenment. Therefore, we sh ould think, “Now I can do this . It is easy. Therefore, now 
that I have a human rebirth, I will put effort  into practicing the six perfections day and 
n i g h t . ”  I f  w e  w e r e  t o  g o  t o  a n  i s l a n d  w h e r e there were many jewels but returned empty-
handed, without bringing anything back with us, this would be foolish. Similarly, as we now 
have this precious human rebirt h that can be used to attain both our temporary and ultimate 
aims, it would be foolish not to use it well . With this precious human rebirth we can 
temporarily attain a higher rebirth and avoid a lo wer rebirth, and finally or ultimately we can 
achieve nirvana or omniscience. Thus, we need to put effort into doing this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-1C Considering the difficulty in finding it 
1 Illustration of the difficulty of finding it 
2 Reasons why it is difficult to find 
3 The rarity of those obtaining the causes of leisure and endowments 
4 The result of sustaining those objectives 5 The method of meditation with four special features 
6 Differentiated, sustained mode [of practice] 
2B4B-1C1 Illustration of the difficulty in finding it 
Third: In the Basis of Scriptural Transmission  it says that the beings who die from the 
bad and happy realms and migrate to the ba d realms are like the dust of the great 
earth, and that the beings who are born fr om there into the happy realms are like 
the dust taken up with the tip of a fingernail. {52} Therefore, [a precious human 
rebirth] is difficult to find from both the happy and the bad realms. 
 
It is difficult not only to find a precious human rebirth in particular but even just to find a 
human rebirth in general. The text cited here s ays that those who die from a bad migration or 
from a happy migration and are reborn in the lo wer realms are like the dust that composes 
the entire earth. On the other hand, thos e who die from a bad migration or a happy 
migration and are reborn in a happy migration are like the amount of dust that sits on the tip 
of a fingernail, that is, it happens very rarely. Th us, to take a lower rebirth, like a fingersnap, is 
very easy. On the other hand, to take rebirth in the upper realms is very difficult. Why is this? 
To discover the answer we can examine our own mind. Having done so, we will see that we 
continually create many causes for taking rebirt h in the lower realms while creating very few 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
188 causes – virtue – for taking rebirth in the upper realms. Most of our actions are non-virtuous, 
the result of which is suffering, that is, rebirt h in the lower realms. There are different lower 
realms where different degrees of suffering are experienced: the hell realms, hungry ghost 
realm, and animal realm. However, in all of them there is suffering. Because we create the 
causes of suffering, we experience the result. On the contrary, our virtuous actions are very 
small. We mostly create non-virtuous actions ou t of anger, attachment, jealousy, doubt, wrong 
view, belligerence, resentment, an d the like. Thus, our mind is rich in non-virtuous mental 
factors, in fact it is filled with them, like a rich person’s treasure house. Our virtuous minds, 
on the other hand, are very few. We need to check our own mind to verify this, not other 
people’s minds! If we were paid to be a spy it  would be appropriate to check others’ faults as 
in this way we would earn our salary. However, since we are not paid to do this, why should 
we do it, given that it only causes us to crea te negative karma that brings us unhappiness and 
suffering? We need to understand this and then  make a choice about what is better to do. 
With this understanding, we should do as much as we can to eliminate non-virtuous actions 
and to not allow non-virtuous minds to arise, th at is, to try to stop them by applying their 
antidotes. This may be difficult, but we should  at least try to stop thinking non-virtuous 
thoughts and to be more relaxed. When doing Zen meditation we try to stop thoughts from 
arising, sometimes this can be useful. We need to take care of ourselves as others cannot do 
this for us. And even though the buddhas try to take care of us, we are not able to perceive 
this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-1C2 Reasons why it is difficult to find 
If you ask just why it is so di fficult to find, it says in the Four Hundred [Verses] : 
 
For the most part people fix 
On the side that is unholy. 
Consequently common beings  Mostly surely go to bad realms. 
 
Accordingly, there are many humans and ot her beings who mostly fix on the side 
of the ten non-virtues and that is also why, consequently, they go to the bad 
realms. Furthermore, if, for each mome nt of anger and the like towards a 
bodhisattva, you have to spend one eon in  the hell of Incessant Torment (Avichi), 
the negativities accumulated over many li fetimes which have not come to fruition 
nor been overcome by antidotes, and wh ich are present in your own continuum, 
will doubtlessly cause you to spend many eons in the bad realms.  
 
Why is this precious human rebirth difficult to find? In his Four Hundred Verses  Aryadeva says 
that it is difficult to find because most human beings hold to the side of the unholy rather 
than holding to the side of the holy. That is, be cause they look to the bad side and not to the 
good side, most ordinary beings definitely go  to the bad migrations. In other words, they 
mostly take rebirth in the lower realms due to creating non-virtuous actions and not creating 
virtuous actions. An ordinary being is someone who is not an arya being, a superior being. 
Such ordinary beings hold to the unholy, that is , not being interested in the holy they hold to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
189 its opposite. “Holy” refers to that which is g ood, for example, the positive actions in which 
arya beings engage. Therefore, the “unholy” is that which arya beings avoid, for example, bad 
actions. Thus, the reason that it is difficult for us to obtain a precious human rebirth is 
because we hold to the unwholesome or non-vi rtuous and thereby create many non-virtuous 
actions due to which we will not be  reborn in the ha ppy migrations.  
 In short, we mostly engage in the ten non-vi rtuous actions because our mind is mostly fixed 
on the side of non-virtue. Due to the cause, non-virtue, we will take rebirth in the lower 
realms, meaning that having died we will go to the lower realms. It is not that we are walking 
toward them right now!  
 Even one instant of anger toward a bodhisa ttva, a being who has generated the mind of 
enlightenment , can destroy hundreds of eons of  virtue, as a result of which we will take 
rebirth in the hell of Unrelenting Torment (Avici ) for eons. But we have created non-virtuous 
actions over many lifetimes, the results of wh ich have not yet ripened nor have they been 
destroyed by their antidote, due to which this non-virtuous energy or imprint abides within 
us. This is what acts as the ca use for us to take rebirth in the lower realms, and not in the 
higher realms. Due to all the non-virtuous ac tions that we have created and the lack of 
virtuous actions, it becomes difficult to be reborn in the upper realms.  
 If we were to spend one day sitting on our meditation cushion and checking our body in 
terms of how we move, checking our speech in te rms of what we say, and checking our mind 
in terms of what we think, we would come to understand that we mostly create non-virtuous 
actions, and not virtuous actions. For this reason , it is difficult to find  a rebirth in the happy 
realms, especially as a human being with a pr ecious human rebirth possessing the eighteen 
qualities, and instead we mostly take rebirth in  the lower realms. Since we have obtained this 
present opportunity just this one time, we have to be careful not to waste it but to take its 
essence by practicing the Dharma, developing  love for all sentient beings, a mind of 
enlightenment, and a good heart. We should de velop these attitudes toward everyone, it not 
being the case to develop them toward our frie nds but not toward people who we consider to 
be neutral and not toward our enemies, who in stead we want to be unhappy and to suffer. 
We should give up such attitudes. Developing love and so forth for others is said to be the best way that we can take care of ourselves.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-1C3 The rarity of those obtaining the causes of leisure and endowments 
Although, if you thus made sure to clear away and purify the causes of bad 
migrations that were accumulated earlier and closed the door to new engagement 
in them, happy migrations would not be rare, as it is, they are very rare indeed. If 
you fail to do so, you will go to bad migrations, and, once you have gone to bad 
migrations, you do not create virtue, but always commit negativities, and therefore 
do not even hear the names of the happy realms for many eons, as it says in 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior.  
 This is similar to what was said before. In short,  why is it difficult to obtain a happy or higher 
rebirth? It is because we do not create the ca uses of the eight leisures and ten endowments. 
Since we rarely do this, we do not obtain a precious human rebirth. In addition, we have not purified the non-virtuous actions that we created both in past lives and earlier on in this life, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
190 which are the causes of taking rebirth in the lo wer realms. We also continue to newly engage 
in non-virtuous actions. In other words, we have not blocked or closed the door on them. 
Having done non-virtuous actions we need to purify them. We also need to abandon newly 
creating them, that is, we should try to block th e door of engaging in them. If we do this, it 
will not be difficult to obtain a higher rebirth.  However, since we do not do this, it will be 
difficult to obtain such a rebirth.  
 We constantly engage in many new non-virt uous actions and, because we do not purify 
them, they continually increase in strength. Th is will cause us to take rebirth in the bad 
migrations for many, many eons to come. Having  been born there, we will not even hear the 
name “happy migration,” and we will only expe rience suffering. In this way, we will not 
achieve a higher rebirth again.   Therefore, right now we need to create the causes of a precious human rebirth possessing 
the eighteen qualities. In other words, we need  to create virtuous actions, purify the non-
virtuous actions that we have already created, and avoid creating new non-virtuous actions. By 
doing this, we will once again obtain a higher rebirth, that is, in the next life we will once again obtain a precious human rebirth possessing  the eighteen qualities. If we create the 
causes for this, no one can stop it from happen ing. No one else can throw us into the lower 
realms. Even if someone were to throw us into th e ocean or we were to throw ourselves into it 
thinking to commit suicide, if we do not have th e karma to die we will be able to get out. On 
the other hand, if we have created non-virtuous actions we will helplessly jump into the lower 
realms, like someone wishing to commit suicide who jumps off a high bridge into a river. Even though mentally we do not want to commi t suicide, our actions will be similar in that 
we voluntarily jump into the lower realms. Havi ng been reborn there, we will not even hear 
the names of the happy migratio ns – “human being,” “anti-god, ” or “god,” nor will we hear 
the name “buddha,” “foe-destroyer,” or “holy be ing.” The beings born in the hell realm wail 
out of pity for themselves due to their suffering . Therefore, we should try not to create non-
virtuous actions in the future if we wish to take rebirth in th e happy migrations.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-1C4 The result of sustaining those objectives 
Potowa said:  
 
In the region of Phan there was a soli d fort by the name of Ma'i Chakar 
that had been seized by an enemy. For a long time the people had been 
their poor servants. One old man used to be in anguish about this fort 
and when, one day, he heard people saying that it had been won back, 
he grabbed his spear and, not being able to walk, dragged himself along 
saying, “If only the capture of Ma’i Chakar is not a dream.” Like this, 
having won leisure and endowments, one must also derive such joy from it and practice the Dharma. 
 {53} In accordance with this statement, yo u should meditate in order to gain this 
kind of attitude. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
191 This passage cited from Potowa is difficult to understand in the Tibetan. “Potowa,” the name 
of place, is the name of a well-known Kadam geshe whose present incarnation is Dra-gyab 
(Behind the Rock) Rinpoche who live s in Sera Monastery, India.  
 In Tibet there was a palace or fortress called Ma’i Chakar that had been seized by an 
enemy. One old man, having heard that this palace had been won back, was overjoyed. We 
should be like him in that we should be extremely happy that we have obtained a precious 
human rebirth possessing the eight leisures an d ten endowments. Based on this, we should 
make a determination to practice the Dharma an d to use this life we ll. Thus, we need to 
develop a strong motivation to put effort into developing this attitude. By doing this, we will 
slowly obtain inner qualities and experience inner happiness. If, on the other hand, it is useless to be sad and discouraged, thinking “I cannot do anything. Poor me!” Instead we 
s h o u l d  t h i n k ,  “ I  a m  c a p a b l e .  W h y  c a n  I  n o t  d o  i t ?  I n  t h i s  v e r y  l i f e  I  c a n  a t t a i n  h i g h e r  realizations and even buddhahood.” Encouraging ou rselves in this way, we should happily put 
effort into practicing the Dharma whereby we will experience the result of happiness. 
Contrarily, if we think badly about ourselves, we will only become mentally depressed and incapable of doing anything. We will not be able to sleep, nor to digest or enjoy our food and 
perhaps will even feel nauseous at the mere si ght of food! All this is created by ourselves 
alone. If we think everyone is against us, that ev eryone is looking at us badly, and that no one 
wants to communicate with us, this is only our mental projection. Perhaps someone else 
wants to talk to us but it is us who look away! This is not right. Therefore, it is better to think, 
“Now I have obtained this precious human rebirt h. I am very lucky. Since I want to obtain 
such a rebirth again in the future, I will prac tice Dharma day and night in order to develop 
my inner concentration, generosity, morality, pati ence, and so forth.” If we try to do this, we 
will be able to. For example, if we do not know something, by studying it we will come to know it. For example, if we want to learn Tibetan, first we have to learn the alphabet. Perhaps it may appear to be difficult at the beginning bu t, by putting effort into it, one day we will be 
able to read Tibetan. I myself have not stud ied English much but due to listening to many 
translators I can now speak some English. Even though it is not perfect, other people can 
understand me and I can say many things. I did not study much, but I learned a bit. Therefore, even to learn a language we need to  endure some difficulties as the pronunciation 
may be difficult, the grammar is different, and so  forth. For example, in Italian this cup is 
called “ tazza ,” whereas in Tibetan ta means horse and tsa means salt, therefore tazza  would be 
horse-salt! In English we say A, B, C, D ( aye, bee, see, dee ), whereas in Italian we say a, be, chee, 
dee a n d  s o  f o r t h .  I t  i s  n o t  e a s y  t o  p r o n o u n c e even one letter properly! For example, the 
Tibetan sound nga is difficult for non-Tibetans to say. To  add to this difficulty, there are even 
different pronunciations among the Tibetans themselves!  In short, when we put effort into learning something new, we will slowly, slowly come to 
understand it. We cannot expect to learn something new immediately.   In our everyday life, we need to try to keep our mind happy and relaxed, to be less worried. 
We should try this! Think, “Everything will im prove. One day I will know everything. I will 
also be able to fly by myself. I will no longer need to take planes!” for example, there is a 
realization called “fast-walking,” which we can ob tain. With this attainment, we could go to 
and return from Pisa (about 40 kms. away) in ten minutes. I am not joking. Some people can 
do this. There was once a monk named Geshe Jampel Senggye. In one day someone met him while walking in a particular place, and on the same day another person saw him another 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
192 places, these two places being as far apart as Ro me and Milan. Although this geshe seemed to 
walk at a normal speed, others could not keep up with him. This was due to his having the 
realization of fast-walking. We t oo can attain such qualities.  
 
Tuesday morning, 1 March 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 53) says:  
2B4B-1C5 The method of meditation with four special features 
Thus, four thoughts regarding the Dharma  are necessary for the generation of a 
fully qualified wish to take the e ssence of this basis of leisure: 
1. The need to accomplish [the Dharma] – because all sentient beings only want 
happiness and do not want suffering, and attaining happiness and eliminating 
suffering only depends on the holy Dharma. 
2. The ability to accomplish [the Dhar ma] – because you have the external 
condition, a spiritual teacher, and the internal condition, the leisures and 
endowments. 
3. The need, also, to accomplish  [the Dharma] in this life  – because if you do not 
accomplish it within this life, it will be difficult to find the leisures and 
endowments in many [future] rebirths. 
4. The need to accomplish [the Dharma] ri ght now – because the time of death is 
uncertain. 
The third one counteracts the laziness of ab andoning it due to thinking “I will 
practice the Dharma in later lives,” and the fourth one counteracts the laziness of 
not engaging in it due to thinking “It n eeds to be accomplished in this life, but 
although it was not accomplished in earlie r years, months, and days, it is enough 
to accomplish it much later on.” It is admissible to make them into three through 
subsuming these two under “ [the need to ] accomplish it quickly.” Like that, 
remembering death can also be linked to them. In any case, as this is a lengthy 
topic it will be explained below. 
 If we wish to take the essence of this precious  human rebirth that we have obtained, we need 
to generate four thoughts in our mind. First of all we need to practice Dharma . Why is this? 
Because all sentient beings want to be happy and do not want to suffer, we need to help them to achieve happiness and to eliminate suffering  and this depends on practicing the holy 
Dharma or a spiritual path. We cannot do th is in any other way. We cannot buy their 
happiness with money, that is, no matter how ri ch we are we cannot buy happiness for them. 
Perhaps our money could give them some physic al happiness, but it cannot give them mental 
happiness. Therefore, the only thing for us to do is to practice the holy Dharma.  
 In addition, we are able to practice the Dharma . Why is this? We possess the two favorable 
conditions for this. First of all we possess th e external favorable condition of having met a 
virtuous spiritual friend or teacher, and seco ndly we possess the internal favorable condition 
of having a precious human rebirth possessing th e eighteen qualities. Due to these conditions, 
we are able to practice the Dharma. “To prac tice Dharma” means to strive to abandon all 
negative actions of body, speech, and mind and to strive to collect all virtuous actions of body, 
speech, and mind. By doing this, we can a ttain happiness in the future and eliminate 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
193 s u f f e r i n g .  W e  c a n n o t  d o  t h i s  i n  a n y  o t h e r  w a y .  T h e r e f o r e ,  w e  n e e d  t o  p u t  e f f o r t  i n t o  
practicing the Dharma. We should not fix our mind on external things such as making 
money, doing business, and so forth. We tend to  fix on external projects but as they often 
cannot be accomplished we become sad and do no t know what to do. It is not easy to have 
success in business and it is not easy to make money.  
 Then, we need to practice the Dharma in this life . Why is this? Because we have obtained the 
favorable conditions of the eight leisures and ten endowments in this life but it will be 
difficult to find such an opportunity again in our next life.  
 Then, we need to practice the Dharma right now . Why is this? Because the time of our death is 
uncertain. We might die tomorrow, or someth ing may happen later on today and we might 
even die tonight. When we will die is not sure but it is sure that death will definitely come. 
This will be explained more extensively later on.  
 We may think to practice Dharma later on in th is life but, since it is not definite that we 
will be able to do so, we need to eliminate such  laziness. Why is this? Because it is not certain 
when we will die, it could happen even in thes e very days. Therefore, we need to eliminate 
our laziness and practice the Dharma right now.  W e  n e e d  t o  p r a c t i c e  D h a r m a  i n  t h i s  l i f e  
quickly. We should not think, “Today I will  not practice Dharma, maybe I will do it 
tomorrow,” or “This year I will not practice Dh arma, maybe I will do it next year,” or “This 
month I will not practice Dharma, maybe I will do  it next month.” Thinking in this way, we 
will not practice the Dharma now and later on it will also be difficult to practice the Dharma. 
Therefore, we need to eliminate such laziness and just now, quickly, quickly, practice the 
Dharma. To do this we should remember that de ath will definitely come but we do not know 
when. Having been reborn in cyclic existence wh erever, we will definitely die. There is no one 
who will not die. And because the time of our death is uncertain we need to practice the Dharma now. Perhaps today we feel very healthy and are not sick but even this evening we could experience a strong pain in our head or  stomach and very early that next morning we 
may need to be taken to the hospital. We cannot  say that because we are not sick now, we will 
never get sick! Sometimes due to cold, due to food, or due to other conditions, we become 
sick. Due to an imbalance in the elements – eart h, water, fire, and wind – of our body, we can 
lose our life. There are many conditions that ca n take our life, and few conditions that sustain 
it and help us remain healthy. Therefore, we n eed to think, “I must pr actice the Dharma right 
now.” Thinking about death-impermanence in this  way, we will generate a stronger wish to 
practice Dharma so that at the time of death we can die happy. In short, since we accept the 
existence of future lives and wish to take a happy  rebirth, we need to practice Dharma and to 
practice it right now, not later on.  Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-1C6 Differentiated, sustained mode [of practice] 
A How to contemplate from various points of view 
B How to contemplate in particular 
2B4B-1C6A How to contemplate from various points of view 
As the mind is more significantly subdue d if you contemplate from various points 
of view, you should contemplate as explai ned above. If you cannot do that much, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
194 you should subsume them in the three101: (1) what the entity of the leisures and 
endowments is, (2) the manner in which they are greatly meaningful from a 
temporary and ultimate point of view, and (3) how difficult they are to find from 
the point of view of cause and effect. Yo u should take up each of the points 
explained above that suit you and meditate on it. 
 
We should check how to make our mind strong  in the practice of Dharma from various 
points of view. We should think about the enti ty of the leisures and endowments. With this 
precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qu alities we can attain both our temporal and 
ultimate aims. But is it easy to obtain the eigh teen qualities? It is not because we need to 
create the perfect cause for each one of them. Even if we are reborn again as a human being 
we will not necessarily have a precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities. The 
basis of the practice of Dharma is morality or  ethical discipline: the abandonment of killing, 
stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisive sp eech, harsh words, idle talk (which becomes 
heavy due to doing it often), covetousness (a mind that wants this and that), malice (the 
thought to harm), and wrong views (these in gene ral do not arise very much). This is what to 
practice Dharma means, therefore we should try to do practice as  was explained above. In this 
way we will come to consider the success of ou r future lives, which are many, more important 
than the success of this one single life. After that we will come to develop renunciation or 
definite emergence.   With this body we can achieve many temp oral things. We can set up a business, go 
dancing, climb snow mountains, swim in the oc ean… We can do whatever we want. However, 
we can also achieve our final aims, that is, we can ensure the happiness of future lives and can 
also achieve liberation or enlightenment. To do  this, we need to put effort into practicing 
Dharma whereby we will achieve our aims.   This human rebirth is difficult to find because it is difficult to create its cause. Since its 
cause is difficult to create, the result is also difficult to obtain. Without cause a result cannot 
arise. Therefore, we should practice the Dh arma. We should meditate on this precious 
human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities wh ich is difficult to find, but when found is 
very meaningful and useful. Then, having found it, we will quickly lose it. Thus, we should 
meditate on death-impermanence, thinking about the fact that death is certain, the time of 
death is uncertain, and at the time of death noth ing except the Dharma will be of any help to 
us. All our wealth, the many friends and relative s around us whose crying makes us even more 
sad, and our precious body that we have taken so much care of and have cherished, none of 
this can help us. When we die, this body becomes a corpse and even those who once liked our body will hold their nose against the bad odor and experience a sense of repulsion when 
they come near it. In the Indian tradition wh en a family member dies, many wailing woman 
gather around and follow the corpse as it is ta ken to the funeral pyre to be cremated. There is 
no benefit from this. Perhaps in the past the purpose was to show that the person had had a 
good relationship with the ot her people in the village, however nowadays these women are 
paid to cry!   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
                                             
 
101 “three” – dang gsum  is an insertion by Trijang Rinpoche 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
195 2B4B-1C6B How to contemplate in particular 
1 The difficulty in finding [the leisures and endowments] from the point of view of their cause 
First: The difficulty in finding [the leis ures and endowments] from the point of 
view of their cause. 
Generally speaking, {54} even for the attain ment of a mere happy migration, it is 
necessary to perform one of the pure virtue s such as discipline. In particular, for 
the attainment of the complete leisures and endowments, you need a lot of roots 
of virtue such as getting hold of a base through pure ethical conduct, to reinforce 
that with giving and the like, and to make connections by means of stainless 
prayers. In that case, it becomes apparent  that those who acco mplish such causes 
are very few, which is why one should th ink that, proportionately, the result – a 
general and specific base of the happy realms – is difficult to find. 
 A precious human rebirth is difficult to find from  the point of view of its cause. In order to 
take a rebirth in the happy migrations in genera l, whether as a human being, an anti-god, or a 
god, it is necessary to have created pure virtue. The basis of taking such a higher rebirth is the 
practice of morality or discipline, which is very difficult to do. Because the cause is difficult to 
create, it is difficult to find a human rebirt h. We can examine this. For example, presently 
there are about 6 billion human beings in our world but if we look at the animals, for 
example, we will see that even the ants in a sm all area of ground are more numerous. Then, if 
we look at the animals living in the ocean we will see that there are even more. Then, there 
are more hungry ghosts than animals, and more  hell beings than hungry ghosts. Therefore, 
even though human beings appear to us to be many in reality there are not so many.  
 It is recounted that one time when a lama  was teaching the lam-rim and explaining how 
difficult it is to obtain a human being, a man in the audience said to those around him that 
obviously the lama had never been to China, where there were many, many human beings, as 
otherwise he would have realized that it is not so difficult to be reborn as a human being. While China is the most populated country in our world, the Chinese people are not very 
happy. Their life is difficult and they are always worried about doing something wrong 
because they could be accused of a crime, be aten, and even killed. Although they are not 
happy, they cannot show this to others. Instead th ey must always appear to be happy. This is 
because human rights are not respected in Chin a. Therefore, even though the Chinese have 
been born as human beings, they are no bette r off than animals. Animals kill and eat each 
other. For example, as soon as the cats that li ve here at the Institute see an insect moving, 
they pounce on it and kill it, even without any wi sh or need to eat it. In  this way they create 
non-virtue. Nor do birds create virtue. However, we as human beings can create virtue, although it is may not be completely perfect.  We can make a determination, for example, 
thinking, “I will try never to kill a single sentient  being,” and then strive to keep this promise. 
This is one morality. We can also make the resolu tions “I will not steal a single thing,” “I will 
try to never engage in sexual misconduct,” “I wi ll try to never lie or cheat other people,” and 
so forth. Even if we cannot practice all ten virt ues, we should at least try to practice one of 
them. This will become the practice of morality th at acts as a cause for us to take rebirth in 
the happy migrations.   Having achieved a precious human rebirth po ssessing all eighteen qualities in a complete 
way, we need to practice morality as the basis. On top of that, we need to practice generosity, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
196 patience, and the other perfections. However,  among them we mainly need to practice 
generosity: the generosity of giving material th ings, the generosity of giving protection, and 
the generosity of giving the Dharma or our knowle dge. We need to do this from a good heart, 
not as a business or as a way to make money.  
 In addition to the practice of morality and generosity, we need to make pure or stainless 
prayers in order to obtain a precious human rebi rth. However, it is not easy to create such 
virtuous actions. Having taken vows, for exampl e, even though we m ay not transgress a root 
vow, we often transgress the smaller vows. It is  also difficult to abandon the ten non-virtues 
and practice the ten virtues perfectly. Therefore, it  is difficult to create the cause of a precious 
human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities. However, because we now have this rebirth, 
we need to make sure that we obtain another one in our next life so that in this way we can slowly improve and gain realizations that le ad to attaining the small enlightenment, the 
middling enlightenment, or the great enlighte nment of buddhahood. We need to practice 
creating the causes of such a precious human re birth. If we do not create the causes, it is 
logical that we will not obtain the result. The re sult is difficult to obtain because in order to 
obtain it we need to create causes of similar ty pe. It is not that non-virtuous actions bring the 
result of happiness, nor that virtuous actions br ing suffering. Therefore, if we want to have a 
happy result we need to create its specific caus e. Because the cause is difficult to create, the 
result, a human rebirth, is difficult to obtain , and a precious human rebirth is even more 
difficult to find. In fact it is rare, only  a very few people have such a rebirth.  
 In short, among those who take a higher rebi rth, those with a precious human rebirth are 
very few. For example, in a family of ten childr en maybe only one or two will be interested in 
the Dharma or spiritual practice, most of them will not be interested in it and will only be 
interested in mundane, material things. We see can this with our own eyes. We need to 
examine our own world as in this way we will  come to understand this subject better.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The difficulty of finding [the leisures and endowments] from the point of view of the result 
The difficulty of finding [the leisures and endowments] from the point of view of 
the result. Meditate on the fact that, from the po int of view of the beings in the bad 
migrations, different in rank from us, ev en the mere happy realms seem hard to 
attain, and from the point of view of bein gs in happy migrations, of the same rank, 
too, those with the distinguished leisures
102 are extremely rare. Geshe Dolpa laid 
great emphasis on this. He said that all other teachings come about brought on by 
this. As it is like this, you should strive accordingly. 
 
In general a higher rebirth and in particular a precious human rebirth are very difficult to 
obtain because we need to create causes that are similar to the result, and we create such c a u s e s  o n l y  v e r y  r a r e l y .  I f  w e  t h i n k  i n  t h i s  w a y ,  w e  w i l l  d e v e l o p  t h e  w i s h  t o  p r a c t i c e  t h e  
Dharma. For example, we should meditate on de ath-impermanence thinki ng: death is certain, 
the time of death is uncertain, and at the ti m e  o f  d e a t h  o n l y  t h e  D h a r m a  w i l l  b e  o f  a n y  
                                             
 
102 i.e., the leisures complemented by the endowments 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
197 benefit to us. We should also meditate on th is precious human rebirth and its cause, pure 
morality, on the basis of which we also need to  practice generosity and make stainless prayers. 
By thinking in this way, we will generate the wish to practice the Dh arma. If we think about 
these subjects as well as the meditations of middl ing beings and great beings, we will want to 
practice the Dharma even more.  
 Due to seeing the benefits of practicing the Dharma, we will want to practice it. For example, if we understand the benefits of inve sting our money, for example, the interest it 
will bring, we will want to invest it and will  engage in investing it in the stock market. 
Likewise, understanding that if we sow seeds in the ground we will later reap the result of a good harvest, we will sow the seeds, do the nece ssary work to make them sprout, and reap the 
result. Likewise, if we use this body well, we will again obtain the result of another precious 
human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualitie s in the future. Understanding this, we will 
want to practice Dharma and will actual ly engage in practicing the Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2 How to take the essence: the three beings’ mode of applying the path103
 
A Generating certainty with regard to the general presentation of the path 
B The actual way of taking its essence 
The second one has two points: Generating  certainty with regard to the general 
presentation of the path and the ac tual way of taking its essence. 
2B4B-2A Generating certainty with regard to the general presentation of the path 
1 How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the paths of the three [types of] beings 
2 Giving reasons for gradual guidance from the point of view of the three [types of] beings  
The first one has two points: How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the 
paths of the three [types of] beings and giving reasons for gradual guidance from 
the point of view of the three [types of] beings. 
 
We have obtained this precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities, therefore we 
need to take it essence. How should we do th is? There are three ways of practicing the path 
according to the three types of beings.  
 “The general presentation of the path” refers to the path of small beings, path of middling 
beings, and path of great beings. It does not refer to the path of accumulation, path of 
preparation, path of seeing, path of meditation, and path of no-more-learning.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A1 How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the paths of the three [types of] 
beings 
A How the meaning of all the excellent teachings [of the Buddha] is subsumed under the 
accomplishment of two objectives 
First: As everything the Buddha did, in the beginning the generation of the mind 
[of enlightenment], in the middle the accumu lation of the collections, and at the 
end manifest, complete buddhahood, was done  for the welfare of sentient beings 
alone, all his Dharma teachings also on ly accomplish the welfare of sentient 
                                              
103 JN: Is this correct? It seems like two outlines have been merged into one. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
198 beings. That being so, the goal to be acco mplished, the welfare of sentient beings, 
is twofold: temporarily high status and ultimately certain goodness.  
 
All the Buddha’s teachings are included in the pa th of small beings, path of middling beings, 
and path of great beings. The pa th of small beings includes th e recognition of the precious 
human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities, that  is it very meaningful, that by means of it 
all temporal and final aims can be attained, and that it is quickly lost and difficult to find 
again. We should think about th e precious human rebirth from th e point of view of its cause 
and from the point of view of the result. From the point of view of its cause, it is necessary to 
practice pure morality and so forth. That fact that it is difficult to find can also be understood 
by means of examples or analogies, many of  which are mentioned in the teachings on the 
stages of the path.   While we have obtained such a rebirth presen tly, it will quickly be lost. Therefore, we 
should think about death-impermanence in relati on to the three points: death is certain, the 
time of death is uncertain, and at the time of death only the Dharma can be of any help. Each 
of these three points is further divided into thr ee for a total of nine points or rounds that are 
to be meditated. We should also meditate on the law of cause and results, for example, that 
non-virtuous actions bring the result of rebi rth in the lower realms. The hell realms are 
composed of eight hot hells, eight cold hells,  various neighboring hells, and the occasional 
hells. There are also different types of hungry  ghosts: those with outer obscurations, those 
with inner obscurations, and those with both outer and inner obscurations. When those with 
outer obscurations look for water and, seeing a ri ver in the distance, actually arrive at there, 
all they see is a dry river bed. Likewise, if th ey see a tree laden with delicious fruit in the 
distance, when they get there all they see is a withered tree without any leaves or fruit. Because 
of these outer obscurations they cannot find  either food or drink. Those with inner 
obscurations, on the other hand, are able to fi nd some food but when they put it in their 
mouth and swallow it, it becomes like molten ir on that burns their throat and stomach. Some 
other hungry ghosts have both outer and inner obscurations. In general, hungry ghosts have 
stomachs that are as big as mountains but their throats are tiny and narrow. If we were to be 
reborn as a hungry ghost we would not be able to bear this suffering. In spite of this, we can be reborn in this state due to th e negativities we have committed. 
 Then we should examine the situation of anim als. Those that are taken care of by human 
beings have a little better life, whereas those that  live in the ocean and th ose that live wild on 
the ground eat each other, are stupid, and so fo rth. This is all the result of non-virtuous 
actions. Seeing this, we must abandon creating  negative actions and seek protection from 
such suffering. Looking around, we will see th at only the Three Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha, can help us. Theref ore, we need to develop fait h and confidence in them and 
request them to protect us from the suffering  of the lower realms. Right now we have not 
been born in the lower realms, but fearing that we will fall into them into the future and 
experience great suffering there, we ask the Buddh a to help us. The Buddha helps us by giving 
us teachings. Then, by practicing the Dharma, the actual refuge, we will be protected from 
suffering by actualizing true cessations throug h meditating true paths. This, the Dharma 
Jewel, is the actual refuge that can protect us from all suffering. The Sangha are like our 
helpers. For example, by following the example of how they practice the Dharma, we too will 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
199 be able to stop committing non-virtuous action s, whereby we will be protected from falling 
into the lower realms. Hence, we go for re fuge to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.  
 When we go for refuge to the Three Jewels , we need to abandon something specific in 
relation to each one of them. Thus, if we go for refuge to the Buddha as our final refuge, we 
should abandon taking mundane gods as our final refuge. If we go for refuge to the Dharma, 
w e  s h o u l d  a b a n d o n  h a r m i n g  e v e n  o n e  s i n g l e  b e i n g .  I f  w e  g o  f o r  r e f u g e  t o  t h e  S a n g h a ,  w e  should follow virtuous friends and abandon non-vi rtuous friends, such as Tirthikas, Samkyas, 
Vaishashikas, Charvakas, and other followers of the ancient Hindu traditions.   I n  a d d i t i o n ,  w h e n  w e  g o  f o r  r e f u g e  t o  t h e  Three Jewels, we need to practice something 
specific in relation to each one of them. Th us, with respect to the Buddha, we need to 
consider any image of a buddha as if it were an actual living buddha and treat it with respect. 
With respect to the Dharma, because they teac h us how to meditate and cease suffering we 
should treat Dharma texts with  respect by not walking on them or over them and by not 
sitting on them, and instead put them in a high place. With respect to the Sangha, we should 
respect all monks and nuns by th inking that they are our spiritual friends who help us in our 
practice. There are also general precepts of refu ge that need to be maintained which can be 
understood by reading about this subject. If we go for refuge to the Three Jewels there will be 
many benefits, as was mentioned before. On the other hand, if we do not go for refuge, there 
will be only bad results.   If we create a non-virtuous action we must develop regret for it and make a determination to not commit it again. Then we should go for refuge to the Budd ha, Dharma, and Sangha, 
and generate the mind of enlightenment toward all sentient beings. Then we should apply an 
actual antidote by reciting mantras or sutras, doing prostrations, or doing some other type of 
virtuous action. For example, we could recite the hundred-syllable mantra of Vajrasattva or 
just his short mantra OM VAJRASATTVA AH or OM VAJRASATTVA HUM. We should 
try to do some purification every evening before going to bed. Thinking that we have purified 
all our negative actions, we sh ould feel happy and then lie down while trying to generate a 
good heart, the mind of enlightenment, compa ssion, or love, and then slowly fall asleep. In 
this way, while we sleep, we will continue to pr actice the Dharma. This is of great benefit, so 
we should try to do it.   If I have said anything useful, please try to put it  into practice. If not, just leave it aside! In 
either case, try to keep your mind relaxed and to not be agitated or worried. Instead, try to 
relax! Try to have less desire for material things  and try to be more cont ent and satisfied. This 
is one way to practice the Dharma in daily life.   Tuesday afternoon, 1 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 54-55) says:  
B How lesser beings attain high status  
{55} As for the undertaking to attain the former: everything that has been set forth 
is included in the actual cycle of teachi ngs for lesser beings or in the cycle of 
teachings common to lesser beings. Special lesser beings do not mostly act for the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
200 sake of this life, pursuing [instead] the excellence of high status in future lives and 
engaging in achieving the causes for that. In the Lamp on the Path104 it says: 
 
Whoever pursues by any means, 
The happiness of samsara only, Just for his own benefit, Should be known as the least of beings. 
 
“High status” ( mngon mtho ) refers to rebirth in a higher realm.  
 All the many different kinds of teaching s that were given by Buddha Shakyamuni are 
included in the actual cycle of teachings of le sser beings or in cycle of teachings that is 
common to lesser beings, that is, which is shared by middling and great beings.  
 Lesser or small beings are of two types: mere  small beings and special small beings. Mere 
small beings are those who work for the happiness of this life, whereas sp ecial small beings are 
those who do not take care of this life but inst ead emphasize the happiness of future lives, as 
they wish to improve in each successive life.   There is an event related to this that happe ned sometime in the past in Tibet. A man in 
the Tibetan government, who had not studied much  lam-rim but had heard just a little bit of 
teachings, claimed that great beings are poli ticians who belong to the government, that 
middling beings are the rich business men of Lhas a, and that small beings are the poor monks 
of Sera, Ganden, and Drepung Monasteries who had poor clothing, food, and so forth. The 
person to whom he said this knew the lam-rim well and only laughed at him, saying that it 
would follow that the debating partner (Tsensha b) of His Holiness the Dalai Lama was a small 
being! Another minister, who knew the Dharma we ll, said that politicians are not great beings 
but that monks are because they are rich inside . We cannot see others’ inner realizations. It 
can happen that externally someone has an attrac tive body, wears fine clothing, and so forth, 
but this does not mean that he or she is rich in inner qualities. In fact, a beggar living on the road might be richer in qualities, even though his clothing is poor and his body unattractive.  
 In short, mere small beings th ink only of the needs of this li fe, food, money, and so forth, 
whereas special small beings think to practice  Dharma by observing morality, practicing 
generosity, and making prayers in order to crea te the causes of obtaining a rebirth of high 
status, that is, a precious human rebirth possessi ng the eighteen qualities. Without creating 
the causes, it is not possible to obtain the result. 
 Atisha in his text Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment  said that someone who strives only to 
obtain the happiness of cyclic existence and to take  care of him or herself alone is the least of 
beings. Such people only think of themselves and the happiness of this  life. However, even 
thinking of future lives and practicing in order to create the causes for happiness in the future 
is not of great benefit as it is still only a rebirt h in cyclic existence. As long as we are born in 
cyclic existence, we will have to experience  the different types of sufferings. Therefore, 
t h i n k i n g  i n  t h i s  w a y ,  w e  n e e d  t o  g e n e r a t e  a  s t r o n g  i n t e r e s t  i n  a n d  a s p i r a t i o n  t o  a c h i e v e  
nirvana, the state passed beyond cyclic existence,  and for this reason to engage in practicing 
the Dharma. This motivation is better, therefore we need to generate it.  
 
                                             
 
104 Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment  by Atisha 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
201 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How intermediate beings achieve the certain goodness of liberation 
There are two kinds of certain goodness: (1 ) the liberation that is merely release 
from samsara and (2) omniscience. In this regard everything that has been set forth 
beginning from the vehicles of hearers and solitary realizers is included in the 
actual cycle of teachings for intermediate  beings or in the cycle of teachings 
common to intermediate beings. Intermed iate beings develop disenchantment 
with existence as a whole and, having ma de the liberation that is release from 
existence for their own welfare their object  of attainment, they engage in method 
for that, the three trainings. In the Lamp on the Path  it says: 
 
Indifferent105 to the pleasures of existence, 
One desists from evil deeds –  
Whoever pursues only personal peace 
Is called “an intermediate being.” 
 
Middling or intermediate beings strive to attain definite or certain goodness, which is of two types. The first type of definite goodness is libe ration from cyclic existence or the achievement 
o f  n i r v a n a .  T h e  s e c o n d  t y p e  o f  d e f i n i t e  g o odness is the omniscient state of buddhahood. 
Those who abandon cyclic existence and achieve ni rvana are the hearers and solitary realizers. 
All of the Buddha’s teachings were given in order to take care of the different types of beings, 
such as the Hinayana hearers and solitary realizer s. For example, he gave the first teaching on 
the four noble truths in order to take care of  Hinayana disciples. Some of these teachings are 
the actual path of middling beings and some are common to the path of small beings and 
some to the path of great beings.  
 How can we achieve the path of middling beings ? To do so, we need to generate a wish to 
abandon the entirety of cyclic ex istence. “Cyclic existence” refe rs to the constant joining by 
the force of afflictions and actions. By joining again and again [with aggregates ], we circle, like 
a prayer wheel, in cyclic existence. In other wo rds, we are born again and again in the six 
realms: the three bad migrations  and the three happy migrations. The three bad migrations 
are the hell realm, hungry ghost realm, and an imal realm, whereas the three happy migrations 
are the human realm, anti-god realm, and god realm. We circle in these realms, going up and 
down, but not yet getting out of them.   When the Buddha taught  the four noble truths, he first said that it is necessary to 
recognize sufferings, that it is then necessary to  abandon the causes of suffering, that they are 
to be abandoned by meditating the path, and that  we thereby actualize cessation. In short, we 
need to recognize suffering as suffering, to ab andon the causes, to actualize cessations, and to 
meditate paths. Where do true sufferings come from? They come from true origins. We need 
to recognize that these origins, the source of true sufferings, are contaminated actions and the 
mental afflictions. Due to the afflictions, we enga ge in negative actions that bring the result of 
suffering. We need to abandon th e causes of suffering – actions and afflictions. If we abandon 
them, what will we achieve? We will achieve tr ue cessations. How we do this? We do so by 
                                             
 
105 srid pa’i bde la rgyab phyogs shing  – lit. : “having turned one’s back on  the happiness/pleasures of existence” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
202 meditating true paths. What ar e the true paths to be meditated? Mainly we meditate on the 
selflessness of persons and the se lflessness of phenomena. In th e context of the Hinayana, the 
selflessness of persons refers to the lack of a self-supporting su bstantially existent self, this 
being the object of negation. The realization of the selflessness of the person or the being acts 
as the antidote to the conception of a self (self- grasping), that is, to the conception of a self-
supporting substantially existent self. This real ization has the opposite mode of apprehension 
to the conception of a self, therefore it can aban don it. This conception of a self is the first 
link, ignorance, among the twel ve links. When this is aban doned, we abandon creating 
karma, the second link of karmic formations. When we no longer create karmic formations, 
we will not deposit imprints on the consciousness,  the third link. In this  way, we will be able 
to cease the suffering results: consciousness, na me and form, the six sources, contact, feeling, 
birth, and aging-death. Thus, we need to elimin ate the causes. The first link is ignorance, the 
second is karmic formations, the third is cons ciousness, the fourth is name and form, the 
fifth is the six sources, the sixth is contact (t he coming together of a consciousness, a sense 
power, and an object), and the seventh is feelin g (which is produced by contact – for example, 
contact with something soft produces happy f eeling, whereas contact with a thorn produces 
suffering and contact with something between these two produces neutral feeling). This 
produces the eighth link, craving. When this in creases there is the ninth link, grasping. This 
produces the tenth link, becoming or existenc e (the increase in strength of the karmic 
formations deposited due to ignorance on the co nsciousness). This produces birth (birth in 
this context refers to conception in the womb as a human being). This then gives rise to the 
twelfth link, aging-death. “Aging” includes the fa ct that sometimes, having been conceived, we 
die without ever being born, and that sometime s a grandfather or grandmother remain alive 
while their grandchild dies, there being no fixe d order with respect to death, that first old 
people die and then younger people. “Death” means that having taken this body, the life-
faculty or life-power, which keeps the connec tion between the body and mind, ceases to 
function whereby the mind leaves the body and it is no longer conjoined with feeling. Even if 
we wish to live for 80 years, 90 years, or 100 years, or even for 110 or 115 years, it is unlikely 
that this will actually happen.  On the other hand, some people do not want to grow old 
because they recognize the problems of old age (for example, that some old people become 
like small children) and do not wish to live longer than 70 or 75 years. Someone once asked me to pray that he die before he reached the ag e of 75 because at this age most people cannot 
go to the toilet alone, wash th emselves, get out of bed, and so forth. I asked him whether he 
was sure that having died he would be reborn as a human being, but he was not worried about this!   In short, we should try to improve. We should  practice the path of middling beings as in 
this way we will achieve liberation from cyclic existence, that is, nirvana. What is the method 
or cause for achieving this? It is to practice th e three higher trainings: the higher training in 
morality, the higher training in concentration,  and the higher training in wisdom. These are 
the main objects to be practiced. Atisha’s Lamp on the Path of Enlightenment  says that we need 
to give up attachment to or turn away from the happiness of cyclic existe nce. We also need to 
avoid non-virtuous actions and strive to achieve personal peace, that is, the cessation of all 
sufferings. Those who are interested in achieving their own personal peace or nirvana are called “middling beings,” since they are neither small nor great beings.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
203  We, on the other hand, are attached to the pl easures of cyclic existence. For example, we 
are attached to the five desirable objects. We  are attached to attractive forms (shapes and 
colors) which are objects of the eye consciousne ss. When we see such forms, we feel happy. 
On the other hand, when we see unattractive forms, which are di fficult to bear, we experience 
unhappiness and become angry. Because of atta chment and anger we engage in actions that 
bring suffering. We are also attached to pleasa nt sounds, for example, singing or chanting, 
which are objects of the ear consciousness. We  are attached to pleasant odors, such as 
perfumes, which are objects of the nose consci ousness. We are attached to good tastes, 
delicious foods, which are objects of the tongue  consciousness. We are attached to pleasant 
tangible objects, which are objects of the body  consciousness. Due to these attachments, we 
engage in negative actions that bring the result of suffering. For this reason, we need to give 
up attachment to attractive forms, pleasant sounds, fragrant odors, delicious tastes, and 
pleasant tangible objects. We need to turn away from them. In our everyday life, the sense 
power first engages an object, then this produc es consciousness, due to which different ideas 
arise. We need to give up all such attachment to the pleasures of cyclic existence, whereby we 
will be able to achieve nirvana or  personal or individual peace.  
 To do this, we need to practice morality as a basis. For example, we  can take the five lay 
precepts, or even just one, two, three, or fo ur of them. Having taken these vows, we should 
then safeguard them. In this way, we practice th e base of all that is good – morality. If the 
base is good, something good will rise from it. For example, if we build a house on a stable base or foundation, the house itself will be stable , whereas if the base is not strong and stable 
whatever is built upon it will collapse. Therefor e, we need to practice morality. In addition, 
we also need to practice concentration, for ex ample, calm abiding. We can take any object 
that we like as an object. Some people even ta ke the image of the flame of a candle and try to 
focus on it. However, the best object is a holy image, thus we should visualize such an image 
and then try to focus our mind on it. We ca n also meditate and develop concentration on 
emptiness or selflessness, however this is not very easy. In short, first we should develop 
concentration so as to achieve calm abiding and then on this basis achieve special insight. 
This is discussed in detail in the context of the path of great beings. 
 When attachment arises it is because we see an  object as attractive. To counteract this we 
should think that it is very ugly. By meditating in this way, our mental image of the object will 
change and our attachment will diminish. If we have anger, the mental  attitude wishing to 
harm ourselves or others, we should apply the antidote of love, the mental attitude wishing 
ourselves and others happiness and the causes of happiness. Love is the opposite of anger, 
therefore by trying to develop love for ours elves and other sentient beings our anger will 
diminish.   When strong pride arises, we should exam ine where the I is. We can ask ourselves, 
“Among the five aggregates which one is the I?  Is the form aggregate the I? Is the feeling 
aggregate the I? Is the discrimination aggregat e the I? Is the compositional factors aggregate 
the I? Is the consciousness aggregate the I?” Then , among the form aggregate, “Is the eye the I? 
Is the ear the I? Is the nose the I? Is the to ngue the I? Is the body the I?” We should do 
analytical meditation in this way, trying to find  the I. However, we will not be able to find it. 
Our body is composed of the four elements, ther efore we can also ask ourselves: “Is the earth 
element, the solidity of our body, the I? Is the water element, the liquids in our body, the I? Is 
the fire element, the heat in our body, the I? Is the wind element, the movement in our body, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
204 the I?” If we check in this way, we will not be able to find the I, whereby the pride thinking 
“I” will diminish.  
 In addition, ignorance arises in our mind, for example, the ignorance conceiving a self-
supporting substantially existent I. When this  happens, we should meditate on dependent-
relation. The I or self or person or being is im puted on the basis of any of the five aggregates. 
If we examine this, we will find that the I depe nds on the five aggregates, that the person is 
imputed by thought on the basis of any of the five aggregates. Therefore, the person depends 
on the five aggregates. The person also depend s on causes and conditions, for example, on 
karma. The person also depends on the fath er and mother as our body comes from the 
combination of the semen and blood of our pa rents into which our mind entered and then 
the embryo developed through various stages. Th e person is also dependent on parts. Thus, 
the person is only an imputati on by thought on the basis of any of the five aggregates. We 
should meditate on dependent-relation in this way as doing so will el iminate ignorance or the 
conception of a self or the view of the transitory collection.  
 At times the doubt that thinks “Maybe this, maybe that, maybe yes, maybe no” arises. In 
order to counteract it we need to unde rstand the nature of all phenomena.  
 In short, we need to meditate on ugliness as  the antidote to attachment, on love as the 
antidote to anger, on dependent-relation as the antidote to ignora nce, on which of the 
elements, sources, and so forth is the I as th e antidote to pride, and so forth. Tantric 
practitioners can also imagine that all phenom ena including their own body become empty, 
that from the empty state arises  a seed-syllable which is the nature of mind, and that this 
transforms into oneself as a deity such as  Tara, Yamantaka, Chakrasamvara, Chenrezig 
Gyalwa Gyatso, Avalokiteshvara,  and so forth. Having receiv ed an empowerment, we can 
visualize our body as a deity and so forth. Ho wever, even without an empowerment, we can 
meditate on emptiness, love, compassion, and impermanence. For exampl e, we can think “All 
compounded phenomena are impermanent becaus e they change momentarily.” They change 
even in the instant of a fingersnap. A fingersnap can be further divided into sixty-five parts 
and things change even in one of these parts, th ey do not abide for even this length of time 
but continually mutate. For the reason that they change momentarily, all compounded 
phenomena are impermanent.  We can also meditate on the uncertainty of cyclic existence. Sometimes we are in high 
positions, sometimes we are even in prison. So metimes we are rich, then later on we lose 
everything and become poor. Similarly, the poor sometimes become rich. In this way, there is 
no certainty. Things are constantly changing . Today someone is our good friend, tomorrow 
something may happen and he or she becomes ou r worst enemy. Things are always changing, 
thus they are impermanent. There is no certaint y at all in cyclic existence. Even our friends 
are uncertain, for a while they are our good fr iends and then they change. We often see in 
our world that, having happily given birth to a chil d, a couple later begins to argue, then they 
separate, and then they no longer even want to  see each other. This happens more and more 
often. Why? This shows that the nature of cyclic existence is un certainty, nothing is fixed or 
certain. We should meditate th is way on true sufferings.  
 A l s o  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o  t r u e  s u f f e r i n g s ,  w e  s h o u l d  e x a m i n e  t h e  f a c t  t h a t  t h i s  b o d y  i s  a  contaminated, appropriated aggregate. It is an  illustration of a true suffering. We should 
check in what way it is a true suffering. This body is the nature of suffering. Due to it, we 
experience the suffering of suffering, the suff ering of change, and pervasive suffering. The 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
205 suffering of suffering is the experience of actu al pain, for example, kidney pain, pain in the 
liver, pain in the lungs, and so forth. Thus, to that which is already the nature of suffering is 
added pain. The suffering of change refers to th at which is for a time pleasure. For example, 
when we lie in the sun on the beach, initially we  experience pleasure but the longer we stay in 
the sun the more we begin to burn and to experi ence suffering. Therefore, “change” refers to 
the fact that something is initially happiness and then transforms into suffering. Another 
example of this suffering is if we eat delicious f ood and keep on eating it, because it is gives us 
pleasure, eventually we will come to have a stomach ache and experience pain. Pervasive 
suffering is the fact that our body is pervaded by suffering in that from the crown of our head 
to the soles of our feet we experience pain, for example, when pricked with a needle. This 
experience shows that our entire body is perv aded by suffering. This is the explanation of 
pervasive suffering in relation to our body, howe ver it can also be understand in terms of all 
cyclic existence in that suffering pervades the lo west of hot hells up to the Peak of Existence. 
All beings experience suffering. For example,  human beings, whether those in the highest 
positions, those in middling positions, or those in  the lowest positions, all of them experience 
physical and mental suffering. The worst is ment al suffering, for example, worry about losing 
one’s possessions. This leads us to thinking ho w we can cheat others while at the same time 
maintaining our reputation of being honest an d so forth. All of these sufferings are true 
sufferings.   The causes of true sufferings are actions and afflictions. “Actions” refers to all types of 
actions. Bad actions bring problems.   In brief, because the nature of cyclic existenc e is suffering we should wish to give it up. 
Even the things that appear to bring happine ss in the end only bring suffering. They too are 
the nature of suffering. In fact, all the plea sures and happiness of cyclic existence are the 
nature of suffering and bring suffering. By thin king about this, we will generate the wish to 
get out of cyclic existence and to achieve libera tion or nirvana. Hinayan a hearers and solitary 
realizers take the mental afflictions as their objects of abandonment and thereby also abandon 
contaminated actions. In this way, they achiev e their own happiness or peace. This is the aim 
of middling beings.   True origins are actions and afflictions. How many actions and afflictions are there? There 
are many. The root afflictions are attachment, an ger, ignorance, pride, doubt, and afflicted 
views. The latter are also further divided into th e five: the view of the transitory collection, 
extreme view, the view holding a bad view as a supreme view, the view holding bad conduct as 
good conduct, and the wrong view that the law of  actions and results, past and future lives, 
and the Three Jewels do not exist.  In this way there are ten afflic tions or ten subtle-increasers. 
Then, from the point of view of the Madh yamaka School there are twenty secondary 
afflictions. They have different  natures and functions, but they  always bring a bad result. We 
should try to learn about all of them.  Then, in terms of actions we often talk about “karma.” There is karma that is both created 
and accumulated, karma that is accumulated bu t not created, karma that is created but not 
accumulated, and karma that is neither create d nor accumulated. An action that is both 
created and accumulated is one for which we en gage in the preparation. For example, going 
to war wishing to kill our enemies (the preparat ion) and then killing someone and rejoicing in 
it. An example of an action that is accumulate d but not created is not actually killing other 
people but sending others to kill, this being the type of action that Geor ge W. Bush creates by 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
206 sending soldiers to Iraq. Although he does not ac tually do the action of killing with his body, 
mentally he accumulates the action of killing . On the other hand, a soldier who does not 
want to kill but is ordered to do so and then kills someone even though he does not want to 
kill commits an action that is created but not accumulated. An action that is neither 
accumulated nor created is, for example, to acci dentally step on and kill an insect. In this 
case, we did not have the motivation wishing to kill and therefore lack the preparation. There 
is an action, a karma, but it is neither accumulated nor created.  
 Then there are black actions,  white actions, and mixed black and white actions. There are 
actions of body, speech, and mind. Then from th e point of view of cyclic existence there are 
projecting actions and actualizing actions. For example, we take rebirth due to a projecting 
action, this being an action that projects a result. There are many, many different types of 
actions. Karma is thus very deep and not easy to understand.  
 In short, everyday we should try to collect virtuous actions and avoid committing non-
virtuous actions. This is our job in everyday life. It will bring the result of a higher rebirth in 
the future, one in which we will experience en joyment and be able to practice Dharma, and 
perhaps even attain enlightenment or buddhahood  and then manifest in the many different 
world systems in order to teach and benefit sent ient beings in all these places. We need to 
achieve the state of happiness.  
 Wednesday morning, 2 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D How great beings attain omniscience 
There are two means of attaining omniscienc e: the great vehicle of secret mantra 
and of the perfections. These two are cont ained in the cycle of teachings of great 
beings. Since great beings are under the power of great compassion, having made 
enlightenment their object of attainment in order to bring all the sufferings of 
sentient beings to an end, they train in the six perfections, the two stages, etc. In 
the Lamp on the Path  it says: 
 
He whose own mind is affected by suffering, 
Who thus yearns to bring to an end All the suffering of others completely, {56} Such a one is a superior being. 
 As for the means by which th ese beings attain enlightenment, they are set forth 
under two [headings]: the perfections and mantra. 
 The buddhas are omniscient. There are two ways of attaining omniscience: (1) by means of 
the secret mantra vehicle and (2) by means of the perfection vehicle. The word “mantra” is 
composed of the syllable man, meaning mind, and tra, meaning protection. Therefore, mantra 
is “that which protects the mind .” The word “tantra” means continuum; it includes the tantra 
of base, tantra of path, and tantra of result.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
207   Both secret mantra and the perfection vehi cle are included in the cycle of teachings of 
great beings. A great being is one whose mind is  controlled by compassion. Wishing to free all 
sentient beings from suffering, they take enlightenment or buddhahood as their object of 
attainment. Then, in order to do this state, they  engage in the practice of the six perfections 
and the two stages of learners. The six perfecti ons are the perfections of generosity, morality, 
patience, joyous effort, concentration, and wi sdom. The two stages are the generation stage 
and completion stage. In order to attain enlighte nment, we need to practice all of these. Great 
beings understand that all sentient beings, like themselves, are suffering, and therefore, 
wishing to put an end to all their suffering, de termine to attain enlightenment. Such beings 
do not think of themselves alone.  
 The word “being,” kye bu (skys bu ) in Tibetan and parusha  in Sanskrit, means “one who is 
able,” that is, one who is able to attain enligh tenment. To attain this state, beings practice 
sutra or the mahayana perfection vehicle, and then the tantra or mantra vehicle. It is said that 
it is possible to reach up to the tenth grou nd by means of the sutra path, but that a 
bodhisattva on the tenth ground must necessaril y enter the tantra path and achieve the actual 
clear light, whereby he attain s buddhahood, the union of the actual clear light and pure 
illusory body, or the state of Vajradhara. We n eed to understand this and to try to practice 
accordingly.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E Elucidating the sources of the term “three beings” 
The term “three beings” is mentioned in many texts such as the Compendium of 
Ascertainments  and the Commentary on the Treasury .106 
 
“The three beings” are mentioned in the Compendium of Ascertainments  by Asanga, which sets 
out many different types of beings and the diffe rent names for them. They are also mentioned 
in the commentary on the Treasury of Manifest Dharma . Since we are beings, parusha , we are 
capable. Capable of what? We are capable of learning and studying and of attaining inner 
realizations and qualities such as  calm abiding and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
F Clearing up doubt 
Although, with regard to small beings, th ere are both those wh o devote themselves 
to this life and those who devo te themselves to future lives, this is about the latter. 
One should consider them to be engaging in the unmistaken means to high status. 
 
Small beings or beings of small capacity are of two types. One type thinks of and puts effort 
only into this life, whereas the other type puts  effort into achieving the happiness of future 
lives. Among these two, in this context we are discussing the latter, i. e., those who think of 
and emphasize the next life. In order to attain a higher rebirth in the next life it is necessary 
to practice an unmistaken or perfect method, th is being meditation on relying on a guru, the 
precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen  qualities, its entity and qualities, its 
                                              
106 Vasubandhu’s Auto- Commentary on the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge  cf. Note 18 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
208 meaningfulness, the difficulty of finding it from  the point of view of cause, examples, and 
number, the fact that having been found it do es not last long due to death-impermanence, 
and the need to abandon non-virtuous actions an d create virtuous actions, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim says: 
2B4B-2A2 Giving reasons for gradual guidance from the point of view of the three [types of] 
beings 
A The purpose of guiding someone by way of the paths of the three beings B Giving reasons for such gradual guidance 
The second one has two points: what is th e purpose of guiding someone by way of 
the paths of the three beings and givi ng reasons for such gradual guidance. 
2B4B-2A2A The purpose of guiding someone by means of the paths of the three beings 
First: Thus, although it is explained in te rms of the three beings, the path of great 
beings contains within it the paths of the two other [beings], which is why Master 
Ashvagosha says that these two are bran ches of the Mahayana path. Consequently, 
here, they are not guidance  o n  t h e  p a t h  o f  s m a l l  b e ings who make only the 
happiness of existence their object of atta inment, nor on the path of intermediate 
beings who make only liberation from sams ara for their own benefit their object of 
attainment. Rather, through considering some paths common to those two to be 
preparatory practices leading to the path of great beings, they are taken to be 
branches for training in the path of great beings.  
 
Why is it necessary to lead someone in the path s of the three beings, the small, middling, and 
great? Although there are many teachings on th e objects of practice of the three beings, the 
path of small beings and the path  of middling beings are included  in the path of great beings. 
In fact Ashvagosha said that these two paths are branches of the path of the great vehicle, that 
is, they are causes of it. Due to this, prior to practicing the Mahayana path it is necessary to 
practice the paths of the small and middling bein gs as a cause for the Mahayana path. This is 
because in some contexts “branch” can mean “cau se.” Thus, we need to practice the path of 
small beings followed by the path of middling be ings and only then should we gradually enter 
into the path of great beings. Fo r example, in the case of getting  an education, we must first 
go to elementary school and then to middle or  high school, and only having finished these 
two schools can we go to university. Just as  without completing th e first two schools we 
cannot go to university, similarly we must firs t complete the paths of small and middle beings 
before entering the Mahayana path.   The beings who wish to obtain the happiness of cyclic existence, that is, who take this as 
their object of attainment, are small beings or  beings of small capaci ty. Those who wish to 
mainly achieve freedom from cyclic existence are middling beings or beings of middling capacity. They strive to achieve nirvana for th emselves, without thinking of others. Thinking 
only of their own purpose, they wish to achieve liberation from cyclic existence. To do this 
they must engage in the path of middling beings.   Thus, the path of small beings and the path of middling beings can be considered to be 
like preliminaries to the path of great beings . Thus, we first go for refuge to the Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha, and try to safeguard the pr ecepts of refuge. Then we guard the law of 
cause and result and act accordingly. Then we try to understand the four noble truths and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
209 train in the three higher trainings of morality , concentration, and wisdom. All this must be 
done prior to engaging in th e Mahayana path. It is similar to the need to do the six 
preparatory practices prior to engagi ng in meditation on the lam-rim. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B Giving reasons for such gradual guidance 
1 The actual reasons 
2 The purpose 
The second one has two points: the actual reasons and the purpose. 
2B4B-2A2B-1 The actual reasons 
A The entry gate to the Mahayana 
B The need to consider its benefits and allow one’s delight to increase before generating the mind [of 
enlightenment ] along with the [relevant] sources 
C The benefits of striving for this mind 
D How the lesser and intermediary [paths] are necessary for laying the basis of those benefits E How you need the lesser and intermediate when training in the actual mind 
F How the lesser and intermediate are necessary for the ritual[s of] accumulation and purification of this 
mental attitude G Advice to cherish the way that the teaching cycles of lesser and intermediate beings become 
branches of that of great beings 
H [The order on the path] I Summary of all paths in the three trainings 
J For the sake of skilful classification: summary of all paths in the two collections 
K The need to enter the Mantrayana 
L How to pursue the perfection only path 
M The stages of engagement in mantra 
N Explanation that the intention of Lamp on the Path  etc. is the engagement in both sutra and mantra 
[vehicles] 
2B4B-2A2B-1A The entry gate to the Mahayana 
First: The entry gate for entering the Mahayana consists in forming the mind 
toward supreme enlightenment. Once it has arisen in the mind, according to 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior : 
 
When bodhichitta has arisen, at once, 
The wretched bound in the prison of cyclic existence 
Are to be called “children of those gone to bliss.” 
 
{57} For in accordance with this statement, [an individual ] who has obtained the 
name of “bodhisattva” is admitted among Mahayana beings. If it107 deteriorates, he 
will leave the midst of Mahayana beings.  
 
The entry gate or door to the Mahayana is th e mind of enlightenment or bodhichitta. When 
we generate this in our mind, we become a bo dhisattva and a Mahayana being or Mahayanist. 
If we lack the mind of enlightenment, the aspi ration to attain highes t enlightenment, we are 
not Mahayanists. There is a different between  Mahayanists and Mahayana practitioners. 
Mahayana practitioners are those who have not yet generated the mind of enlightenment but 
are practicing cherishing other sentient beings, are developing great love and compassion, and 
have a contrived or artificial mind of enligh tenment, and thus are tr ying to practice the 
Mahayana path. However, they are not Mahayana beings or Mahayanists.  
                                              
107 i.e. “bodhichitta” or “the mind toward  supreme enlightenment” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
210  Shantideva says that in the very instant that we generate the mind of enlightenment, we 
become an object of veneration of human beings and gods and come to be called “a child of 
t h o s e  g o n e  t o  b l i s s ”  o r  “ a  c h i l d  o f  t h e  c o n q uerors.” Such a person who has generated the 
mind of enlightenment is a bodhisattva. Although our body remains a miserable, 
contaminated phenomenon that is included in cy clic existence, having generated the mind of 
enlightenment we become an object of venera tion. There are also those who generate the 
mind of enlightenment on the basis of a body of  the hell realm or the body of an animal, that 
is, the body of a naga. It is said that due to receiving teachings from Buddha Shakyamuni, 
some nagas generated the mind of enlightenmen t while their body remained that of a naga. 
Such a being is called a “bodhi sattva” and a “Mahayana being.” 
 If at first we generate bodhichitta or the mind of enlightenment, but then later on it 
degenerates, we will be expelled from the ra nk of Mahayana beings. There are people who 
initially generate bodhichitta but later on, wh en engaging in the bodhisattva activities, 
become discouraged and generate the thought th at it would be better to attain their own 
liberation from cyclic existence, due to wh ich they enter the Hinayana path and leave the 
Mahayana path. This can happen to bodhisattvas  on the small path of accumulation. Having 
degenerated their mind of enlightenment, th ey enter the Hinayana path of hearers.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1B The need to consider its benefits and allow one’s delight to increase before generating the 
mind [of enlightenment ] along with the [relevant] sources 
This being the case, those who wish to enter the Mahayana need to exert 
themselves in many ways to arouse that mind. However, before arousing it, they 
need to familiarize with the benefits of ar ousing that mind and then increase their 
delight with regard to those benefits an d do the seven-limb practice and go for 
refuge, which has been set out in the Compendium of Trainings  and Engaging in 
Bodhisattva Behavior . 
 
If we wish to generate the mind of enlightenm ent, we must first contemplate its benefits or 
advantages. In this way, our mind will become  very happy. Then we  can enter the Mahayana 
path.  
 There are many different method s for generating the mind of enlightenment, thus we need 
to create its causes. To do this, we need to contemplate or familiarize with the benefits of 
mind of enlightenment, whereby we will genera te strong interest in it. We should do 
analytical meditation, contemplating the ma ny reasons for generating the mind of 
enlightenment and entering the Mahayana path. Af ter that, what do we need to do? We need 
to do the seven-limb prayer and go for refuge as is taught in the Compendium of Trainings  and 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior . The first chapter of the latter text sets out the benefits of 
generating the mind of enlightenment and in co njunction with this there is the practice of 
the seven-limbs. The first of the seven limbs is  prostration. We can prostrate with all three 
doors – our body, speech, and mind. However, prostration mainly refers to extending the 
body on the ground, that is, touching one’s he ad, hands, and knees to the ground. However, 
if this is difficult due to physical problems, one can also just fold one’s hands together.  
 We imagine the merit field with Buddha Shak yamuni in front of us. To his right is the 
lineage of the vast, to his left is the lineage of  the profound, and behind him is the lineage of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
211 blessing. He is surrounded by the gurus and the meditational deities of action, performance, 
yoga, and highest yoga tantra. In addition, th ere are all the buddhas, the eight bodhisattvas, 
the twelve solitary realizers, and the sixteen el ders or foe-destroyers. There are the dakas and 
dakinis and Dharma protectors. Externally there are the four Great Kings in the four 
directions. Having visualized them, we should prostrate and make offerings to them. We can 
offer them actual substances, such as water, ligh t, flowers, and so forth, as well as offering 
them all the things that do not belong to us, su ch as snow mountains, gardens of flowers, and 
so forth, by mentally taking them to mind.  
 Then we should confess all our non-virtuo u s  a c t i o n s  b y  d e v e l o p i n g  r e g r e t  f o r  t h e m ,  
determining not to do them again, going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha and 
generating the mind of enlightenment, and appl ying an actual antidote. Then, we rejoice in 
the good or virtuous actions done by oursel ves and others, without being jealous of them. 
Then we request the teachers to turn the wheel  of Dharma and then supplicate them to not 
pass way until all sentient beings are enlightened, that is, until cy clic existence is empty. Then 
we dedicate all the virtue that was created by the previous six limbs for the sake of 
enlightenment. We also dedicate all the virtue that we have created in  the three times – that 
created in the past, that which we are creating  now, and that which we will create in the 
future – that all sentient beings may achieve en lightenment. This is a very short explanation 
of the seven limbs.  Then the text says that we should go for refuge . We can do so by reciting the verse “I go for 
refuge to the Buddha. I go for refuge to the Dh arma. I go for refuge to the Sangha.” In the 
context of tantra we also go for refuge to  the guru. However, th e Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha include all final objects of refuge. In te rms of temporal refuges even this house is a 
refuge as it protects us from heat, cold, rain, snow, and so forth. If someone is trying to kill us and we hide in a forest, the forest also become s a temporal object of refuge. There are even 
small guesthouses high up in the mountains that  are called “refuges” because they protect us 
from suffering, relieve our hunger, and so forth. However, the final refuges are only three: the 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.  
  We can go for refuge with the short verse: 
 
I go for refuge until I am enlightened To the Buddha, Dharma, and Supreme Assembly. By the merit from practicing generosity and the other perfections,  May I attain buddhahood in order to  benefit all migrating beings.  
 Or:   
NAMO BUDDHAYA NAMO DHARMAYA NAMO SANGHAYA  
 Or: 
BUDDHAM SARANAM GACCHAMI  DHARMAM SARANAM GACCHAMI SANGHAM SARANAM GACCHAMI 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
212  
We should recite these words while generating  faith in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.  
 The Compendium  refers to the Compendium of Trainings  by Shantideva. It is also mentioned 
in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds . We should try to study these two texts.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1C The benefits of striving for this mind  
If we summarise the benefits set forth in this way, there are two: temporary and 
ultimate benefits. The former, again, are twofold: not falling into the lower realms and being born in the happy realms. Once  this mind has arisen, the causes of 
miserable existences that were accumu lated previously are purified and the 
continuity of those accumulated later on is interrupted. The causes of happy 
realms that were accumulated previously, due to being conjoined with it, increase 
extensively, and those that are newly create d, due to being motivated by it, become 
endless. When it comes to attaining the ultimate objectives of liberation and 
omniscience with ease through relying on this mind: if an uncontrived wish to 
achieve the temporary or ultimate benefits is not present, one may say “Since those 
benefits arise from generating that mind, I shall endeavor to generate that mind,” but it will only be words. This is very clear if we examine our own mind.  
 W e  n e e d  t o  d e v e l o p  i n t e r e s t  i n  g e n e r a t i n g  t h e mind of enlightenment. If we generate the 
mind of enlightenment there will be two types of benefits: temporary benefits and ultimate or final benefits. The temporary benefits of genera ting the mind of enlightenment are the two: 
we will no longer fall into the lower realms and we will be reborn in the happy migrations. In terms of rebirth, there are only two possibilit ies, either rebirth in the bad migrations or 
rebirth in the happy migrations. However, if we generate the mind of enlightenment that 
wishes to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of  all sentient beings, we will no longer take 
rebirth in the lower realms and will only take re birth in the higher realms. This is because by 
generating the mind of enlighte nment, the causes of rebirth in  the lower realm – non-virtuous 
actions – will cease or be purified. In addition, we will no longer collect new causes for such 
r e b i r t h ,  m o r e  n o n - v i r t u o u s  a c t i o n s .  T h e y  w i l l  b e  s t o p p e d ,  t h a t  i s ,  w e  w i l l  n o t  c r e a t e  t h e m  anymore. Also the collection of virtue in ou r continuum for taking a high rebirth, due to 
being conjoined with or held by the mind of enli ghtenment, will increase greatly, that is, it 
will become stronger. In addition, our newly cr eated virtuous actions, due to being motivated 
by the mind of enlightenment, will become endl ess. Thus, our virtues will only increase and 
will never be exhausted. These are the temp orary benefits of generating the mind of 
enlightenment.   The ultimate or final benefit of generating the mind of enlightenment is that we will 
achieve omniscience. Thus, those who wish to attain liberation and those who wish to attain 
omniscience will be able to do so. Omniscience is “the great liberation” – liberation from both cyclic existence and solitary  peace. Because a buddha thinks only to take care of others 
and never thinks of himself, he is free from both extremes, the extreme of existence and the 
extreme of peace. He has completely abandoned them, that is, he is free from them. Because 
of this, he attains the enlightenment of buddhahood or great liberation.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
213  By generating the mind of enlightenmen t, we can quickly achieve enlightenment. 
Therefore, we need to understand both the temporary and final benefits of the mind of 
enlightenment. Due to it we can achieve our temporary and ultimate aims or the temporary 
and ultimate results. Because all these benefi ts only arise from generating the mind of 
enlightenment, we need to put effort into ge nerating it in our continuum. However, just 
reciting mere words is not enough. We need to  examine our continuum as to whether or not 
we have generated the mind of enlightenment. If we find that we have generated the mind 
wishing to attain liberation or the state of a bu ddha, we should maintain and increase it. If we 
have not yet generated it, we should put effort into generating the contrived or artificial mind 
of enlightenment. To generate the mind of en lightenment we need many causes, however the 
main one is great compassion. This is th e main cause for generating the mind of 
enlightenment because seeing the suffering of ot her sentient beings, and recognizing that they 
are being tormented by the three, six, and eigh t types of suffering, we generate the wish to 
liberate them from suffering and the causes of suffering. Then, with this attitude, we generate 
the extraordinary thought to do this ourselves. Then realizing that we cannot yet do this, we 
sees that only a buddha can do this, and, wish ing to take care of all sentient beings, we 
generate the wish to attain enlightenment for th eir benefit. In this way, we need to always 
generate the mind of love and compassion and the mind of enlightenment toward all sentient 
beings.   Wednesday afternoon, 2 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 57) says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1D How the lesser and intermediate [branches of the path] are necessary for laying the basis of 
those benefits 
In order to develop the wish to attain th ose two benefits, high status and certain 
goodness, it is necessary to develo p the thoughts common to lesser and 
intermediate beings. {58} 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1E How the lesser and intermediate [branches of the path] are necessary when training in the 
actual mind 
Having thus developed the wish to achiev e the two benefits, when you cultivate the 
beneficial mind it is necessary to de velop the root of that mind, love and 
c o m p a s s i o n .  I n  t h i s  r e g a r d ,  i f  y o u r  b o d y  hair does not shiver and quiver as you 
think about the way you yourself wander in  cyclic existence deprived of happiness 
and oppressed by suffering, there is no way the inability to bear how other sentient 
beings are deprived of happiness and oppr essed by suffering can come about. In 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  it says: 
 
In beings to whom previously, 
Such a thought, even for their own sake, Did not even appear in their dreams, How could it arise for the sake of others? 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
214 For that reason, having thought about how,  in the context of lesser beings, the 
harm of the sufferings of bad migrations fa lls upon you and how, in the context of 
intermediate beings, even in [rebirths of ] high status there is suffering and no 
peace or happiness, meditating – in acco rd with your own experience – on the 
s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  w h o  h a v e  b e c o m e  d e a r  t o  y o u ,  b e c o m e s  t h e  c a u s e s  f o r  l o v e  a n d  
compassion to arise. As the mind of enli ghtenment is born from them, training in 
the thoughts shared with lesser and in termediate [beings] is the means of 
generating an uncontrived mind of enlightenment. 
 If we wish to attain high status and certain or  definite goodness, we must first generate the 
thoughts that are common to small and middling beings. In order to generate the mind of 
enlightenment, we first need to think about its benefits – that we ourselves can attain 
enlightenment and that we can then lead others  to high status and liberation. But prior to 
generating the mind of enlightenment, we n eed to develop love and compassion. And prior 
to generating love and compassion, we need to train in the path of small beings and the path 
of middling beings.   In short, in order to develop the mind of  enlightenment, we first need to generate 
affectionate love and compassion. Such love sees  all sentient beings in an attractive aspect, 
and not as repulsive and somethin g to be avoided. Love is the wish that all sentient beings 
have happiness and the causes of happiness. Just as we wish to have happiness and the causes 
of happiness, so too do all sentient beings want the same. However,  in order to obtain 
happiness, we must create its causes. In other word s, if we want to obtain a certain result, we 
first need to create its causes. We should think about the fact that all sentient beings are presently tormented by the suffering of suffering , suffering of change, and pervasive suffering, 
and then generate the mental attitude that wish es them to be free from such sufferings. In 
particular we need to develop th e wish that they be free from pervasive suffering. In this way 
we generate compassion toward all sentient be ings, wishing them to be free from suffering 
and the causes of suffering. Then we take upon ourselves the responsibility to free all sentient 
beings from suffering and the causes of sufferi ng and to set them in the state of happiness; 
this is the extraordinary thou ght or attitude. We make this promise but presently we are 
unable to achieve it. Who can achieve it? On ly the buddhas, the enlightened beings, or 
omniscient ones, are able to do this. Therefor e, we generate the mind of enlightenment, 
which consists of two aspirations. The causal aspiration  is the wish to benefit all sentient 
beings, that is, to achieve the welfare of all sentient beings. The concomitant aspiration  is the 
aspiration to achieve enlightenment. With thes e two aspirations we can generate the mind of 
enlightenment. Bodhichitta or the mind of en lightenment is a primary mind, thus when the 
texts say that it is an aspiration, an aspiration to  achieve enlightenment, this is a case of giving 
the name of the result to the cause.   We should think about the fact that we ou rselves are devoid of happiness and tormented 
by suffering. Just as we wander in cyclic existenc e so too do other sentient beings. If we do not 
think of how we ourselves lack happiness and are tormented by suffering, it will be difficult to 
develop the thought to take care of other sentie nt beings. All sentient beings lack happiness 
and the causes of happiness and all of them are tormented by sufferings. Although these 
sufferings are difficult to bear, still we have not choice but to experience them. Engaging in the 
Bodhisattva Deeds  says that is difficult to generate such  thoughts even with respect to oneself, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
215 that we do not generate a good heart, love , compassion, or the mind of enlightenment 
thinking to take care of others even in dream.  We do not generate such thoughts even toward 
ourselves. However, since sentient beings are more important than ourselves, we need to 
develop the thought to take care  of them. We should not think to take care of some and not 
others, but instead we should gene rate the wish to take equal care of them all. To do this, we 
first need to generate the thoughts of small be ings and middling beings. We need to think, “If 
I myself were to experience the suffering of the lower realms, my body burning in molten 
iron, would I be able to bear it? I would not.” As just now we are free from such suffering, we 
need to ensure that in our next life we will not be reborn in the lower realms by practicing morality and so forth. We should check whethe r or not we could bear such horrific suffering. 
Finding that we would not be able to bear it, we  must take care not to be born in the lower 
realms. The means to do this is  the practice of morality.  
 However, even if we are not born in the lo wer realms but are born in the higher realms, 
the happy migrations, as a human being, anti-god , or god, we would still experience suffering. 
Human beings in general experience more suffer ing than gods, but when gods experience the 
sign of death they experience intense mental suffering for seven days of the god realm which 
is longer than our entire lifespan as a human bein g. It is even longer than many lifetimes as a 
human being, perhaps being as long as 1,000 years.   The anti-gods also have suffering in that they  continually fight with the gods of the Thirty-
Three over the jambu  tree, which has its roots in their la nd whereas its fruit is found in the 
god realm. Due to this, the gods pick and enjo y the fruit, making the anti-gods very jealous. 
Also the female anti-gods, who are extremely beautiful, are carried away by the male gods, making the anti-gods even more jealous. In this  way, they fight and are killed and experience 
suffering.   Since we have suffering even in our ordinary daily life, there is no need to mention that 
human beings suffer. Just being conceived an d being born is suffering. Sickness is also 
suffering, as is death. Due to being unable to ob tain the objects that we desire, we experience 
suffering. Having obtained something we desi re, we then worry about losing it through 
others’ power and so forth. In this way, we  experience much suffe ring, all of which we 
ourselves can see. In addition, our body experiences many different sufferings. Since it is a contaminated, appropriated aggreg ate caused by mental afflicti ons and contaminated actions, 
it is the very nature of suffering. Someti mes we suffer from hunger, sometimes thirst, 
sometimes heat, sometimes cold, and so forth. For example, there are many human beings in 
our world who are unable to find food, and ever y day thousands of children die in the third 
world. These are all sufferings of human beings . Thinking about this, we need to generate 
compassion and love. We need to develop the wi sh to eliminate or relieve this suffering. How 
c a n  w e  d o  t h i s ?  F o r  e x a m p l e ,  i f  w e  h a v e  a  h e adache we can ask a doctor for medicine to 
relieve the pain. There are many different medicines for our physical and mental sufferings. There are also different therapies and healing methods such as pranatherapy, chromotherapy, 
reiki, and so forth. There are many such me thods for relieving the pain and sickness of 
human beings. However, we are more limited in  our ability to help other kinds of beings. 
Although a dog, for example, cannot do much to  relieve its pain other than lick its wounds, 
human beings can take it to a veterinarian who gives it medicine and so forth. But still there 
are many animals that live in forests and other places where no one takes care of them. Since 
human beings are intelligent, they can eliminate their suffering. For this reason, we need to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
216 understand how we ourselves suffer and generate the wish to become free from this suffering. 
How can we do this? Only by practicing the Dharma. Perhaps we cannot prevent the suffering 
of this life but we can ensure that in the future  we will take better rebirths with less suffering.  
 Middling beings understand that even higher rebirths are the nature of suffering. Just to be 
a sentient being is to experience suffering. Theref ore, it is necessary to generate love for all 
sentient beings, the thought to take care of all our mother sentient beings. In order to do this 
we need to generate the mind of enlightenment.  Prior to this, we need to train in the paths 
common to small and middling beings. In this  way we can generate an uncontrived or 
genuine mind of enlightenment. For this, we need its causes, love and compassion. It was 
mentioned before that prior to developing love and compassion, we must generate the 
thought to repay the kindness of  sentient beings, before that we must remember their 
kindness, and before that we must recognize all sentient beings as having been our mother. If 
we do not have a good relationship with our mo ther and are convinced that she was very hard 
and did not treat us well, it can be more benefici al to think that all sentient beings have been 
our father, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, or even  a very close friend whom we love very much. 
We should think about how this person is very good to us and treats us very well, and then 
think that all sentient beings have done the same when they were our very close friend. Then 
remember that as our close friend they were very  kind to us. Then generate the wish to repay 
their kindness. Then develop love for them, then compassion, and then the extraordinary 
attitude. After this, we generate the mind of enlightenment that wishes  to attain buddhahood 
in order to be able to benefit all sentient beings. Thinking in this way, we should strive to develop the mind of enlightenment.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1F How the lesser and intermediate [branches of the path] are also necessary for the ritual 
accumulation and purification of this mental attitude 
Efforts to purify and accumulate by many  means through the thoughts of going for 
refuge, actions and results, and so forth on the occasion of the two paths, also 
constitute methods for training the ment al continuum – preliminary practices for 
the generation of the mind [of enlightenm ent]. As they become [part of] the seven-
limb practice along with going for refuge, these [thoughts common to lesser and 
intermediate beings ] should also be understood as  methods for the arisal of the 
mind [of enlightenment ]. 
 
In order to generate the mind of enlightenment we need to engage in its preliminaries. Here 
in the outline the word “ritual” does not refe r to prayers and pujas but to the practices of 
purifying negative actions and accumulating positi ve energy in order to generate the mind of 
enlightenment. There are different methods of purifying our negativities, for example, those 
that are common to both sutra and tantra. Howe ver, the best means of purification is to 
meditate on emptiness, thinking that the thr ee spheres – the agent, the negative action, and 
the recipient – are all empty of inherent existence.   The seven limbs are, as mentioned before, pr ostration, offering, confession, rejoicing, 
requesting to turn the wheel of Dharma, suppl icating the teachers to not pass beyond sorrow 
(to not enter nirvana) but to remain until a ll sentient beings achieve enlightenment, and 
dedication. Together with these seven limbs, we  go for refuge. These methods are constantly 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
217 mentioned in terms of how to collect merit. We should visualize the merit field in any one of 
the different ways as depicted in various tang kas. We can meditate the members of the merit 
field as stacked one above the other or like  a market place – the Buddha in the center 
surrounded by the meditational deities, bu ddhas, bodhisattvas, dakas and dakinis, and 
Dharma protectors. Or we can imagine th e Buddha alone and think of him as the 
embodiment of all the Buddha, Dharma, and Sang ha. Thus, in order to collect merit we need 
to do one of these visualizations, either the easy visualization of the Buddha alone or the 
more complete visualization of him surrounded by the other deities and so forth. We then 
prostrate to the merit field, make offerings, co nfess our negativities, rejoice, and so forth. 
There are many lam-rim texts translated into English and various other languages, which you 
can read so as to understand more about the merit field.  To generate the mind of enlightenment we need to accumulate a lot of merit and purify negativities. This is our main practice. If ha ving generated the mind of enlightenment or a 
good heart, we give a handful of food to a dog,  cat, or pigeon, we create a huge amount of 
merit. On the other hand, if without the moti vation of love, compassion, or the mind of 
enlightenment we were to give a lot of money to  others in order that they think we are very 
gen er o u s , so  as  t o gai n  fam e o r  a go o d  r epu tation and to be admired by everyone, we will 
create only a very small amount of merit. Cont rarily, if motivated by love, compassion, or the 
mind of enlightenment, even if we only give away something small we will create a lot of 
merit. Therefore, how much merit we cr eate is dependent on our motivation.  
 When Buddha Shakyamuni was on the learner path of a bodhisattva,  he circumambulated 
a Brahmin meditator-sage, who was absorbed in concentration, nine times while hopping on 
one foot and generating a very good motivation to attain enlightenment,  whereby he collected 
merit equal to that collected over nine eons. Br ahmins avoid eating blac k foods, such as meat, 
eggs, and so forth, and eat mainly butter, yogu rt, and milk. In addition, some brahmins only 
eat food prepared by themselves, or food prep ared by their wife, and so forth. Some avoid 
drinking tea, some only eat vegetables, some o n l y  e a t  f r u i t ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  T h e y  h a v e  m a n y  
ritual practices as there are different lineages, so me of which are very strict. While they try to 
avoid making the slightest mistakes, we do not do the same. In short, it is possible to create a 
lot of merit in a short time.  Milarepa went from upper Tibet to a place near the border with Nepal and then to a place south of Lhasa, looking for Marpa the Transl ator. Eventually someone pointed out Marpa, 
who was working in a field. Milarepa asked Marpa to accept him as his disciple. Marpa 
offered Milarepa some food and drink. They at e together and then Marpa told him to eat all 
that remained, to finish the work that still remain ed to be done in the fi eld, and then to come 
to his home. Milarepa finished the food and the work, and then went to report this to Marpa. 
Marpa thought to himself that it was very auspic ious and indicated that Milarepa would finish 
whatever work he was given to do. However, he  refused to teach Milarepa and instead gave 
him physical work to do. He told Milarepa to build a tall house, using stones that were to be carried on his back. Watching Milarepa, Marpa’s wife felt so sorry for him that one day she 
brought a stone to help him. When the work  was almost done, Marpa came and scolded 
Milarepa, saying that the work he had done was not good as one of the stones had been 
brought there by his wife. He told Milarepa to take down the tower and return the stones to 
their original places. He then told Milarepa to  make another tower at another location. This 
happened eight or nine times. Only after Milarepa  had finished this did Marpa accept to give 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
218 him a special teaching on Mahamudra but told hi m that he would have to make an offering 
in order to request Dharma teachings. Ho wever, Milarepa did not own anything and 
although Marpa’s wife gave Milarepa somethin g to offer to Marpa, he did not accept it. 
Eventually he accepted to teach Milarepa for a short time, perhaps just one or two hours. 
However, Milarepa completely understood what  he had been taught and meditated for one 
week immovable in meditative equipoise. When  Marpa asked where Milarepa was, he was 
told that he was sitting in meditation as still as a statue. He said to call Milarepa to come to 
him. This all came about because, by doing what Marpa had said, Milarepa had been able to 
purify all his negativities and obscurations and achieve enlightenment in that very life. This 
can happen.   Prior to meeting Marpa, Milarepa had been begged by his sister, who did not have a good 
relationship with the villagers as they had taken away all thei r belongings when their father 
died, to do something to return the harm caus ed to them by the villa gers. Because of this, 
Milarepa went to study black magic. Having done  so, his sister insistently asked him to use it 
to kill all the villagers and eventually Milarepa gave in to her badgering. Using black magic, he 
caused a black cloud to gather above the villag e from which huge hailstones fell. He then 
caused lightening to set the village on fire, unti l all that remained was his sister’s house. In 
this way he created heavy negative karma which he later needed to purify. For this reason 
Marpa gave him the difficult job of making ma ny tall houses or towers. This story is 
commonly recounted by Tibetans and is also me ntioned in Milarepa’s biography. It shows 
that it is possible to attain enlightenment in th is very life. Because we have a precious human 
rebirth, have met and can practi ce the holy Dharma, we should not waste time in developing 
the mind of enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1G Advice to cherish the way that the teaching cycles of lesser and intermediate beings become 
branches of great beings 
Here the spiritual master should indicate  how the teaching cycles of lesser and 
intermediate beings become branches for th e arisal of the mind of enlightenment, 
{59} and the disciple should also gains ce rtainty in this rega rd. Through recalling 
those [points] with each practice, you shou ld thoroughly cherish this training. If 
this is not done, the path of great be ings and the individual paths become 
unconnected. As you do not gain cert ainty with regard to the mind of 
enlightenment until you reach the actual pa th of great beings, this would be an 
obstacle to the arisal of that mind or, meanwhile, the degeneration of that great 
objective. Therefore, you should exert yourself in it. 
 
We need to understand more clearly that th e practices of the paths of small and middling 
beings are branches of the path of great beings. In other words, they are necessary in order to 
develop the mind of enlightenment. It is import ant that this be taught  by the lama and that 
the disciple definitely understands this.  
 We should apply mindfulness in order to tr ain our mind in the important points of the 
paths of small and middling beings – the method  for generating the mind of enlightenment. 
We should remember this and cherish it. If we do not do this, we will come to think that the 
three paths are unrelated. In short, we will come  to think that the path of great beings is not 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
219 related to the paths of small and middling beings . However, this is not correct in that the 
paths of small and middling beings are branches or causes for developing the path of great 
beings. Since they are very important, we should  do a glance meditation on all the points of 
these paths, like looking at a painting on a wa ll. In other words, everyday we should briefly 
review the path of small beings and then the path of middling beings, before going on to 
meditate on the fact that all sentient bein gs have been our mothers, remembering their 
kindness, generating the wish to repay this kindness, developing love, compassion, and the 
extraordinary attitude, and generati ng the mind of enlightenment.  
 Since we need to have all these points clea r in our mind, we should try to emphasize the 
practices of all three paths. In this way, we will  achieve the actual path of great beings without 
much effort. On the other hand, if we do no t meditate on the paths of small and middling 
paths, we will not be able to achieve the path of  great beings. We will experience interferences 
and will lose the great aim or objective. Our mind of enlightenment will degenerate and we 
will not be able to achieve the aim of attainin g enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient 
beings. Therefore, it is definitely import ant to meditate on th e two common paths.  
 
Thursday morning, 3 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 59) says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1H [The order on the path] 
1 The order of the two minds etc. and how to train [in them]  
Having trained in this manner, you sh ould make the uncontrived mind of 
enlightenment arise in your mental cont inuum as much as possible. Then, in 
order to make it stable, first go for un common refuge and then perform the ritual 
of the aspiring [mind of enlightenment ]. Having taken the aspiring [mind of 
enlightenment ] through by means of the ritual, pr actice its trainings. Then, time 
and again develop the wish to train in the trainings – the six perfections, the four 
ways of gathering, etc. Once the wish to  train in them has come forth from the 
bottom of your heart, take the pure vow of the engaging [mind of enlightenment ]. 
 
“The two minds” in this context refer to the aspiring or wishing mind of enlightenment and 
the engaging mind of enlightenment. Thus, here  they do not refer to the conventional and 
ultimate minds of enlightenment.   We need to train in the mind of enlighte nment by meditating until we generate an 
uncontrived mind of enlightenment. We need to  put effort into meditating on it. Having 
generated the mind of enlightenmen t, we then need to make it stable by going for refuge in a 
way that is not common to or shared by sm all and middling beings. In the case of the 
uncommon refuge of the Great Vehicle, the Bu ddha Jewel is the enjoyment body, which is 
one of the form bodies; the Dharma Jewel is th e true cessations and true paths related to the 
abandonment of the obscurations  to knowledge; and the Sangha Jewel is the bodhisattvas 
who have achieved the path of  meditation and so forth.  
 Then we should take the aspiring mind of enlightenment by means of the ritual. Having 
done so, we must abandon the four black dhar mas and rely on the four white dharmas. In 
other words, what is to be aban doned is the four black dharmas an d what is to be practiced or 
adopted is the four white dharmas. It is explai ned in some texts that by giving up even one 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
220 sentient being with the though t “I cannot develop love and co mpassion for him or her,” we 
lose the vow of the aspiring mind of enlightenment and accrue many faults.  
 Having taken the aspiring mind of enlightenmen t, we then need to practice in accordance 
with that to be practiced or trained in. We sh ould develop the wish again and again to train 
in the six perfections and four means of gather ing disciples. The six pe rfections are the usual 
ones: generosity, morality, patience, joyous effort, concentration, and wisdom. The four 
means of gathering disciples are to give material things in order to bring others close to one, 
to talk nicely to them, to te ach them the Dharma, and to prac tice in accordance with what 
one teaches. We can see that Christian practi tioners also engage in the four means of 
gathering disciples. First they give material th ings to those who are poor and talk nicely to 
them, then they teach them the beliefs of Christ ianity, and then they also act in accordance 
with what they have taught. Sinc e these four are also practices of bodhisattvas, we should not 
criticize their behavior.  
 T h e n ,  i f  w e  r e a l l y  w i s h  t o  p r a c t i c e  t h e  s i x perfections and the four means of gathering 
disciples, we should take the vo w of the engaging mind of enli ghtenment, that is, the actual 
bodhisattva vows. Having taken them, what do we  need to practice? We need to practice the 
bodhisattva conduct, the six perfections and so fo rth, as much as possible in our everyday life. 
In addition, having taken the bodhisattva vo ws, we should study and then safeguard the 
eighteen root downfalls and fo rty-six secondary infractions. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The order of explanations 
Then, even risk your life in order not to be tainted by a root downfall. Strive not 
to be tainted by small and medium contamin ations and by infractions. However, if 
you get tainted, purify them well by means of what has been expounded with 
regard to restoring downfalls. Then, trai n in general in the six perfections and 
especially in concentration, the essence of calm abiding, in order to make the 
mind serviceable with respect to whatever  virtuous object you wish. The statement 
in Lamp on the Path  that you train in calm abiding in order to develop the 
superknowledges108 is only an illustration. Atis ha himself has stated on other 
occasions that it also serves to develo p special insight. Therefore you should 
develop calm abiding for that purpose too. Then, {60} in order to cut the bonds of 
grasping at the two selves, decide on the meaning of emptiness by means of the 
view. Through sustaining this mode of medi tation flawlessly, accomplish the entity 
of wisdom, special insight. 
 
Having taken the bodhisattva vows, we need to av oid being stained by a root downfall even at 
the risk of losing our life. We should also  avoid by stained by the contaminations and 
infractions. There are four cont aminations that need to be abandoned. If we commit one of 
them, it is considered to be a small contaminatio n; if we commit two or three of them, it is a 
middling contamination; and if we commit all four  it is a great contam ination These four are 
mentioned in the Six Session Guru Yoga: (1) no t regarding the downfall as detrimental, (2) 
                                              
108 JN: mngon shes , can also be translated as “clairvoyance” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
221 not forsaking the wish to repeat such behavior, (3) delighting and taking pleasure in it, and 
(4) having no shame or embarrassment. By commi tting all four, we lose the bodhisattva vows. 
If, on the other hand, we commit a small or middling contamination, we can purify and 
restore the bodhisattva vows by retaking them. In fact, even after having committed a great 
contamination whereby the vows are completely lost, they can still be retaken again. The 
bodhisattva and tantra vows are such that even  if one commits a root downfall they can be 
retaken. For this reason they are likened to gold or silver which, when broken, can be melted 
down and newly refashioned into the same obje ct. On the other hand, the vows of individual 
liberation are likened to a clay pot which, once broken, cannot be put back together again. In 
spite of this, since there is always the danger of degenerating the bodh isattva vows we should 
be careful with respect to them. 
 We should practice the six perfections and in  particular we should try to achieve calm 
a b i d i n g .  W e  s h o u l d  m e d i t a t e  s i n g l e - p o i n t e d l y  o n  a n  o b j e c t  a s  m u c h  a s  p o s s i b l e .  T h u s ,  w e  should first try to develop calm abiding by trai ning in it again and again. Having attained 
calm abiding, the body and mind become complete ly serviceable, that is, we can do whatever 
we want with them. Then we should develop special insight in relation to emptiness. 
Meditation on emptiness is the main antidote  to all the afflictions because it directly 
counteracts the root of all the afflictions – the conception of a self of persons or the 
conception of all phenomena as truly or inherent ly existent. In fact, “emptiness” refers to the 
fact that all phenomena la ck inherent existence.  
 We need to abandon the two conceptions of  a self: a self of persons and a self of 
phenomena. “Phenomena” in this context refers to the five aggregates: the form aggregate, 
feeling aggregate, discrimination aggregat e, compositional factors aggregate, and 
consciousness aggregate. On the basis of these aggregates (phenomena), we impute the self, 
the person, or the being. In th is way, the person depends on  the aggregates. Likewise, the 
body aggregate does not exist inherently or truly, that is, it is empty of inherent or true existence. We should take this la ck of inherent or true existence as our object of the mode of 
apprehension and strive to develop special insi ght with respect to it. The ultimate truth is 
emptiness. Conventional truths include whatever  we see with our eyes, hear with our ears, 
smell with our nose, taste with our tongue, and f eel with our body, as well as all the objects of 
the mind, such as space, dreams, visions, and so forth. Such conventional truths are also 
called “deceptive truths.”   In order to meditate on emptiness, we first need to establish it by means of many reasonings. An example of one of these reasonings is:   
This table does not exist inherently because it is not an inherently existent one or 
an inherently existent many. It is not an  inherently existent one because it has 
parts. Having parts and being partless are direct contradictions, and partless 
phenomena do not exist. The table is also not an inherently existent many because 
it is not an inherently existent one. Ma ny cannot exist without one. Therefore, the 
table is not an inherently existent on e or an inherently existent many.  
 We should try to get a mental image, a meaning generality, of what inherent existence is like. 
For example, even though we do not have horn s on our head, we can imagine what we would 
look like if we did have horns on our head. Or  we can imagine what we would look like with 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
222 a tail. Similarly, even though all phenomena do  not exist inherently, we can imagine how they 
would exist if they were inherently existent. Fo r example, they would be completely stable and 
immutable. On the other hand, because phenomena are not inherently existent they change, 
can move, and so forth.  
 
Another reasoning is: a flower is not inherently existent because it is not inherently produced 
from self, other, both, or without causes. In other words, all compounded phenomena are not 
inherently produced from themselves, they are not inherently produced from other, they are n o t  i n h e r e n t l y  p r o d u c e d  f r o m  b o t h  s e l f  a n d  other, and they are no t produced without a 
cause; therefore, they are not inherently prod uced. Nagarjuna sets out this reasoning in his 
Fundamental Wisdom  in order to refute the views of schools other than the Prasangika 
Madhyamaka. For example, one non-Buddhist school asserts that all phenomena are 
inherently produced because they are produced from self, whereas another such school asserts 
that they are inherently produced from both. The Vaibhashika, Sautrant ika, Chittamatra, and 
Svatantrika Madhyamaka, which are Buddhist schools, assert, on the other hand, that 
phenomena are inherently produced from ot her. The Jains assert that phenomena are 
produced either from self or without a cause.  The Charvakas also assert that phenomena are 
produced without a cause.   All these views existed in ancient India. The Samkya view, for example, is that all 
phenomena are included in twenty-five categori es. Among them, the most important cause is 
the Primordial Principle, which is partless, uncaused, and permanent. The being, self, or 
knower are neither cause nor result, that is, it is  not a cause nor does it have a cause. Some of 
the twenty-five are both cause and result. They a ssert that when the being looks at all results 
and asks who created them, it will find that it is the Primordial Principle that created them. Having been seen, the Primordial Principle be comes ashamed and disappears, whereby all its 
results – forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tang ible objects, and the four elements – also 
disappear, leaving only the being. At this time the being attains liberati on and cyclic existence 
comes to an end. Other schools say that everyt hing was created by Ishvara, that is, by his 
thinking of something, it arises. Since there were these many different tenet systems of the 
ancient Indian schools, Nagarjuna had to refute all such views. 
 In Tibet, when I was a small child, my grandmother once told me how human beings were created. She said that human beings were fash ioned out of butter by the Old Man, who then 
gave them life by blowing into their nose. Ho wever, when he called out “Human being,” his 
creation did not respond. Due to this, he then fashioned eyes, ears, nose, and so forth out of 
ashes, blew on the figure again, and once again called out “Human being!” This time the 
being responded and came alive! Wondering whether or not this was true, I too made some small figures out of butter and called out “D o g !  C a t !  S h e e p ! ”  a n d  s o  f o r t h ,  b u t  n o t h i n g  
happened! When I asked my grandmother why none of them had responded, she only 
laughed at me! There are similar stories in ma ny cultures. However, Buddha Shakyamuni, the 
Omniscient One, taught that everything is cr eated by the mind. In other words, we create 
actions motivated by the mind, just as we firs t mentally develop a project and only later on 
actualize it. For example, architects first make drawings of a house, indicating where to put 
the bathroom, bedrooms, kitchen, veranda, and so fo rth, and then later on it is actually built. 
Similarly, electronic things, such as computer s, are first created mentally by someone and 
then later on they are physica lly constructed. Cell phones, wh ich we can now use not only to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
223 talk to others but also to send written messages,  take photos, see who we are talking to, and so 
forth, are the same. They are all created by the mind, that is, first the mind thinks to make 
something and then later on it is actualized.  
 We should make a mental plan to medita te and achieve calm abiding, and then to 
meditate on emptiness or ultimate truth in or der to attain the spec ial insight that takes 
emptiness as its object. This wisdom realizing em ptiness destroys the conception of a self of 
persons and the conception of a self of phen omena, and thereby cuts the root of cyclic 
existence. Then, even if we wish  to take rebirth for the benefit of others, we can do so. Thus, 
at the moment we should put ef fort into trying to understand emptiness more deeply. This 
will be discussed later on in th e context of special insight.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1I All paths are contained in the three trainings  
Accordingly, except for the accomplishment  of calm abiding and special insight, 
up to and including the training in the vow of the engaging [mind of 
enlightenment ] constitutes the training in ethical discipline; calm abiding is the 
training in the mind; and special insight is  training in wisdom. So it says in the 
Commentary on the Lamp on the Path . 
 
All the paths are included or contained in the th ree higher trainings: the higher training in 
morality, the higher training in concentration or  the mind, and the higher training in wisdom 
or special insight. Up to the generation of the aspiring and engaging mind of enlightenment 
and the taking of the bodhisattva vows is all incl uded in the higher training in morality. Calm 
abiding is the higher training in concentration or in the mind. Special insight is the higher 
training in wisdom. Wisdom itself is in fa ct special insight. This is taught in the Commentary 
on the Lamp on the Path  by Atisha.  
 In short, the vows of individual liberation , the bodhisattva vows, and the tantra vows are 
included in the higher training in morality. Th e training in setting the mind single-pointedly 
on an object is included in the higher traini ng in the mind. The anal ytical meditation on 
emptiness or analytical meditation on the four  noble truths and their sixteen attainments in 
included in the higher training in wisdom.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1J For the sake of skill in classification, all paths are contained in the two collections 
Furthermore, up to and including calm abiding is method, the collection of merit, 
the path based on conventional truth, an d the stages of the vast path, while the 
generation of the three sp ecial wisdoms is wisdom, the collection of wisdom, [the 
path] based on ultimate truth, and the stages  of the profound pa th. Therefore, you 
should generate great certainty with respec t to their order and set number, as well 
as the fact that enlightenment cannot be attained by means of method and 
wisdom that are separate from one another. 
 
All six perfections are included in the two co llections – the collection of merit and the 
collection of wisdom. The first five – genero sity, morality, patience, joyous effort, and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
224 concentration – are, among method and wisdom , included in method, and, among the two 
collections, they are included in the collection of merit. In addition, th ey are paths that rely 
on or are based on the conventional truth. They are also the stages of the vast path. The three 
special wisdoms, on the other hand, are, am ong method and wisdom, included in wisdom, 
and, among the two collections, are included in the collection of wisdom. They rely on or are 
based on the ultimate truth. They are al so the stages of the profound path.  
 The three wisdoms could be: (1) the wisdom  analyzing for the conventional, (2) the 
wisdom analyzing for the ultimate, and (3) the wisdom analyzing how to cherish and benefit 
sentient beings. They could also be something else but I do not remember this subject right 
now.  
 If we collect merit but not wisdom, or wisdom  but not merit, or collect merit and wisdom 
separately, we will not be able to achieve bu ddhahood. Therefore, we need to collect both 
merit and wisdom. In other words, we need to practice generosity and so forth in order to 
collect merit, and we need to meditate on empt iness in order to collect wisdom. Alternatively, 
it can be said that we need both method and wisdom. Just as a bird with its two wings intact can fly whereas if one of them is broken it cannot, similarly due to having both merit and 
wisdom we can go to enlightenment.   Thursday afternoon, 3 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 60) says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1K The need to enter the Mantrayana 
Having trained your mental continuum th us by means of the common paths, you 
must enter the Mantrayana, for, once you have entered it, you will quickly 
complete the two collections. 
 
Having trained in the common pa th of the perfection vehicle,  we should then enter the 
mantra or tantra vehicle. Why is this? Becaus e by means of entering the tantra vehicle and 
practicing it, it is possible to quickly  complete the two collections, the collection of merit and 
the collection of wisdom. For this reason, it is important to enter the path of tantra.  
 For example, if we travel somewhere by foot we  will not get to our destination very quickly, 
whereas if we go there by bicycl e we will get there a bit quicker, if we go there by car we will 
get there even quicker, and if we go there by plane we will get there much quicker. Traveling 
by foot is like the small path, by  bicycle is like the middling path , by car is like the bodhisattva 
vehicle or the mahayana, and by plane is like th e tantra path. Therefore, in order to quickly 
complete the two collections we need to enter the path of tantra and practice it. From the 
point of view of tantra, it is possible to simultaneously collect merit and wisdom, whereas this is not possible from the point of view of sutra,  according to which one first collects a lot of 
merit and only then collects wisdom. Because these two can be achieve simultaneously by 
means of tantra, it becomes quicker to achieve buddhahood.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1L How to pursue the perfection path alone 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
225 If you cannot manage more than [the perfection path ] or due to the small power 
of your lineage you do not want to, you shou ld just expand on these very stages of 
the path more and more.  
 
If we travel the perfection path alone we will not achieve enlightenment very quickly. 
However, some people are only able to practi ce the perfection path and some, due to small 
power of their lineage, do not want to enter th e tantra path. For such people it will not be 
easy to attain enlightenment as it will be necessa ry to practice the stages of the path again and 
again, increasing them more and more.   Thus, if we wish to attain complete buddh ahood quickly, we should first practice the 
perfection vehicle and then at a certain point en ter the practice of tantra. Wishing to practice 
tantra, we first need to receive an initiation or empowerment. In action tantra (kriya tantra) 
there are two empowerments – the water em powerment and the crown empowerment. In 
performance tantra (charya tant ra) there are the five empowe rments of the five buddha 
lineages – the water, crown, vajra, bell, and na me empowerments. In yoga tantra there are the 
five empowerments of the five buddha lineag es plus the vajra-master empowerment. In 
highest yoga tantra there is the common vase empowerment of the five buddha lineages as 
well as the vajra-master empowerment which is included in the vase empowerment, together 
with the secret empowerment, wisdom empowerm ent, and word empowerment. In the case of 
the vase empowerment, the empowering substanc e is the water in the vase. The disciple is 
either given this water to drink, or he or she is given it to put on his or her forehead, or the vase itself is place on the crown of his or her head. This is followed by the secret, wisdom, and 
word empowerments. Having received these four  empowerments, we can enter the practice of 
highest yoga tantra. Empowerment is therefore sa id to be the door to the tantra vehicle.  
 To summarize, it is not possible to achiev e enlightenment by means of the sutra path 
alone.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1M The stages of engagement in mantra 
As for engaging in mantra, since proper re liance on a spiritual teacher is generally 
given great emphasis in all the vehicles and particularly in mantra, you should 
make it [even] more pre-eminent [in th i s  c o n t e x t ]  t h a n  b e fore. Then, having 
ripened your mental continuum by means of an empowerment that comes from a 
pure tantra class, you should risk your life for, that is, guard, the commitments and vows that you obtained at that time. {61}. Es pecially, if a root downfall occurs, even 
though you take them again, this will spoil your mind and it will be difficult for 
positive qualities to develop. Therefore,  do not be tainted by them. Do not get 
tainted even by branch downfall and, if  you do get tainted, you should not be 
unconcerned about it, but purify it thro ugh confession and restraint. Then you 
should be guided as appropriate in the yoga with signs in accordance with the 
lower tantra classes or in the yoga of th e generation stage in accordance with the 
higher tantras. On that basis you should train as appropriate in the yoga without 
signs in accordance with the lower tantra classes or in the yoga of the completion 
stage according to the higher tantras.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
226 What is the order of the stages for entering in to mantra? In the case of all the vehicles in 
general, whether the hinayana or mahayana, or wh ether the small, middle, or great vehicles, it 
is necessary to rely on a guru, teacher, or virt uous spiritual friend. Then, in particular if we 
wish to engage in the practice of tantra or mant ra, we need to rely on a teacher who is able to 
confer empowerment and so fort h. To confer empowerment, the guru himself must have 
received that particular empowerment, have comp leted the “suitable activities” retreat of that 
deity, and have performed the conc luding burnt offering or fire puja to the deity. Only if he 
has done all this is he qualified to confer that particular empowerment.  
 A perfect or pure practice of tantra arises from receiving an empowerment that arises from 
a pure source. Empowerment ripens our contin uum. On the occasion of an empowerment, 
we receive vows and commitments that we must then  safeguard even at the risk of losing our 
life. Thus, it is very important to keep thes e vows and commitments well. If we commit a root 
downfall, we should take the tantra vows once again. However, when this happens our mental 
continuum is spoiled and the vows are no longer as good as they used to be. It is like leaving 
an object out in the rain whereby it gets dama ged and is not as useful as before. Thus when 
this happens, it becomes difficult to generate good qualities in our continuum.  
 In addition, we should take care to also  not be stained by the branch or secondary 
downfalls. With respect to the tantra vows, ther e are defeats and gross infractions. We should 
avoid such defeats and gross infractions, but if one happens, instead of thinking that it does 
not matter, we should engage in purifying it by  confessing the transgression. If we do not do 
this, our continuum will be spoiled or damaged.   From the point of view of the lower tantras, we need to engage in the yoga with signs and 
then, when that becomes stable, in the yoga wi thout signs. From the point of view of the 
higher tantras we need to engage in the yoga  of the generation stage and then, when that 
becomes stable, in the yoga of the completion st age. There are some differences in these with 
respect to the various deities but the different st ages can be set out as the isolation of body, 
the isolation of speech, the isolation of mind, th e metaphoric clear light, the impure illusory 
body, the actual clear li ght, the pure illusory body, the unio n of a learner of the actual clear 
light and pure illusory body, and the union of no-more-learner and the achievement of enlightenment or the state of Vajradhara. We need  to train in these stages in order to become 
better and better in them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2A2B-1N Explanation that the intention of the Lamp on the Path  etc. is the engagement in both sutra 
and mantra [vehicles] 
The body of the presentation of the path is set forth in Lamp on the Path , and the 
lam-rim also guides [students] in the same way.  
 
The body of the presentation of  the path is set out in the Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment , 
and the lam-rim also guides us in the path in a similar way. First we engage in the sutra path 
and then, having trained in this, we are led into  the tantra path. This is similar in Atisha’s 
text and in the teachings on the stages of th e path. Therefore, we too need to follow this 
procedure. In the Lamp on the Path , Atisha first explains the vehicles of the three beings and 
then toward the end sets out the n eed to enter the mantra vehicle.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
227 Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2A2B-2 The purpose 
A The actual purpose 
B The sources 
2B4B-2A2B-2A The actual purpose 
1 Question 
Second: “If the Dharma-cycles of lesse r and intermediate beings are the 
preparatory practices of great beings, it shou ld indeed be all right to consider them 
the stages of the path of great beings. But what is the use of saying ‘the stages of 
the path that are common to lesser and intermediate [beings]’?” 
 
Here a question is posed which is then answered in the next section. Wh y is it necessary to 
practice the paths of small and middle beings prio r to engaging in the practices of great beings 
since it should be enough to immediately engage  in the practices of great beings? Given this, 
why say “the stages of the path that are common  to small and middle beings”? In other words, 
since we are great beings, that is, mahayana prac titioners, why should we  engage in the paths 
that are common to small and middl ing beings? This person thinks that this is not necessary, 
rather it is enough to engage in  the path of great beings alone. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Answer 
There are two major purposes for classifyin g or guiding three kinds of beings. In 
this way, (1) the conceit of claiming ones elf to be a great being, while the mental 
attitudes that are common to lesser or intermediate beings have not even arisen, is 
overcome, and (2) all three – the highest, intermediate, and least mental attitudes 
– have great benefits. The way in which th ey are great is that since the two more 
advanced beings also need to strive for high status and liberation, there is no fault in teaching the great or intermediate indi viduals who are to be guided how to train 
in the thoughts of those two, and positive  qualities are developed. However, if a 
lesser person trains beginning with the more advanced ones, the more advanced 
thoughts will not arise and the lesser ones will  be cast away, {62} so nothing will be 
developed. Moreover, through being taught the common path and through 
training, those with the good fortune of superior [capacity] will soon develop 
positive qualities that had or had not aris en before, whereby they can be guided to 
higher and higher [levels], once the lower ones have arisen. Since this is correct, 
their path will not be prolonged. 
 The path is divided into three in terms of some beings being led into the path of small beings, 
some into the path of middling beings, and some into the path of great beings. This division 
is made in order to reduce or eliminate the pr ide of those who, withou t having trained in the 
paths of small and middling beings, think of them selves as great beings. Since some beings are 
very intelligent, some are middling intelligent, an d some are less intelligent, it is necessary to 
teach the three paths to respectively those with sharp faculties, middling faculties, and small 
faculties. In other words, there are beings wh o have great capacity, beings who have middling 
capacity, and beings who have small capacity. Those with small capacity should be taught the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
228 small path, whereupon, by training in it, thei r mental faculty improves and they can be led 
into the middling path. Similarly, those with mi ddling capacity should be taught the middling 
path, whereupon by training in it their mental faculty improves  and they can be led into the 
great path, the Mahayana.  
 How does there arise great benefit? Since sm all beings are more interested in obtaining 
higher rebirth, they should be taught the path  of small beings. Those who are interested in 
attaining liberation or nirvana should be taught the path of middling beings. However, both 
those who wish to attain the happiness of higher rebirth, that is, the success of future lives, 
and those who wish to attain liberation, must fi rst enter the path. Initia lly we are all ordinary 
beings who are not interested in  the Dharma or meditation, ther efore interest in the Dharma 
must first be induced before they can be led in to the small path. When this interest has been 
developed, they should e taught about the fact that future lives are mo re important than this 
life through the explanation that when this life ceases we do not cease to exist, rather our 
mental continuum continues. Then, because this  life is only one and our future lives are 
many, future lives are more important. For this reason it is necessary to practice the Dharma 
in order to obtain a good rebirth in the future . To do this, then need to be taught how to 
practice the morality of the ten virtues. They  should also be taught how to meditate, for 
example, how to do the breathing meditation. Th ey need to be told that they should focus 
their mind on the breath, following the inhalati on and exhalation of the breath while trying 
not to allow their mind to be distracted to othe r things. It is said that when many conceptions 
arise, we should stop them by meditating on th e breath. To do this we think, “Now I want to 
exhale,” while focusing one part of the mind  on the breath and an other on the wish to 
exhale. Then we think, “Now I want to inhale” and so forth.  In this way, the breathing 
meditation can reduce conceptions. Purification  can also be done in concomitance with the 
breathing meditation by imagining that with each  exhalation we exhale all the negative energy 
created by our body, speech, and mind since beginningless time. For example, when we are 
very agitated or nervous or the mind is complete ly dark, sinking, or filled with laxity, we can 
imagine exhaling all this negative energy to a gr eat distance in the form of black smoke. Then 
when we inhale we can imagine inhaling, in the form of white light, all the good qualities of 
the holy beings, their compassion, love, and positi ve energy, as well as all the positive energy 
of the entire universe. Thereby we achieve what ever we need and become very relaxed. We 
can meditate in this way, training our mind. This  is a simple meditation but it is necessary to 
do it. Our mind is like a crazy elephant. However, while a crazy elephant can be tamed by 
being hooked with iron hooks and beaten with sticks, our mind cannot be controlled by such 
things. Our mind can only be controlled by meditation.   In this way beings of small capacity can be led into the path of small beings. On the other 
hand, if the great path is taught to them, even th ough they try to train in  it they will be unable 
to generate its qualities and realizations. Therefor e, it is better to initially lead them in the 
small path, whereby they can achieve realizatio ns and improve more and more. Contrarily, if 
someone who has given up the small path is led in  the path of great beings, he or she will be 
unable to generate either the lower or higher path, due to which realizations will not arise, 
only ignorance will arise. Therefore, everyone needs to first travel the small path, then the 
middling path, and then the great path, progressive ly going higher and higher. In this way we 
will be able to gradually develop the entire path to enlightenment.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 28 February-3 March 2005 (05) 
229  If those who are very intelligent or who have  good fortune, having already generated the 
common paths, are taught the high er path, they will quickly achieve these qualities. Thus, the 
best is to first be taught the small path, then the middling path, and then  the great path. If we 
are led gradually in the paths, we will be able to generate all of them. In this way we will 
quickly generate the Mahayana path. Therefore, in  your everyday life try to develop love and 
compassion toward all sentient beings. This is the main base for the increase of the Mahayana 
qualities and the cause of generating the conventional mind of enlightenment.  
 First we generate the aspiring mind of en lightenment and then the engaging mind of 
enlightenment. In this way we accumulate meri t on the path of accu mulation and enter the 
path of preparation. Then we achieve the path of seeing and gradually attain the forbearances 
and knowledges. Then we achieve the path of me ditation. In this way all the obscurations or 
the objects of abandonment gradually diminish . Then, by means of the Hinayana path, we 
can attain the state of a foe-de stroyer in which all the afflic tive obscurations have been 
abandoned, although we will still have the ob scurations to knowledge. Having attained the 
state of a foe-destroyer, we can then en ter the Mahayana path and gradually attain 
buddhahood. However, we can also, right from  the beginning, enter the Mahayana path 
without engaging in the Hinayana path of hearer s or solitary realizers. Some people, on the 
other hand, engage in the Hin ayana path for a while and then due to some circumstances 
meet a mahayana spiritual friend, listen to Mahaya na teachings and, generating interest in it, 
give up the Hinayana path and enter the Maha yana path. There are these different ways of 
traveling the path. 
 In short, we need to familiarize our mind with the path of small beings, the path of 
middling beings, and the path of great beings. We need to generate definite emergence or 
renunciation in our mind. It is ea sy to wish to give up suffering but not as easy to give up the 
pleasures and excellences of this world! Ho wever, by giving them up, we can achieve 
enlightenment. Buddha Shakyamuni was at one ti me a prince, the son of a king, who had a 
wife and a son, but then, due to generating renunciation, he left his family and together with five servants meditated for six years while engagi ng in ascetic practices, eating and drinking 
very little. He gained concentration but his bo dy became like a skeleton, just bones covered 
with skin. When he was eventua lly offered a bowl of butter an d honey, he ate it whereby the 
strength of his body improved, but the other five ascetics thought that he was no longer a true 
practitioner and so abandoned him. The future  buddha then sat down under a bodhi tree to 
meditate. He destroyed the interferences or demo ns by the power of his meditation on love. 
First they manifested many beautiful woman wh o danced and sang around him, but, by the 
power of his meditation, he was able to transform them into ugly old hags with wrinkled skin. In this way, they could not harm him. The demons  then sent an army of  soldiers who shot at 
the Buddha with bows and arrows, but when th e arrows touched his body they transformed 
into flowers whereby they did not harm him. Li ke this, he destroyed the demons and then at 
sunrise attained enlightenment and manifested  omniscient mind, becoming a buddha. We 
will stop here on an auspicious subject that we too will go to buddhahood!  
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
230 Monday afternoon, 7 March 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 62) says:  
2B4B-2A2B-2B The sources 
The need to develop mental states gradually is proclaimed in [the Sutra ] Requested 
by the King Lord of Dharanis  through applying the analogy of a skilled jeweller 
cleaning precious stones gradually to th e meaning. The protector Nagarjuna also 
taught to gradually lead in the path of high status and certain goodness:  
 
First the Dharma of high status, 
Then that of certain goodness comes forth. 
Therefore, once you achieve high status, 
Certain goodness will excellently come by stages. 
 It is necessary to train the mind gradually with out jumping here and there. Just as a skilled 
jeweler gradually cleans and refines precious ston es, so too do sentient beings need to be led 
gradually according to their dispositions and imprints. Thus, the same teachings should not 
be given to all beings. In fact, if certain teachi ngs are given to certain beings they will not be 
o f  a n y  b e n e f i t  a n d  m a y  e v e n  b e  o f  h a r m .  T h e r e f o r e ,  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  b e  s k i l l f u l  i n  g i v i n g  teachings in accordance with particular people’s mental dispositions. Just as a skilled jeweler purifies and cleans precious stems gradually, simi larly it is necessary to give different kinds of 
teachings in order to clean for sentient be ings to clean their mental afflictions.  
 In this context three levels of teachings ar e mentioned: easy Dharma teachings, middling 
Dharma teachings, and profound Dharma teachi ngs. The Buddha, for example, first taught 
the wheel of the four noble truths, then he taug ht the wheel of emptiness or signlessness, and 
then he taught the wheel of the differentiation  of characteristics. Th e beings for whom the 
first wheel was taught were, from the point of view of tenets, Vaibhashikas and Sautrantikas, 
and from the point of view of path, mostly hearers. The beings  for whom the second wheel of 
Dharma was taught were, from the point of view of tenets, Svatantrika Madhyamikas and 
Prasangika Madhyamikas. The beings for whom  the third wheel was taught were, from the 
point of view of tene ts, Chittamatrins. The King of Dharanis  Sutra  also sets out three wheels of 
Dharma but explains them a bit differently. This  subject can be learned from other texts.  
 Nagarjuna said that first it is necessary to give teachings on the path of small beings in 
order for sentient beings to generate more inte rest in attaining a rebi rth of high status, for 
example, as a human being, in their next life. In other words, first we must stop thinking only of this life. Because this life is just one, whereas future lives are many, we need to give emphasis to future lives, that is, to obtaining rebirth as human being or god. Therefore, it is 
necessary to first teach sentient beings morali ty – the abandonment of the ten non-virtuous 
actions and the practice of the ten virtuous acti ons. Having been taught morality, they should 
be taught the need to strive for certain or definite goodness. Hearers should be taught 
middling teachings, that is, the four noble truths  and that the pleasures of cyclic existence of 
are not complete and even bring suffering, in order to generate interest in them regarding the state of liberation or nirvana. Then they sh ould be slowly led in the higher path, the 
Mahayana. After that they should slowly be in troduced to the Prasan gika Madhyamaka point 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
231 of view – the profound and vast teachings of  the Mahayana. Nagarjun a said that sentient 
beings should be gradually taught high st atus and definite goodness in this way.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Arya Asanga also said: 
 
A l s o ,  i n  o r d e r  t h a t  t h e  s i d e  o f  v i r t u e  b e  g r a d u a l l y  a c c o m p l i s h e d  properly, the bodhisattva initially te aches those who have the wisdom of 
childish sentient beings easy Dharma, and causes them to follow easy directions and instructions. Real izing that they have developed 
middling wisdom, he causes them to follow intermediate Dharma teachings and intermediate directions  and instructions. Realizing that 
they have developed vast wisdom , he teaches them the profound 
Dharma and causes them to follow subtle directions and instructions. His beneficial activities descend on those sentient beings progressively. 
 Asanga also said that in order to gradually increase virtues on the side of enlightenment, the bodhisattva first gives easy teachings to childish beings with an ordinary mind as well as makes 
t h e m  f o l l o w  e a s y  a d v i c e  o r  d i r e c t i o n s  a n d  i n structions. Then he slowly teaches them the 
middling level of Dharma teachings, that is, the path of middling beings, and makes them 
follow middling level of advice and instructio ns, that is, the Hinayana path to nirvana. He 
teaches them that cyclic existenc e is the nature of suffering due to which it is necessary to get 
out of cyclic existence and achieve nirvana. For this purpose, the main objects to be 
abandoned are the afflictive obscurations – the afflictions such as attachment, anger, 
ignorance, pride, doubt, and afflicted view. Th en he teaches them how to abandon them by 
means of applying their specific antidotes. By being taught the middling Dharma in this way, 
they become vessels for vast or great wisdom. Then the bodhisattva teaches them emptiness, 
the profound. This refers to the Perfection of  Wisdom Sutras in 100 ,000, 25,000 and 8,000 
verses, which teach emptiness explicitly and teach the path, the eight topics and seventy 
categories, implicitly. All of these are nece ssary to develop a deeper understanding of 
emptiness. Then the bodhisattva teaches that emptiness is divided into twenty, sixteen, and 
four types, and that there two types of self lessness, the selflessness of persons and the 
selflessness of phenomena. Then he teaches th at the realization of emptiness should be 
conjoined with great compassion and love, that is, with the conventional mind of 
enlightenment that wishes to attain buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings. Then 
he teaches that based on this, sentient beings should practice  the activities or conduct of 
bodhisattvas, the six perfections and the four means of gathering disciples (generosity, talking 
nicely, giving teachings, and practicing what one teaches).   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Aryadeva, in his Lamp of Summarized Behavior , establishes that first the training in 
the contemplations of the perfection vehicle and after that the mode of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
232 engagement in mantra {63} needs to be gradual. Summarizing the meaning of this 
he says: 
 
In order for beings who are beginners 
To get involved in ultimate truth 
The means the perfect Buddha expounded Resemble the steps of a flight of stairs. 
 
In his text Summarized Behavior , Aryadeva says that first it is ne cessary to train the mind in the 
thoughts or contemplations of the Mahayana, that is, of the perfection vehicle. This means 
that first one should train in the vast and profound, whereby one comes to develop the mind 
of enlightenment, as well as great compassion and love, and the realizat ion of emptiness. Only 
after that should one enter the mantra vehicle. To practice tantra one first needs to receive 
empowerment. Without receiving an empowermen t, one cannot practice tantra. In fact the 
door to tantra is the receiving of an em powerment. If someone, without receiving 
empowerment, practices tantra by reading books and so forth, he or she will not obtain its 
result because in order to achieve the result it  is necessary to receive empowerment. There are 
four classes of tantra: action tantra (kriya tant ra), performance tantra (charya tantra), yoga 
tantra, and highest yoga tantra (mahanuttarayoga ). It is necessary to receive empowerment in 
these different classes of tantra. Having re ceived empowerment, when one practices the 
sadhana of the deity one should try to visualiz e oneself as that particular deity. First one 
transforms into emptiness, then with respect to  this mind realizing emptiness one thinks “I 
am the truth body.” From emptiness one arises as, for example, a cubit of light which is the 
nature of one’s mind, with respect to which one thinks “I am the enjoym ent body.” Then this 
transforms and one arise as the deity with one face and two arms, with respect to which one 
thinks “I am the emanation body.” When practici ng tantra, it is necessary to carry death into 
the path to the truth body, the intermediate state into the path to the enjoyment body, and 
birth into the path to the emanation body. By do ng this visualization ag ain and again, it will 
slowly become more familiar. In this way, one should try to practice tantra.  In order for beginners to engage in the ultima te truth, the method ta ught by the Buddha is 
like a  flight of stairs that is to be climbed one by one.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B  The actual way of taking its essence 
1 Training the mind in the stages of the path common to lesser beings 
2 Training the mind in the stages of the path common to intermediate beings 
3 Training the mind in the stages of the path of great beings 
The second one has three points: Training  the mind in the stages of the path 
common to lesser beings, training the mind  in the stages of the path common to 
intermediate beings, and training the mind  in the stages of the path of great 
beings. 
 
The path common to small or lesser beings be gins with the meditation recognizing the 
precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qu alities, the difficulty of finding it, and the 
fact that it can easily be lost due to death- impermanence. Thus, the subsequent meditation is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
233 that of the nine-round meditation on death, of which the three main points are: death is 
certain, the time of death is uncertain, and th at at the time of death nothing, no worldly 
activities nor our wealth or body, can help us . Next there is the meditation on the lower 
realms: the sufferings of the he ll realms, the sufferings of th e hungry ghost realm, and the 
sufferings of the animal realms. One examines whether or not one could bear such rebirths. 
Since one could not bear them, one meditates on the need to abandon creating the projecting 
causes that throw one into the lower realms and strive to create the projecting actions that 
will throw one into the higher realms. Look ing for something to protect one from such 
sufferings, one will discover that only the Th ree Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, are 
capable of doing this. Thus, one contemplates th eir qualities and, having generated faith in 
them, goes for refuge to them . Having done so, one must re spect the general and specific 
advice concerning what to abandon and what to  practice with respect to each one of them. 
Then one meditates on the need to guard the law of actions and results. One contemplates 
the nature of karma, for example, that karma is definite, that karma increases, that if karma is 
c r e a t e d  i t  w i l l  n e v e r  b e  l o s t ,  a n d  t h a t  i f  k a rma has not been created its result will not be 
experienced. One also meditates on the fact that  there is karma that is both accumulated and 
created, karma that is accumulated but no t created, karma that is created but not 
accumulated, and karma that is neither accumula ted or created. This can be understood from 
the Hundred Actions Sutra , one of the Buddha’s teachings, as well as from the fourth chapter of 
the Treasury of Manifest Dharma .  
 Having understood how actions function, that is, how they bring a result, one will come to 
abandon non-virtuous actions and engage in vi rtuous actions. However, due to the many 
different afflictions that arise in  the mind of ordinary beings, th ey create non-virtuous actions. 
These actions need to be purified by means of applying the four opponent forces: the force of 
going for refuge and generating the mind of enli ghtenment, the force of generating regret for 
the negative actions that have been done, the fo rce of resolving not to do them again, and the 
force of applying an actual antidote, such as  reciting mantras, doing prostrations, and so 
forth. By purifying negative actions, one will go higher and higher.   Then on the path common to middling or in termediate beings, one meditates on true 
sufferings. For example, one examines the many different sufferings that are experienced even 
as a human being. Then one looks for the cause, wh ereby one will find that  it is true origins – 
actions and afflictions (karma and klesha). Ha ving understood this, one will apply their 
antidotes by meditating true paths, that is, on emptiness, whereby one will actualize true 
cessations, the cessation of all the afflictions.  When the causes are purified, one no longer 
creates actions to be reborn again in cyclic existence. One will also realize the result – 
liberation or nirvana.  Then on the path of great beings, one contem plates the fact that even if one achieves 
nirvana or freedom from cyclic existence, still all one’s mother sentient beings will continue 
to be tormented in cyclic existe nce. Thereby, one will generate the wish to take care of them 
and thereby enter the Mahayana path. Then, one strives to generate bodhichitta either by 
means of the meditation on the six causes an d one result, which come s down from Buddha 
Shakyamuni to Maitreya, from him to Asanga, and so forth, or by means of the meditation on 
equalizing and exchanging self and others, which comes down from Buddha Shakyamuni to 
M a n j u s h r i ,  f r o m  h i m  t o  N a g a r j u n a ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  T h u s ,  i n  a c c o r d a n c e  w i t h  t h e  l i n e a g e  o f  Asanga one meditates on the six causes and one result, and in accordance with the lineage of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
234 Nagarjuna one meditates on exchanging self and others through thinking of the disadvantages 
of cherishing oneself and the advantages of cherishing others. One should do whichever 
meditation is more comfortable and easier for one’s mind. After that one should receive 
empowerment and enter the path of tantra.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 63) says:  
PART II: 
SMALL SCOPE 
Explanation of the stages of the path common to lesser beings  
2B4B-2B1 The stages of the path common to lesser beings 
A The actual training in the contemplations of lesser beings  
B The gauge of those contemplations having arisen C Clearing up misconceptions about them  
{63} The first one has three points: the ac tual training in the contemplations of 
lesser beings, the gauge of those contempl ations having arisen, and clearing up 
misconceptions about them. 
 
First there is the topic of training in the actu al path of small beings, then the measure of 
having trained in this, and then the clea ring up of misconceptions about this. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A The actual training in the contemplations of lesser beings 
1 Developing a mental attitude of interest in future worlds 
2 Relying on the methods for the happiness of future worlds 
The first of those has two points: developing a mental attitude of interest in future 
worlds and relying on the methods fo r the happiness of future worlds. 
 
We need to develop a mind that is interested in future worlds or future lives and then rely on 
the methods for achieving the happiness of  future worlds or future lives.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1 Developing a mental attitude of interest in future worlds 
A Being mindful of death: the thought that one is not going to stay in this world for long 
B What things will be like in future existences: thinking of the happiness and suffering of the 
two kinds of migrating beings 
The first one has two points: being mindful of death – the thought that one is not 
going to stay in this world for long; and w h a t  t h i n g s  w i l l  b e  l i k e  i n  f u t u r e  
existences – thinking of the happiness an d suffering of the two kinds of migrating 
beings. 
 
We will generate interest in our future lives by  remembering that we will not remain in this 
world for long. Why is this? Because we will s oon die. No matter how much we wish to stay 
alive and do not want to die, still we  will die. One day death will come.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
235  Having thought about this, we next examine what will happen if  we die. We will find that 
we will either go to a happy migration or to a bad migration. However, which one is not. If we 
practice well, we can perhaps be  confident of not being reborn in the lower realms and of 
being reborn in the higher realms, however for the most part we cannot be sure of this. We 
need to think about this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
Explanation of how to be mindful of death –  
that one will not stay in this world for long 
2B4B-2B1A-1A Being mindful of death – the thought that one is not going to stay in this world for 
long  
1 The disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of death 
2 The advantages of cultivating it 
3 What kind of mind that is mindful of death is generated 
4 How to cultivate mindfulness of death  
The first of those has four points: the disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness 
of death, the advantages of cultivating it ,  w h a t  k i n d  o f  m i n d  t h a t  i s  m i n d f u l  o f  
death is generated, and how to cultivate mindfulness of death.  
 There are disadvantages of not being mindful of or remembering death. On the other hand, there are advantages to remembering death. What  kind of mind that is mindful of death is 
generated? The kind of mind that remember s death is an analytical mind. How is the 
mindfulness of death cultivated? By examinin g the fact that death will definitely come. 
Everyday we need to think of death, how th e elements cease to function, how the body 
gradually becomes unable to move, how the mind slowly becomes unable to remember 
anything, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A1 The disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of death  
A Demonstration that the mind’s bias towards the idea that one is not going to die is the gateway of 
harm 
First: Although in all of us there is the thought that at the end of our days death 
will come, every day we think “I will no t die today,” “Today I will also not die.” 
That way, even right until we are about to die, the mind holds on to the idea that 
we are not going to die.  
 
We tend to think, “I will not die today.” However, this kind of mind is harmful to us in that, due to thinking that we will not die today, we  d o  n o t  e n g a g e  i n  t h e  p r a c t i c e  o f  D h a r m a .  
Instead we think, “I am not going to die today.  Since I will live for a long time, I can do it 
later on. Right now I need to engage in worldl y activities, such as business and so forth in 
order to make money and become wealthy.” Thin k i n g  i n  t h i s  w a y ,  s o m e  p e o p l e  e n g a g e  i n  
harmful actions such as stealing, drinking, smok ing, and so forth. Other people do not do 
negative actions but lazily spend much of their time sleeping. These things happen if we do 
not remember death.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
236  Because there are people who live to be more  than 100 years old, we  too might think that 
we will also live that long. The mind that thinks , “I will die when I am 80, or 90, or 100 years 
old,” is a mind that thinks “I will die in the future, but I will not die today.” Then we think 
the same way the next day and then again the ne xt day, so that, even when we are about to 
die, we still think, “I will not die.” However,  this is not the case. For example, sometimes 
someone buys a motorcycle and soon after has an  accident and dies. That person also thought 
that he or she would not die, but suddenly due to  an accident he or she died. Likewise, every 
weekend young people go out to dance in di scotheques and enjoy themselves until early 
morning, but when they are driving home they become sleepy, have a car accident, and die. 
They had only thought to enjoy themselves by singing and dancing, th ey had not thought to 
die yet still they died. Also it happens that sometimes a thief breaks into a house and shoots 
the people in it, due to which they die. Such things happen every day yet still we continue to 
think “I will not die.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B How this prevents us from even taking an interest in future lives 
{64} If you do not take to heart an antido te to this and you are obscured by such 
an idea, and then develop the idea that yo u will remain in this life, you will keep 
thinking about ways to achieve happiness an d eliminate suffering in this life only 
thinking, “I need this and I need that…” As a mind investigating meaningful goals, 
such as future lives, liberation, and omnisc ience, does not arise, no allowances are 
made for engaging in Dharma.  
 
Due the mind thinking that we will not die, we do not think of future li ves. We think only of 
today, “Today I want to be happy. Today I will do this and that.” Due to not thinking of 
death, our mind is completely blocked from thinking of the future.  
 We do not think of and apply the antidote to not remembering death because we are obscured by the thought “I will not die. I will not die.” We hold to th e fact that we will not 
die, due to which we become obscured and think th at we will remain in this life and therefore 
need this and that. We think to do business, wash  the car, take care of our husband, wife, or 
children, and so forth. Some people engage in the business of selling jewels, some in selling 
cars, some in selling clothing, some in selling make-up, some in running beauty salons, and so 
forth. Why do they do this? Because they need money in order to buy a house and so forth as 
without money they will no t be able to do this.  
 I remember a man in Nepal who married a Tibe tan girl. She would go shopping every week 
and would always buy a new pair of shoes. They had a small house but it was full of shoes! In 
just one or two years, she had bought as many as 45 pairs of shoes! Her husband became tired 
of this and escaped to Drepung Monastery in so uth India where he asked one geshe to ordain 
him as a monk. The geshe said that he could not do this because the man was married. The man explained to him that he could not bear being married and told him not only about the 
shoes his wife had bought but also about the ma ny clothes, make-up, and so forth she would 
regularly buy. Prior to his marriage, this same  geshe had told the man to become a monk but 
he had not accepted this and now regretted his mistake. The geshe advi sed him to remain for 
a couple of months, to study Buddhist philosop h y ,  a n d  t h e n  t o  d o  a n  e x a m  i n  o r d e r  t o  
become a monk. Since the man had been a school  teacher he was able to do this and soon 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
237 became a monk. He then studied very well and later on became a lear ned geshe who was also 
a good and humble practitioner. All this happe ned because he had generated some kind of 
renunciation! On the other hand, there are peop le who first generate renunciation and then 
later on change their mind, give up ordination, look for a partner, find one for a while, and 
then change partners over and over again. This is all due to thinking of this life – thinking to 
obtain the happiness of this life and to eliminate the suffering of this life. This does not refer 
to thinking to eliminate the suffering of agin g and so forth, but only  to the suffering of 
poverty and so forth which we want to  eliminate by accumulating wealth.  
 Since we do not even think of our future lives,  there is no need to mention that we do not 
think of liberation and omniscience. We only think of obtaining happiness in this life. Due 
to this, we do not generate the wish to practice  the Dharma in this life. We do not think to 
attain the highest aim of omnisc ience, the middling aim of liberation, or the small aim of a 
higher rebirth in the future. Our mind is unab le to engage in the practice of Dharma, but 
remains completely blocked. For this reason, we  n e e d  t o  t h i n k  t h a t  i f  w e  h a v e  t o  c h o o s e  
between this life and our future lives, the most  important one is our future lives, these being 
many while this life is only one. If we compar e one to many, the majority is more important.  
 Then we need to think that even if we take a higher rebirth in future life it will still be a rebirth in cyclic existence, and therefore gene rate the wish to attain freedom from cyclic 
existence, that is, liberation or nirvana. Altern atively, we should generate the wish to attain 
enlightenment or buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings. We need to try to train 
in these attitudes in our everyday life and to increase their stre ngth in our mind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How this results in meaningful endeavors also having little power 
Even if you engage in study, co ntemplation and meditation for 100 [years], 
whatever virtue you do will have little power as it is done for the sake of this life 
alone. As you will engage in them linked with faulty behavior, negativities, and 
downfalls, it will be rare for them not to be mixed with causes of bad migrations.  
 
Even if we engage in hearing, thinking, or meditating a lot, due to not remembering death 
most of it will be done for the sake of this life . Due to this, whatever virtues we create will not 
be very powerful. Why is this? For example, we m ay study in order to gain qualities so as to be 
able to teach and gain wealth, a high salary, an d so forth. Alternatively, we may meditate in 
order to make other people think that we are a great meditator due to which we will receive 
offerings, be taken care of by others, and not have to do anything else. Although we engage in 
a bit of meditation, the motivation will not be to achieve higher realizations but to collect 
wealth and to be respected. This is not good  and if we create virtues motivated by such 
thoughts, they will not be powerful. These action s will be mixed with or linked to non-virtue 
and faulty conduct. Actions that are a mixture of  virtue and non-virtue, rather than bringing 
rebirth in the higher realms, are more likely to become the cause of rebirth in the lower 
realms. Therefore, whatever we practice, we need  to be careful not to mix virtuous or white 
actions with non-virtuous or black actions. Instea d we should strive to create actions that are 
only white or virtuous, however this is very ra re. Even when we listening to the Dharma, in 
one part of our mind attachment , anger, ignorance, pride, jealousy, resentment, and so forth 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
238 can arise. Our listening can also be mixed with sleep. In short, whatever little virtue we do, we 
should ensure that it is not mixed with non-virtue but remains completely white.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D How this results in long-term goals also being postponed 
Even if you aim at future worlds and allow for their attainment, you will not be 
able to cease the laziness of postponement th at thinks, “I shall do  it later.” A major 
effort at accomplishing it properly will  not come about, as you while away your 
time with sleepiness, pointless chatter, an d the distractions of food, drink, and the 
like.  
 
Due to laziness we think, “I cannot do it today.  I will do it tomorrow .” Then again the next 
day we think the same and one again postpone it till later. This laziness of postponement 
results in us not engaging in Dharma practice. Even if we want to do something for the next 
world or life and try to practice, out of laziness we will continually postpone it till later. Instead we will pass our time in sleep and leth argy, engaging in meaningless talk, enjoying 
eating and drinking, and so forth.  Thus, not only do we waste time  out of laziness, but we also 
pass our time in a state of sleepiness and lethar gy. We also spend our time chattering about 
t hi s  an d t hat  per s o n , w hat  he o r  s he i s  do in g, an d s o  fo r t h. As  w e n eed t o eat  an d dr i nk, 
sometimes we go to a restaurant where we need to  wait even one hour just to get the aperitif! 
Then again no more food comes for a while and time passes in useless talk until the actual 
meal comes. After that we pass more time drin king coffee or a drink and eating a desert. In 
this way, we continually waste our time.  
 Tuesday morning, 8 March 2005 (Happy Women’s Day!)  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 64) says:  
E How holding to permanence induces attachment, aversion, and so forth and how they induce faulty 
behavior 
Not only that, through putting great effort  into the excellences of this life, the 
mental afflictions and the faulty behavior  resulting from them increase and then 
you turn your back on the nectar of  Dharma. Since that leads to the bad 
migrations, what could be more  inappropriate than that?  
 
Due to holding ourselves and others – co mpounded phenomena – to be permanent, 
attachment, hatred, ignorance, an d other mental afflictions are induced. Due to thinking that 
we will not die and holding our body and mind to  be permanent, we generate attachment to 
our relatives, wealth, fame, and so forth; to th ose who interfere with ge tting all the things we 
want, we generate hatred, thinking that they are acting against us; and towards others, we 
generate confusion. This attachment, hatred, an d  s o  f o r t h ,  t h e n  i n d u c e  f a u l t y  b e h a v i o r  o r  
conduct, that is, inappropriate or incorrect behavior.  
 In other words, thinking mostly of ourselves,  we put effort into achieving the happinesses 
and excellences of this life. This then produces  the mental afflictions of attachment and so 
forth, which in turn produce many bad activities  or faulty behavior. Due to their increasing 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
239 more and more, we then turn away from the ne ctar of the Dharma, th e Buddha’s teachings. 
Then what happens? Our bad attitude and faulty ac tivities lead us to the lower realms in our 
next life. Since this would be a mistake and ve ry bad, what could be more unsuitable than 
that?  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
From the Four Hundred Verses :  
 
If someone sleeps as if at ease, 
As if the ruler of the three worlds, The lord of his death did not exist – What else could be more awful? 
 
And in Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behavior  it says: 
 
Everything has to be abandoned, 
Unaware that this is so, I performed all kinds of negativities, For the sake of friend and foe. 
 
“The three worlds” mentioned above in the Four Hundred Verses  refer to the worlds above, on, 
and under the ground. Due to not thinking about death, we sleep as ease. Although we think 
that we are “the ruler of the three worlds” and that we are very powerful, one day we will fall 
d o w n .  T h e r e f o r e ,  t h i s  k i n d  o f  b e h a v i o r  i s  v e r y  u n s u i t a b l e .  W e  w i l l  d i e  a n d ,  w h e n  w e  d i e ,  
whatever we own or rule, even the three worlds , must be left behind. We also leave behind 
our sons and daughters, our ministers, our friend s, and, going on alone, our mind leaves even 
o u r  b o d y  b e h i n d .  A l t h o u g h  w e  d o  n o t  k n o w  w h e r e  w e  w i l l  b e  r e b o r n ,  i f  w e  c r e a t e d  m a n y  negativities we will definitely only take rebirth without choice in the lower realms.  
 Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says that unaware of death we  take care of our friends and 
harm those who are not are friends, that is, our foes or enemies. In other words, not 
understanding and not recognizing that we will have to die and that when this happens we 
will have to give everything up and go on alone, we take care of our friends and act against t h o s e  w e  d o  n o t  l i k e  o r  w h o  w e  c o n s i d e r  t o  b e  o u r  e n e m i e s .  I n  t h i s  w a y  w e  c r e a t e  m a n y  negativities. The result of this will be that, wi thout choice, we will go on alone to the lower 
realms.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A2 The advantages of cultivating it 
A The great value 
Second: {65} Once a genuine awareness mindful of death has developed, for 
instance if you are convinced that you wi ll die tomorrow and have just a little 
understanding of the Dharma, you will see th at henceforth you will be without the 
company of relatives and friends and will av ert craving for them. In the majority of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
240 people the wish to take the essence of this  life by means of giving things away and 
the like will naturally arise. In that way, s eeing that all effort for the sake of worldly 
goals such as gain and fame are futile, you will turn away from faulty behavior, 
accumulate the good karma of going for refuge, ethical discipline, and the like. 
What could be more meaningful than asce nding to sublime states oneself by those 
means and guiding migrating beings there too?  That is why it is also praised with 
many analogies.  
 
Having found a precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities, we need to take its 
essence. Thinking that it is very useful and me aningful, we need to put effort into thinking 
about death-impermanence because if we do not re member death it will be difficult for us to 
take its essence. On the other hand, if we re member that we will definitely die today or 
tomorrow, we will naturally strive to gain some  understanding and experience of the Dharma. 
By thinking of the fact that, when we die, we will not be accompanied by our friends and 
relatives, we should give up attachment to them. Even though we might stay together with 
them for a while, one day something will happe n and we will separate or we will die. It 
happens that one day we are close friends with someone and then the very next day we argue with him or her and no longer want to stay to gether, work together, or eat together. Because 
this happens, we should try not to be too attached to our friends and relatives.  
 In addition, if we have accumulated wealth, we  should try to give it away to needy sentient 
beings. If we understand when we die we will no t be able to keep our wealth, effortlessly and 
naturally the thought to give away our money and possessions, as a donation to schools, 
hospitals, temples, and so forth, will arise. We  will spontaneously want to give them away. We 
will also understand that the thought to gain wealth, respect, and so forth is a mundane or 
worldly concern. Does it have any essence? It do es not. Discovering that  such things have no 
essence, it will be easy to turn away from an d eliminate faulty behavior and bad conduct. We 
will also naturally go for refuge to the Th ree Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, and 
try to practice morality, as well as generosi ty and patience. Buddha Shakyamuni said that for 
lay people it was most suitable to practice ge nerosity, morality, and patience. Chandrakirti’s 
Supplement to the Middle Way  also says: 
 
The Sugata mainly praise d these three practices  
Of giving, ethics, and patience for householders.  These are also the collection of merit, the cause  Of a buddha body the nature of which is form.    [3.12] 
 Therefore, lay people should put effort into these three perfections. While everyone needs 
effort, including the ordained, the ordained also need to practice the perfections of 
concentration and wisdom. Lay people or householders, on the other hand, do not in general have time to develop concentration and wisdom due to being busy with their everyday lives. 
However, they can practice morality. Morality includes the morality of abandoning the ten 
non-virtuous actions. It also includes the mo rality of keeping vows such as the vows of 
individual liberation – the one-day precepts an d the five precepts of lay men and lay women, 
which include not taking intoxicants.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
241  In addition, lay people should practice gene rosity by giving away whatever they can to 
others, for example, giving food to dogs, cats, birds, and so forth with a good motivation of 
compassion and love. Even giving one morsel of food to another sentient being is the practice 
of generosity. In addition, lay people need patience in their daily life. This is important 
especially with respect to other family members.  Patience is not something outside ourselves, 
rather it is a mind that remains undisturbed when others say or do something against us. 
Thus, it does not mean that externally we a ppear to be patient while inside our mind is 
churning! This is still better than  reacting negatively, but patience  is something that occurs in 
the mind and in the heart. If we try not to disturb others, our own mind will not be 
disturbed. We need to develop respect for an d patience toward the members of our family. 
For example, when our husband or wife is a bi t naughty we need patience. When there is a 
lack of patience, a couple will eventually separa te. Since we tend to separate again and again, 
it is better to stay with our first partner and instead practice patience. 
 By collecting good actions through practicing  morality and so forth, we will climb to a 
higher state. In addition, we will also be able to lead other migrating beings in the path, that 
is, in the understanding that worldly activities  are essenceless and that they too need to 
practice the Dharma by way of generosity, mora lity, and patience. By doing so, we will render 
our precious human rebirth very meaningful. Such  actions are praised with many examples or 
analogies.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In the Parinirvana [Sutra]  it says: 
 
Among all plowing of fields, that in autumn is the best. Among all 
footprints, that of the elephant is the best. Among all discriminations, 
those of impermanence and death are the best: they eliminate all the 
desire, ignorance, and pride of the three realms. 
 
Similarly, it is praised, among other things, as being a hammer that instantly 
destroys all mental afflictions and all faulty  behaviors as well as being a gate to the 
simultaneous accomplishment of all that is virtuous and excellent. 
 With respect to plowing fields, the best is to  plow them in the autumn because when seeds 
are later sown in that field they will grow well. The best of footprints is  that of the elephant 
since it is bigger than other animals. Am ong all discriminations, the best are the 
discriminations of impermanence and death. These discriminations eliminate the desire, 
ignorance, and pride of the three realms – the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm. 
They eliminate desire because, through seeing th at we will die, we will no longer be attached 
to the good qualities of this world. Instead we will understand that they only bring a deceptive 
happiness and not final or absolute happiness.   There are different types of ignorance, for example, the ignorance not knowing thusness, 
selflessness, or emptiness and the ignorance not knowing actions and results. In this context 
the ignorance not knowing actions and results is the main ignorance that is eliminated by the 
discriminations of death and impermanence. The la w of actions and results refers to the fact 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
242 that a certain kind of action brings a certain ki nd of result. This is a natural law that was not 
made by any nation or country.  
 The discriminations of death and impermanence also eliminate the pride that causes us to 
be swollen or puffed up with ourselves. Thus, the discriminations of death and 
impermanence eliminate these three mental afflictions.  
 Impermanence refers to the fact that a ll phenomena change momentarily and do not 
abide. Instead they are like a flowing river that never stops. For example,  with respect to this 
year 2005, the first and second months have al ready finished and we have now arrived at the 
third month, which every day, every hour, every minute becomes less and less. Our life passes in this way but we do not think about or recognize this reality. Life goes by very quickly. Even 
if we have a lifespan of 100 years, everyday it lessens. Thus, there is impermanence in general, 
as well as the specific impermanence of death,  both our own and others. If we examine this 
well, we will see that everyday many people die du e to the many conditions that take our life – 
being killed, sickness, a heart attack, car accide nts, a building collapsi ng, and so forth. We 
should think about this.   If we think about death-impermanence, th e afflictions and faulty conduct will be 
spontaneously destroyed as if by  a hammer. Simultaneously, the d oor to all virtuous actions – 
going for refuge, practicing generosity, morali ty, patience, and so fo rth – will be opened.  
 Middle Lam-Rim says:  
B It is the door to all excellence 
In brief, the time for achieving the goals of beings is only this time of having 
gained a special basis. We mostly remain in  bad migrations and even if we make it 
to the happy migrations just once, they  are predominantly places of unfreedom, 
due to which we do not find the opport unity to accomplish the Dharma. If we 
gain a basis suited to accomplishing the teachings and still do not accomplish the 
Dharma properly, it is due to  this thought of “I’m not go ing to die yet.” Therefore, 
this mind that holds to the position of no t dying {66} is the door to all manner of 
degeneration and mindfulness of death is the door to all excellence.  
 The discrimination of death-impermanence an d the going for refuge are the door to all 
excellence. In brief, we can accomplish all the aims of beings at this time when we have 
achieved this human body, a special basis. Alth ough we have had beginningless lives, in most 
of them we were reborn in the lower realms and then remained there for a long time. We 
only achieved a happy realm, for example, as a human being, every once in a while, and then 
once again we returned to the lower realms. Now that we have a human rebirth we are still busy with worldly activities, do not have much ti me to practice the Dharma, and it is difficult 
for us to practice it. Why is this? It is beca use in our world everyone is busy and there are 
always many things to do. Although we coul d practice the Dharma well with this body, 
because we have no time and are busy we do not find time to meditate, recite prayers ,and so 
forth. We should check why this happens.   Some people, having gained such a special body, try to practice but are unable to do it perfectly and correctly. For example, having taken an empowerment and received commitments such as the commitment to do the S i x  S e s s i o n  G u r u  Y o g a ,  t h e y  d o  i t  v e r y  
quickly while the mind is distracted to other th ings such as preparing dinner. Therefore, even 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
243 when we practice, we do not do it very well or very perfectly. Why is this? It all stems from the 
root that is the thought, “I am not going to die yet.” We hold ourselves to be permanent and 
this grasping to not dying is the cause for all g ood things to degenerate. However, even if we 
have not practiced the Dharma we will still die. Th erefore, we need to try to think, “I will die, 
maybe today, maybe tomorrow.” We should meditate on death-impermanence and 
continually remember death as this is the door to all excellence. This is because if we are 
worried about dying tomorrow, if we feel the re ality of death-impermanence, we will put effort 
into our practice of the Dharma. This will lead to virtuous actions, which are the cause of all 
excellences and perfections.   Hence, we should try in everyday life, as much as possible, to do some analytical 
meditation on whether or not we  will die. We will definitely die. When? We do not know. 
What can help us at the time of death? If we examine this we will find that only our Dharma practice will be of help at the time of death, nothing else can help us. Therefore, every day we 
should try to do a bit of meditation on de ath-impermanence. By familiarizing with this 
thought, we will engage in the practice of the Dharma. Thus, meditation on death-
impermanence is a good method for inducing us to practice the Dharma.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How it is necessary to give up misunderstandings and meditate from the bottom of one’s heart  
Therefore, you should not think: “This is  a practice for those who do not have 
other profound Dharma on which to medita te” and “You should meditate on this 
object of meditation but only a bit in the beginning, it is unsuitable to practice it 
continually.” Rather you should meditate upon it, until you gain certainty from 
the bottom of your heart that it is necessary in the beginn ing, in the middle, and at 
the end.  
 
We need to abandon misunderstandings or mi staken conceptions regarding meditation on 
death and then meditate on it from the depths  of our heart. For ex ample, we should not 
think that meditation on death-impermanence is only for those who do not meditate on a 
more profound Dharma; this would be a mistake. Nor is it correct that it is an object of 
meditation for a bit in the beginning, but then la ter on there is no need to meditate on death-
impermanence. Instead we need to meditate on  death-impermanence at the beginning, in the 
middle, and at the end. We should try to gain  certainty from the bo ttom of our heart that 
such meditation is necessary at all times. We ca n do it at the beginning , in the middle, and at 
the end of the day, or at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end of our Dharma practice. 
In short, everyday we should try to meditate a bit on death-impermanence as this will induce 
going for refuge, the practice of morality, and so forth. It will also induce an understanding of 
the four noble truths and meditation on the Mahayana path, for exampl e, the recognition of 
all sentient beings as having been our mother, their kindness, the need to repay this kindness, 
love, compassion, the extraordinary thought, and the mind of enlightenment. Everyday we 
need to do a brief glance meditation or brie f review meditation by means of analytical 
meditation, not placement meditation, on a ll the points of the stages of the path. 
 
Tuesday afternoon, 8 March 2005  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
244 Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 66) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A3 What kind of mind that is mindful of death is generated 
Third: The fear born from wo rries about separation from relatives etc. is the kind 
of fear of death of those who are not trai ned in the path. Therefore, here this is 
not was it to be generated. Well then, what [kind of fear is to be generated ]? All 
bodies that are taken under the power of karma and mental afflictions do not pass 
beyond death, which is why – even though this may give rise to fear – it cannot be 
prevented for the time being. However,  without blocking the causes for bad 
migrations and without accomplishing th e causes for high status and certain 
goodness, you will fear death. With respect to that, if you think about the resulting 
fear, this can be accomplished, whereby yo u will not be afraid on the verge of 
dying. If you do not achieve this object ive, through fear of not being liberated 
from the cyclic existence in general and of falling into the bad migrations in 
particular you will be tormented by remorse at the time of death.  
 
The fear of being separated from relatives, friend s, wealth, and so forth at the time of death is 
the kind of fear that is generated by those who have not trained in the path. However, this is 
not the fear that we should generate in this context. Why is that? Because we are people who 
have trained in the path. On the other hand, if we were dying right now and feared separation from our relatives, friends, wealth, and our belongings, it would show that we have 
not trained in the stages of th e  p a t h .  S o  w h a t  k i n d  o f  f e a r  s h o u l d  w e  g e n e r a t e ?  W e  t a k e  
rebirth by the force of afflictions and contamin ated actions. Whatever kind of rebirth we 
take, whether as a human being, anti-god, god, animal, and so forth, we will definitely die. 
We cannot escape death. Therefore, if we fear death but cannot yet avoid it, what do we need 
to do? We need to try to stop creating the caus es for taking rebirth in the lower realms. If we 
have a precious human rebirth but do not use it to create the causes of higher rebirth in the 
future, then when we die we will necessarily ex perience fear. What can we do to avoid taking 
rebirth in the lower realms? We can practice  virtuous dharmas and abandon non-virtuous 
dharmas, whereby we will no longer need to worry about being reborn in the lower realms. 
Thus, we should practice this no w so as to avoid experiencing fear at the time of death. As 
long as we are not free from cyclic existence we can fall into the lower realms. If we do not 
practice Dharma henceforth until we die, at the time of death we will regret not having done 
this and will experience the fear of taking rebirt h in the lower realms. However, at that time it 
will be too late. Therefore, we should not do  t h i s .  W h a t  s h o u l d  w e  d o ?  W e  s h o u l d  t r y  t o  
practice well, due to which we can be free from the worry of falling into the lower realms.   In addition, by practicing the path of middl ing beings, we can even achieve liberation or 
nirvana due to which there will be no need for any more fear. In short, due to generating a 
strong determination to practice Dharma, we ca n avoid taking rebirth in the lower realms and 
take rebirth in the higher realms. In addition, we can practice and achieve high status or nirvana or even complete enlightenment or  buddhahood. Now we can practice: we are 
healthy, we are intelligent, all our faculties are complete, and we have all the necessary conditions. Therefore, right now we need to practice the Dharma. Therefore, we should 
develop the mind of renunciation or definite  emergence that thinks to become free from 
cyclic existence and strives to attain the state of liberation. To do this, we need to abandon 
creating non-virtuous actions.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
245  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4 How to cultivate mindfulness of death 
A It is certain that we will die 
B It is uncertain when we will die  
C At the time of death nothing except for the Dharma will be of benefit 
Fourth: You should meditate on this by way of the three root  thoughts, the nine 
reasons, and the three resolutions. In this  regard, the three [root thoughts] are: (1) 
it is certain that we will die, (2) it is uncertain when we will die, and (3) at the time 
of death nothing except for the Dharma will be of benefit. 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4A It is certain that we will die 
1 Actual reasons 
2 Resolution 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1 Actual reasons 
A The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no conditions for warding him off  
B One’s lifespan cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly 
C You die without having had time to practice Dharma while alive  
The first one has three points: (1) the Lord  of Death will certainly come and there 
are no conditions for warding him off, (2 ) one’s lifespan cannot be increased and 
diminishes incessantly and (3) you die without having had time to practice 
Dharma while alive {67}.  
A The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no conditions for warding him off 
First: In the Udanavarga  it says that whatever body you have taken, whatever 
country you reside in, and whatever the time , you will be defeated by death. It will 
come to pass that way and cannot be turn ed back by fleeing swiftly away or by 
force, wealth, material substances, mantra s, or medicines, as it says in [the] Advice 
to a King [Sutra] . Kamaba said: “Now some fear of death is necessary. At the 
moment of death you must not be appreh ensive. We do it the other way round: 
now we are not afraid [but] in the moment of death we dig our fingernails into our 
chests.” 
 
There are three roots, nine reasons, and thr ee resolutions or determinations to make. The 
first of the root thoughts is that death is defi nite, that is, we will definitely die. This root 
thought is further divided into three reasons.  (1) Even powerful people, kings, teachers, 
politicians, famous singers and writers, and so forth, will die; there is no one who does not 
die. There are many conditions that take our li fe. We cannot ward off or turn away death. (2) 
Even if our lifespan is 100 years, nothing can be  added to it, instead it continually diminishes 
day after day. (3) Even if we want to practice  the Dharma but think th at right now we do not 
have time, still we will die. Therefore, the conclusi on is that we will definitely die. We need to 
meditate on this.   How can we turn away the conditions for de ath? We cannot. Our body can become sick, 
for example, due to the fact that our world is very polluted by chemicals that can cause us 
cancer and so forth. This pollution becomes a condition that takes our life. There are also 
some conditions for life that transform into co nditions for death. We cannot add anything to 
our life, everyday our life becomes shorter and shorter. In one day and night, each minute our 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
246 lifespan becomes shorter and shorter. One day finishes quickly, then one week finishes 
quickly, and then one month finishes quickly. In  this way time goes quickly and our lifespan 
finishes. We cannot do anything to increase it.  
 Because we are presently busy, we think that  while we cannot practi ce the Dharma today, 
we will do it later on. However, thinking like this, one day death will arrive and we will no 
longer be able to practice the Dharma. Th inking about this, we need to make the 
determination: “I will practice the Dharma. I will really practice the Dharma. Everyday I will 
practice the Dharma.”  
 Whether we take a human body, anti-god body, god body, animal body, hungry ghost b o d y ,  o r  h e l l  b o d y ,  w e  w i l l  d i e .  T h e r e  i s  n o  b o d y  t h a t  o n c e  o b t a i n e d  w i l l  n o t  d i e .  A l s o  wherever we reside, there is no place in whic h we will not die. Wherever we go, under the 
ground, inside a mountain, on top of a mountain , up into space, to other planets or to the 
moon, there is no place where we will not die. Wherever we go we will die. There is no one 
who can say, “I will never die.” Everyone will di e when the time arrives. Therefore, we cannot 
escape death. It will come. Even if we swiftly run away from it, we will not be able to escape 
death. Even if we are very powerful, we will not be able to avoid death. Even if we are very rich, we will not be able to pay death to no t come. Perhaps if we are rich, we can pay a 
hospital a lot of money whereby we can postpo ne death for a bit longer, but still one day 
death will come. Sometimes it happens that do ctors make a mistake and the patient dies 
during surgery. Sometimes they even leave some  instrument or a piece of cotton gauze inside 
the patient’s body, due to which he or she dies . Even though they do their best, the patient 
becomes worst and then dies.  When we take medicine, sometimes it can cure  the body of sickness but it cannot eliminate 
death. There is also no substance or  mantra that can turn death away.  
 Kamaba said that it is necessa ry to generate the fear of deat h now. Due to fearing death, we 
will engage in practice whereby at the time of death we will be free of fear and worry. We will 
be able to die happily, like someone who return s home after having visited another country. 
Thinking that we have practiced well, we can go to our next life free of  worries. Thus, we need 
to think about death now. On the other hand, if  we do not worry about or fear death while 
we are alive, at the time of death we will tear our chest with our fingerna ils. However, then it 
will be too late to do anything. There are peop le who at the time of death experience great 
fear and call out for help, wailing in fear, but no  one is able to help them. At the time of 
death some people say “Take this weight off me. I am sinking under the earth,” this shows 
that after death they will be born in the hell or hungry ghost realms. When others experience 
cold and beg to be covered with more blankets, this is a sign that af ter death they will be 
reborn in the cold hell. When others experience great heat an d ask for the blankets to be 
removed, this is a sign that af ter death they will be reborn in  the hot hells. These experiences 
at the time of death show that  the person did not practice we ll during his or her life by 
engaging in virtue so as to be reborn in the higher realms, but instead continually engaged in 
non-virtuous actions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B One’s lifespan cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly 
Second: As it says in [the Sutra of] Entering the Womb , attaining a lifespan of a 
hundred years seems to be the limit of what  is possible. However, even if you reach 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
247 that, meanwhile, the years until then wa ste away by the passage of month after 
month, day after day, and day and night. As they too waste away with the passage 
of morning and so on, it seems that the lifespan in general has already degenerated 
from before and that the remainder also diminishes incessantly without anything 
being added.  
 
The Sutra of Nanda’s Entering the Womb  says that very few human beings have a lifespan of 100 
years. However, even if we have such a life span, still one year passes away month by month, 
one month passes away day by day, and one day passes away in a day and night. Then in one 
day there is morning, then afternoon, then ev ening, then night, and once again another 
morning. Like this time passes quickly and our lifespan, even 100 years, is quickly exhausted. 
While our life is quickly exhausted, we cannot add any time to it. In this way our life quickly, 
quickly, quickly, quickly finish es. What can we do? We cannot do  anything about it. It will 
finish. This is what is said here.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behavior  it says: 
 
This life decreases constantly, 
Day and night, without respite, If from nowhere there is increase, Either, how could I not die? 
 Day and night without staying still, our life span constantly diminishes. Nor can we add 
anything to it. If, on the other hand, our lifespan decreased but we could add some time to it, things would be fine, but we cannot. However, th ere are some exceptions to this general rule 
as by means of certain long-life tantra practices, such as the recitation of a long-life mantra, we 
can eliminate one particular cause of death due to which we can remain alive longer. 
However, this does not imply that we can add ti me to our lifespan. Every day it continues to 
decrease. Therefore, how could we not die? We will die!  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Furthermore, you should consider this by way of numerous analogies such as a weaver weaving cloth, [animals] to be slaughtered approaching the slaughter place 
with each step, cattle being lead without any control to their place by a herdsman, 
and so forth. This is also taught in [the Sutra of] Extensive Display  by means of many 
analogies: 
 
The three existences are impermanent like autumn clouds; The birth and death of migrating beings resemble a show, The passage of life of migrating beings is like a flash of lightning in the sky; It passes fast like a waterfall from a steep mountain. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
248  
Just as when a weaver weaves his cloth quickly,  he will soon finish his work, so too does our 
life quickly come to an end. Like animals being brought to the slaughter place or like 
prisoners with a life sentence who are told to s ay their last words to their family and then put 
in an electric chair or laid on a bed and inje cted with a lethal drug, we too are approaching 
death. Similarly, just as a herdsman puts his ca ttle without their control in a stall at night and 
closes the door behind them, so too do we not have the power to escape death.  
 The three existences are as impermanent as an autumn cloud, which is rare and quickly 
disappears. The birth and death of sentient beings  is like a show or a play in which an actor 
puts on one mask after the other, disguises hims elf as a woman, and so forth, in that we too 
take different rebirths one after the other. The li fe of migrating beings is quickly over, like a 
flash of lightening in the sky. It also passes as quickly as a waterfall falling down the side of a 
steep mountain. It is also like a flash flood that  occurs when there has been a lot of snow and 
rain and that destroy roads, houses, and so forth.  Our life ends as quickly as this. Therefore, 
we should think, “I will not remain long. I cannot escape death. Wherever I go, I will die,” 
and develop a strong determination in our mind to practice the Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 For someone with the resolve of inner co ntemplation {68} there are no external 
objects that do not point out impermanence to him. Since this is taught, certainty 
arises if you consider it often from many  angles. There is no benefit in thinking 
one has [considered] something several ti mes, but still no certainty arose. As 
Kamaba said: “You say nothing has come about through contemplation, but when 
did you contemplate? During the day you indulge in distractions, at night you 
sleep – don’t lie!”  
 
All functioning things teach impermanence, however we do not understand this. Our mind remains very tight and we continue to think “I  will not die.” We hold to our permanence. 
However, external things show us impermanence , for example, when the wind blows, leaves 
fall from the trees and blow away, buildings are de stroyed, and so forth. We also see that if we 
paint a wall outside white, even after just a few days it will once again be dirty due to wind and rain. Also if a man shaves in the morning, again the next there will be hair on his chin. 
These are all signs of impermanence, that things change.   Some people, like the Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi, lose more and more hair 
every day and think to undergo a hair transplant . People who have money pay a lot to do this, 
however it rarely works. We cannot make ours elves younger. Even though we may undergo 
cosmetic surgery to remove our wrinkles and afte rward we may in fact look younger, in reality 
we are not any younger! Other people use variou s types of creams, trying to make themselves 
look younger, but in reality we cannot become  younger, instead everyday we get older. We 
cannot escape from aging, nor can we turn it away. It is a sign showing us the reality of 
impermanence.   We should check this subject from differe nt points of view, whereby we will gain 
understanding and certainty that death is definite.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
249  Kamaba says that if we say that nothing ha s happened even though we have contemplated 
death-impermanence, when did we actually cont emplate it? During the day we are distracted 
and at night we sleep, therefore we should not lie about having done something that we have 
not done.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 It is not just at the end of our lives when death overcomes us that we proceed 
towards a another world, for up until th en there is not a moment in which our 
lifespan does not diminish. Therefore, ev er since we entered the womb, we have 
been going straight towards a future life without remaining still even for a mere 
instant. In the meantime life also wastes  away as we go towards death led by the 
messengers of disease and aging. Therefore,  do not rejoice in the view that you 
abide during your life without approaching fu ture worlds. It is li ke the analogy that 
at the time of having fallen from a high  mountain peak, the occasion of falling 
through the sky before crashing to the grou n d  i s  n o t  w o r t h y  o f  j o y .  A l s o  i n  t h e  
Commentary on the Four Hundred Verses  it says:  
 
Hero of men, in that night at the very beginning, When someone comes to dwell in a womb in the world – Starting from that point he moves with each day, 
Without the pause of a step, towards the Lord of Death. 
 At the end of our life, the Lord of Death will come and take away our very life. At this time 
we will go on to another life. Therefore, we no w need to think about the fact that our lifespan 
quickly diminishes, that it does not remain immu table. In fact, from the very moment that we 
are conceived in our mother’s womb, our life begins to diminish. In the first instant our 
mind, which is that of an intermediate state be ing, enters the mixture of red and white fluids 
of our parents and we are conceived. Then, in  the second instant, the liquids begin to 
coagulate a little bit and become more curd-like,  then the embryo gradually forms, the head 
and limbs begin to develop, and so forth. Du e to the movement of different inner winds, 
development in the fetus occurs until it becomes a fully developed baby with all its organs 
complete at about thirty-six or thirty-seven weeks of gestation. At that time the baby begins to 
experience the womb as a dirty and smelly plac e, narrow and dark, in which it is not possible 
to move its arms and legs, due to which it de velops the wish to leave the womb. The baby 
then turns upside down and is born. At this time  it is normal to say, “Today a child has been 
born,” whereas according to the Buddhist texts the instant of conception corresponds to the 
time of birth. Sometimes the baby only remain s for a few weeks and then dies, sometimes it 
dies when it is almost ready to be born, someti mes it dies just after birth, and sometimes it 
dies as a small child. Therefore,  the time of death is not cert ain and from the second instant 
onward in the womb we approa ch death. Therefore, we need to think a lot about death-
impermanence. Since death will definitely come , we should develop a very strong wish to 
practice the Dharma and make the decisi on: “I will practice the Dharma.”  
 We like to think that we will remain for a long  time, but it is not like this. Our life is not 
stable, rather it constantly changes. For exampl e, while a white lotus fl ower is very beautiful 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
250 when it first blossoms, after but a few days it wi thers and dies due to wind, rain, and so forth. 
We should think of such analogies regarding th e reality of impermanence. All the things in 
our world, the beautiful flowers, the snow mounta ins, and so forth, chan ge due to causes and 
conditions. Therefore, we must contemplate impermanence. We should also meditate on 
impermanence, thinking that no thing except empty space is permanent. While empty space 
remains the same, everything else changes. Howe ver, empty space allows us to move, to build 
things, and so forth. Without empty space we co uld not do this. In short, functioning things 
change constantly and quickly. Our lifespan is like a play in which there is a king, queen, and 
so forth but after it is over there is no longer a king, queen, and so forth.  
 We should constantly strive to remember de ath by thinking again and again “I will die.” 
Even if we live for 100 years, death will still de finitely come. Until then we do not know when 
death will come. It is uncertain. Also we cannot say that we will not die because at the 
moment we are healthy. We may go to sleep tonight and tomorrow people will refer to us 
saying, “Oh, he/she died last night due to a he art attack.” On the evening before he died a 
well-known Italian journalist was seen by millions  of people on a talk-show, but the very next 
morning they were saying about him “He died la st night.” Even those wh o think that they are 
powerful and will not die, still die. One lama even died while he was sitting on a throne 
giving teachings. We do not know when we will die.  
 I knew a geshe from Sera Monastery who was not very old, perhaps 56 or 57, who wanted 
to come to Italy, but one day while out for a wa lk, slipped, hit his head, and died before he 
arrived at a hospital that was only two or th ree kilometers away. Some people have been 
known to do gymnastics in the bathroom, slip and break their spine, and die. Such things 
happen everywhere. When impermanence arrives, no one can escape. We cannot say, “Death 
will not happen to me today or tomorrow.” Theref ore, we must try to practice Dharma. Only 
this can help us.  
 While we constantly approaching death and our future life, we do not think about or 
remember this. Instead we think that we are go ing to the market, the doctor, and so forth, 
forgetting that we are also going toward death.  We should think that our days and nights will 
quickly finish and that death will come to us.   Wednesday morning, 9 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C You die without having had time to practice Dharma while alive.  
Third: Even if you can live for that long, it is inappropriate to  think you have time. 
As is stated in [the Sutra on] Entering the Womb , initially, during the first ten years of 
childhood, it does not occur to you to practice the Dharma, and at the end, during 
the 20 years of old age, you do not have the power to practice  the Dharma. Of the 
time in between, sleep having snatched aw ay one half and illness and the like also 
having wasted much time, no more than a few opportunities remain to accomplish 
the Dharma.  
 
The Sutra on Entering the Womb  says that even if we live for 100 years, not much of it will be 
spent in practicing the Dharma. For the first ten years of our life, we are too young to develop 
the wish to practice Dharma. Be cause small children are not ab le to understand why and how 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
251 to practice the Dharma, they do not do it. At the end of our life , for the last twenty years of 
our old age, we are also unable to practice the Dharma. Between the age of ten and eighty 
w h a t  d o  w e  d o ?  I n  e a c h  t w e n t y - f o u r  h o u r  p e r i o d ,  w e  s l e e p  a b o u t  e i g h t  h o u r s .  I n  a d d i t i o n ,  
sometimes we are sick and unable to practice. In this way time passes and the occasions in 
which we practice Dharma are short and far be tween. If we examine our day to day life, we 
will see that at night we sleep, then when we wake up, we spend time washing our face and so 
f o r t h ,  d o  a  f e w  p r a y e r s ,  h a v e  b r e a k f a s t ,  g o  to work, work for eight hours, return home, 
prepare dinner, eat dinner, and talk with our family, perhaps go for a walk in the good 
weather, or in the summertime go to the seasid e, relax for a while, go home, and again go to 
sleep. In this way the time in which to practi ce Dharma becomes very short. Also sometimes 
we are so busy that we forget to practice the Dharma. Then when we are sick, we need to go 
to the hospital and so forth. Thus, there are many conditions that take time away from our 
Dharma practice. In fact, from the point of view of Dharma a lot of our time goes to waste. In 
this way, time becomes very short and our life fi nishes. On top of this, even when we practice 
the Dharma, we do not do it very well! Therefor e, we need to make the decision to practice 
Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-2 The decision to practice the Dharma 
{69} Since it is like this, at the time of de ath all the excellences of this life will only 
be an object of recollection – like the recollection of a happy experience in a 
dream after you have woken up. Why would you be delighted by being beguiled by 
this life, if the enemy who is death will ce rtainly come? With this thought in mind 
you should make the decision that you defi nitely need to practice the Dharma and 
reiterate this innermost feeling109 many times. From the Jataka Stories :  
 
Alas, afflicted worldly beings, 
Your stay is not stable, there is no joy; Even this water lily’s splendor Will soon be but a memory. 
 We mostly think of the excellences of this life, wealth and so forth, du e to wanting to have a 
happy life. Even in our dreams we want to be happy. We recount to others the happiness we experienced in a dream, even though it is just a dream. We do not think of the time of death 
and thinking that we will not die, we think of  the things of this life, such as wealth, 
possessions, money, cars, and so forth. We want to have many things, but to obtain them we 
first need to collect money, therefore we thin k only of this. While the enemy who is death 
will definitely come, we do not think of this an d only think of the things of this life. Then, 
even if we wish to practice Dharma and make th e decision to do so, still we will not do it.  
 The Jataka Stories  say that worldly beings whose minds are filled with afflictions are not 
stable due to which they are unable to be happy.  Even if they are happy for a day or two, once 
again they experience mental unhappiness. A kumu da flower, a white lotus flower, is very nice 
while it lasts, but it soon wilts.  Also the flowers on this table ar e very nice but if we were to 
                                             
 
109 JN: zhe dam  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
252 put them outside for even one hour in the cold and wind, they would soon dry up and 
become ugly. Our life is like this, it quickly finishes like falling leaves.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4B The time of one’s death is uncertain  
1 The need to generate a mental state mindful of death every day 
[2 The actual reasons 
3 The decision that from now on you need to practice the Dharma]  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4B-1 The need to generate a mental state mindful of death every day 
Second: It is certain that death will come between now and 100 years [from now] 
and it is not certain on which day in be tween it will come. Therefore, it is not 
definite on any day like today whether yo u will die or not. Nonetheless, the mind 
siding to the idea of death, you must gene rate the awareness that thinks “I will die 
today,” for if the mind sides with the idea of not dying with the thought “I will not 
die today,” you will constantly prepare for staying in this life and will not prepare 
for future lives. Due to this, if you then  get seized by the Lord of Death in the 
meantime, you will have to die in anguish. However, if you prepare to die every 
day, you will accomplish a lot that is mean ingful for the future, so that even if you 
do not die it is good to have done it, and if you die, it was all the more necessary.  
 We need to think about the fact that death w i l l  r e a l l y  h a p p e n .  W e  s h o u l d  g e n e r a t e  t h e  
awareness of death-impermanence every day by thinking, “Before the next 100 years pass by, 
death will definitely come to me. When will it ha ppen? I do not know.” Perhaps we will die at 
the age of 99, 98, 97 , 96, 95 and so forth or perhaps we wi ll die tomorrow, or even tonight, or 
even this afternoon. Due to there being many ci rcumstances that can ta ke our life, we could 
even die today. Therefore, we do not know wh en death will come, but definitely we will die 
before the next 100 pass by. We  cannot decide “Today I will not die.” Why? Because when 
the conditions arise, we will die. It can happen that when walking along the street that we are 
hit by a crazy driver in a car and die. Therefore,  we do not know when we will die. Because of 
this, we need to think, “I will die. Perhaps I will even die today.”   Death is suffering because at death the conne ction between the mind and body ceases. Our 
family members and friends who cry out of sadne ss at out death also suffer, even though this 
is of absolutely no benefit. Hence, we need to think, “Since I will definitely die, I need to  practice the Dharma. My practice  of the Dharma can help me when I am dying. Nothing else, 
no condition whatsoever, nothing at all, can help me at the time of death.  
 On the other hand, if we continue to think “Today we will not die,” we will be constantly 
occupied with making preparations to obtain th e happiness of this life and will not practice 
the Dharma. Only our practice of the Dharma is a preparation for our future lives, collecting 
money, wealth, and so forth, which is only for the sake of this life, are not. Therefore, we 
need to make preparations for our future life by  practicing the Dharma. Even if we think that 
we will not die and do not make preparations for our future life, one day the Lord of Death 
will arrive, whereupon we will experience sadne ss and regret. This itself becomes a cause for a 
bad rebirth. While we have imprints of both vi rtuous and non-virtuous minds, if we die with 
sadness, worry, and so on, or with attachment for our body, belongings, relatives, and so on, 
this will cause the imprint of a non-virtuous action  to ripen. This will cause us to take rebirth 
in the next life in the hell realm, hungry ghos t realm, or animal realm. Which of these three 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
253 is not sure, but due to the ripening of a non-virt uous action we will definitely be reborn in 
one of them.  
 Therefore, everyday we need to think “Today  I will die,” and make preparations for our 
future lives. In this way, we will achieve our aim of happiness in future lives. When we die, 
things are not finished. We just give up this body and take another one. We need to make 
sure that we take a good body, for example a human body possessing the eighteen qualities. To do this, we must practice the Dharma. This means that we must meditate everyday on the 
lam-rim, the stages of the path , by meditating on death-impermanence or any of the other 
lam-rim meditations. First we should do analytic al meditation and then from time to time do 
single-pointed or placement meditation while trying to keep our mind fixed on the object.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4B-2 The actual reasons 
A There is no certainty with regard to the lifespan in Jambudvipa, which is why the time of 
death is uncertain  
B There are many conditions that lead to death and few conditions that promote life  
C The body is extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore uncertain  
This has three points: (1) there is no ce rtainty with regard to the lifespan in 
Jambudvipa, which is why the time of de ath is uncertain, (2) there are many 
conditions that lead to death and few that promote life, and (3) the body is 
extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore uncertain. 
A There is no certainty with regard to the lifespan in Jambudvipa which is why the time of 
death is uncertain 
First, in general the lifespan  of the beings of Uttarakuru110 is set, and for most 
beings of the other [continents ] there is more certainty, even though it may not be 
s u r e  t h a t  t h e  f u l l  e x t e n t  o f  t h e  l i f e s p a n  o f  e a c h  i n d i v i d u a l  b e  r e a c h e d .  F o r  t h e  
beings of Jambudvipa the lifespan is ex tremely uncertain. In the beginning, they 
even reached immeasurable years, {70} afterward there is a maximum duration of 
ten years and even nowadays it does not s eem certain whether they die in their old 
age, in their youth, or in the middle. In the Treasury  it says:  
 
Here it is uncertain: in the end, 
Ten years; at first, immeasurable.111 
 
Through taking to heart the fact that your  gurus or friends and so forth have died 
through sudden internal or external condit ions for death before reaching the end 
of their lives, you should think over and ov er again, “I too have a similar quality.” 
 The lifespan of human beings in Jambudvipa is  uncertain, we can die at any age. This is 
because there are many conditions that can take  our life, and few condit ions that support our 
life. Then, even among the condit ions that usually sustain life, there are those that at times 
                                             
 
110 JN: sgra mi snyan , Unpleasant Sound 
111 JN: There is a negative particle missing in the Tibetan text which should read: ‘di na ma nges tha mar ni / lo 
bcu dang po dpag tu med  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
254 transform into the cause of death. Our body appear s to be strong, but it is not, rather it is 
very fragile. In fact it is said to be simila r to a water bubble, which is extremely fragile.  
 On the other hand, the human beings of the northern continent, Unpleasant Sound 
(Uttarakuru), have a fixed lifespan of 1000 years. They cannot die before reaching that age 
and so will definitely live for 1000 years. Whil e the human beings of the western and eastern 
continents have a long lifespan, its duration is  not completely fixed. However, for the most 
part, they can be certain not to die before their lifespan is exhausted. Contrarily, the lifespan 
of the human beings of Jambudvipa, the southe rn continent, is very uncertain. At the 
beginning of the eon, their lifespan was immeas urable, after which it gradually decreases until 
their maximum lifespan will be ten years. Thus, at  that point many of them will not even live 
to the age of 10.  
 When Buddha Shakyamuni came to this wo rld, the lifespan of human beings was 100 
years. Perhaps it is somewhat less now but we ca n still say that it is 100 years, even though 
very few people actually reach 100 and most di e before. Some even die shortly after they are 
conceived in the womb, others die after five or  six months in the womb, and some die while 
they are still a small child. Therefore, our life span is very uncertain. While the grandparents, 
parents, uncles, and aunts remain alive, a youn g child can die. This is because the time of 
death is not certain in Jambudvipa. We need to contemplate this fact.   It is said that there are five periods of development in the womb, each of which has a 
particular name, and after birth there are furt her divisions in relation to the periods of 
infancy and so forth. In short, at the be ginning of the eon, human beings had an 
immeasurable lifespan and at the end they will only live for a maximum of ten years. We see 
that, due to outer and inner conditions for deat h, our teachers and friends die before their 
life is complete. For example, our guru, Lama Thubten Yeshe, died even though he was not 
yet old. We also had friends who have already died. We also had relatives who died before they got old. This is because there are many co nditions that can take life. If we think about 
this, we will realize that we are in the same situ ation. Therefore, since it  is not sure when we 
will die but it is sure that we will die, we need to practice the Dharma well. We need to make 
a strong decision to do this and then put effort into it. 
 There are many external conditions that can take our life, for exampl e, fire, water, wind, 
earth, and so forth. There are also inner conditions, for exampl e, eating bad food, which can 
cause us to die. Damage to our inner organs ca n also be a condition for our death. Therefore, 
we should think, “Death will also come to me. I have seen my teachers and friends die due to 
various conditions. This will also happen to me.”  We are the same as them. Hence, we should 
think, “Death will definitely come. But when it  will come, I do not know. Therefore, I need 
to practice the Dharma.” By thin king in this way, we will be inspired to practice the Dharma 
now.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B There are many conditions that lead to death and few conditions that promote life 
Second: Since there are many harmful infl uences – animate as well as inanimate – 
to this life, you should thoroughly consid er how it is threatened by human beings 
and non-human malevolent influences, how there are types of animals that 
endanger one’s body and life through manifold harm, and likewise how both 
internal illnesses and external elements cause harm. Furthermore, one’s body is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
255 necessarily formed from the four elements  and they too harm each other if their 
domains expand or diminish out of ba lance, thereby causing illnesses and 
ravishing one’s life. Since they exist simult aneous with oneself, even though body 
and life appear to be stable they cannot be relied on.  
 
This is another reason for practicing the Dhar ma. There are many conditions that take or 
harm our life, for example, both human beings  and non-human beings, such as spirits. In 
addition, there are various types of animals that can harm us and take our life. An example of 
a human being taking our life is a thief who, wanting to rob our house, kills us. Another example is being killed in a place of war, due to  a bomb thrown by a soldier. We can also be 
killed by spirits as well as by ferocious animals such as tigers, lions, el ephants, and so forth. 
We can even be killed by small insects, such as bees. Once a monk was walking from McLeod 
Ganj down to Dharamsala together with the oracle of the Tibetan government, Ka Dong, 
when they were attacked by angry bees. The monk was stung nine or ten times and, even 
though he was brought to hospital, died from the bites. There are also small snakes whose 
poison is so strong that, having been bitten by one, one will die before one can take seven 
steps. Even a small mosquito can bite us and give us an illness that takes our life.   Internally there are various illnesses that ca n kill us. According to Tibetan medicine there 
are 400 types of illness that can harm us and ta ke our lives. However, there are also many new 
illnesses that have arisen in this past century wh ich, even if they do not kill us, weaken us so 
much that we cannot do anything.   Externally there are the four elements that can also harm us. For example, a strong wind, 
such as a tornado, can uproot a tree and crus h us to death. An ea rthquake can cause the 
death of many people. Water, such as floods or tsunamis, also kill many people. Fire can also kill us as well as burn down entire forests and many houses.  
 We also have the four elements – earth, wa ter, fire, and wind – inside our body. When 
they are out of balance, we become sick and can even lose our life. For example, when the fire 
element is strong, we experience fever or hi gh blood pressure. When the wind element is 
disturbed, the mind is also disturbed. In fact  there are many different  sicknesses related to 
each of the four elements. We need to think about this.   While this body and lifespan appear to be st able, they are not. They are unstable. Nor is 
our mind stable, it quickly changes. One day we  want something, and the next day we do not 
want it anymore!  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In the Parinirvana [Sutra] it says:  
 
The discrimination of death is that this life, constantly surrounded by 
hostile enemies, weakens in each moment and that there is nothing 
that increase it. 
 The discrimination of death should be that ou r life is surrounded by many hateful enemies 
and that in each instant it degenerates or weak ens and that there is no thing that increases it. 
In each moment our life degenerates, that is, it  becomes shorter. Even if our lifespan is 100 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
256 years, after one year it is no longer 100 years. Since one day pa sses quickly, so does one month 
and one year. Our life is like a flowing river, it never stops.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And in the Precious Garland : 
 
We live amidst the conditions for the Lord of Death, 
Like a butter lamp in a gale. 
 The Lord of Death abides as an inner condit ion within us, like a butter lamp that is 
immediately extinguished in a gale (literally, a red wind). Death is strong and powerful, like a strong wind that can easily extinguish a fragile flame.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Besides life itself permeates the reality of death, since many conditions for life are 
unreliable. From the Precious Garland : 
 
There are many conditions for death. 
Those for living are only few. Even they may well be deadly. 
Therefore, always practice the Dharma. 
 
L i f e  i t s e l f  g o e s  t o w a r d  d e a t h .  T h e r e  a r e  m a n y  c o n d i t i o n s  t h a t  t a k e  o u r  l i f e  a n d  t h o s e  t h a t  sustain it are very few. In addition, even the fe w conditions that normally sustain life can at 
times transform into conditions that bring abou t our death. Therefore, everyday we need to 
try to practice the Dharma. To practice the Dharma, put very simply, means to abandon non-
virtuous actions and to create or collect virtuo us actions. Thus, we should abandon creating 
any of the ten non-virtuous actions and try to create even one of the ten virtuous actions. 
Alternatively to practice the Dharma can refe r to the recitation of mantras, prayers, and 
sadhanas, to doing prostrations, to building temples, stupas, and statues, to working to help the poor, and to taking care of the sick. All of  these can be included in the practice of the 
Dharma. For example, we can do a sadhana, ge nerate ourselves as a deity, and carry death 
into the path to the truth body (dharmakaya), carry the intermedia te state into the path to the 
enjoyment body, and carry birth into the path  to the emanation body. If we are tantra 
practitioners we should practice the generation st age in this way. We should also eat, drink, 
dress, wash, and so forth motivated by the wish to transform them all into virtue. In this way 
these daily activities also become Dharma practice.   Everyday we should try to keep mindfulness and introspection present in our mind. In this way, we should try to make our life useful and meaningful day after day.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
257 C The body is extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore uncertain 
{71} The body is as vulnerable as a water bubble, therefore this and that, such as a 
thorn piercing it, may occasion the destru ction of life without the need for major 
h a r m .  T h u s  i t  i s  v e r y  e a s i l y  o v e r c o m e  b y  c o n d i t i o n s  o f  d e a t h .  I n  t h e  Letter to a 
Friend  it says:  
 
If physical things – the ground, Mount Meru, and oceans – 
Are burnt up by the seven blazing suns 
And even ashes are not left behind,112 
What need is there to mention exceedingly feeble human beings? 
 
Our body is very fragile, like a water bubble that  can easily be destroyed. For example, even a 
simple thorn that piercing the sole of our f oot can become a condition that takes our life. 
Thus, there are many conditions th at can take or destroy our life. Since such conditions easily 
destroy our body without any difficulty, even th ough it appears to be strong, it is not.  
 Nagarjuna’s Letter to a Friend  says that even the ground, Mount Meru, and the oceans can 
be destroyed by the seven blazing suns. This refe rs to the end of the eon at which time seven 
suns will appear simultaneously and burn the ground, Mount Meru, and the oceans, such that not even ashes will remain . All will be completely destro yed. Therefore, what need is 
there to mention that our body will be easily destroyed? Since our human body is weak and 
fragile, we can quickly and easily lose our life.   In short, there are many external conditions  that can take our life. Although our body 
appears to be strong and healthy, in reality it is not. Rather it is very soft and fragile, and can 
easily be destroyed.   We should do the nine-round meditation on death-impermanence. That  death is certain has 
three reasons, that the time of death is uncert ain has three reasons, and that at the time of 
death only our Dharma practice and nothing el se can b e of help h a s three reasons. When 
dying none of our relatives, such as our father , mother, son, or daughter, can help us. Nor is 
our wealth of any help to us then. Even this body, which we have cherished so much, cannot 
help us as we need to leave it  behind and go on alone. When  death comes we cannot take our 
guru, father, mother, a very dear friend, or anyo ne else with us. We cannot use our wealth to 
stop our death nor can we bring it with us. We  cannot even bring our body with us, we must 
leave it behind whereupon it comes to be called a “corpse.”  
Wednesday afternoon, 9 March 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4B-3 The decision that it is necessary to practice Dharma from now on 
At the end of thoughts like these, you should reiterate many times the innermost 
decision to practice the Dharma from this  very moment, for it is uncertain when 
                                              
112 According to the cosmogony alluded to here, everything  physical will be destroyed by fire at the end of a 
cycle of eons. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
258 t h e  b o d y  a n d  l i f e  w i l l  b e  o v e r c o m e  b y  t h e  L o r d  o f  D e a t h  a n d  i t  s h o u l d  n o t  b e  
assumed that there is still time. As Shri Jagatamitra said:  
Earth Lord, as long as this borrowed body 
Abides in pleasure – not sick, not decayed, 
At that time take its essence. Without the fears of illness, death, decay, 
In times of illness, old age, and decay,  
You may be concerned, but to what avail? 
 
Among the three root [thoughts], the thought about the uncertainty of the time of 
death is the most important, which is why you should make effort in it.  
 
We need to make the decision to practice the Dharma right now, starting immediately. In the 
end we will die, but it is not certain when our body and life will be destroyed. Therefore, we 
should put effort into practicing the Dharma right now. We should make a decision to do 
this from the depths of our heart, thin king “I will practice the Dharma now!”  
 “Earth Lord” refers to our present body which we have borrowed for the time being. 
However, one day it will be taken back by its ow ner, like a tenant sent away by the owner of a 
house. Since our body is neither ill nor dec ayed, and we presently abide in happiness, we 
need to take the essence of this life right now.  While our body will become ill and old in the 
future, and its bones, blood, and so forth will degenerate, and we will die, right now this has 
not yet happened, due to which we can practi ce the Dharma. On the other hand, when we 
have become old and our body has degenerated, even if we think that it is necessary to 
practice the Dharma and want to do so, at that time it will be difficult.  
 There are three roots: (1) death is certain, (2) the time of deat h is uncertain, and (3) at the 
time of death all that can help us is our practi ce of the Dharma, nothin g else and no one else, 
whether our friends, our wealth, or our body, ca n help us. At death our mind leaves our body 
and we have to leave all these behind. This wi ll happen to us one day. Among the three root 
thoughts, the most important is the thought that the time of de ath is uncertain. Therefore, 
we need to put effort into thinking about this, whereby we will be inspired to put more effort 
into practicing the Dharma.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4C At the time of death nothing except for the Dharma will be of benefit 
1 The actual reasons 
2 Decision 
2B4B-2B1A-1A4C-1 The actual reasons 
A [You cannot take friends along] 
Third: Thus when you see that you have to go another world, even if at that time 
you are surrounded by loving and grieving friends and relatives, you cannot take 
even one of them along.  
 
At the time of death, when we go to another wo rld, that is, to our next life, nothing except 
the Dharma will be of any benefit to us. Even  though our close relatives and friends stand 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
259 around us, they cannot help us. We cannot bring even one of them with  us. Due to this we 
suffer much. In fact, their crying and wailing will only make us sadder, yet still we will not be 
able to bring even one of them with us.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B [You cannot take  possessions along] 
Whatever heaps of attractive riches you have obtained, you cannot even take along 
even a small particle of it.  
 
No matter how much money and wealth we have accumulated, even a treasure house full of 
jewels, clothing, shoes, and so forth, when we di e we will not be able to bring along even one 
small particle of it. However, perhaps our re latives will be happy about this! It happens 
sometimes that when a person is alive his or he r relatives are not very close to him, but when 
he is dying suddenly they show up claiming to be  his brother or sister, uncle or aunt, father or 
mother, and so forth. These relatives then begin to argue amongst themselves about who 
should get what, saying that a pa rt of the inheritance is due to  them. In the worst cases they 
even end up in court. Thus, our wealth and belongings are not very useful to us at the time of 
our death and they may cause serious problems between our relatives.  
 There is a story about an old monk who lived in a monastery near Lhasa, Tibet. He owned 
a piece of turquoise, which he guarded very care fully and did not allow any of his disciples to 
touch for fear that they would break it. One day when he was close to death, one of his 
disciples said to him that he must bring the tu rquoise with him. The dying monk said that he 
could not, but his disciple insisted, saying that he had always kept it with him. He told his 
disciple to bring him the turquoise, whereupon he crushed it into powder and swallowed it together with a glass of water. He then told hi s disciple not to worry as  in this way he would 
bring the turquoise with him!  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C [You cannot take your body along] 
If you have to give up even the flesh and bones that you were born with, what need 
to talk of anything else?  
 
Our friends and relatives also cannot help us, given that we cannot bring even one of them 
with us. Also no matter how much money, clot hing, animals, possessions we have, we cannot 
bring even the tiniest particle with us. Even th is body of flesh and bones that we were born 
with, must be given up, that is, it must be left behind when we die. We cannot bring it with 
us. If we think in this way, we will come to re alize that at the time of death we must go on 
alone.  
 Tibetan lay people commonly say that when we die, we will have visions of beings who come to take us seven layers below the earth to the hungry ghost re alm where the Lord of 
Death lives. They will bring us in front of th e Lord of Death who will check in a mirror how 
many virtues we have and for each one will se t aside a white stone, and how many non-virtues 
we have and for each one will set aside a blac k stone. When he is finished, he will compare 
the number of white and black and decide where we are to be reborn. Usually there are only a 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
260 few white stones for every 100 black ones, so then  the Lord of Death will tell us in which of 
the lower or higher realms we are to be reborn , whereby we will be immediately born there.  
 At the time of death, most of us will experien ce fear. Only those who have lived a good life, 
and can be confident of not being reborn in th e lower realms and of being reborn as a human 
being, are relaxed and calm at the time of death. When some people die, even though 
externally they appear to be de ad, their mind still abides togeth er with the subtle wind in the 
indestructible drop at the center of their hear t chakra. They can remain  in meditation on the 
clear light for as long as a week or even for an entire month.  
 When the mind of an ordinary being leaves th e body, if it goes out through the top of the 
head it indicates that the person will take a g ood rebirth, whereas if it goes out through a 
lower part of the body it indicates that the pe rson will be reborn in the lower realms. Usually 
there is also some red liquid that exits from th e nostril and some white liquid that exists from 
the lower orifice, unless the person has been sick  for a long time before dying. The body then 
becomes thinner and begins to smell. Everyone ca lls this body a “corpse”  and it is brought to 
the cemetery to be buried.   There is a story about a Nepalese man who fell  into a coma, but his family, convinced that 
he was dead, brought his body to the river in Pashupath to wash it prior to the cremation. 
When his feet were put in the river, the man woke up and asked where he was. He was told 
that he had died, but he argued that he had no t! Someone, thinking he was a zombie, wanted 
to beat him, but some other people stopped hi m. As the man became a bit better he became 
able to sit up. However, according to Nepalese tradition, because he had “died” he could not 
go back to live in his home. For this reason , his family made a bed for him on the veranda 
and gave him food to eat, but did not allow hi m to go inside the house. This made the old 
man very sad but he could not do anything about it.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1A4C-2 The decision to practice nothing but Dharma  
A The actual [decision] 
Then think: “At that time, it  will certainly come to pass that all the excellences of 
this life leaves me, just as I leave them, and I will proceed to another world. This 
will happen today.” {72} You should make the decision many times to practice the 
Dharma without submitting to the power of  conditions like the body, friends, and 
possessions.  
 
The first decision is “I will practice the Dhar ma.” The second decision “I will practice the 
Dharma right now.” The third decision is “I  will practice the Dharma purely.” Without 
submitting to the power of our friends and rela tives, possessions, and body, we should make 
the decision to practice the Dharma purely. Fo r example, our venerable teacher, Geshe Yeshe 
Tobden, when he was a teacher earning a good salary at the Tibetan Institute of Higher 
Studies in Sarnath, suddenly decided to give ev erything up and go to meditate in the hills 
behind Dharamsala. He remained there unti l His Holiness the Dalai Lama asked him to 
come to teach here in Italy. Some people are able  to give up everything and spend their life in 
meditation, for example, Saint Francis of Assisi.   One day we too will have to give up all our excellences, our wealth as well as our body, and go to another world, that is, to another life and another place. Since this could happen even 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
261 today, we should not think to pass our time in taking care of our friends and relatives, our 
belongings, and our body. Instead, not allowing ourselves to come under their influence, we 
should practice the Dharma right now and in a pure way.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The need to try hard since it is the foundation of the path  
Although this arises with difficulty, you sh ould try hard since it is the foundation 
of the path. In the words of Potowa: 
 
These are my meditations on impermanence illuminating my 
appearances. Through eliminating all th e appearances of this life – close 
relationships, possessions, and the like – and aware that I will go here and there to another life alone wi thout anything, wishing to not be 
attached to this life I think: “The r e  i s  n o t h i n g  t o  d o  o t h e r  t h a n  t o  
practice the Dharma.” As long as th is [attitude] has not arisen in my 
mind, I will sit with the path s to all the Dharma blocked. 
 The understanding of death-impermanence is th e base or foundation of the path, therefore 
we need to put effort into doing the nine-round meditation on death-impermanence, which is composed of the three roots that result in the three decisions. In other words, because this 
meditation is the basis of Dharma  practice, we should strive in it. Although it is not easy to 
generate the realization of this meditation, we n eed to put effort into it  since this meditation 
is the base of the entire path.   For this reason, Geshe Potowa said that his me ditation on impermanence is like a light or 
illumination that allows us to clearly see in the darkness. It is like a lamp or candle in a dark room, which enables us to see what is in the room. We need to eliminate attachment to the 
appearances of this life, our relatives, posse ssions and so forth, by meditating on death-
impermanence. We must go on alone to our next life; no one else can come with us. 
Therefore, the one thing that can help us at  the time of death is our Dharma practice. 
Nothing else can help us. By thinking of this, we  will give up attachment to this life, to our 
wealth, relatives, and so forth. If we do not ge nerate this understanding in our mind, the path 
to all the Dharma will remain blocked. In other words, if we do not think about death-
impermanence, we will not think to practice th e Dharma. Therefore, it is important to think 
about death-impermanence. In fact in the Ny ingma tradition the first meditation to be 
practiced is that on impermanence, the fact that everything changes. Having done this 
meditation, all other realizations will come. On  the other hand, if th is meditation is not 
done, no progress will be made on  the path. Thus, their way of practicing is different from the 
Gelug tradition in which the first meditation is  that on relying on a guru, followed by the 
meditation on recognizing the precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities, its 
causes, and the difficulty of finding it. After th at in the Gelug tradition, we think about the 
f a c t  t h a t  w e  h a v e  f o u n d  t h i s  g o o d  f o r t u n e  just this one time but that there are many 
conditions that can take it away from us. In ot her words, this precious human rebirth quickly 
comes to an end because there are many condit ions that bring about death. Then, we think 
that death is certain, that the time of death is uncertain, and that at the time of death nothing 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
262 other than the practice of the Dharma will be of any help to us. We can meditate in 
whichever of these ways suits us since we all have different mentalities and dispositions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And Dolpa said: 
 
Incidentally, if you accumulate the collections and purify obscurations, 
make requests to the deities an d [your] guru, and contemplate 
insistently together with perseveran ce, even that which you think will 
not come about for 100 years will come about effortlessly, for compounded phenomena do not remain static as they are. 
 When someone asked Kamaba about moving on to another object [of meditation] 
he said: “Repeat the previous one!” When asked about the remaining ones, he 
said: “There is nothing beyond it.” 
 In order to attain calm abiding, we need to accumulate merit and purify our negativities or 
obscurations. How can we do this? While mainly  doing meditation, at other times we should 
accumulate merit and purify obscurations (in th is context mainly the karmic obscurations as 
opposed to the afflictive obscurations and the obscurations to knowledge). In addition, we 
should make strong prayers to the meditational deities and to our own gurus. If we do this, 
even without meditating for one hundred years it will not be difficult to generate realizations 
in our mind. Since all compounded phenomena do  not remain static, but are fluctuating and 
transitory, even if we think that we will no t obtain realizations, we will obtain them.  
 When someone asked Kamaba whether he coul d change his object of meditation, Kamawa 
told him that he should do th e same meditation again and again. The rest of the Tibetan 
sentence is difficult to understand but it seems to mean that there is no thing else to meditate 
on.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How to carry out the practice of all the excellent scriptures [of the Buddha] 
Thus, if you know how to practice reliance  on a spiritual teacher, the leisures and 
endowments, as well as impermanence in this and that context of the excellent 
scriptures and their commentaries, and sustain them, you will easily find the 
intention of the Conqueror. You will also become aware of them in other 
contexts. 
 When we meditate on guru devotion or reliance on a guru, we should first examine how 
many qualities the guru needs. Then, having found a qualified teacher, we should rely on him 
properly in thought and action . Then, we should meditate on  the eight leisures and ten 
endowments of a precious human rebirth. Then , we should meditate on impermanence by 
means of the nine-round meditation on death. In this way we will be able to easily understand 
the intention of all the Buddha’s script ures as well as the commentaries.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
263  
In short, in our every day life we should do so me analytical meditation on relying on the guru, 
the precious human rebirth, death-impermanence , the objects of refuge and how to go for 
refuge to them, the law of cause and result an d the need to safeguard it, and so forth.  
 
(Oral transmission began 7:11 PM)  
Thursday morning, 10 March 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
Explanation of what will become  of you in future worlds: 
How to think about the happiness and suffering  
of the two [types of] migrating beings 
2B4B-2B1A-1B The happiness and suffering of the two [types of] migrating beings 
1 Thinking about what will become of you in future worlds 
[2 From among the happiness and suffering of the two migrations, considerations about the suffering ] 
2B4B-2B1A-1B1 Thinking about what will become of you in future worlds 
Second: That being so, since it is certain that you will die soon, {73} you have no 
time to spend in this life and, after deat h, it is not that you become non-existent; 
you must take rebirth. Since apart from th e two there is no other place of birth, 
you will be reborn in either the happ y migrations or the bad migrations. In 
addition, since you are not under your ow n control but are under the control of 
other – karma, you will be reborn acco rding to the wholesome and unwholesome 
karma that impels you.  
 
Up to now we have talked about this life, but now we will examine what will happen in our 
next life. Since we will soon die, that is, we wi ll not remain in this life for long, what will 
happen to us next? It is not that we become non-existent, rather we must once again take 
rebirth. There are two types of rebirth: rebirth in the happy migrations and rebirth in the bad 
migrations. We are not able to choose in which of these we will be reborn, but will be projected there by our actions. If we have crea ted virtuous actions we will be born in a happy 
migration, whereas if we have created non- virtuous actions we will be born in a bad 
migration. Of course, if we could choose, we wo uld choose to be reborn in a happy migration! 
However, due to our mind being under the contro l of afflictions, we are unable to make a 
choice and completely follow the afflictions, du e to which we create negative actions and do 
not create good actions. Therefore, we are no t free, but are under the control of our karma, 
that is, our actions.   With respect to rebirth, there are two types of actions: projecting or throwing karma and 
actualizing karma. We mainly create projecting karma. When we create an action it does not go to waste but instead leaves an imprint on th e consciousness, which at the time of death is 
activated and becomes projecting karma. Due to  the power of this karma we are projected 
into either a happy migration or a bad migration.  For this reason, we need to avoid creating 
non-virtuous actions and create virtuous actions.  This is our job and our responsibility. With 
mindfulness we need to be careful to avoid en gaging in negative actions and to engage in 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
264 good actions. If we create black or unwholes ome karma it will only bring the result of 
suffering, whereas white or wholesome karma will  bring the result of happiness. Thus, “white 
karma” is karma that brings the result of ha ppiness or pleasure, wher eas “black karma” is 
karma that brings suffering and unhappiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2 From among the happiness and suffering of the two migrations, considerations about the 
suffering 
A The need to think about suffering 
[B How thinking about suffering is a vital point C How to think about suffering] 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2A The need to think about suffering 
Think about the suffering of the bad migr ations considering, “What will become 
of me if I am reborn in the bad migrations?” Nagarjuna said: 
 
Every day remember the hells  
Which are fiercely hot and cold. Also remember the hungry ghosts, Emaciated by hunger and thirst 
 
Remember and look at animals Beset with the sufferings of dullness. Give up their causes; enjoy the causes for happiness. Once you have gained that hard to gain,  A human body in Jambudvipa, 
Endeavor to cut the causes of the bad migrations. 
 
Since there is karma that brings the result of happiness and karma that brings the result of 
suffering, they can be called respectively “hap py karma” and “suffering karma.” We need to 
examine suffering by thinking, “If I were to be reborn in the bad migrations what would 
happen to me?” If we examine this, we will find that we will experience suffering, as set out by 
Nagarjuna.   If we are reborn in the hell realm, we will experience the suffering of either intense heat or intense cold. Later on there will be more details about this suffering and its duration.   When we meditate on the hell realm and so  forth, we should not imagine that someone 
else is experiencing the suffering of heat or co ld. Instead we should imagine that we ourselves 
are in hell; for example, our body being surrounded by fire and being burnt. If we imagine ourselves experiencing this suffering, we will deve lop the wish to avoid such suffering and will 
therefore give up creating its cause. We should also imagine our body frozen, like ice, in the 
cold hell and unable to do anything to reli eve the suffering through remembering that even 
when the weather is cold here in this world we are unable to bear it and do not want to go outside. Therefore, we should not imagine someone else as experiencing this suffering but think of ourselves in this situation. In this way we will generate a strong determination to 
never take such a rebirth again in the future. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
265  We should also think about the suffering of  hungry ghosts. They experience hunger and 
thirst due to being unable to find food and drink. Their bodies are shriveled up and their 
necks are thin, but their bellies are huge. We should  try to imagine what it would be like to be 
r e b o r n  a s  s u c h  a  b e i n g  a n d  w h a t  w e  w o u l d  f e e l  l i k e  i f  w e  c o u l d  n o t  f i n d  f o o d  a n d  d r i n k .  
Based on this understanding, we should determin e to avoid creating the causes to be reborn 
as a hungry ghost. 
 We should also think about what an animal rebirth would be like. An imals are very stupid. 
They also eat each other and experience many other sufferings that we can see. We should 
imagine ourselves born as an animal, for example,  as a dog. While there are dogs that have a 
good owner and are given food and even clothing, we should imagine ourselves reborn as an abandoned dog and examine the suffering we would experience. We should also imagine 
what it would be like to be a wild animal living in a forest where there is the constant danger of being eaten. Some animals do not kill and ea t other animals, for example, elephants, cows, 
and so forth, but they are killed and eaten by ot her animals. They can even be eaten by small 
animals that enter the body. Since we could not bear such a rebirth, we should determine to 
give up creating its causes, non-virtuous actions.  Some say that very heavy negative actions br ing the result of rebirth in the hell realm, 
middling negative actions as a hungry ghost, and small or light negative actions as an animal. 
Others say that heavy negative actions bring re birth in the hell realm, middling negative 
actions as an animal, and small negative action s as a hungry ghost. We should examine why 
there are these different assertions. However, in short, we should try to abandon the cause of 
rebirth in such realms, that is, we should ab andon non-virtuous actions and create virtuous 
actions.   It is difficult to achieve rebirth as a human be ing in Jambudvipa because it is very precious. 
A l t h o u g h  t h e  l i f e s p a n  h e r e  i s  u n c e r t a i n ,  w e  possess the inner conditions for practicing the 
Dharma – the six elements due to having ta ken birth in a womb. We can transform our 
energy into good energy and achieve enlightenmen t even in this life, even in three years and 
forty-five days. This is because in Jambudvipa it is easier to generate renunciation than in the 
other continents. It is difficult to develop renunciation in Unpleasant Sound due to the 
lifespan being fixed at 1000 years and due to being wealthy. Since these human beings are 
happy, they do not think to practice the Dhar ma and cannot generate renunciation. Also in 
the eastern and western continents it is difficult  to generate renunciation. This does not refer 
to the eastern and western parts of this world, but to different worlds. In Tall Body, the human beings’ bodies are very tall. In the west ern continent, there are very special cows that 
are a source of precious jewels, whereby th e human beings there are very rich. In our 
continent, Jambudvipa, the lifespan is not fixe d, the rich become poor , and the poor become 
rich. Because things change very quickly here, it is easier to generate the mind of renunciation 
or definite emergence. Since we have obtained  such a human rebirth now, we need to make 
our mind very strong in cutting off the causes of rebirth in the lower realms and we need to put effort and work into this. It is not easy to cut the causes, the main one being karma, for 
such a rebirth. Karma is produced by the a fflictions and the root of the afflictions is 
ignorance. In fact, in the contex t of the twelve links, the first link is ignorance. Due to the 
ignorance of not knowing the selflessness of pers ons acting as a causal motivation, we engage 
in different types of actions. Thus, the root of  all the virtuous and no n-virtuous actions that 
we create is ignorance. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
266  There is a causal motivation and a simultaneous  or time motivation. If  the time motivation 
is virtuous, the action will be virtuous and will bring the result of rebirth in the higher realms 
in the future. If the time or simultaneous moti vation is non-virtuous, the action will be non-
virtuous and will bring the result of rebirth in the bad migrations in th e future. Therefore, we 
need to cut the root of cyclic existence – igno rance or the conception of a self. However, for 
the moment we need to at least avoid creating non-virtuous actions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2B How thinking about suffering is a vital point 
Meditation about the sufferings of cyclic  existence in general and of the bad 
migrations in particular is a very vital point, for if you thus consider how you 
yourself have fallen into the ocean of suffering, despair will repel pride and 
arrogance. Having seen that suffering is a result of non-virtue, you will be very 
careful to avoid negativities and downfalls. Since you do not want suffering but 
want happiness, once you see that [happiness ] is the result of virtue, you will also 
enjoy accomplishing virtue. In proportion to your own experience, compassion for 
others will arise, and out of aversion to cyclic existence you will strive for 
liberation. For fear of suffering, yo u will take refuge forcefully.  
 
We need to meditate on the sufferings of cyclic  existence in general and the sufferings of the 
lower realms in particular. In general as long as  we are reborn in cyclic existence, we will not 
be completely free from suffering. There are six realms or three realms – the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm. The desire real m consists of six types of migrating beings: 
gods, anti-gods, human beings, animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings. However, even if we 
are reborn in the Peak of Existence of the formless realm, one day the karma created by 
having meditated in the past will be exhausted,  and we will fall once again into the desire 
realm, perhaps even into the hell, hungry ghost,  or animal realm. Therefore, there is nowhere 
in cyclic existence that is completely free of suffering.   The happier states of cyclic existence include,  for example, the seventeen levels of the form 
realm, thirteen of which are levels in which or dinary beings are reborn and five of which are 
pure lands in which arya beings are reborn. Then there are the six types of desire realm gods. 
Then there are the human beings of the four continents [and eight sub-continents ]. In all 
these realms there is suffering. In the desire re alm suffering is manifest, whereas in the form 
realm physical suffering is not manifest. Ho wever, these gods experience great mental 
suffering when death approaches and they see with  their clairvoyance that they will fall into a 
lower realm and experience suffering there. They experience particular signs of their 
impending death for seven days before their de ath but these seven days are like a thousand 
human years. Therefore, they experience inte nse suffering for a long period of time.  
 If we think about the fact that we have falle n into the ocean of suffering, it becomes easier 
to generate renunciation. It will also reduce ou r haughtiness and pride since this suffering is 
the result of non-virtue. Therefore, we need to very carefully try not to create negativities and 
downfalls. It is important to try not to do this . Why is that? Because we do not want suffering, 
but want to be happy, to enjoy ourselves, and to  experience pleasure. Happiness or pleasure is 
the result of virtuous actions. Understanding this, we will put effort into creating virtuous 
actions. We will also enjoy creating virtuous ac tions, such as meditating, reciting prayers, and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
267 so forth. On the other hand, if we do not un derstand the good result that will come about 
due to meditation, prayer, and so forth, we will th ink that it is a waste of time to sit unmoving 
like a statue and that it would be better to  spend our time working and making money.  
 Realizing that we suffer, we should also gene rate compassion for all other sentient beings, 
who are suffering in the same way. Thinking in this way, we will generate compassion. 
Through understanding that there is no essenc e in cyclic existence and that it has many 
disadvantages, we will generate the mind of re nunciation and the wish to achieve liberation, 
the state of everlasting happiness. We should generate compassion and think about how we 
can lead other sentient beings into the libera ted state and free them from the sufferings of 
cyclic existence. We should generate strong fear  regarding such sufferings and go for refuge to 
the objects of refuge who are Buddha, Dhar ma, and Sangha. A buddha is someone who has 
abandoned all objects of abandonment and is free from obscurations, and has achieved all 
knowledge and is omniscient, knowing all that ex ists. The real Dharma is true paths and true 
cessations. The cessation of suffering and the ca uses of suffering is a true cessation. It is 
actualized by meditating true paths, whereby all afflictions and their results, contaminated 
phenomena such as this body, are abandoned.  The real Sangha are arya beings, those who 
have achieved the path of seeing, path of me ditation, or path of no-more-learning. They 
meditated true paths and achieved true cessat ions. Those who achieve the actual refuge of 
true paths and true cessations are the Sangha. They help us in our practice of Dharma.  
 There are two types of objects of refuge, the causal and the resultant. The causal Buddha 
refuge is, for example, our Teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, who taught us what to practice, 
whereby we can attain liberation from cyclic existence. The resultant B u d d h a  r e f u g e  i s  t h e  
buddha we will become in the future. The causal  Dharma refuge is the true paths and true 
cessations in others’ continua. The resultant Dharma refuge is the true paths and true 
cessations in our own continuum. The causal Sangha  refuge is other arya beings such as foe-
destroyers and so forth. The resultant Sangha refuge is the arya that we will become in the future when we achieve true paths and true cessations. We should develop the wish to 
meditate true paths and actualize true cessations and with this motivation take refuge in the 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
These positive qualities of suffering th at comprise many important points of 
practice {74} are stated in Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behavior  i n  t e r m s  o f  s u f f e r i n g  
[already] arisen in one’s own continuum, ho wever, they are equal[ly applicable] to 
suffering one is yet to experience.  
 
Suffering has one good quality – it can be el iminated! This is mentioned in Shantideva’s 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds . In addition, the suffering in our own continuum makes us 
generate the wish to attain liberation and en lightenment. It also makes us develop great 
compassion and the mind of enlightenment,  due to which we will attain buddhahood. 
Therefore, the suffering in our continuum is of benefit to us. If we recognize our own 
suffering, for example, that today we have a head ache or a toothache, we will go to the doctor 
who perhaps will then send us to  the hospital for X-rays and so forth. On the other hand, if 
we have sickness in our body but it is not manife st we will not go to the doctor or hospital to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
268 find out what is wrong. Sometimes when someon e only experiences a bit of pain they put off 
going to the hospital but, when they finally do go , the doctors say that it is already too late to 
do anything. There was a geshe, Geshe Thubte n Tsering from Ganden Jangtse Monastery, 
who lived in Madrid, Spain. He had had a pain in his neck for a long time and had been in 
hospital in Singapore, Malaysia, and Bangkok, but even after he arrived in Spain he 
continued to have pain. However, the root of  the pain could not be found. The doctors 
always looked at his neck but could not find anything. Some years later his stomach became 
swollen but he did not experience pain for a long  time. One day when he had a bit of pain he 
went to the hospital where he was told that it  was necessary to undergo an operation. When 
the surgeons opened him up, they found that hi s stomach was completely rotten and that it 
was to late to do anything for him. They told  him he would die in five or six days. Someone 
called me from Spain asking me to do some pu jas for Geshe Thubten Tsering. I also asked his 
monastery and friends to pray for him as he wa s very sick and perhaps would quickly die. 
Some days later I received a call that he had no t yet died and in fact he did not die until two 
months later. Therefore, sometimes when a sickne ss is not manifest, in that there is no pain 
and so forth, it becomes too late to cure it and the person dies. On the other hand, when there is pain there is the benefit that  the illness can be found and cured. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C How to think about suffering 
1 The actual [considerations concerning the suffering of the bad migrations] 
2 How it is necessary to meditate on this until the experience is produced  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1 The actual [considerations concerning the suffering in bad migrations] 
A Thinking about the sufferings of hell beings 
B Thinking about the sufferings of animals 
C Thinking about the sufferings of hungry ghosts 
Thus, the considerations about the sufferi ng of the bad migrations have three 
points: thinking about the sufferings of hell beings, animals, and hungry ghosts. 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1A Thinking about the sufferings of hell beings 
1 The actual [considerations] 
2  The need for fear at the thought that you have already accumulated numerous causes for being born there 
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1A1 The actual [considerations] 
A The great hells of sentient beings 
B The neighboring hells 
C The cold hells 
D The occasional hells 
 
The first one has four points: the great he lls of sentient beings, the neighboring 
hells, the cold hells, and the occasional hells.  
A The great hells of sentient beings 
First: 32,000 yojanas113 below here there is Continual Revival, and below it are 
seven more hells each sepa rated by 4,000 yojanas. 
 In the first among the eight, Continua l Revival, the sentient beings come 
together and stab each other with various weapons that arise by the power of their 
                                              
113 See introduction above, note 27 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
269 karma. Whenever they faint and collapse on  the ground, a voice rings out from the 
sky, “You, come back to life!” Upon that, they stand up again and start stabbing as 
before, due to which they experience immeasurable suffering. 
 In Black Line, the hell guardians put bl ack lines in [the shape of] many squares 
and the like on the [bodies of] the sentient  beings born there and then the latter 
experience the suffering of being cut into  pieces by weapons along those lines.  
 In Crushing Hell,114 the hell guardians pack the se ntient beings, once they have 
been rounded up, between two goat-faced or similar iron mountains. Then, they 
are immediately crushed by the two, whereupon rivers of blood spurt out from all their orifices.  
 In Howling Hell, the sentient beings in se arch of an abode enter iron houses. {75} 
As soon as they enter, fires blaze all around and they burn.   The Great Howling Hell is like the prev ious one, the difference being that the 
iron house has two layers.   In Hot Hell, the hell guardians put the sentient beings into very hot and blazing iron cauldrons of several yojanas, where th ey are burnt like fish. They are impaled 
through their buttocks on blazing iron st akes that emerge at the crown of the 
heads. Fire blazes out of their mouths, eye sockets, nostrils, and ears as well as all 
their pores. They are laid out, on their back or face down, on the blazing iron 
foundation and pounded and tormen ted with blazing iron hammers.  
 In Very Hot Hell, an iron trident is stuc k into their buttocks so that the right and 
left prongs emerge from the two should ers and the middle one from the crown of 
the head. Owing to that, tongues of fire blaze from their orifices such as the 
mouth. Their bodies are wrapped in blazin g, hot iron sheets and placed headlong 
into an iron cauldron full of boiling li quid, whereupon they are tossed up, down, 
and about as they boil. Then, once their skin, flesh, and blood have been destroyed and nothing but the skeleton is left, they are pulled out again and spread out on the iron foundation. After that, when the skin, flesh and blood have 
developed again, they are put in once again. Apart from that, it is like the Hot 
Hell.  
 I cannot say much about this as I haven’t been there! I am joking. There are different hells. 
The “great hells” are the hot hells. Then ther e are the neighboring hells, cold hells, and 
occasional hells. The occasional hells also exis t in the human realm, there being stories about 
this in the Hundred Actions Sutra (Karmashatam ).  
 The hot hells are the main hells. The first of  these is Continual Reviving, in which one 
faints and revives, again and again. In Black Line Hell the guardians mark one’s body with 
black lines and then cut it into pieces along the lines. In Crushing Hell, the guardians put 
one between two iron mountains with the shape of an animal’s head that come together, 
crushing one between them.   There are different causes for such rebirths. Fo r example, if, without a strong motivation to 
kill, we carelessly set grass on fire due to whic h many insects, such as ants, die, this can 
become the cause for taking rebirth in the hell  where there is least suffering. Among the eight 
                                             
 
114 bsdus ‘'joms  – lit. “(hell of) bringing to gether (and) dest roying”, Skt. samghata  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
270 hot hells, the worst suffering is in Unrelent ing Torment (Avichi). In the others there is 
gradually less suffering, therefore rebirth in them  depends respectively on the heaviness of the 
action. This in turn depends on the presence  of a motivation, an actual action, and a 
conclusion. For example, if, with a motivation th at is very negative, one tortures other human 
beings very badly by breaking their bones and so forth, one will be reborn in Unrelenting 
Torment. The cause for taking rebirth in the Bl ack Line is cutting up animals, for example, 
fish, that are not yet dead or putting them live  into boiling oil and so forth. The cause of 
rebirth in Crushing Hell is said to be crushing , for example, lice between one’s thumb nails in 
order to kill them.  
 In Howling Hell, the beings wail and howl due to their suffering. Rebirth there is caused by beating and torturing others. In this hell, on e is forced by one’s ka rma into an iron house 
surrounded on all sides by blazing fire, due to which the body is burned. Suffering greatly, 
one wails or cries loudly.   In Great Howling Hell, there is even more su ffering because the iron house is made of two 
layers, which are again surrounded by blazing fire in all directions. Due to this, the beings there wail even more loudly than in Howling Hell.  In Hot Hell, the hell guardians put the bein gs into cauldrons of boiling liquid, due to 
which intense suffering is experienced as their organs and so forth melt. Fire comes out the 
orifices of their eyes and so forth and the pore s of their body. The hell guardians stretch them 
out on the burning iron ground on their backs or on their stomachs. They also beaten them 
with incandescent hammers. In these ways these sentient beings experience the suffering of 
intense heat. Therefore, we should be careful not to harm others with fire or beat them. 
 In Very Hot Hell, the sentient beings are pierced with burning incandescent tridents, the points of which come out through their head and shoulders. Due to this, they experience 
great suffering and flames of fire issue forth from their mouths and orifices. They are also 
wrapped in burning iron sheets and put upside down into molten iron where they bob up 
and down as they boil and burn. Although thei r skin, flesh, and blood vanish, they are then 
restored once again due to their karma. In this  way, they experience the suffering of great 
heat. Could we bear such a rebirth? Since we co uld not, we must stop creating its cause – non-
virtuous actions – and strive to en gage only in virtuous actions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 In Without Respite, the foundation is completely ablaze for hundreds of yojanas 
from the east. As it spreads, the force of the fire increases, gradually destroying the 
skin, flesh, sinews, and bones of the sentie nt beings to the marrow. Like the wick 
of a butter lamp, their whole body is pervad ed by blazing tongues of fire. {76} In 
the other three directions it is similar.  
 In Unrelenting Torment (Avichi) there is not on e instant in which ther e is no suffering. In 
other words, there is continuous, unrelenting su ffering. The foundation blazes with fire for 
hundreds of yojanas in all directions. The fire  burns one’s skin, flesh, sinews, and bones to 
the marrow. Like the wick of a butter lamp whic h still remains even while being burnt by fire, 
their bodies are completely consumed by fire yet still remain.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
271 Thursday afternoon, 10 March 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 76) says:  
 
 As the fire coming from the four directio ns mixes there, [these beings] experience 
incessant suffering and only by their path etic howling are they understood to be 
sentient beings. In iron baskets they are made to jump on burning iron embers. 
They are m ade t o  fall do w n  o n the iro n  fo un dat io n  and t o  clim b up huge iro n 
mountains. Their tongues are pulled out from their mouths and spread out flat with a hundred pegs, then made to be without a wrinkle or crease, as though preparing cow hides. Then again they are placed on the iron foundation face up, 
their mouths are opened with iron tongs,  and blazing lumps of iron are put into 
their mouths. Boiling copper is poured in to their mouths and burns their mouth, 
throat, and entrails before issuing from th eir lower bodies. Apart from that it is 
similar to the Very Hot Hell.  
 The fire comes from all sides from a distance of  many yojanas until it meets together and is 
mixed, whereby the beings there experience uninterrupted suffering. Since their burning 
bodies appear to be the very nature of fire, they can only be understood to be sentient beings from the sound of their wailing.   Their sufferings are quite easy to understa nd from the description given above. The 
guardians of the hell realm torture the hell bein gs in many ways, due to which they experience 
suffering. We t o o  ha ve been bo rn in such pl aces and experienced such suffering. We have 
also been born in the form and formless real ms and experienced great pleasure there, but 
similarly we have also forgotten this experien ce. We should think about whether or not we 
could bear the suffering of the hell realm. Since we could not, we must stop engaging in non-virtuous actions, the cause of taking rebirth in the lower realms, right now. If we do not stop 
engaging in such actions, we will once again ta ke rebirth there and experience great suffering.  
 In short, the hell beings are made to hop about on the incandescent iron ground and to 
climb up and down burning iron mountains. Thei r tongues are pulled out and spread out flat 
with pegs. They are made to lie on their back s on the burning iron foundation, while blazing 
lumps of molten iron are put in their mouths . Boiling copper is also poured into their 
mouths, burning their insides and then leaving through the lower parts of their bodies. These 
are the particular sufferings of Unrelenting Torm ent, which in other ways are similar to those 
of the Very Hot Hell.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
How long those sufferings are experienced is as stated in the Letter to a Friend :  
 
Even if, for a billion of years, you experience 
Completely unbearable sufferings in that way, As long as the non-virtue  has not been exhausted, 
Equally long you will not get rid of your life. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
272 Moreover, in the Treasury and Actuality of the Stages  it is stated that 50 human years 
are one day in the [god realm of the] Four  Great Kings, thirty of those one month, 
and twelve of those one year. 500 such year s is the lifespan of  the beings of the 
Four Great Kings. All that is one single d ay in the hell of Continual Revival, 30 of 
those a month, twelve of those a year, an d 500 such years a lifespan. Likewise 100, 
200, 400, 800, and 1,600 human years resp ectively form a day [in the other five 
desire realm gods ranging] from the Thirty-Three up to Controlling Others’ 
Emanations, and their life-spans can be 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, {77} 8,000, and 
16,000 god years. These respectively fo rm a day in Black Line through the Hot 
Hell, and, they can reach from 1,000 through 16,000 of their own years. In the hell of Great Heat they can reach half an intermediate eon and in Without Respite, one intermediate eon.  
 How long does the suffering of the hells la st? Even though there may seem to be the 
conditions for death, as long as we have not exhausted the non-virtuous  actions that are the 
cause for rebirth there, we will not die and wi ll continue to experience this suffering.  
 Fifty human years are one day in the Four Gr eat Kings, thirty such days are one month, 
and twelve such months are one year. The lifesp an of the beings in this realm is 500 such 
years. They are equal to a single day in the Re viving Hell, thirty such days are one month, 
twelve such months are one year , and 500 such years is the life span of those in the Reviving 
Hell. In each of the other hot hells the lifesp an increases in correspondence with the length 
of the days for the other gods of the desire real m. In Great Hot Hell the beings live for half an 
intermediate eon, and in Unrelenting Torm ent or Without Recite they live for an 
intermediate eon. This is mentioned in the Treasury of Manifest Dharma  and Actuality of the 
Grounds .  
 We cannot even begin to imagine the length of these lifespans. If we could, we might have 
a heart attack!   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The neighboring hells 
Second: Each one of the eight hells has fo ur side walls and four gates. Outside, 
they are surrounded by an iron fence, and that fence also has four gates. By each 
gate there are the four remaining hells of  sentient beings: (1) the Pit of Burning 
Embers, (2) the Bog of Putrid Corpses or the Bog of Excrement Reeking of 
Corpses, (3) the Razor Road, etc., and (4) the River Without a Ford.  
 In the first, there are hot embers up to the knees and when sentient beings go to 
look for a place [to stand], as they set th eir feet down their skin, flesh, and blood 
are destroyed, and as they lift them up they regenerate. 
 
I do not need to say much about this as you can understand it just by reading the above. 
There are four surrounding or neighboring hell s located around each side of the eight hot 
hells. The hot hells are surrounded by four iron wa lls with a door or gate  in each of the four 
directions. Outside that, they are surrounded by a n  i r o n  f e n c e .  O n  o n e side there is first 
neighboring hell, the Pit of Burning Embers. The sentient beings born there look for a place 
to relax a bit, but when they make a step their f oot is burned, and when they lift it up it is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
273 restored to normal while the other foot is burn ed. This suffering is experienced due to having 
created its cause – carelessly burning and killing other sentient beings with fire. On the other 
s i d e  o f  t h i s  h e l l  i s  t h e  S w a m p  o f  D e c o m p o s e d  Corpses, a swamp or bog from which it is 
difficult to extract the legs and is filled with inse cts that bite the flesh. On the other side there 
is the Razor-filled Plain, a road or path made of razors that cuts the feet and legs. On the 
other side there is the River Without a Ford, a river that cannot be crossed except by going 
into it whereupon the body is badly burned.  
 Sentient beings are initially born in one of th e main hot hells, then, when they die from it, 
they are reborn in one of the surrounding or ne ighboring hells. It is di fficult to leave them 
and great sufferings that cannot be eliminated are experienced there.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 Nearby, there is the second one, the Bo g of Excrement Reeking of Corpses. As 
they cross it in search of an  abode, the sentient beings fall into it and sink up to 
their head. In this bog there are worms called “sharp-beaks” that pierce the skin, 
flesh, sinews, and bones and dig through them all the way to the marrow.  
 In this hell sentient beings fall into a swamp  or bog in which insects pierce and bore into 
their flesh and so forth right up to the marrow of their bones.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 Near the bog there is the third one, a pa th filled with razor-blade teeth. When 
sentient beings walk along it in search of an abode, as they put their foot down, 
their skin, flesh, and blood are cut, and as they lift it up they grow back again.  
 
In this hell, the sentient beings, looking for a pl ace in which to rest, walk on a road made of 
razors that cuts the skin, flesh, and bones of their feet, causing them much suffering. But as 
they lift their feet up, they are once again rest ored. In this way the same suffering is repeated 
over and over again.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 N e a r b y  t h e r e  i s  t h e  F o r e s t  o f  S w o r d - l e a v e s .  A s  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  w a l k  a r o u n d  i n  
search of an abode, when they make use of its shade and settle down, {78} swords 
emerge from the trees and chop up their limbs and other body parts. When they 
faint there, reddish-brown dogs come, grab them from behind and eat them. 
 In this forest the leaves of the trees are like swords. The sentient beings look for a place to rest and sit down in the shadow of these trees, whereupon swords come from the trees and cut their limbs to pieces. When they fall down in a faint, dogs come and grab them from behind 
and eat them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
274  
 N e a r b y  i t  i s  t h e  F o r e s t  o f  I r o n - S p i k e d Trees. Sentient beings walking around 
there in search of an abode set about clim bing up the trees. As they climb up, the 
tips of the thorns point downwards and as  they climb, down they point upwards, 
chopping up the limbs and other body part s. The birds with iron beaks that exist 
in that place alight on their shoulders or heads, peck out their eyeballs, and eat 
them.  
 In the forest or grove of shalmali or iron-spo ked trees, the sentient beings, looking for a place 
to rest, climb up the trees, whereupon their th orns point downward and pierce them. Then, 
when they climb back down, their thorns poin t upward and once again pierce and destroy 
their limbs and body parts. Bird s with iron beaks land on their shoulders or head, and peck 
out and eat their eyeballs.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 These places are considered to be one du e to the harm by weapons being similar. 
 
Because in these three neighboring hells – the Razor-fille d Plain, Grove of Sword Leaves, and Forest of Iron-
Spoked Trees, the sentient beings  are harmed by weapons, they are considered to be one.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 The fourth, near the Shalmali Forest, is the so-called River Without a Ford filled 
with fast moving, boiling water. Sentient beings in search of an abode fall into it 
and are cooked as they bob up and down like peas thrown into a cauldron filled with water over a great fire. On either ba nk of the river stand [guardians] holding 
sticks, hooks, and nets in their hands who do not allow anyone to get out. Having 
pulled them out with  the hooks or nets, [the guardians ] place them face upward 
on the blazing great foundation and ask th em what they want. When they say, “I 
don’t know and cannot see anything, however I am hungry and thirsty,” [the 
guardians ] put fiercely blazing lumps of iron into their mouths and pour boiling 
copper into their mouths. 
 
Near the Iron-spoked Forest is the River Withou t a Ford that cannot be crossed at any point. 
In it, the water flows very fast and is like mo lten iron. The hell beings, looking for a place to 
rest, fall into this river where th ey experience the great suffering of being cooked like peas in a 
cauldron of boiling water. However, in spite of  the intense suffering, these beings do not die 
and when they try to get out of the river, guardi ans on either bank of the river beat back them 
back with sticks. They pull the hell beings ou t of the river with hooks and nets, lie them on 
the burning foundation, and ask them what they want. When the hell beings reply, “I do not 
know anything. I cannot see anything. I am hung ry and thirsty,” the guardians put lumps of 
burning iron and boiling copper in their mouths an d tell them to eat and drink. In this way, 
the beings there experience unbearable suffering due to their karma.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
275 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 The Actuality of the Stages  explains that the lifespan in the neighbouring and 
occasional hells is uncertain. However, suffe ring will be experienced as long as the 
potency of the karma for experiencing th ose sufferings has not been exhausted. 
 
The beings in the neighboring and occasion al hells do not have a fixed lifespan.  
 There is a story in a sutra about an occasion al hell in the human realm. At night it would 
t r a n s f o r m  i n t o  a n  o c c a s i o n a l  h e l l  i n  w h i c h  t h e  b e i n g s  f o u g h t  a n d  k i l l e d  e a c h  o t h e r ,  a n d  during the day it would return to its usual form  of a monastery where all the monks were very 
subdued and kind to each other. This was seen  by a bodhisattva who, when traveling, came 
across a monastery and asked to be allowed to  remain there for a few days. He was given 
permission to stay but was told to remain lock ed up in his room and not to look out at a 
certain time. However, he did not follow this ad vice and, looking out, saw that the rooms of 
the monastery had become iron houses that were  being burnt on all sides and that the beings 
inside where fighting and killing each other. He  was amazed by this, but a short time later it 
once again became a quiet monastery.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C The cold hells 
The third – the cold hells – are directly opposite the eight great [hot] hells of sentient 
beings each at a distance of 10,000 yojanas . {79} 32,000 yojanas below that there is 
the hell of Blisters and from there, se parated by 2,000 yojanas each, the other 
seven hells. Among those eight, in the on e of Blisters you are hit by strong icy 
wind and your body shrivels, while blisters appear on it everywhere. In the hell of 
Bursting Blisters you shrivel as the bl isters burst open. Chattering Teeth, 
Lamentation, and “Brrr” are named after th e sounds that are uttered. In Splitting 
Apart Like an Utpala Flower, due to being hit by strong icy wind, you turn blue in 
color and split apart into five or six pieces. In Splitting Apart Like a Lotus you pass beyond blue and become red, splitting apart into ten or more pieces. In Great Splitting Apart Like a Lotus your skin becomes deep red and you split apart into 
100 or even more pieces. All this is explained in Actuality of the Stages .  
 
The cold hells are described here much more br iefly than were the hot hells. The cold hells 
are located 10,000 yojanas from the hot hells. A yojana
115 is composed of 8 krosha, a krosha is 
composed of 500 armspans, an armspan is compos ed of four cubits, a cubit is composed of 24 
fingerwidths, and so forth, as explained in the Treasury of Manifest Dharma . 32,000 yojanas 
below that is the Blistering Hell. The other se ven cold hells are each located 2,000 yojanas 
below the previous one. In the Blistering Hell the body is struck by an extremely cold wind 
and blisters break out on the body. In Bursting Blisters, the blisters burst open into pieces.  
 In Chattering Teeth the beings cannot open their mouths, the teeth being clenched tight 
together due to the cold. In Lamentation or Gr oaning, the beings wail “What can we do?” In 
                                              
115 JN: approximately 7.2 kms 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
276 Brr or Moaning, they complain continually of the cold. These three he lls are named after the 
sounds the beings make.  
 In Splitting Like an Utpala a great wind blows,  turning the body blue and causing it to split 
into five or six pieces. In Splitting Like a Lotu s, the body becomes red and splits into ten or 
more pieces. In Great Splitting Like a Lotus, the body becomes dark red and splits into one 
hundred or more pieces. These facts are explained in Actuality of the Stages . Could we bear 
such suffering? Since we could not, we must av oid creating the cause of such rebirths – non-
virtuous actions. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 As for the lifespan, it is stated that if you were to fill a storage container up to the 
brim with eighty kharis of sesame seed s from Magadha and take out one sesame 
seed every hundred years, the lifespan in th e hell of Blisters would last longer than 
for the sesame to be completely exhausted,  and the lifespan in each hell below is 
twenty times that of the previous one. 
 
The lifespan increases by twenty in each of the successive cold hells. Because of this, having 
been born in the hell realm, it can seem that  one will never again be reborn in the higher 
realms. For this reason, we need to strive in our daily life to eliminate the causes of such 
rebirths. A cause of taking rebirt h in the cold hells is, for exampl e, to put small insects outside 
in the cold due to which they immediately die, to  throw animals such as cats or dogs in very 
cold water even as a joke, and so forth. These acts  will act as a cause for us to be reborn in the 
cold hells where we will be struck by very cold wi nd. If we experience such suffering, it is only 
because we have created the ka rma to be reborn there.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D The occasional hells 
The fourth: These exist in the vicini ty of the hot and cold hells. In Actuality of the 
Stages  it says that they also ex ist in human places, and in Basis of [Vinaya] Scriptures  
it is stated that they exist near the shores of great lakes, as it occurs in Expression of 
the Realizations of Sangharakshita .  
 
The occasional hells are located near the hot an d cold hells, but others also exist in the 
human realm. Another text says that they can be found on the shores of the ocean in the 
human realm. Sangharakshita was the monk who visited a the monastery and saw how it 
transformed into an occasional hell.  
 In our everyday life we create and collect many negative actions. However, it would be better to try to avoid creating negative actions and to try to create only virtuous actions, whereby we 
will come to experience happiness. On the other hand, if we only create negativities, we will experience suffering again and again. For this reason, we need to choose what we want to 
experience in the future and if  we wish to experience happi ness we must definitely stop 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 7-10 March 2005 (06) 
277 creating non-virtuous actions and strive to crea te virtuous actions. Ho wever, if you want to 
experience sufferings, you can do whatever you want! 
 
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
278 Monday afternoon, 14 March 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 79) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1A2 The need for fear at the thought that you have already accumulated numerous causes 
for being born there 
Since it is very easy for the causes of bi rth there, as will be explained below, to 
come about, whereby each day you also a ccumulate many of them, and since also 
those that you accumulated before are i mmeasurable, it is inappropriate to sit 
around happily. {80} Therefore, thinking  about them, you should be afraid, for 
nothing other than this unsteady resp iration separates you from them. From 
Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behavior : 
 
How can you sit there happily, 
Having created the karma for hell? 
 Every day we accumulate negative and non-virtuous  actions – the causes fo r rebirth in the hell 
realm. Due to this, it is not right to sit abou t happily. Instead we should think about the fact 
that we have accumulated non-virtuous actions and generate the wish to purify them. Fearing 
their results when our breath comes to a stop, we  must refrain from engaging in actions that 
will bring us rebirth in the lower realms and crea te only the virtuous actions that will bring us 
rebirth in the upper realms.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And in the Letter to a Friend  it also says: 
 
Evildoers separated only 
By the time it takes for the breathing to stop, Hearing about the boundless torments of hell And not scared in thousand ways, are like vajras. 
 
If seeing, hearing, remembering, and reading Descriptions of hell as well as their depictions 
Generates fear, what need is there to speak 
Of experiencing the unbearable fully ripened effects. 
 
The intense suffering is also stated in the Letter to a Friend : 
 
Just as the bliss of extinguishment of craving Is supreme among all kinds of bliss, Likewise among all kinds of sufferings –  Those of Avici hell are the most unbearable. 
 
Here, if in one day three hundred spears Were to hit you brutally, the suffering 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
279 Would be small compared to the sufferings of hell, 
It would not even be a fraction of them. 
 
Having created heavy non-virtuous actions, as s oon as our breathing stops we will immediately 
be reborn in the hell realm. Even upon hearing about the sufferings of hells or seeing 
drawings, paintings, or statues of them, we gene rate fear, like, for example, when seeing the 
relieves of the eight cemeteries in the Nyingma Golden Temple in south India. Therefore, we 
should definitely generate fear when thinking  about the non-virtuous actions that we have 
done and strive to purify them. If we do this, we will not need to fear taking a bad rebirth since we will be reborn as a human being, anti-god, or god.   However, as long as we are born in cyclic ex istence we will experience suffering. We can see 
that even as human beings we experience wo rry, for example, about getting cancer, even 
though this pain is very small compared to th e much greater suffering of the hells where there 
is suffering all the time, day and night. Even th e gods of the form realm experience suffering, 
especially the suffering of the signs of death. Si nce wherever we are born in cyclic existence, 
we will experience suffering, we need to genera te the wish to pass beyond cyclic existence and 
go to the other shore of nirvana or the highest st ate of enlightenment. To do this we need to 
purify our negativities. Sufferings and negativities  have one quality: respectively they can be 
eliminated and purified.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
You should come to understand that the cause giving rise to such suffering is only 
your own faulty behavior and strive with all your might not to be tainted even by 
minor faulty behavior. From the same [text]: 
 
The seed of these non-virtuous effects consists In faulty behavior of body, speech, and mind. Strive with such resourcefulness that nothing, Not even a speck of them, is done by you. 
 Why do we experience such sufferings? It is due to having committed faulty or non-virtuous 
actions of body, speech, and mind in the past and not having purified them. Since these seeds 
abide in our mind, when the conditions arise they ripen and bring forth their result of 
suffering. Therefore, while we are intelligent and physically powerful we must put effort into 
purifying our negativities.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1B Thinking about the sufferings of animals 
Second: The weaker animals are killed by more powerful ones. They become the 
chattels of gods and humans and lackin g freedom and being under the control of 
others, they are killed, beaten, an d harmed. It is explained in the  Actuality of the 
Stages  that owing to {81} accompanying humans and gods, they do not have 
another abode. The Commentary on the Treasury explains that their main abode is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
280 the great ocean and that the others spread  out from there. Furthermore, they are 
born in darkness and in water, age ther e and die. They are worn out by heavy 
burdens, put to the plow, shorn, driven , and killed miserably by means of many 
different killing methods. They are torm ented by hunger, thirst, sun, and wind. 
They are persecuted by hunters and the like in many ways, whereby they are always 
terrified. Therefore, you should feel sadde ned and disquieted thinking of the many 
ways in which they suffer.  
 With respect to their lifespan, in the Treasury  it says that “the longest animal 
lifespan is one eon” and it is explained th at the long-lived ones attain a mere eon 
while the short lived ones are unspecified.  
 
Among the animals, the bigger ones kill and eat the smaller ones. For example, if we examine 
the animals we see around us in our daily life , such as the pigeons, swallows, cats, and so 
forth, we will see that the cats are constantly trying to catch the pigeons and other birds. Some 
animals, such as sheep, cows, horses, donkeys, buffaloes, elephants and so forth, are utilized 
by human beings as if they were things. Lack ing freedom and under others’ power, they are 
killed, beaten, and harmed by human beings. Animals live in the same places as gods and 
human beings, that is, they do not have a separa te abode. There are some that take rebirth in 
very dark places and some that are born in th e water, where they age and die. Some animals 
are used by human beings to carry heavy burdens. Others are made to pull plows, others have their wool shorn, and so forth. They are killed in many different ways, for example, by cutting 
off their head, cutting open their stomachs, being shot, and so forth. They also experience the 
sufferings of thirst, hunger, great heat, strong  wind, of being hunted, and so forth. Human 
beings often rejoice, like crazy people, in having killed a helpless animal.   In short, animals suffer in many ways every day. We should think, “If I were born as an 
animal, would I be able to bear it?” We should meditate on what it would be like to actually 
be born in this state. Since we could not bear it, we need to abandon creating its cause – non-
virtuous actions.  
 Some animals live for one eon while others  only live for one day. Therefore, the Treasury of 
Manifest Dharma  says that the lifespan of animals is uncertain.  
 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1C Thinking about the sufferings of hungry ghosts 
Third: Those who predominan tly attend to miserliness will be born as hungry 
ghosts. They too have hunger and thirst . Since their skin, flesh, and blood are 
dried up, they are like burnt logs. Their faces are covered with hair. Their mouths 
are exceedingly dry and they lick them with their tongues.  
 
A Those with external obstructions to food and drink 
B Those with internal obstructions to food and drink 
C Those with obstructions to food and drink itself  
There are three of them: those with external  obstructions to food and drink, those 
with internal obstructions to food and dr ink, and those with obstructions to food 
and drink itself.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
281 Here the text clearly explains the suffering of  hungry ghosts. The cause of such rebirth is 
miserliness – being tight-fisted and unable to give to others. Hungry ghosts experience the 
suffering of hunger and thirst. Their skin is dr ied up, like a burnt log. Their faces are covered 
with hair, blocking their vision, and they are not intelligent enou gh to tie it back out of the 
way. They are very thirsty. There are three types of hungry ghosts:  
4. those with external obstructions to food and drink,  
5. those with internal obstructions to food and drink, and  
6. those with obstructions to food and drink itself. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim says:  
A Those with external obstructions to food and drink  
As for the first ones, if they wander towa rds springs, lakes, and ponds, they are 
hindered externally by sentient beings holding swords, spears, and lances and, 
seeing the water as pus and blood, they do not want to drink it.  
 When the hungry ghosts with external obstructions see water, such as a lake and so forth, in the distance, they go toward it, but when they arrive nearby they see beings holding swords, 
spears, and so forth who block their approach. Also  what appeared to be large river or lake in 
the distance is only a dry river bed or lake bed when they arrive there. Likewise, if they see trees laden with fruit in the distance and approa ch them, when they get there all they see are 
dried up trees without any leaves or fruit. Th is is all due to their specific karma.  
 It is said that when a human being sees a cu p of water, a god sees a cup of nectar and a 
hungry ghost sees a cup of pus and blood. Likewise, if the human beings drinks it, he experiences water; if the god drinks it, he expe riences nectar; and if the hungry ghost drinks 
it, he experiences blood and pus. This is also due to their karma.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Those with internal obstructions to food and drink  
The second ones have mouths like the me re eye of a needle. Their mouths blaze 
with fire, and they have goiters and big be llies. Even if they end up finding food 
and drink without others creating obstruct ions, they are not able to eat and drink 
them. 
 
The hungry ghosts with internal  obstructions have mouths that  are the size of the eye of a 
needle. Flames of fire come from their mouths . They have huge goit ers on their necks and 
enormous bellies. Even though they are not hi ndered by other beings, due to their karma 
even when they find food they cannot enjoy it  because of their small mouths, the fire coming 
from their mouths, or their goiters.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Those with obstructions to food and drink itself 
As for the third ones, the so-called “fire- garlanded ones” get burned due to {82} 
everything they eat and drink catching fire. The so-called “filth-eaters” eat 
excrement and drink urine. They only eat and drink that which is unclean, smelly, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
282 harmful, and despicable. Some cut their own flesh and eat it. They cannot make 
use of clean and good food or drink.  
 
Whatever these hungry ghosts eat or drink, it  catches fire and burns them. Others eat food 
that has transformed into excrement, and dr ink that has transformed into urine. This 
happens due to their having created certain karm a in the past, whereby they experience such 
suffering without any choice.  
 Whatever they eat and drink, it becomes uncl ean and filthy. Not being able to find food, 
some of them cut their own flesh and eat it. Th ey are unable to enjoy or use clean or good 
food and drink due to the heavy negative karm a they created in the past, mainly out of 
miserliness. Presently we are human beings who have many enjoyments, but if we are miserly 
and, instead of practicing generosity, keep ever ything for ourselves, we too will be born as 
hungry ghosts. Could we bear this? We could no t, therefore we need to purify its causes. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 Their abode, as explained in the Commentary on the  Treasury , is below the city of 
Rajagriha in Jambudvipa, separated by a distance of 500 yojan as, and from there 
the other hungry ghosts have spread out. As for their life span, it says in the 
Actuality of the Stages  that one human month is a da y and that they reach 500 of 
their years. In the Letter to a Friend  is says: 
 
Attending to suffering uninterruptedly, 
Fettered by the thick rope Of karma of faulty behavior, some embodied beings  Do not die for five or even ten thousand years. 
 
The commentary explains that the lifespan of some hungry ghosts is 5,000 years 
and of some 10,000 years. 
 In all three bad migrations th e body size is indefinite. In Actuality of the Stages  it 
says that through the power of the non- virtues there are all kinds of sizes. 
 
Where do the hungry ghosts live? They are said  to live 500 yojanas below Rajagriha. In the 
Torma Offering to Kalarupa  i t  s a y s  t h a t  t h e  L o r d  o f  D e a t h  a b i d e s  i n  t h e  l a n d  o f  t h e  h u n g r y 
ghosts, seven levels below the ground. This is the main place in whic h hungry ghosts live, 
others spread out from there. How long do they live for? Some hungry ghosts live for 5,000 years and others live for 10,000 years.   The body size of the hell beings, hungry ghos ts, and animals is indefinite, there being some 
that are extremely tall and some that are very sm all. We see, for example, big animals such as 
elephants, middling animals such as cows and bu ffaloes, and small animals like cats and so 
forth. Similarly, there are hungry ghosts that are very big and those that are very small.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-2 How it is necessary to meditate on this until the experience is produced 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
283 In accordance with that, when you think about the sufferings of bad migrations 
reflect: “If it would be difficult for me to sit for one day with my hands stuck in 
embers, or to just stay in a freezing cave during a winter storm without clothes, or 
to be without food and drink for a few days, or for my body to be bitten by 
something like a bee, how could I bear the sufferings of the hot hells, the cold 
hells, the hungry ghosts, and the animal s who devour one another alive?” You 
should meditate with respect to such experiences until a change of mind of intense 
{83} fear and terror occurs. Through thin king about this now with a good base, 
what has been accumulated previously is pu rified and what you will engage in later 
on lessens. Through intense aspirational pr ayers, direct the virtue that has been 
accumulated previously and thereby increa se it manifold. Since this opens up 
many avenues for engaging in them newly,  every day one will make the leisures 
meaningful. If you do not think about this  now, once you have fallen into the bad 
migrations, even if you look for it, you will not find a refu ge that protects you from 
those fears. At that time, you will lack the power of mind to take on what should 
be done and reject what should no t be done. This is mentioned in Engaging in 
[Bodhisattva] Behavior . 
 
We should think about such sufferings, trying to  imagine what it would be like to experience 
them ourselves and asking ourselves whether or not we could bear to be reborn in the bad 
migrations. For example, could we bear the suffering of putting our hands in embers for one day? We could not. Could we bear staying outsid e during the winter in a strong wind without 
any clothes on even for a single night? We coul d not. If we had nothin g to eat or drink even 
just for three or four days, could be bear it? Most of us could not. If we were to be stung by insects such as bees, mosquitoes, and so forth, could we bear it? We could not. Could we bear 
being eaten alive by another animal? We could not. This being so, how could we bear the 
sufferings of the hell beings, hungry ghosts, an d animals? Thus, if we examine the sufferings 
of the beings of the three lower realms and as k ourselves whether we could bear them, we will 
find that we could not. Therefore, now that we have this opportunity, this precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities, we should not waste it. Generating fear of the 
sufferings of the bad migrations and realizing that  we could not bear them, a change occurs in 
our mind. Due to this, we will engage in purify ing the negativities that we accumulated in the 
past and will not engage much less in creati ng non-virtuous actions in the future. For 
example, if today we develop an experience of  this strong suffering in our meditation, the 
next day we will try to refrain from creating  non-virtuous actions and to purify the non-
virtuous actions that we have already created in the past. We will also make strong prayers 
that direct and increase whatever virtue we have  already accumulated. This will open up many 
doors to making our life meaningful by practici ng virtue every day again and again. Since this 
is what will make our precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities meaningful, 
we must do it. If instead we do not think about or  do this, in our next life we will fall into the 
hell realm, hungry ghost realm, or animal real m where we will experience intense sufferings. 
At that time, even if we search for a refuge we wi ll not find it. In other words, if we waste this 
present opportunity we will fall into the bad migr ations where we will not find an object of 
refuge even if we look for it. Right now we have the power of mind to be able to examine what kind of actions are to be done and what kind of actions are not to be done, but if we 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
284 were reborn in the animal realm, for example, we would not be able to do this. Having been 
born there, it will be too late to engage in su ch practices. Therefore, right now we need to put 
effort into it.  
 
This concludes the subject of th e sufferings of the lower realms. Next we must make ensure 
that we find happiness in our future lives. 
 
(Oral transmission  started 7:10 PM) 
 
Tuesday morning, 15 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 83) says:  
Explanation of how to rely on the meth ods for the happiness of future worlds 
2B4B-2B1A-2 Explanation of how to rely on the methods for the happiness of future worlds 
A Training in going for refuge: the holy gate for entering the teachings  
B The root of all well-being: generating the confidence of firm conviction in actions and [their] 
effects  
The second one, [how to rely on the methods for the happiness of future existences]  has two 
points: training to go for refuge: the holy  gate for entering the teachings, and the 
root of all well-being116: generating the confidence of  firm conviction in actions 
and [their] effects. 
 
This section sets out how to rely on the method s for achieving happiness in future lives. The 
first of these is the door of entry into Buddh ism – going for refuge to the Three Jewels and 
training in this. To enter into Buddhism we must take the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha as 
our final refuge, while still being able to take temporary refuge in those gods, human beings, 
and so forth who can protect us in the meantime if we ask them for help. In other words, we 
can ask worldly gods such as Brahma, Indra, an d others for some kind of temporary help, but 
we cannot take them as our final refuge. 
 Since all happiness and excellence (well-be ing) comes from generating belief and 
confidence in the law of cause and result, that  is, actions and their results, we need to 
generate faith in it and then abide by this law.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A Training in going for refuge: the holy gate for entering the teachings 
                                              
116 The Tibetan expression, which is consistently translated  as “well-being” here, consists of a combination of 
the two syllables bde and legs (lit. “happy–good”), bde referring to the happiness of happy, i.e., higher, realms, 
and legs referring to “certain goodness,” i.e., liberation fr om cyclic existence or enlightenment. Thus “well-
being” implies both temporary and ultimate happiness. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
285 1 The causes on which going for refuge depends  
2 Depending on them, the objects to which to go for refuge 
3 The way in which to go for refuge as much as one can 
4 The stages of training after having gone for refuge 
The first one has four points: the causes  on which going for refuge depends; 
depending on that, the objects in which to  go for refuge; the way in which to go 
for refuge as much as one can; and the st ages of training after having gone for 
refuge. 
 
First, what are the main causes for going for refuge? Then in dependence on these causes, 
what are the objects of refuge? Then, how do we go for refuge to them? Then, having gone for 
refuge, what are the precepts or trainings of refuge that are to be kept?  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A1 The causes on which going for refuge depends 
First: Although, in general, there are many  causes, here it is the fact that, as 
explained above, we do not stay in this li fe but soon die and that after death we 
will not have control over where we will be reborn but will be controlled by our 
karma. Also karma, according to Engaging in [Bodhisattva ] Behavior , is [like this]: 
 
As a flash of lightning at night amidst the clouds 
Illuminates the darkness for a moment, 
Likewise on the road, through the power of buddhas 
A rare understanding of merit comes forth in the worldly. Therefore, that which is virtuous is always weak, While that which is evil is extremely strong and unbearable. 
 {84} Thus, by thinking about how you will fall into the bad migrations due to the 
power of wholesome karma being small and that of unwholesome karma being 
extremely strong, the two arise: fear of th e bad migrations and the conviction that 
that which is rare and precious,
117 [the Jewels ], can protect you from them. 
Consequently, if these two remain but words, going for refuge will be similar. 
However, if they are present intensely and fi rmly, going for refuge will also come to 
tame the mind. Therefore, you should strive in those two causes. 
 Presently we have obtained a good human rebirth due to having created its causes in our past lives. However, we will not remain alive for long , but will soon die. When we die, where will 
we go? We will not have any control or choice over where we will be reborn, but will be completely under the control of our karma. Ther efore, we should carefully examine our mind 
in terms of what kind of motivations are directing our actions of body, speech, and mind. If our motivation is always good, we will create virtuous actions of body, speech, and mind, whereby our future rebirth will also be good. On the other hand, if we create non-virtuous 
actions of body, speech, and mind, without choice  we will take rebirth in the lower realms.  
                                             
 
117 dkon mchog , “rare (and) precious/most excellent” is the word  used for “jewel” in the context of going for 
refuge. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
286  Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says that just as when lightning flashes at night it only 
briefly illuminates the surroundings, similarly by the power of the buddhas we occasionally 
generate a short-lived virtuous mind, whereby we create merit and gain some wisdom. In 
general our virtuous actions are quite small an d weak, whereas when we  create non-virtuous 
actions even in our daily life they are very heav y. Thus, our white or virtuous actions are very 
weak, whereas our non-virtuous or  black actions are very strong. Due to this we will fall into 
the lower realms. Thinking about this, we should  generate fear of the sufferings of the lower 
realms. Then what should we do? We should  look for someone who can protect us. The 
Three Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, ha ve the power to protect us. Therefore, we 
should generate complete belief or conviction in them.  
 Thus, there are two main causes of going for re fuge. The first one is fear, mainly fear of the 
sufferings of the lower realms. The second is fa ith or confidence that  the Three Jewels can 
protect us from these sufferings. Thus, if we recite “I go for refuge to the Buddha. I go for refuge to the Dharma. I go for refuge to the Sangha,” without fear of  the sufferings of the 
lower realms and without faith that the Three Jewels can protect us from them, they will 
remain mere words without much power. On the other hand, if our fear and faith is very strong, so too will our going for refuge be strong  and come from our heart. Therefore, initially 
we need to develop these two causes.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A2 Depending on them, the objects to which to go for refuge 
A Identifying the objects [of refuge]  
B The reasons why they are worthy to be refuges 
The second one has two points: identifying the objects [of refuge] and the reasons 
why they are worthy to be refuges. 
 
We need to recognize the entity of the objects of refuge and understand why they are correct 
objects of refuge.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A2A Identifying the objects [of refuge] 
First: In the Praise in One Hundred Fifty Verses  it says:  
 
To one in whom perpetually 
All faults are definitely absent, To one in whom in every manner, All good qualities abide;  If someone like that exists, It is fit to go for refuge to him, To praise him, to attend on him, To abide in what he teaches. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
287 Thus, if someone has the intelligence to di fferentiate between what is a refuge and 
what is not a refuge, it is appropriate fo r him to go for refuge to the undeceiving 
protector, the Buddha Bhagavan. This also illustrates the Dharma Jewel and 
Sangha Jewel. From the Seventy Verses on Going for Refuge : 
 
Buddha, Dharma, Sangha are 
The refuge of those who want liberation. 
 If there exists someone in whom all faults are absent and all good qualities are present, we 
should take refuge in him. Therefore, we shou ld examine the qualities of a buddha, eight of 
which are mentioned in Sublime Continuum . In short, a buddha is one who has abandoned all 
the objects of abandonment and has comp leted great compassion (the mind of 
enlightenment), wisdom, and ability or power. Du e to this, a buddha is able to help us. For 
this reason, the Buddha is one of the main obje cts of refuge. Thus, it is suitable for human 
beings who have a mind and are intelligent to go  for refuge to him, praise and respect him, 
and try to abide by his teachings.   Those who have wisdom should differentiate what  is an object of refuge and what is not, 
meaning what is and is not a final object of re fuge. The Buddha is an object of refuge because 
he never deceives us. We need to go for refu ge to him if we want to achieve buddhahood. 
 Similarly, we should also go for refuge to  the Dharma Jewel and Sangha Jewel. Those who 
wish to attain liberation should take the Bu ddha, Dharma, and Sangha as their objects of 
refuge. An example of the Buddha Jewel is Bu ddha Shakyamuni, the Dharma Jewel is true 
paths and true cessations, and the Sangha Jewe l is arya beings. That other objects are not 
objects of refuge means that they are not fi nal objects of refuge, although they can be 
temporary objects of refuge.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A2B The reasons why they are worthy to be refuges 
1 The actual reasons  
Second: Someone who is free from all fear , skilled in the means of liberating 
others from fear, steeped in great compa ssion toward everyone without closeness 
and distance, and who works for the welfare of all those who help and do not help 
h i m ,  s u c h  a  o n e  i s  w o r t h y  t o  b e  a  r e f u g e .  A s  o n l y  t h e  B u d d h a  h a s  t h o s e  
[qualifications], while Ishvara and the like do not, he is a refuge. For that reason, 
the Dharma taught by him as well as the Sa ngha of hearers are also {85} worthy to 
be refuges. 
 A buddha possesses four qualities. First of all, he  himself is free from all fear. In other words, 
a buddha is completely free from all fears due to having attained the quality of the four 
fearlessnesses. He is also free from fear because he has abandoned all the objects of 
abandonment – the afflictive obscurations, obsc urations to knowledge, the obscuration to 
absorption, karmic obscurations, and fruitional obscurations.   A buddha is also skilled in the means or methods for liberating others from fear. He knows all the different methods necessary for people of different mentalities to become free from 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
288 fear and then teaches them these methods. Fear  cannot be removed with the hand, nor can it 
be washed away with water; it can only be  removed by giving teachings to others. 
 A buddha also has great compassion for all sentient beings. He does not hold some 
sentient beings as near and some as far but has the same compassion for all of them. For 
example, in Dharmakirti’s Commentary on Dignaga’s ‘Com pendium of Valid Cognition’  it says that 
a buddha has the same attitude toward someone who is cutting the flesh of one side of his 
body and to someone else who is massaging the other side of his body with fragrant 
sandalwood oil. We, on the other hand, who do  not have great compassion, like those who 
help us, our friends, and do not like those wh o do not help us. A buddha does not have such 
partiality.  
 A buddha also acts for the welfare of both those who help him and those who do not help 
him. It is not that he only benefits those who help him and does not benefit those who do 
not help him.  Only a buddha possesses these four qualities;  they are not possessed by the eight mundane 
gods such as Ishvara, Mahadeva , Brahma and so forth, who ar e described in various texts. 
Although these gods are very proud, they bo w down before a buddha because they do not 
have such qualities.   Thus, we go for refuge to a buddha who has thes e four qualities. We also go for refuge to 
the Dharma that he teaches and that we deve lop in our mental continuum. We also go for 
refuge to his disciples, such as the hearers,  who are the Sangha. Th ere are eight types of 
sangha, ranging from approachers to stream enterers through ab iders in foe-destroyer, that 
can be further divided into twenty. We should go for refuge to all of them.  The actual refuge is the Dharma. If we list en to teachings, memorize them, and meditate 
on them, we will develop the path, for exampl e, the mind of renunciation or definite 
emergence that wishes to emerge from cyclic exis tence. In this way, we will achieve the path of 
accumulation, then the path of preparation, path  of seeing, path of meditation, and path of 
no-more-learning. This is how we need to practice.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Advice to be persistent in conviction, the principal cause  
That being so, once you have derived cert ainty with regard to these [objects of 
refuge] set forth in the Compendium , since when you are able to rely on them with a 
single-pointed mind, it is impossible for yo u not to be protected, generate certainty 
from the bottom of your heart. Of the two causes for being protected, there is no 
incompleteness in the external cause since our Teacher, [the Buddha,] has already 
achieved it, however since the internal cause,  taking hold of that refuge trustingly, 
has not come about, that is why we suffer.  
 
We should set our mind single-pointedly on  the three objects of refuge – the Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha – as in this way they will be  able to protect us. In other words, if we, 
from our own side, deeply go for refuge, there is no doubt that the Bu ddha and so forth will 
definitely protect us. Therefore, we need to gene rate confidence or certainty in them from the 
bottom of our heart.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
289  For three countless eons Buddha Shakyamuni accumulated and completed the collections 
of merit and wisdom and attained buddhahood. Th erefore, there is no lack in the external 
object or condition for refuge. However, if ther e the internal cause for refuge is absent, the 
Buddha will not be able to help us. On the ot her hand, if we have completely confidence 
from the depths of our heart in the three obje cts of refuge, they can help us. However, we 
tend not to be completely confident in the Three Jewels, due to which we continue to 
experience physical, mental, an d both physical and mental su ffering. There are many causes 
and conditions for experiencing unhappiness and we have created all of them. There is no 
point to thinking that our unhappiness comes fr om other people – our parents or our friends 
and so forth, and not from our own mind. This  is wrong. While some mothers even blame 
their daughters for their suffering and physical  sicknesses, the real cause is the mental 
afflictions, – attachment, anger, pride, jealou sy, and so forth. These are what cause us to 
engage in bad or negative actions, wh ich ripen in the result of suffering.  
 In short, we suffer because we do not have co mplete confidence in the Three Jewels. In this 
way we cheat ourselves. We should thin k, “I will never do that again!”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3 The way in which to go for refuge as much as one can 
A Understanding their positive qualities 
B Understanding their distinctions 
C Assertion 
D Going for refuge by not advocating other ones 
The second one has four poin ts: Going for refuge by understanding their positive 
qualities, understanding their specifics, a ssertion, and not advocating other ones.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A Understanding their positive qualities 
1 The positive qualities of the Buddha 
2 The positive qualities of the Dharma 
3 The positive qualities of the sangha 
First: Since it is necessary to be mindful of  the positive qualities of the refuges, this 
has three points: the positive qualities of the Buddha, the positi ve qualities of the 
Dharma, and the positive qualities of the Sangha. 
 
First we need to recognize the qualities of the ob jects of refuge. The qualities of the body of a 
buddha consist of the 112 signs and exemplif ications: the thirty-two signs and eight 
exemplifications. The qualities of his speech cons ist of the sixty-four melodious qualities. The 
qualities of his mind consist of the twenty-one groups of exalted wisdoms. The qualities of his 
enlightened activities consist of the twenty -seven enlightened activities. We need to 
understand each one of these qualities.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1 The positive qualities of the Buddha 
A The actual qualities 
B Supplementary points 
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A The actual qualities 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
290 1 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] body 
2 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] speech 
3 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] mind 
4 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] exalted activities  
The first one has four points: the positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] body, speech, 
mind, and exalted activities.  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A1 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] body 
First: You should be mindful of the signs and exemplifications of a buddha. In the 
Praise in Analogies  it says:  
 
Your body is adorned with the signs, 
Beautiful, nectar for the eyes, Like a cloudless sky in autumn Ornamented with clusters of stars. 
 
O Muni, endowed with the color of gold, 
Beautiful, dressed in monastic robes, 
Like a golden mountain peak Wrapped in clouds at dusk or dawn.  O Protector, the splendor of your facial orb, 
Although unadorned by jewelry, 
Is beyond that of the moon disc, Although vast and clear of clouds.  If the lotus of your mouth And a lotus in bloom in the sun  Are beheld by a bee, it Will have its doubts about the lotus.  Your face endowed with the color of gold, White teeth making it [more] beautiful, {86} Like immaculate autumn moonbeams Filtering through golden mounts. 
 
Venerable one, your right hand, Embellished by the sign of the wheel Gives breath to the people Frightened by cycle of existence. 
 
O Muni, as you walk, your feet Draw what looks like lotuses of Glory on the earth [you tread]. With lotuses how would it be lovelier? 
 You should remember them in ac cordance with this statement. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
291  
A buddha’s body is adorned with the signs and exemplifications. He is beautiful, nectar for the eyes, like a cloudless autumn sky filled with stars; his body gold in color, adorned with the 
three robes of a monk, like a golden mountain peak enveloped in clouds; his face naturally 
beautiful though unadorned with jewelry, sple ndid like the full moon free from clouds; his 
face making whoever sees it happy, like a lotus th at opens at sunrise allowing the bees to take 
the pollen inside; golden face with beautiful t eeth, like a golden mountain splendid in the 
autumn moonlight; his right hand marked with  a Dharma wheel relieving sentient beings 
from the fear of the suffering of cyclic existe nce; his feet not touchi ng the ground when he 
walks yet leaving behind the imprint of a lotus in  the ground and rocks; his body like a lake 
beautified with lotus flowers.  
 The Buddha had a disciple called Legpe Karma who said that even th ough he had stayed 
with the Buddha for many years he had not seen an y qualities in him. Instead he said that the 
Buddha only cheated thos e who paid respect and made offeri ngs to him by prophesying that 
they would achieve certain qualities and so fort h. However, he too said that the Buddha’s 
body was beautiful!  
 The main qualities of a buddha are se t out in the eighth  chapter of the Ornament for Clear 
Realizations . You should try to understand them more deeply.  
 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A2 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] speech 
Second: You should think about the very marvelous way in which when sentient 
beings in the realms of the world ask di fferent questions at the same time, he 
apprehends them with wisdom that possesse s a single instant of mind and answers 
all the questions with one utterance that  they understand in their respective 
languages. In the Chapter of the Truthful One  it says:  
 
If thus all beings, in a single moment, 
Ask a question with many terms, His mind comprehends them in a single moment And answers them all with one melodious [statement].  Thus know that the melodious Brahma voice Of him who gives instructions, rings forth in this world. He thoroughly set in moti on the wheel of Dharma 
That eradicates the sufferings of gods and men. 
 You should reflect along the lines of this statement. 
 When many people ask the Buddha different questions at the same time, the Buddha can reply to all of them at the same time in a comp lete way with even just one phrase. This is one 
of the particular qualities of a buddha’s sp eech. For example, when the Buddha taught 
“Compounded phenomena are impermanent,” some of the listeners heard “All contaminated 
aggregates are suffering,” some heard “All contaminated aggregates  are empty of being 
permanent, partless, and independent,” and so me heard “All contaminated aggregates are 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
292 selfless.” In this way, with one phrase the Buddha was able to teach different things to 
different sentient beings in accordance with their needs. It is said that even one word can be 
understood in different ways by different disciples who thereby receive a particular 
instruction. Due to this, everyone is able to understand the Buddha’s speech very easily. Also 
those who know human language s hear the response in thei r human languages, those who 
know the gods’ languages hear it in their god la nguages, and so forth with respect to the anti-
gods and hungry ghosts. Therefore, even though  the Buddha only teaches in one language, all 
those around him understand him in their own language. Thus, the Chapter of the Truthful 
One says that if 100 people, for example, were to  simultaneously ask 100 different questions, 
the Buddha could respond to all of  them with a single phrase.   
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A3 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] mind 
A The positive quality of knowledge  
B The positive quality of mercy 
The third one has two points: the positive  quality of knowledge and the positive 
quality of mercy. 
 
In this context, two qualities of the mind of  a buddha are mentioned: the quality of his 
exalted knowledge and the quality of his mercy. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
A The positive quality of knowledge 
First: Since all knowable objects – modes and varieties – are engaged by the Muni’s 
unobstructed knowledge, like a dhatri  berry118 placed on the palm of his hand, the 
diverse knowable objects are pervaded by the Muni’s knowledge. However, they are 
not pervaded by others’ [knowledge ] as knowable objects are vast and their 
consciousnesses are narrow.  
 
The buddha knows all objects of knowledge – both  ultimate truths (modes) and conventional 
truths (varieties). These two truths are differe nt, yet a buddha sees them simultaneously. He 
directly and simultaneously sees the ultimate tr uth and the varieties of objects, for example, 
the different human beings sitting here in this room, like seeing a flower in the palm of his hand. His knowledge is not obstructed, whereas we, for example, cannot see what is beyond 
the walls of this room. A buddha’s knowledge also pervades all the phenomena in all the world systems. In other words, he knows ev erything. The minds of human beings, on the 
other hand, are not like this as, due to ou r minds being narrow and small, they do not 
pervade all phenomena. If we examine our mind , we will realize that we do not even know 
what is behind us! We also do not know what is inside us, our inner organs, and whether they 
are healthy or damaged, big or small, and so fort h. Since we are obscured even as to what is 
inside our body, there is no need to ment ion that our knowledge does not pervade all 
phenomena!  
                                             
 
118 A berry with a somewhat transparent skin that allows for the veins, seeds, and pulp to shine through. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
293  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In this regard it says in Praise of the Praiseworthy :  
 
Only your exalted wisdom, 
{87} Encompasses all the knowable objects; 
For all the others apart from you, 
Some knowable objects remain to be known. 
 And:  
Bhagavan, the phenomena of all times, 
All aspects, all places of origin, 
Are the sphere of activity of your mind, 
Like a dhatri  berry in the palm of your hand. 
 
With regard to phenomena, static or mobile, Unitary or various and distinct, There is nothing to which your mind is obstructed – Just like wind moving to and fro in space. 
 You should reflect in accordance with this statement. 
 A buddha’s knowledge pervades all objects of kn owledge, that is, all phenomena, whereas the 
knowledge of other beings does not. The phenom ena of all times, all aspects, and all places 
can be directly seen by a buddha, for example, like seeing a myrobalan fruit in the palm of his hand. This fruit is sometimes said to be kind of transparent fruit, the inside of which can be 
seen from the outside, however I do not think th is is true as I saw this fruit one time in 
Kopan Monastery.  
 Whether phenomena move or not and whether th ey are single or various, a buddha sees all 
of them individually. Like the wind moving in  space, a buddha’s mind is not obstructed by 
anything. Thus, even though we try to hide so mething from them, they can see it, whereas we, 
on the contrary, cannot see something even if it is  just covered with a piece of cloth. When we 
become a buddha, we too will be able to see things in this way.  
 Tuesday afternoon, 15 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 87) says:  
B The positive quality of mercy 
Second: Just as sentient beings are boun d by the afflictions without any control, 
the Muni is bound by great compassion  without control and therefore great 
compassion continuously arises in him when he perceives suffering migrating 
beings. In the One Hundred and Fifty Verses  it says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
294  
All of these migrating beings 
Are equally bound by the afflictions. 
In order to untie their afflictions 
You have long been bound by compassion. 
 Should I first prostrate to you 
Or to that which causes you  
To stay in samsara for long, aware Of its faults – great compassion? 
 
In the Chapter of the Truthful One  it also says: 
 
When he sees the many beings always 
Obscured by ignorance and mental darkness 
Who are imprisoned in the prison of samsara, Compassion is born in the holy sage. 
 
You should remember [mercy] in accordance with these statements.  
 
A buddha possesses the quality of mercy. Beca use all sentient beings are bound by the 
afflictions without any power, they experience suffering. Similarly, Buddha Shakyamuni’s 
continuum is bound without any power by great compassion and mercy, that is, his mind is 
overcome by compassion and mercy, due to which he wishes to liberate all the sentient beings who, bound by their afflictions,  are experiencing various types of suffering. Thus, a buddha 
continually possesses great compassion in his co ntinuum, due to which he looks at all times 
upon sentient beings, wishing to help and take care of them.  
 One Hundred and Fifty Verses  says that the buddhas, seeing that all migrating beings are 
bound by the afflictions, wish to  liberate them. In this sense, their minds have been bound by 
compassion for a long time. Due to this, they wish  to take care of sentient beings by enabling 
them to eliminate their sufferings and the causes  of sufferings, and to create the virtue and 
generate the good minds that bring good results.  
 Then the question is posed as to whom or to what to prostrat e, that is, to the buddhas or 
to the great compassion in their continuum. Wh en the buddhas see sentient beings who have 
faults, negativities, and bad qualities, they gene rate the great compassion  that wishes to take 
care of all sentient beings. This is the jo b of all buddhas since they have taken upon 
themselves the responsibility to free sentient be ings from suffering and set them in liberation 
or omniscience. Sentient beings are imprisoned  in the prison of cyclic existence by the 
ignorance or darkness that obscures their mi nd. Thus, the main cause of the suffering of 
birth, death, things getting better, things getting worse, and so forth is ignorance or 
confusion. For this reason, sentient beings  need to be liberated from ignorance.  
 The main cause of rebirth in cyclic existence is  ignorance, this being the first of the twelve 
links. It acts as the cause of projecting or th rowing karma. This karma leaves an imprint on 
the consciousness which remains, without going to  waste, in the form of a seed or imprint. 
When someone is approaching death, the afflic tions – craving and gras ping – arise. They 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
295 cause an imprint that was left on the consciou sness to be activated. This link is called 
“existence” or “becoming”; it is an actualizing karma. Among the twelve links, there are three 
actualizing causes for taking rebirth: cravin g, grasping, and becomi ng. The three links of 
ignorance, karmic formations, and consciousne ss are projecting causes. The four links of 
name and form, six sources, contact, and feelin g are the projected results. The two links of 
birth and aging-death are actualized results. In th i s  w a y ,  w e  t r a v e l  o r  t a k e  r e b i r t h  i n  c y c l i c  
existence over and over again. Ignorance is always  at the root of this, th erefore it is the root 
that causes us to wander in cyclic existence.  Therefore, we need to  eliminate it. How? By 
understanding the nature of phenomena – the se lflessness of persons and the selflessness of 
phenomena. From the point of vi ew of the lower tenets, the self lessness of persons is the lack 
of a self-supporting substantially existent se lf. However, from the point of view of the 
Prasangika Madhyamaka school the selflessness of persons is the lack of inherent existence, or 
existence from its own side, of the person, wh ereas the lack of inherent existence of the 
aggregates is the selflessness of phenomena.  Selflessness is also called “emptiness,” the 
realization of which can cut the root of cy clic existence – ignora nce or confusion.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A4 The positive qualitie s of [the Buddha’s] exalted activities 
Fourth: By means of both the spontaneous and uninterrupted exalted activities of 
his body, speech, and mind, he benefits all sentient beings. In fact, insofar as a 
trainee is fit for guidance, it is impossible for the Muni not to give that trainee 
what is excellent and pull him out of his de generation. That is why it is stated that 
they certainly perform all the appropriate actions. {88}  
 
The enlightened activities of the buddha s’ exalted body, speech, and mind arise 
spontaneously and uninterruptedly, whereby a buddha strives constantly to benefit all 
sentient beings. Thus, from the side of the bu ddhas they are constantly checking what they 
can do to ripen and help sentient beings. Th ey are always ready to act for our benefit. 
However, if we from our side are not ripe, that is, are not yet ready to be brought to the side 
of liberation and are still heading toward the side of cyclic existence with a mind 
overwhelmed by afflictions, they will not be able to help us. In this case, we would be like, for example, a child who does not want to study an d go to school, college, or university, and, 
even though the family tries to help him, he does not listen and perhaps even leaves home 
and starts to smoke, steal, and so forth. In this way, the child’s mind cannot be subdued and 
so it is difficult to bring him to the side of go od. Similarly, only if someone is mentally ready 
o r  r i p e  c a n  a  b u d d h a  h e l p  h i m  o r  h e r  a n d  b r i n g  t h a t  p e r s o n  t o w a r d  t h e  s i d e  o f  enlightenment. Thus, although th e buddhas do whatever they can to help sentient beings, if 
we are not ripe they will not be able to do anything to help us. In short, if sentient beings can be helped the buddhas help them, but if th ey cannot be helped the buddhas cannot do 
anything. For example, just as the orange tree outside in the courtyard appears to be laden 
with delicious fruit, but in reality the oranges ar e very bitter and inedible, similarly, there are 
b e i n g s  w h o  e x t e r n a l l y  a p p e a r  t o  b e  v e r y  n i c e  but inside their minds are like a rock and 
nothing can be done to change them. Thus, ev en though the buddhas are always ready to 
perform enlightened activities for the benefit of all sentient beings, they are not able to help 
all sentient beings.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
296  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1B Supplementary points 
1 Gaining certainty regarding the conviction: the cause of going for refuge purely 
Potowa said this: “If you keep contempl ating again and again, the firmer your 
conviction and the purer your mental co ntinuum becomes, the more blessings will 
arise. As you gain certain knowledge in this  regard, you will go for refuge from the 
bottom of your heart and then, if you mere ly train in the precepts, everything you 
do will become an instance of practicing the Buddha’s Dharma.”  
 
As a cause of going for refuge to the Three Jewe ls, we need to develop the faith or confidence 
that they can eliminate our sufferings and brin g us into the path to happiness, whereby we 
too will be able to achieve the result. Potowa said that if we think about the Three Jewels 
again and again, we will gain greater and grea ter faith in them whereby our continuum will 
become more and more pure, due to which we will receive their blessings. If we gain a definite understanding of this, we will go for refuge and will train in the precepts of going for refuge. 
In this way, whatever we do will become  the practice of the Buddha’s Dharma.  
 Therefore, initially we need to do analytic al meditation on the qualities of the Buddha 
Jewel, Dharma Jewel, and Sangha Jewel, whereby more confidence in them will arise. This will 
act as a condition that cleans or purifies ou r mental continuum, whereby we will receive the 
blessings of the Three Jewels. As we gain certaint y regarding this, we will go for refuge to them 
from the depths of our heart and train in what to adopt and what to discard with respect to 
the precepts of going for refuge. For example, ha ving gone for refuge to the Buddha, we must 
abandon taking refuge in non-Buddhist teachers. At the same time, we must train in seeing 
any representation of the Buddha, whether a drawin g, painting, or statue, as if they were the 
actual Buddha Jewel. Having gone for refuge to the Dharma Jewel, we must abandon harming 
any being and develop respect for all the scriptures , big or small, as if they were the actual 
Dharma Jewel. Having gone for refuge to the Sangha Jewel, we must abandon associating and 
staying with, for longer than one week, non-Bu ddhists who criticize the Buddhist teachings. 
In other words, we must abandon friends whose company makes our mind degenerate due to their influence. In addition, we must respect al l practitioners, monks, and nuns, as if they 
were the actual Sangha Jewel. We should deve lop respect for all those who wear the robes of 
monks and nuns because they definitely have some  qualities. In addition, there are lay people 
who are the actual sangha, for example, Marp a the Translator who had high realizations. 
When I was living in India, I heard about a monk in Tibet who remained at home and 
worked the fields under the control of the Chinese. One day he sent a message to his 
classmates, Khensur Jampa Tegchog, my teache r Geshe Tashi Bum, and others, saying that 
even though he lived at home like a householder and did the same work as lay people, his 
mind was completely liberated. I think he had be come an arya being. Therefore, by looking at 
someone from the outside, we cannot tell what he or she is like on the inside. 
 In short, every day we need to generate fa ith from the bottom of our heart in the Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha and to try to put the Buddha’s teachings into practice.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
297 2 Not gaining the conviction 
We do not value the Buddha’s exalted knowle dge even as much as that of a keen 
woman fortune-teller. If a keen fortune-tell er tells you, “I know there will be no 
bad luck for you this year,” you walk aw ay happy and comfortable. If she says, 
“This year [there will be] great misfortu ne. Do this. Don’t do that!”, you will try 
hard to accomplish it, and, if you do not manage, you will think, “I did not 
accomplish what she told me to do” and yo ur mind will be anxious. If the Buddha 
says, “Do this and that. Accomplish this and that,” do you take it on? If you do not 
accomplish it, does your mind become anxi ous? Explained from [the point of view 
of] Dharma, to say, “Due to place and time  that is inconvenient now. I’ll must do 
this,” is to ignore the Buddha’s statemen ts and proceed on the basis of your own 
understanding. If you turn the mind within  and investigate this in detail, rather 
than being unquestioningly happy and confus ed with respect to the mere words, it 
will strike you as very true.  
 
We tend to not respect or value the exalted knowledge of a buddha as much as we do the 
knowledge of a woman fortune-teller, that is, a woman who makes divinations. Due to this, 
when she makes divinations and pr edicts that we will not have any problems this year, we 
become very comfortable, like sitting on a soft  cushion! We do not worry any longer because a 
fortune-teller, like Khadroma, for example, who is much respected in Dharamsala, has told us 
this good news. On the other hand, if she tells us that we will experience many problems and 
difficulties, when they happen we will think th at it is because we did something wrong and 
will blame ourselves for the problem. On the ot her hand, when the Buddha says to this kind 
of action and not to do that kind of action , that is, to abandon non-virtuous actions and 
adopt virtuous actions, to do meditation an d so forth, do we confidently follow these 
instructions or not? In general, we do not believe and have confidence in what the Buddha 
said, nor do we always do what he has advised.  Instead we tend to ignore his teachings and 
turn to fortune-tellers. For example, in India there are people who make predictions based on 
a parrot choosing a certain card from a pile of cards!   If we examine our own mind, we will probably find that we do not have strong faith or confidence in the buddhas or holy beings. For example, it is said that the Virgin Mary 
appeared and gave prophecies in certain places to certain people, but some people believe in 
this and others do not. We tend to believe people only when they tell us nice things or give us good news. For example, if we have to chose between following the advice received from two 
people, one who is very humble and honest while the other is very intelligent but not so honest, we will more likely believe the intellig ent one who talks deceptively. There are also 
many stories of men who, bragging about th eir money and possessions, deceive women by 
promising them everything they want. This ha ppens, not just here but everywhere! There are 
also cases of older women who talk very nicely to young men in order to catch them. In short, 
it is easier to form a relationship with some one who talks pleasantly and sweetly, rather than 
with someone who has a rough way of talking. But the buddhas are not like this, they never 
cheat us. Therefore,, if we do not have faith and confidence in them, everything will only 
become worse.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
298 3 Insistent advice to achieve certainty 
Therefore, think about the Buddha’s positi ve qualities again and again, and strive 
to achieve as much certainty as possible. If it develops, you have reached the main 
point of going for refuge, because a similar certainty will come with respect to the 
Dharma that arose from him and the Sa ngha of those who accomplished that 
Dharma. Without it, there is no way that going for refuge, a tamed mind, let alone 
other paths, will come either.  
 
We need to gain certainty and understanding regarding the qualities of body, speech, and 
mind of the Buddha, as well as his enlightene d activities, by thinking about them again and 
again. We need to put strong effort into achieving this certainty, whereupon confidence and 
certainty will also arise with respect to the Dhar ma Jewel and with respec t to the Sangha Jewel 
who have accomplished the Dharma. This is the e ssential point of going for refuge; it is real 
going for refuge. Without this, other paths will no t come about. Since th e path taught by the 
Buddha alone leads to enlightenment, we need to  go for refuge from the depths of our heart 
to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.  
 In short, there are three objects of refu ge, the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, each of 
which has the eight qualit ies that are taught in Sublime Continuum  (Uttaratantra ). Thinking 
about these qualities, we should develop certaint y with respect to the fa ct that they alone are 
final or absolute objects of refuge, whereas other refuges are not final objects of refuge.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-2 Positive qualities of the Dharma 
Second: On account of your respect for the Buddha, you should be mindful 
thinking: “The fact that the Buddha has {8 9} limitless positive qualities arose from 
manifesting and meditating the Dharma of scriptures and realization, true 
cessations and true paths, the epitome of the abandonment of faults and the 
achievement of positive qualities. That is the meaning of the Compendium of the 
Dharma [Sutra ].  
 
We can generate respect for the Buddha Jewe l because the Buddha has many qualities. 
Thinking about this, we can also  generate respect for the Dharma . For example, if we examine 
where all the infinite qualities of the Buddha come from, we will come to understand that 
they come from the Dharma or doctrine of scriptures and the Dhar ma or doctrine of 
realization. The doctrine of realizations cons ists in the true paths and true cessations. 
Meditation on true paths brings about th e abandonment of all faults, that is, the 
abandonment of all objects of abandonment, whereby true cessations are achieved. 
Meditation on true paths also brings about the generation of all good qualities, which are the 
entity of realization. Thus, all this – the ab andonment of all objects of abandonment and the 
achievement of true cessations, as well as  the achievement of higher attainments or 
realizations such as omniscience – comes from meditating true paths.  The doctrine of the 
scriptures refers to studying, reading, and list ening to teachings, then thinking about them, 
and then meditating them, whereby we graduall y achieve the path of accumulation, path of 
preparation, and the path of seeing, at whic h time we attain true paths and then true 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
299 cessations. Then, at the end, we achieve the st ate of omniscience, the achievement of all the 
good qualities of a buddha of both the abandonments and realizations.  
 Therefore, first we need to study the script ures, think about them, and meditate on them, 
whereby we can generate renunciation in our mi nd and a clear knower, such as the path of 
accumulation and so forth, and in the end a ttain omniscience. All this comes from the 
practice of the Dharma. We need to remember this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-3 Positive qualities of the Sangha 
Third: This mainly refers to persons who are aryas. Recalling the positive qualities 
of the Dharma, be mindful of those who accomplish it correctly. That is the 
meaning of Compendium of the Dharma . 
 
The Sangha Jewel consists mainly of arya person s. We should remember the qualities of the 
Dharma Jewel, which is what is accomplished by the Sangha Jewel, arya beings. The Sangha 
Jewel has two main qualities: the quality of kn owledge and the quality of freedom. The quality 
of knowledge includes the knowledge of ulti mate truth or thusness, the knowledge of 
conventional truth, and the knowledge of inner sciences. The quality of freedom includes the 
three freedoms from the thr ee types of obscurations.  
 In short, the Buddha, Dharma , and Sangha are the objects of refuge, and we need to 
develop confidence in them by thinking about their good qualities as this will bring a good 
result to us.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3B Understanding their distinctions 
Second: As is apparent from the Compendium , go for refuge aware of the mutual 
distinctions between the Three Jewels.  
 
We need to understand the distinctions betw een the Three Jewels. For example, the Buddha 
is the teacher that shows the pa th, the Dharma is the subject th at he teaches, and the Sangha 
are those who practice it. Another analogy is th at the Buddha is like a university professor; 
the Dharma is like the subject we study at univ ersity such as Politica l Science, Geography, 
Medicine, Electronics, and so forth; and the Sa ngha is like the classmates with whom we 
study. If we study a particular subject well, we will be able to obtain a high degree and become a professor ourselves. Similarly, if we practice  in accordance with the doctrines of scripture 
and realization taught by the Buddha, we will first become sangha, and then at the end, by 
practicing more and more, we will even become a buddha.   Another way to see the Three Jewels is that th e Buddha is like a doctor, the Dharma is like 
medicine, the Sangha is like nurses, we ourselves are like patients, and cyclic existence is like a 
hospital. If the doctor diagnoses our illness and prescribes medicine, and we take it with the 
help of the nurses, then one day we will be able to leave the hospital. Similarly, if we practice 
the Dharma taught by the Buddha with the help  of the Sangha, one day we can leave cyclic 
existence and attain libera tion or even buddhahood.  
 Thus, when going for refuge we should think about the Three Jewels in one of these ways.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
300  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3C Assertion 
Third: As is apparent from the Extensive Commentary on the Vinaya , we should go 
for refuge in terms of considering the Bu ddha to be the one who teaches refuge; 
the Dharma to be nirvana, which is the ac tual refuge; and to the Sangha to be the 
companions who accomplish refuge.  
 
The Buddha is the one who teaches refuge, th e Dharma is the state gone beyond cyclic 
existence, nirvana, and the Sangha are the co mpanions who help us. This is way going for 
refuge is explained in the Extensive Commentary on the Vinaya .  
 Wednesday morning, 16 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 89) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A3D Not advocating other ones  
The fourth: Through understanding the su periority and inferiority of Buddhist 
and non-Buddhist teachers, teachings, and students, you should consider the 
Three Jewels alone to be a refuge, and sh ould not consider teachers and so forth 
who are incompatible with them to be a refuge. With respect to the difference 
between the two [sets], the difference between  the teachers is that the Buddha is 
without faults and has completed the positi ve qualities while other teachers are the 
opposite to that. In the Praise of the Particularly Exalted  [One] it says:  
 
Having abandoned the other teachers, 
Bhagavan, I take refuge in you. If you ask “For what purpose?” Because You have no faults but have qualities. 
 And: 
 
The more I’ve thought about the scriptural traditions 
Of others, the Tirthikas
119, the more 
My confidence in you, Protector, has grown. 
Those whose minds are wasted by the 
Faulty tenets of the non-omniscient, 
Whose thinking is wasted, do not see {90} Faultless teachers – not even you.  
 
                                             
 
119 Six principal Indian tenet systems at the time of the Buddha, literally “Forders”, so called [?] because they 
were pointing out fords for crossing the river of suffer ing – paths to liberation – which they did not achieve 
due to ignorance about the truly appropriate means. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
301 We need to understand between what are and wh at are not objects of refuge. In other words, 
we need to differentiate between the Buddhist  teachers, Buddhist teachings or doctrine, and 
followers or students of the Buddhist doctrine  and the non-Buddhist teachers, non-Buddhist 
teachings, and their followers, such as the Ti rthikas. Since the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha 
– the Three Jewels – are real objects of refuge, we should not consider teachers and so forth 
who are incompatible or contradictory with them  to be a refuge. For example, we should not 
take refuge in the six well-known teachers of  Hindu tenets in ancient India, who were not 
Buddhists.   The Buddha is without even subtle faults and has completed all the qualities of body, 
speech, mind, and enlightened activities. Other te achers are the opposite to that in the sense 
that they are not without faults and have not completed the qualities of body, speech, mind, 
and enlightened activities.  
 The writer of the text Praise of the Particularly Exalted  One was originally a Hindu 
practitioner who later on converted to Buddhism. He says that having abandoned other 
teachers, he goes for refuge to the Bhagavan because the Bhagavan has eliminated all faults 
and possesses all good qualities. He saw the di fference between the Tirthikas, many of whom, 
for example, would often fight with their husb and or wife, whereas the Buddha, who had had 
a wife and had been surrounded by many beautifu l women, gave them all up and went to the 
forest to meditate. The Buddha has completed al l good qualities, therefore he alone is a 
worthy object of refuge, while other teachers ar e not. For this reason, we should not look for 
other objects of refuge.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4 The stages of training after having gone for refuge 
A The actual content  
B Eliminating inaccuracies [with respect to the precepts of going for refuge] 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A The actual content  
1 Specific precepts [for the individual objects of refuge] 
2 Common precepts [for all three objects of refuge] 
The fourth one has two points: specific pr ecepts [for the individual objects of 
refuge] and common precepts [for all three objects of refuge]. 
 
Having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma , and Sangha, there are specific precepts or 
trainings to be kept with respect to each of the individual objects of refuge. For example, 
having gone for refuge to the Buddha, we must  not go for refuge to non-Buddhist teachers; 
having gone for refuge to the Dharma, we must not go for re fuge to other teachings; and 
having gone for refuge to the Sangha, we must not go for refuge to non-Buddhist friends and 
so forth. In addition, having gone for refuge to the Buddha, we must consider any paintings 
and so forth of the Buddha as an actual livi ng buddha and therefore an object of refuge. 
Having gone for refuge to the Dharma, we must respect the texts or scriptures of the teachings 
by not throwing them on the ground, putting th em under our bed, using them as a cushion, 
and so forth. Having gone for refuge to the Sa ngha, we must not criticize or disparage monks 
and nuns and other virtuous spiritual friends bu t respect the conventional sangha as if they 
were the actual Sangha. These are the specific precepts or trainings with respect to the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
302 individual objects of refuge – Buddha, Dh arma, and Sangha. The common precepts or 
trainings will be explained below.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1 Specific precepts [for the individual objects of refuge]  
A Precepts of what is to be stopped 
B Precepts of what is to be accomplished 
The first one has two points: inhibitory precepts and precepts of accomplishment. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1A Precepts of what is to be stopped 
First: From the  [Sutra of Great Final ] Nirvana : 
 
One who goes for refuge to the three 
Is a perfect approacher to virtue. 
He does not ever go for refuge To some other gods.  
One who goes for refuge to the holy Dharma 
Is free from the mind to harm or kill. One who goes for refuge to the Sangha 
Does not mingle with the Tirthikas. 
 
In accordance with this statement there ar e three [inhibitory precepts]: (1) to not 
go for refuge to other gods, (2) to abando n causing harm or difficulty to sentient 
beings, and (3) to not associate with Tirthikas.  
 Those who go for refuge from their heart to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha are considered 
to be “virtue approachers,” a title normally rese rved for male or female lay vow-holders. Those 
who take refuge in the Buddha should never go  for refuge to other gods, for example, to 
Mahadeva, Brahma, Indra, the Sun (Surya), the M oon (Chandra), and so forth. While we can 
take temporary refuge in them and ask them for their help, we should not go for final refuge to these gods. This building is also a type of temporary refuge since it protects us from rain 
and snow. A forest can also be a refuge if we hi de in it to escape from someone who wants to 
kill us. There are also places to stay in the mountains that are called “refuges” because they 
can protect us from the weather and serve food and drink.   In relation to going for refuge to the Dharma, we should never harm any sentient being. In relation to going for refuge to the Sangha, we should not associate with Tirthikas.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
1 Not to go for refuge to other gods 
The first of these: If one should not rega rd even worldly gods, Rudra, Vishnu and 
the like, as a long-term refuge, there is no  need to speak of nagas and local spirits 
who belong to the hungry ghosts. In this re gard, while it is not appropriate to rely 
on them from a lack of conviction in the three objects of refuge, it is not 
inappropriate to seek their assistance for some action of temporary character, for 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
303 example, like seeking assistance from a benefactor for one’s livelihood or like 
relying on a doctor in hope of a cure for an illness.  
 
If worldly gods such as Rudra, Vishnu, and so forth, were final objects of refuge, so too would 
nagas and local spirits be final objects of refuge; however, they are not. If we were to go for 
final refuge to Rudra, Vishnu, Ram, Lakshmi, and so forth due to lacking faith in the three 
objects of refuge, this would not be suitable. On  the other hand, it is suitable to ask Rudra, 
Vishnu, Ram, Lakshmi, and so forth for tempor ary help or benefit, in the same way that, 
confident that he or she can help us, we ask a benefactor for money in order to buy food, to 
pay our rent, and so forth, or the way in which we rely on a doctor for help when we are sick.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 To give up causing harm or difficulty to sentient beings 
The second one consists in giving up causing harm or difficulty to humans, 
animals, and so forth through thought or actions like beating them, binding them, 
ensnaring them, piercing their noses, and loading them unbearably.  
 
If we go for refuge to the Dharma, we mu st abandon harming animals and other human 
beings by beating them, binding them, trapping  them, putting a ring through their noses, 
loading them with heavy burdens, and so forth. In short, we must give up harming others by 
thought and by action, meaning th at we need to give up even  the thought to harm another 
person or an animal, as well as giving up actually physically harming them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Not to associate with non-Buddhists 
The third one consists in not conforming  to those who are unconvinced of the 
protection of the Three Jewels and denigrate them.  
 
If we go for refuge to the Sangha, we should abandon associating with those who criticize the 
Three Jewels, do not believe in their existence, and so forth. There are those who say that if 
the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha exists, it shou ld be possible to point them out. There are 
also many people, especially the younger genera tion, who do not believe in past and future 
lives because they say that they cannot see them directly. One time I was invited to give a talk 
in a Catholic school in Sardinia. While the professor who had invited me did not criticize 
Buddhism, some of his students said to me, “I f you believe in past and future lives, show 
them to us! Also where are the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha that you talk about?” I said to 
them “If something cannot be pointed out, does that mean that it does not exist?” Someone 
answered that it was like that, whereupon I said, “Since you believe in God, show him to me!” 
The person remained open mouthed and unable to respond. 
 While we do not need to follow or practice  other religions or doctrines, we should not 
criticize them because they are suitable for di fferent people, different cultures, and different 
places. For particular people these other reli gions are more suitable than is Buddhism. 
However, we ourselves should take the Buddha,  Dharma, and Sangha as our final objects of 
refuge. Having taken the Buddha as our teacher, realizations and qualities will develop in our 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
304 continuum whereby we will become Sangha and eventually become a buddha. This is 
possible. Okay? 
 
(Oral transmission 11:55 AM, pp. 90-101) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B Precepts of what is to be accomplished 
1 How to train with respect to the representations of the Buddha 
2 How to train with respect to the representations of the Dharma 
3 How to train with respect to the representations of the Sangha 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B1 How to train with respect to the representations of the Buddha 
A The actual way to train with respect to the representations of the Buddha  
{91} Second: However excellent or flawed painted pictures of the Buddha’s body 
may be, do not disparage them and do  not put them on the ground when 
inconvenienced. Having given up the i rreverence of pawning them etc. and 
defaming them, regard them as fields of respect like the Teacher [himself]. In the 
Letter to a Friend  it says:  
 
Do as the wise who honor any form 
Of the Sugata – even made from wood. 
 Representations of the Buddha are statues and so  forth, representations of the Dharma are 
texts and so forth, and representations of th e Sangha are monks and nuns, including their 
robes. Whether a statue, painting, and so forth of the Buddha is of good or bad quality, we 
should not put it in a bad place, nor should we pa wn it, that is, give it as a guarantee in order 
to borrow money. Whether or not the painter or  sculptor was skilled, we must respect all 
representations of the Buddha. Thus, we shou ld not differentiate between representations 
that are well made and those that are not. Likewise, whether a statue is made of gold, silver, wood, or clay, we should treat it with respect. Th us, it is not that we sh ould respect those that 
are made of valuable materials but not respect those that are made of poor materials. Nor 
should we respect statues and so forth that are well-made but not respect those that are not. If 
we do not respect them, we will experience th e ripened results that are explained below. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Examples of the fully ripened effects of irreverence that occurred in the past  
In the Scripture on Discernment  it  is  s t at ed t hat  M an av aka pila abus ed s an gha w h o  
were learners and non-learners in 18 di fferent ways saying things like: “You 
elephant heads! How do you know what is  Dharma and what is not?” Because of 
that, he was reborn as a sea monster, a spec ies of fish, with 18 different heads, and 
remained an animal from the time of th e Teacher Kashyapa to that of the Shakya 
King [Shakyamuni]. 
 
Manavakapila, for example, spoke badly to the sangha calling them “E lephant head” and so 
forth in eighteen different ways in order to  put them down and win debates with them. 
However, due to this, in his next life he was born as a sea monster, a kind of huge fish, with 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
305 eighteen heads. He remained in this form from  the time of the Teacher Kashyapa to that of 
Shakyamuni, and everyone who saw him would ex perience fear. For this reason, we should 
avoid calling others by derogatory names, sayi ng they are like animals and so forth, as 
otherwise we too will experience the unplea sant fruitional or fully-ripened result.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim says:   
 In Minor Precepts  [of the Vinaya ] it says that after the teacher Krakucchanda had 
passed into nirvana, when King Carumat had a big stupa built, a hired workman 
twice scoffed at it saying: “Who knows when such a huge stupa will ever get finished.” Later on, when the stupa had been  nicely finished, he felt sorry and with 
his wages had a golden bell made and tied it  to the stupa. Due to that, he was born 
as “The Well-sounding One” with an ugly  complexion and a small body but a very 
pleasant voice. Therefore, do not talk ab out representations saying “This is like 
that.” It is inappropriate to disparage th e establishment of a great representation 
from good materials and to dissuade [other s] from it through disruptive remarks. 
 At the time of the Buddha there was an extremely ugly monk wh o had a very pleasant voice, 
such that when others heard him singing or chan ting they were amazed at the beauty of his 
voice and repulsed by the ugliness of his bo dy. When the Buddha wa s asked why this had 
happened, he replied that in th e past, when King Carumat was b uilding a large stupa, one of 
the hired workers remarked, “When will this big stupa ever be finished?” Later on when the 
stupa was finished, the worker repented his word s and offered the stupa a golden bell bought 
with his wages. Due to this, he was reborn as  a human being whose body was small and face 
very ugly, but with a beautiful voice. His ugly  small body was the result of denigrating the 
stupa, whereas his beautiful voice was the result of offering the stupa a golden bell. Therefore, 
we too should be careful of disparaging representations of the Three Jewels.   Wednesday afternoon, 16 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 The Great Yogi [Jangchub Rinchen] gave At isha a statue of Manjushri to look at 
and asked: “What is the quality like? If it is  good, I’ll take it and give the four gold 
coins Rongwa Garge has given me”. {92} Atis ha said: “There is nothing that is not 
good about the Venerable One’s body. As fo r the sculptor, he is average.” Having 
said this, he placed the statue  on the crown of his head.  
 
The Great Yogi gave Atisha a statue of Manjus hri and asked him to look at it and tell him 
whether it was excellent or faulty. He said that if  it was good, he would give four gold coins in 
exchange for it. Atisha responded that while th e body of Manjushri is always excellent, the 
sculptor was just average, and then placed the statue on his head. This story indicates that 
with respect to statues and so forth we should not think, “This one is good. That one is not 
good,” and thereby respect those that are well made and not respect those that are not. By 
doing this, we would create negative karma. Th us, whether a statue is made of gold, silver, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
306 clay or any other material, for the mere fact that it is an image of a holy being we should 
respect it.   
Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B2 Precepts associated with the Dharma  
A The actual [precepts]  
You should abandon irreverence to as little as four lines of Dharma. You should 
abandon pawning volumes of scripture, tr ading them, putting them on the bare 
ground or in inconvenient places, carry ing them around toge ther with shoes, 
stepping over them and so forth. Instead tr eat them with respect as if they were the 
Dharma Jewel. 
 
Here the text says that we should abandon a lack of respect even toward a mere four lines, 
that is, one verse, of Dharma. However, it is of ten said that we should respect even a single 
word of Dharma. We should also abandon pa wning volumes of scripture, selling them, 
putting them on the bare ground, and so forth. Instead we should  put them in high places or, 
at the very least, cover the ground with a shaw l, a coat, and so forth and then place them on 
it. We should not carry them together with sh oes, for example, by tying shoes together and 
then draping them with a text over our shoulder s. We should also not allow the lower parts of 
our cloths to pass over the texts. Instead we sh ould respect these texts as if they were the 
actual Dharma Jewel.  
 Middle Lam-Rim says:  
B How the masters of former times acted 
It is said that Geshe Chengawa used to pu t his palms together an d rise up when he 
saw scriptures [of the Buddha’s teachings]  being brought to him. Later on, when 
he could not get up any more, he used to [simply] put his palms together. 
 It is said that when Atisha came to Ng ari, one tantric practitioner did not listen 
to Dharma [teachings] from him. However, when one scribe smeared residue from 
his teeth on a Dharma text and Atisha, seeing  it and unable to bear it, said: “Alas! 
That’s no good. That’s no good!”, the ta ntrika gained faith and listened to his 
teachings.  
 Sharawa said: “We play around with the Dharma in all sorts of ways. Irreverence 
for the Dharma and expounders of the Dharma is a cause for distorted wisdom. 
We are already confused enough now. What are we going to do if we become more 
confused?”  
 Geshe Chengawa was Ge she Lodro Gyatso from Chengawa who wrote many texts on mind 
training. He acted with great respect toward  the scriptures and would stand up when 
scriptures were brought to him. Even when he was older and could no longer get up, he 
would still put his hands together in a gesture of respect. We too should act like this.  
 When Atisha was first invited to Tibet by Ki ng Jangchub O, he stayed some time in the 
area of Ngari, most of which is now included in  Lhadak, India. It is recounted that at that 
time one tantric practitioner initially did not attend his teachings. However, upon hearing 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
307 that Atisha had scolded a scribe whom he had s een take some dirt from his teeth and smear it 
on the text in order to mark hi s place, the tantric practitioner developed faith in Atisha and 
after that attended his teachings. 
 Geshe Sharawa, who was from  the monastery of Shar Bump o in the Pembo region of 
Tibet, said that we tend to play with the Dhar ma and that our disrespect for the teachers and 
teachings becomes the cause of corrupt or distorted wisdom, meaning that we become more 
ignorant instead of wiser, so what could be more  stupid than this? For this reason, we should 
not joke about or play with the Dharma or th e teachers. Nor should we deprecate them in 
any way, for example, by saying that a certain text  is not good, as such behavior will only cause 
us to generate distorted or faulty wisdom wh ereby we will become even more ignorant and 
confused than we already are. Instead we sh ould treat the Dharma and those who teach the 
Dharma with respect.   Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B3 Precepts with regard to the Sangha  
A The actual [precepts] 
You should not abuse or despise the Sangha  as well as anyone merely bearing the 
marks of ordination. Nor should you look at them as opponents in any way having 
made [arbitrary] divisions in terms of “your group” and “my group.” Instead you 
should treat them with respect as if  they were the Sangha Jewel. In Exhortation to 
the Special Attitude  it says: 
 
Those who, dwelling in forests, wish for qualities Should not look for faults in other [people], 
They should not produce the attitude: 
“I’m especially noble, I’m the best.”  
{93} All carelessness grows
120 out of this complacence.121 
Don’t let contempt for lesser monks arise. 
You won’t reach liberation for one eon. This is the succession
122 of this teaching.  
 
We should not deprecate or criticize the Sang ha, even those who just wear the robes of a 
monk or nun and have the mere name “monk” or “nun.” Nor should we divide them into 
groups of friends and enemies. Rather we shou ld think that of them as if they were the 
Sangha Jewel and generate respect for them.   W e  s h o u l d  a l s o  n o t  t h i n k ,  “ I  a m  v e r y  l e a r n e d .  I  a m  n o b l e , ”  w h i l e  l o o k i n g  f o r  f a u l t s  i n  
other people. We should not allow such attitude s to arise at any time as this arrogance or 
haughtiness, which is similar to pride, is the r oot of all non-conscientiousness. It leads us to 
criticize others thinking, for example, “He is an  inferior monk, I am superior.” However, such 
                                             
 
120 lit.: “this is the root of all carelessness” 
121 JN: rgyags , haughtiness 
122 go rim  – 1) [in] [intrinsic or situationa l] order/ sequence; 2) succession of causes and effect; 3) steps, rank 
class, strata 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
308 behavior blocks the attainment of liberation fo r an eon. In short, we should not criticize 
others while praising ourselves as this would be  very negative in relation to the Sangha and 
will bring a similar result upon us.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B How the masters of former times acted and the benefits [of that] 
Geshe [Drom] Tonpa and the Great Yogi, instead of stepping over a piece of 
yellow material on the ground, would shak e it and carry it to a clean place. You 
should train in accordance with their practice, for others will respect you as much 
as you respect the [Three] Jewels. In the King of Concentration  it says:  
 
What kind of actions you have done, 
That kind of effects you will obtain. 
 When Geshe Drom Tonpa and the Great Yogi wo uld see even a small piece of yellow cloth 
on the ground, they would not walk over it but wo uld pick it up, shake it clean, and put it in 
high and clean place so that others would also not step over it. We too should train in this 
way because by doing so we will collect merit – the cause of achieving higher realizations 
quickly.  
 The King of Meditative Stabilizations  says that we obtain a result similar to the cause. In 
other words, if we create a virtuous action it will bring the result of happiness whereas if we 
create a non-virtuous actions, such as disrespe ct, it will bring the result of suffering. For 
example, if we respect our pare nts, then when we ourselves become parents our children will 
also respect us. Likewise, if we harm others or  destroy their belongings, we too will be beaten 
or even killed and our belongings will be dest royed. Since we all want happiness and pleasure 
and do not want suffering or unhappiness, we need to create good causes, that is, virtuous 
actions, whereby we will experience good result s, that is, happiness. If , on the other hand, we 
do the opposite and create bad actions, we will experience only bad results.  
 Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2 Common precepts [f or all three objects of refuge] 
A Remember the differences and positive qualities of the Three Jewels and, due to that, go 
for refuge to them again and again 
 
We must go for refuge three times during the day and three times at night while remembering 
the good qualities of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.  
 
B Remember their great kindness and, due to that, exert oneself at all times to make offerings 
to them and offer them even the first portion of one’s food and drink 
 
We need to remember the kindness of the Three Je wels in taking care of us and at all times 
worship them by making offerings to them. Even when we are about to eat or drink 
something, we should first offe r it to the Buddha or the Three Jewels and after that eat or 
drink it. If, in addition, we think that by doing so our food or drink has been blessed by 
them, this practice will become even more effective.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
309  
C Remember their great compassion and, due to that, set other migrating beings in such a 
mode [of behavior]  
 
We need to remember the great compassion of th e Three Jewels in taking care of us and then 
strive to make other sentient beings go for refuge to them.  
 
D Whatever one does and whatever one needs, having worshipped the Three Jewels, 
supplicate them and abandon other worldly methods 
 
Whenever we do activity, we should remember the Three Jewels and make requests to them 
and at the same time abandon relying on worl dly gods for whatever we need. Instead we 
should rely on the Three Jewe ls, the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, alone. Likewise, whatever 
we need, we should ask the Buddha, Dharma , and Sangha for help in obtaining it.  
 
E Aware of the benefits, go for refuge three times a day and three times at night  
 
Seeing the benefits of going for refuge to th e Three Jewels, we should go for refuge three 
times during the day and three times at night. In other words, we should recite one of the 
refuge prayers three times during the day and three times at night while remembering the 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.   
F Do not give up the Three Jewels for one’s life nor for a laugh but guard against this 
 
We should not give up the Three Jewels even if our life is in danger nor should we do so to make others laugh. Instead we must guard ours elves against such behavior, as otherwise we 
will commit a downfall – the cause of rebirth in the lower realms.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The second one has six points: Remember th e differences and positive qualities of 
the Three Jewels and, due to that, go fo r refuge again and again; remember their 
great kindness and, due to that, exert onesel f at all times to make offerings to them 
and offer them even the first portion of  one’s food and drink; remember their 
great compassion and, due to that, set ot her migrating beings in such a mode [of 
behavior]; whatever one does and what ever one needs, having worshipped the 
Three Jewels, supplicate them and abandon other worldly methods; aware of the 
benefits, go for refuge three times a day an d three times at night; do not give up 
the Three Jewels for one’s life nor for a laugh but guard against this. 
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2A Remember the differences and positive qualities of the Three Jewels and, due 
to that, go for refuge again and again 
First: As explained above, think abou t the differences between things non-
Buddhist and Buddhist as well as among the Three Jewels and their positive 
qualities.  
 
Non-Buddhists in Tibetan are literally “outer beings,” whereas Buddhists are “inner beings.” 
We should think about the differences between them. We should also think again and again 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
310 about the good qualities of the Three Jewels. If we do this, we ourselves will become improve 
more quickly.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2B Remember their great kindness and,  due to that, exert oneself at all times to 
make offerings to them and offer them even  the first portion of one’s food and drink 
1 Constant offerings 
Second: You should understand all the well-being you experience as the kindness 
of the Three Jewels and make offeri ng to them by acknowledging that. 
 
We should make offerings to the Three Jewels daily. In other words,  through understanding 
that whatever happiness and excellence comes to us is from the kindness of the Three Jewels, 
we should generate the wish to repay their kind ness by making offerings to them of flowers, 
bowls of water, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The peculiarity that the collections are completed with little trouble  
Since you constantly need to eat and dr ink, {94} if you continuously offer123 the 
first portion of them you will complete a great amount of collections with little 
trouble. Therefore, you should offer th e first portion of whatever you enjoy, 
including even water, from the bottom of your heart. 
 
Since we need to eat and drink every day, we ca n easily collect merit by  offering them without 
making much effort. Thus, whenever we eat or drink, we should first offer it to the Three 
Jewels by reciting an offering prayer. By doing so, we will collect a lot of merit without much 
difficulty and effort. Even when we are about to drink water, we should first offer it to the 
Three Jewels from the depths of our heart. In this way we will create much merit.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Impure offerings  
Moreover Sharawa said: “You should not ma ke [offerings] from the blue [mold] on 
coagulated milk and yellow leaves, but make them but from something good. 
[Worship] comes about each time through of fering the first portion of tea, but not 
through something like cleaning out the dust.” 
 
T i b e t a n s  m a k e  a  k i n d  o f  c h e e s e  m i x e d  w i t h  butter that gets moldy and rotten when it 
becomes damp. We should not offer this, nor should we offer yellowed, withered, or rotten 
vegetables. Rather we should ma ke offerings of good things. We  can offer even a small bit of 
tea but should not offer that which has been dusted off.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
                                              
123 de dag gyi phud kyis mchod pa  – what has been rendered here as “o ffer the first portion” literally mean 
“worship with the first portion” and thus follows on to the previous paragraph 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
311 4 The manner of respect when offering 
In a sutra it says:  
 
For instance, if at the time of planting seeds in a fertile field something 
remains unplanted, it cannot just be  left. Likewise, by planting the 
seeds of well-being continually th roughout all four seasons in the 
sublime field from which all future well-being springs, may the field of 
merit be tilled with the plow of confidence in them.  
 If that which needs to be done does no t occur, it would be a very great loss. 
 If we have fertile land, we should not leave it  empty but instead should plow it and sow good 
seeds, such as barley, wheat, vegetables, and so  f o r t h ,  i n  i t .  S i m i l a r l y ,  w e  s h o u l d  p l o w  t h e  
merit field with confidence or faith in the Th ree Jewels and plant the seeds of buddhahood in 
it. If we do not do that, it would be a great pity and a great loss.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 The need to exert oneself in making offerings 
T o  n o t  h a v e  e v e n  a s  m u c h  r e g a r d  f o r  t h e  b e s t  o f  f i e l d s  a s  f o r  a n  o r d i n a r y  f i e l d  
would not a good attitude. Therefore, we should strive, at all times, to make 
offerings to the [Three] Jewels.  
 
Since the Three Jewels are a the best of fields, if we were to look upon them as if they were an 
ordinary field this would not be a good a ttitude but would be arrogant on our part. 
Therefore, we should strive to make offerings at all times to the Three Jewels. We can even 
make offerings and create a great amount of meri t by merely imagining beautiful flowers, nice 
clothes, and so forth and mentally offering them to the Three Jewels.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
6 High status, paths, etc. are attained through making offerings in that way 
If you do that, through the power of the roots of virtue that  grow in the most 
excellent field, the power of your intelligenc e concerning the stages of the path will 
increase. When your intelligence is very feeble such that you do not retain the 
words while listening, do not understand  the meaning while contemplating, and 
nothing arises in the mind while meditati ng, the quintessential instruction is to 
rely on the power of the field.  
 
In order to achieve high status (high rebirth) and definite goodness (liberation or 
omniscience), we need to create the cause by co llecting merit with respect to a holy field. In 
other words, we need to engage in virtuous action s with respect to a holy or excellent field. If 
we do this, when we try to meditate on the stag es of the path our mind will be strong and our 
intelligence will increase. Thus, if, due to the po wer of our mind being weak, we are unable to 
understand something at the time of listen ing and unable to memorize it, unable to 
understand the meaning while thinking about it, and unable to gain the realization of it by 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
312 meditating, we should rely on a holy field wher eby we will accumulate merit. In this way, we 
will be able to understand and memorize that  which we previously could not understand and 
could not memorize; we will be able to unde rstand that which we previously could not 
understand by thinking about it; and we will be able to realize that which we previously could 
not meditate on and realize. In this way, our qu alities, such as concen tration and wisdom, will 
increase more and more. For this reason, the instruction is to rely on such a field.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
7 How the size of the offerings and so forth is a distinction to do with the mind 
Also the offering is not confined by the thing [offered], it is confined by your 
confidence. As it is stated [in the scriptures ], if you have faith it is enough to offer 
mandalas, water, and offerings that are not considered by anyone [to be their 
property], therefore you should act accordingly even if you do not have any 
material things [to offer]. {95} Not to b e  a b l e  t o  g i v e ,  e v e n  t h o u g h  y o u  h a v e  
something, saying: “I, a wretched pauper  without any merits, do not have any 
other possessions to offer,”124 would be, in the words of Potowa, like a blind 
person putting some cheap aromatic plant125 into a smelly conch-shell container in 
order to fool someone with eyesight by calling it “sandalwood and camphor perfume.”  
 Whether something becomes a great or small offe ring depends on our mind, that is, on our 
motivation. For example, we can offer even th ings that we do not possess with faith and 
confidence in the Three Jewels. For example, we can offer a mandala of the entire universe by 
making a particular gesture with our hands. We can also offer water and other things that are 
not owned by anyone. Thus, we can offer the en tire universe, forests, beautiful mountains, 
lakes, oceans, and so forth by mentally taking them to mind and imagining offering them to 
the Three Jewels. In this way we can make offerings of many thin gs rather than thinking that 
we are poor and do not have any belongings to offer. On the other hand, if we do in fact possess material things but are unable to offer them even mentally, this would not be right. 
We should not think of ourselves as wretch ed paupers without any merits and without 
anything to offer. This would be like a blind person trying to fool someone with good eyesight by putting an aromatic plant into a smelly po t and calling it “perfume.” In general it is 
difficult for the blind to deceive those with eyesight, but perhaps sometimes they try!   Thursday morning, 17 March 2005 (Happy Saint Patrick’s Day!) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 95) says:  
8 How to train in upright[ness with regard to] offering substances, following the masters of former times  
Puchungwa said: “At first I used to offer a pungent aromatic plant. Then I had the 
means to offer sweet incense prepared from  four substances. Now I offer the most 
                                              
124 This verse from Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  (chapter 2, verse 7) is commonly recited during offering 
ceremonies. 
125 JN: spang spos , valeriana officinalis 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
313 exquisitely fragrant aloe wood, durushka , etc.” In accordance with this statement, if 
you do not give anything out of contempt for small offerings, you will go on like 
that throughout your entire life. Howeve r, if you develop perseverance from a 
lesser stage, it will get better and better. Therefore, you should train following the 
practice of this master of former times. I t  i s  s a i d  t h a t  h e  o n c e  p r e p a r e d  i n c e n s e  
[worth] twenty-two gold coins.  
 
We should train following the example of past ma sters by not making offerings of things that 
have been obtained by deceitful means. Puchun gwa initially offered a pungent type of incense 
uncomfortable to the nose. Then , when he had more money, he offered incense having a 
sweet smell and composed of four substances. Af ter that, when he became  wealthier, he made 
offerings of costly incense made of aloe wood  (akaru), duruka, and so forth that have an 
excellent fragrance. Similarly, we too should o ffer whatever we have, even something small. If, 
on the other hand, we continually think that so mething is too small to offer, we will never 
make any offerings during our entire life. Therefore, we should offer whatever we can obtain, even the very small, while generating the mind wi shing to make offerings. In this way we will 
gradually improve.  In short, we should not deprecate small offe rings, but offer whatever we have. We should 
also mentally offer whatever food or drink we have before eating or drinking it. We can even offer our clothing to the holy beings. Likewise, when we wash our face, take a shower, and so 
forth, we can think that we are offering ablution  to the holy beings. In this way whatever we 
do will be a virtuous action and collect merit.  Since we can make offe rings mentally by means 
of visualization, we should never think, “I don’t have anything to offer.”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
9 Refutation of the manners of speaking [to the effect] that the way bodhisattvas make offerings, having 
gained control over material things, is impure 
If great bodhisattvas, having gained cont rol over material things, emanate many 
hundreds of thousands of bodies and for each body emanate hundreds of 
thousands of hands, etc., that appear in all the fields and make offerings to the 
Conquerors for many eons, the statement by those who know on ly the superficial 
appearance of positive qualities that “As for me, I do not hope [to reach] 
enlightenment in that way,” is the idle t a l k  o f  [ p e o p l e ]  w h o  h a v e  v e r y  l i t t l e  
familiarity with the Dharma.  
 
The great bodhisattvas, who have attained control over material things, can emanate 
hundreds of thousands of bodies, each of wh ich has a hundred thousand hands, and with 
each hand they present offering s to the merit field or Conquerors of the ten directions for 
many eons. Thus, if someone, thinking that it is  not possible to emanate so many bodies with 
so many hands, were to say “I do not hope to achieve enlightenment in this way,” it would show that this person has very little un derstanding of the Dharma. Not seeing the 
bodhisattvas’ ability to emanate ma ny bodies even in a single atom , such people th ink it is not 
t r u e .  H o w e v e r ,  w e  s h o u l d  b e  a b l e  t o  u n d e r s t a n d  t h i s  b a s e d  o n  t h e  f a c t  t h a t  s c i e n t i s t s  h a v e  proven that even tiny atoms,  which cannot be seen with the eyes, are very powerful. 
Therefore, we should be refrai n from saying such things.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
314  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
10 How to make offerings with other vast things  
In the Jewel Cloud  [Sutra ] it says:  
 
From the sutra collections you should study what are very vast offerings 
and honors and from the bottom of yo ur heart dedicate them with the 
most excellent special attitude to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
 
You should do like that. 
 How can we offer other vast things? The sutras s ay that we should listen  to explanations of 
how to make offerings and act respectfully and then dedicate them from our heart. In other 
words, we should mentally offer all the good things that we see in the world, the oceans, 
mountains, lakes, forests, flowers, and so fo rth, to the buddhas and bodhisattvas from the 
depths of our heart. In this way we can make offerings with vast things, there being no need 
to hold them in our hands in order to offer th em. Instead merely take them to mind and then 
mentally offer or dedicate them to the Three Jewels, the buddhas, and bodhisattvas. In this 
way we will first become bodhisattvas and then buddhas, whereupon we will be able to take 
care of all sentient beings. Thus , we should manifest a big mind that wishes to make offerings 
of all the vast things in the world.   Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2C Remember their great compassion and, due to that, establish other beings in 
such a mode [of behavior]  
Third: Out of loving concern126 establish other sentient beings in going for refuge 
as much as you can. {96} 
 
Out of great compassion or mercy, we should try to set other sentient beings in going for refuge. We should do this by talking to people nicely and then, motivated by great compassion, leading them as much as possible in going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha. If we talk nicely to people we can bring about a change in their minds, whereby they too can come to think about going for refu ge. In this way we should set as many human 
beings in the practice of Buddhism as possible,  that is, in going for refuge to the Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha, whereby they become Buddhists.  
 However, we, in short, should explain to ot hers the fact that every human being needs to 
develop love and compassion for others. I think all religions and all people would accept the 
truth of this fact. On the other hand, if we  were to say to Christians, Moslems, and 
practitioners of other religions that they shou ld practice Buddhism, they would reject this. 
Therefore, to avoid this, we should explain to th em that it is necessary for us to develop love 
and compassion for all sentient beings because a ll sentient beings want to be happy and none 
of them want to suffer, and it is our respon sibility to set them in happiness and free them 
                                             
 
126 JN: brtse ba , can also be translated as “mercy” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
315 from suffering. It would be best to talk to th e people we meet in this way since love and 
compassion are not rejected by any religion. Since everyone has the seed of innate love and 
compassion, such teachings are easy for them to understand. Therefore, this is what we 
should teach them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2D Whatever one does and what ever one needs, having worshipped the Three 
Jewels, supplicate them and abandon other worldly methods 
Whatever you do and whatever requirements  you see, rely on the Three Jewels and 
do what is in agreement with them such as  making offerings to them and so forth. 
However, it is inappropriate to rely in al l ways on that which is not in agreement 
with them such as Bon. Consequently, yo u should trust the Three Jewels at all 
times.  
 
Whatever we do and for whatever purpose, we should first rely on the Three Jewels, Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha, that is, we should re quest them for help in accomplishing and 
succeeding in whatever it is th at we want to do or achieve. Relying on the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha, we should make offerings to them, prostrate to them, make praises to them, and 
so forth. We should generate confidence and belief in the Three Jewels and not rely on that which is not compatible with them, for example, the Bon tradition.  
 Why is Bon specifically mentioned here? It is  because the Bon tradition says that when our 
relatives die, they can help us achieve success if  we respect them, make offerings to them, and 
so forth. Some say that the Bon tradition is a fo rm of shamanism, whereas others say that it is 
a form of Buddhism that was founded by  their teacher 1000 years before Buddha 
Shakyamuni visited the world. Therefore, they s ay that although it is not based on Buddha 
Shakyamuni’s doctrine, it is based on the doct rine of a buddha. However, I myself do not 
think that this is true. I think th at it is a story that was invented by someone. In the past the 
Bonpo also made animal sacrifices, offered th e blood of animals whose necks had been cut, 
and so forth, whereas such rituals were never part of Buddhism. There are three types of Bon 
– Black Bon, White Bon, and Mixed Bon. The Bo npos took the Buddhist texts, such as the 
Ornament for Clear Realizations , and created their own scriptures by replacing the word 
“Dharma” with the word “Bon.” There are sti ll many Bon practitioners in southern Tibet 
near the border with Burma and Assam. I have heard that some of them do pujas in which 
they offer live chickens, sheep, goats, buffaloes, and so forth, and that if  they do not have any 
animals to offer, they offer an egg by breaking  it open. It is for these reasons that Lama 
Tsongkhapa says that we should not rely on the Bon tradition.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2E Aware of the benefits, go for refuge three times a day and three times at night 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
316 1 It is the measure of being a Buddhist 
2 It is the basis of all vows  
3 The karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and exhausted 
4 One accumulates vast merit 
5 One will not fall into the bad migrations 
6 One will not be harmed by human and non-human obstacles 
7 One will attain everything one wishes for 
8 One will swiftly attain buddhahood 
The fifth one has eight benefits : It is the measure of being a Buddhist, it is the basis 
of all vows, the karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and 
exhausted, one accumulates vast merit, on e does not fall into the bad migrations, 
one is not harmed by human and non-huma n obstacles, one attains everything one 
wishes for, and one swiftly attains buddhahood. 
 
There are eight benefits of going for refuge  to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. Among 
them, the first is that one becomes a Buddhist as going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha is considered to be the boundary or measure or door that defines a Buddhist. On the other hand, if we do not go for refuge to  the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha as our final 
refuge, we will not be considered to be a Buddhist practitioner.   Another benefit of going for refuge is that it  serves as a basis for taking vows because in 
order to take vows we need to have previously  gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha. In other words, in order to take any of  the eight vows of individual liberation it is 
necessary to first go for refuge to the Three Je wels. The same is true of the bodhisattva vows 
and so forth.   Also due to going for refuge, the karmic obsc urations that we accumulated previously will 
become thinner, that is, they will lessen, and ev entually they will be exhausted. Also due to 
going for refuge, we accumulate vast merit. We will also not fall into the bad migrations, that 
is, we will no longer take rebirth in the lower realms. In addition, interferences, both human 
and non-human, will not be able to harm us. Th ere exist many different types of interferences 
including human beings who try to harm us by, for example, black magic, casting spells, and 
so forth. “Non-humans” include spirits, of wh ich there are many different types, that cause 
harm to sentient beings. Also inanimate ob jects, such as wind and fire, can cause 
interferences. If we go for refuge, such interferences will not be able to harm us. 
 In addition, due to going for refuge, we will  be able to achieve all our wishes, including 
enlightenment, as well as our temporary aims . And, by going for refuge properly, we will 
quickly attain buddhahood.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
1 It is the measure of being a Buddhist 
First: Although, generally speaking, there a ppear to be many ways of positing non-
Buddhists and Buddhists, it is widely known that Jowo [Atisha] and Shantipa 
distinguished them by [the fact of] going for refuge. Therefore, [Buddhists ] should 
be understood to be those who have achieved going for refuge and have not given 
it up. Hence, as for the measure of being a Buddhist, it is necessary to consider the 
Three Jewels as teacher and so forth from  the bottom of your heart. Without that, 
even though you do virtuous deeds, yo u will not be included among Buddhists.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
317 In general there are many different ways of posi ting “outer beings” and “inner beings,” that is, 
non-Buddhists and Buddhists, but Atisha and Sh antipa (perhaps Ratnakara Shantipa who was 
one of Atisha’s teachers) said that they are di stinguished by the fact that Buddhists are those 
who go for refuge from the depths of their he art to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha and do 
not give up the precepts of refuge, whereas no n-Buddhists do not do th is. However, Buddhists 
and non-Buddhists can also be distinguished from the point of view of method or conduct 
and from the point of view of wisdom or vi ew. For example, Buddhists are those who hold 
the views that: 5. all compounded phenomena are impermanent,  
6. all contaminated phenomena are suffering,  
7. all phenomena are empty and selfless (for exam ple, they are empty of being permanent, 
partless, and independent), 
8. nirvana, the state passed beyond sorro w or cyclic existence, is peace.  
If we accept or assert these four seals, we are considered to be Buddhists from the point of 
view of wisdom. I do not remember the four from the side of method, which are mentioned 
in a text by Khedrub Je, one of Lama Tsongkha pa’s two main disciples, and in some Sakya 
texts. Because of this, there are people, for ex ample, some Vaibhashikas, who from the point 
of view of wisdom are Buddhists but are not Buddhists from the point of view of method, 
and vice versa.  
 In short, in order to be a Buddhist it is necessary to go for refuge to the Three Jewels from the bottom of our hearts while thinking that th e Buddha is the teacher, the Dharma is his 
teachings, and the Sangha are those who follow hi s teachings. If we do not go for refuge in 
this way, even though we accumulate virtue we will not be included among Buddhists.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 It is the basis of all vows 
Second: In the Commentary on the Treasury  it says:  
 
Those who go for refuge have gained  access to taking all the vows 
correctly. 
 And in Seventy Verses on Going for Refuge  it also says: 
 
Upasakas go for refuge to the three; 
That is the root of the eight vows. 
 The intention is that, through going for refuge, the thought of passing beyond 
suffering
127 is stabilized and that the vows spring from that.  
 
In order to take vows it is necessa ry to have the basis of having gone for refuge. In this context 
“vows” refers to the vows of individual liberati on. In order to take them perfectly, we must 
first go for refuge to the Three Jewels. Because of this, going for refuge is like “a door” to 
                                              
127 “myang ’das kyi bsam pa ” – the literal meaning of “ myang ’das ”, a contraction of “ mya ngan las ’das pa ” is 
“passing beyond suffering.” It is the Tibeta n rendering of the Sanskrit term “nirvana”. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
318 taking these vows. For example, if we wish to go into a temple, we must first open the door, 
whereas if the door remains closed, we cannot enter it. Likewise, if we do not go for refuge, 
we cannot take the eight vows of individual liberation:  
(1) the one-day precepts (eight vows that ar e similar to the Eight Mahayana Precepts),  
(2-3) the vows of laymen an d laywomen (five vows),  
(4-5) the vows of novice monks and nuns (thirty-six vows),  
(6) the vows of probationary nuns (thirty-six pl us twelve additional vows that are taken when 
training for two years prior to taking the 364 vows of full-ordination), and  
(7-8) the vows of fully-ordained monks an d nuns (253 and 364 vows respectively).  
Thus, two of the eight vows are vows taken by lay people and six are vows taken by ordained people. The basis for taking any of these vows is refuge.   Having gone for refuge, the thought to atta in nirvana, the state passed beyond sorrow, 
becomes stable and this makes the generation of  vows more stable. On the other hand, if we 
take vows without the proper motivation and with out thinking at the time of the ordination 
that we have received the vows, we will not actu ally possess the vows but will merely have the 
aspect of someone who has taken vows. Vows can be taken but degenerated, or taken but not 
achieved. Having received the vows of a novice monk or nun, for example, we need to abide in them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and exhausted 
Third: In the Compendium of Trainings  it says: 
 
Here, in the context of showing that negativities are purified by going 
for refuge, the story of the pig should be presented as an illustration. 
 
For instance, a son of a god who was going t o  b e  r e b o rn  a s  a  p i g ,  { 9 7 }  t h r o u g h  
going for refuge was not born as one. It is stated that: 
 
Those who have gone for refuge to the Buddha, Will not go to the bad migrations. Having given up their human body They obtain the body of a god. 
 It is stated similarly with respect to the Dharma and Sangha.  
 The son of a god was to be reborn in his next li fe as a pig but, due to going for refuge to the 
Three Jewels, he was not born as a pig because in  this way he purified the negative karma to 
be born as a pig. This example shows that th ose who take the Buddha and so forth as their 
objects of refuge will not be reborn in the lowe r realms. Instead those who go for refuge to the 
Buddha while they are human beings will, when  they die, give up their human body and 
obtain the body of a god. The same result come s from going for refuge to the Dharma and the 
Sangha. Thus, those who go for refuge to the Dh arma Jewel – true paths and true cessations – 
will not be reborn in the bad migrations and when they die and give up their human body 
they will take the body of a god in their next li fe. It is similar for those who go for refuge to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
319 the Sangha Jewel. In short, going for refuge to  the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha is the source 
of increasing all our good qualities.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 One accumulates vast merit 
Fourth: In the Summary of the Perfections  it says:  
 
If the merit of refuge were to take shape 
Even the three realms would be small as a container. Great oceans, foremost of water bodies, Could not hold or measure it. 
 That is how [vast] it is. 
 If the merit or benefit of going for refuge were  to take form, it could not fit in the three 
realms: above, on, and below the ground. Just as  the water in the oceans cannot be measured 
by taking out one handful at a time, similarly the merit of going for refuge to the Three Jewels cannot be measured.   Thursday afternoon, 17 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 One will not fall into the bad migrations 
Fifth: You should understand this from the above.  
 
By going for refuge to the Three Jewels, we will  not go to the lower realms after our death. 
This is because by going for refuge, not only wi ll we not fall into the lower realms, but, having 
given up this human body, we will attain the body of a god.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
6 We will not be harmed by human and non-human obstacles 
Sixth: This is easy to understand. 
 
It is easy to understand that if we go for refuge we cannot be harmed by human and non-
human interferences because, having gone for re fuge to the Three Jewels, we will come under 
their protection.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
7 One will attain everything one wishes for 
Seventh: Whatever Dharma activity you do , if at the beginning you make offerings 
to the Three Jewels, go for refuge, an d supplicate them, it will easily be 
accomplished.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
320 At the beginning of accomplishing a Dharma acti vity, we should make offerings to the Three 
Jewels, recite a verse of refuge, and ask them fo r their help as in this way we will easily and 
quickly accomplish it. In other words, whenever  we are about to do a virtuous action, we 
should go for refuge, make offerings of water, flowers, incense, and so  forth, and request the 
Three Jewels for help, whereby we will easily achieve success in accomplishing the action.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
8 One will swiftly attain buddhahood 
In [the Sutra ] Requested by Singha  it says:  
 
Through faith unfreedom is abandoned. 
 
In accordance with that, you will obtain  the distinguished leisures and, having 
encountered refuge, train in the special path, whereby you will become a buddha 
without a long delay. Mindful of these kind s of benefits, you should go for refuge 
three times a day and three times at night. 
 If we have faith or confidence in the Three Jewels, we will be able to abandon states of non-leisure and obtain the special or distinguished leis ures, that is, a good rebirth, meet objects of 
refuge such as holy beings, and train in the special path. In this way, we will soon be able to attain our objective of buddhahood or enligh tenment. Thus, remembering the benefits of 
going for refuge, we should go for refuge thr ee times a day and three ti mes a night. In this 
way, things will go better in this life and in our next life. On the other hand, if, having gone for refuge, we do not recite a verse of refuge three times a day and thr ee times at night to the 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, we will create a down fall or fault. Due to this, we will not take 
a good rebirth for eons whereby it will become even more and more difficult to take a higher rebirth. Therefore, we should make sure to go  for refuge three times a day and three times at 
night.   Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2F Do not give up the Three Jewels for one’s life nor for a laugh but guard against 
this 
There is no doubt that we will separate fr om this body, life, and possessions. If we 
give up the Three Jewels for their sake, there will be continuous suffering in all 
successive lives [to come], therefore we should vow not to abandon [our] refuge 
come what may, and not even utter words ab out giving up [our] refuge for a laugh. 
 
We must not give up the Three Jewels, in other words we must not give up going for refuge to the Three Jewels. Since we will have to separa te from our body, life, and belongings, we 
should not create negative karma for their sake by  giving up the Three Jewels as due to this in 
many future lives we will experience contin uous suffering. Therefore, we should make a 
promise to never give up going for refuge to the Three Jewels even if at the cost of losing our 
body, life, or belongings. We also should not give them up even as a joke in order to make o t h e r s  l a u g h .  E v e n  t h i s  w o u l d  c r e a t e  v e r y  n e g a t i v e  k a r m a ,  t h e  r e s u l t  o f  w h i c h  w o u l d  b e  t o  experience suffering and a lack of happiness. Th erefore, we should always examine what kind 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
321 of result such-and-such an action will bring in th e future. Then, if we find that certain actions 
will bring the result of suffering, we must strive to give them up. We need to try to do this; if 
we do not even try, nothing will happen. Theref ore, we must think about the advantages of 
going for refuge and the disadvantages of not go ing for refuge and then make a choice as to 
what to do. This is up to us. However, since sometimes our choices can be wrong and later on 
we come to regret them, we need to be careful, even as joke, not to say “I give up the Buddha. 
I  g i v e  u p  t h e  D h a r m a .  I  g i v e  u p  t h e  S a n g h a .  I  g i v e  u p  m y  v o w s , ”  a s  w e l l  a s  o t h e r  s u c h  
statements related to abandoning the Three Jewels.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2A4B Eliminating inaccuracies [with respect to the precepts of going for refuge] 
1 Refutation of that which is not a precept 
Former masters stated a precept to the e ffect that you should train in going for 
refuge to the tathagata of whatever dire ction you go in, but I have not seen a 
source [for that].  
 
Some past masters said that there is a precept of  refuge that when we are about to walk or go 
in a particular direction, we should first go for refuge to the tathagata of that particular 
direction, however Lama Tsongkhapa says that he has not seen a scriptural source for this 
precept. Wherever we go, we necessarily go in one of the ten directions – east, south, west, 
north, southeast, southwest, northeast, northwes t, up, or down. Thus, th ese masters said that 
we need to go for refuge to the tathagata of  that direction, but La ma Tsongkhapa has not 
been able to verify that there is a valid source for this precept.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The sources of the specific precepts 
Thus, the six common precepts [for all the objects of refuge] are just like they 
appear in the Commentary on the Lamp on the Path . {98} The first three specific 
precepts are explained in the sutra collec tion, whereas the latter three appear in 
the Six Branches of Going for Refuge . 
 The six common precepts or trainings, which are explained by Atisha in his Commentary on the 
Lamp on the Path , are: 
1. to remember the differences and positive qualit ies of the Three Jewels and, due to that, to 
go for refuge to them again and again, 
2. to remember their great kindness and, due to th at, to exert oneself at all times in making 
offerings to them and offering them even the first portion of one’s food and drink, 
3. to remember their great compassion and, due to  that, to set other migrating beings in such 
a mode [of behavior], 
4. whatever one does and whatever one needs,  to worship the Three Jewels and then 
supplicate them and abandon other worldly methods, 
5. to go for refuge three times a day and thr ee times at night while being aware of the 
benefits, and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
322 6. to not give up the Three Jewels even at the cost of one’s life nor as a joke and to guard 
against this. 
 
The first three specific precepts, which have their source in the sutra collection, are: 
1. having gone for refuge to the Buddha, to abandon going for refuge to mundane gods and 
so forth;  
2. having gone for refuge to the Dharma, to abandon harming any sentient being; and  
3. having gone for refuge to the Sangha, to ab andon associating with non-virtuous or non-
Buddhist companions such as Tirthikas.  
 
The latter three precepts, which are set out in Six Branches of Going for Refuge , are: 
1. having gone for refuge to the Buddha, to resp ect any statue of a buddha, whether made of 
gold, silver, wood, clay, and so forth, as well as any painting and so forth, as if it were an 
actual buddha;  
2. having gone for refuge to the Dharma, to resp ect even one word or phrase of the texts of 
Buddha’s teachings as if it were the actual Dh arma Jewel by putting texts in high places, 
remembering that they represent true cessation s and true paths and that by means of them 
we can attain the realization of the actual Dharma; and  
3. having gone for refuge to the Sangha, to resp ect even a scrap of red or yellow cloth as 
though it belonged to the robe s of the sangha, as well as to respect monks and nuns as 
being representatives of th e actual Sangha Jewel.  
 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The difference between degenerating and relinquishing [the precepts] 
As for the way in which the transgression  of these precepts becomes a cause of 
degenerating and relinquishing them, the transgression of [the precept ] to not give 
up your refuge even for the sake of your life actually constitutes relinquishing it. 
Similarly, even if you do not give up th e Three Jewels, but dualistically uphold the 
three – teachers and so forth – that ar e incompatible with them, you transgress 
[the precept to ] not advocate another refuge, and by not having confidence in the 
refuges you also relinquish it. I think that , if these do not occur, it is a mere 
transgression of the precepts but not a cause for relinquishing them. 
 
The transgression of the precepts of refuge beco mes a cause for us to degenerate our precepts 
and can also become a cause for completely relinq uishing them. Therefore, even if our life is 
in danger, we must not give our refuge up by saying, “I give up going for refuge to the Three Jewels.” Also, even if we do not directly ab andon the Three Jewels, by upholding discordant 
teachers, that is, by going for refuge to them, we  transgress the precepts of refuge. If we think, 
for example, “I can also go for refuge to othe r teachers, teachings, and communities that are 
not the Buddha, Dharma, and Sang ha,” then this becomes a cause for transgressing the refuge 
precepts. However, as long as we do not go for refuge to other teachers  and so forth that are 
incompatible with the Buddha, Dharma, and Sang ha from the depths of our heart, while we 
transgress our refuge precepts we will not relinquish them.   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
323 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 The advice not to transgress the precepts because of how great the benefits are, such as being the 
entrance gate to the teachings etc. 
Thus, going for refuge is the great entry gate to the Buddha’s teachings. And, if 
going for refuge does not consist in mere  words, you will not be thwarted by 
external or internal obstacles due to your relying on a superior power, and by the 
distinction of the good qualities coming about easily and deteriorating with 
difficulty, they will increase more and more. Therefore, it is vital that you uphold 
your refuge by means of being mindful of the fear and the positive qualities 
explained above, and that you put effort  into not transgressing its precepts.  
 Going for refuge is the great door or entranceway to the Buddha’s teachings or doctrine. In other words, we become Buddhist practitioners by going for refuge from the depths of our 
heart to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. If we go for refuge to them sincerely, we will not 
be overcome by inner and outer interferences.  O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d ,  w e  s h o u l d  n o t  g o  f o r  
refuge by just reciting the mere words “I go fo r refuge to the Buddha. I go for refuge to the 
Dharma. I go for refuge to the Sangha.” If we go for refuge from the depths of our heart, we 
will generate all good qualities and they will no t degenerate, whereby all our white actions will 
increase more and more. If we remember fe ar and the qualities of Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha, we will uphold our refuge and will not transgress its precepts. Therefore, in our daily 
life we need to go for refuge to the Three Je wels from our heart while reciting the words of 
refuge and recalling their qualities. In this way we will not be overcome by outer and inner 
interferences and our good qualities will increa se more and more, just as the waxing moon 
gradually becomes a full moon, unti l we attain complete buddhahood.  
 Having gone for refuge to the Three Jewels, we also need to guard the law of actions and 
results. Since this is like a precept of going for refuge, next we need to develop conviction in this law.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B Generating the faith of conviction in karma and its results 
A Considering karma and its results in general 
B Considering karma and its results in particular 
C Having considered them, how to engage [in virtuous actions] and counteract [the non-
virtuous] 
The second one – generating the faith of conviction in karma and its results – has 
three points: considerations about karma an d its results in general, considerations 
about actions and their results in particul ar, and having considered them, how to 
engage [in virtuous actions] and counteract [the non-virtuous].  
 
First we need to think about actions and their re sults in general, then about them in specific, 
and then about how to engage in certain actions and avoid others.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
324 2B4B-2B1A-2B1 Considering karma128
 and its results in general 
A The actual way to consider karma and its results in general 
B Considering the specific divisions 
The first one has two points: the actual w ay to consider karma and its results in 
general and considering the specific divisions. 
 
First there is the way to think about actions an d their results in general and then thinking 
about the specific divisions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A The actual way to consider karma and its results in general 
1 How karma is certain 
2 The great increase of karma 
3 You do not meet with karma you have not created 
4 Karma you have created does not dissipate 
The first one has four points: how karma is  certain, the great increase of karma, 
you do not meet with karma you have not created, and karma you have created 
does not dissipate. 
 
The four points here are: the results of karma are certain, karma increases, karma that has not 
been created does not bring a result, and the karm a that has been created is not lost or does 
not go to waste.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-1 How karma is certain 
1 The actual way in which karma is certain 
All happiness having the aspect of pleasant feeling, whether in ordinary beings or 
aryas – even as little as that which is gene rated in a sentient being born in hell in 
dependence on a cool wind springing up – arises from virtuous karma 
accumulated previously. {99} Happiness ar ising from non-virtuous karma is a non-
source. All suffering having the aspect of painful feelings – even as little at that 
which is generated in the mind of an arhat – arises from non-virtuous karma 
accumulated previously. Suffering arising fr om virtuous karma is  a non-source. In 
the Precious Garland  it says:  
 
From the non-virtuous, all suffering; 
Likewise, all the bad migrations. From the virtuous, all happy realms and Happiness in all rebirths. 
 
                                             
 
128 In Tibetan, the word for “action” and “karma” is the same (“ las”). It will be useful to keep this in mind 
throughout the following explanations  on karma. The word “karma” has b een chosen in cases where the term 
“action” failed to put across the implied relation with an  effect, e.g., “karma that is  certainly experienced” or 
“accumulate karma”. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
325 A n y  e x p e r i e n c e  o f  h a p p i n e s s ,  w h e t h e r  b y  o r d i n a r y  b e i n g s  o r  a r y a  b e i n g s ,  i s  t h e  r e s u l t  o f  a  
virtuous action accumulated in the past. Even th e experience of a cool breeze in the hell realm 
that relieves the suffering a bit is due to having  accumulated virtuous actions in the past, that 
is, in a previous life. Without having create d a virtuous action, happiness cannot arise. 
Similarly, all suffering feeling that arises, even that in the mind of a foe-destroyer, is due to 
having created a non-virtuous action in the past  and not having purified it. Virtuous actions 
are not a source of suffering, nor are non- virtuous actions a source of happiness.  
 Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland  says that all suffering comes from non-virtuous actions, as 
does rebirth in the bad migrations. Similarly, all happiness, as well as rebirth in the happy 
migrations, comes from virtuous actions. Thus, both suffering and happiness come from a 
specific source. Suffering comes from the source  that is non-virtuous actions, and happiness 
comes from the source that is virtuous actions. We need to understand this clearly. Then we 
must try as much as possible in our daily life to abandon creating non- virtuous actions and to 
try as much as possible to create virtuous action s. In this way we will make good use of this 
precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qu alities that we have obtained presently. If 
we do not do this but instead use it to engage  in non-virtuous actions, our precious human 
rebirth will be a complete waste.   Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2 Explanations [of this] as the basis of all white dharmas 
Therefore, happiness and suffering do no t arise without a cause or from an 
incongruous cause such as a primordial prin cipal, Ishvara, and the like. In general 
happiness and suffering arise in general fr om virtuous and non-virtuous karma. 
Also the various specifics of happiness an d suffering arise individually from the 
various specifics of the two [t ypes of] of karma without any error. To gain certainty 
with regard to actions and their results bein g certain and infallible is said to be the 
correct view of all Buddhists and is praise d as the foundation of all white dharmas. 
 The law of actions and their results is that happiness comes from virtue and suffering comes 
from non-virtue. However, some people assert that happiness and suffering arise without a cause. For example, the Charvakas do not acce pt past and future lives and say that the 
roundness of peas is without a cause, as is the sh arpness of thorns. Similarly, they also say that 
the colors in the eyes of a peacock’s feathers ar ise without cause. In this way they assert that 
results arise without needing to depend on causes and conditions.  
 The Samkyas, on the other hand, say that a ll results arise from a primordial or general 
principal, that is, it is the creator of all resu lts. They divide all objects of knowledge into 
twenty-five categories and say that, among them , the primordial principal is a cause alone, 
seven are both cause and result, sixteen are results alone, and one – the self, knower, 
consciousness, or person – is neither a cause nor a result. Thus, they assert that the person is 
permanent and that when that person, self, kn ower, or consciousness, which is permanent 
and neither a cause nor a result, searches for the creator of all results and discovers that they 
are created by the primordial principal, the pr imordial principal becomes ashamed of having 
been recognized, whereby all results absorb in to it and it too disappears, like a rainbow 
vanishing in the sky. At this ti me the self, knower, or consciou sness achieves nirvana, and it 
alone remains.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
326  Other schools assert that the creator of everyt hing is Ishvara. They say that when Ishvara 
merely thinks of something, it immediately comes into existence. This a ssertion as well as that 
of the Samkyas are cases of asserting that things  arise from a discordant or incongruent cause, 
however results cannot arise from a discordant cause. We need to think about and 
understand this.  
 One time there was a meeting in Sarnath of pe ople knowledgeable in these different tenets. 
One man strongly asserted that thinks arise wi thout a cause. Another man asserted that if 
something exists it must be able to be seen wi th the eyes, due to which past and future lives 
do not exist. In response, someone asked him, “Does that mean that the back of your head 
does not exist since you cannot see it? Do organs such as lungs, livers, kidneys, and so forth 
not exist in your body since you cannot see them ?” When the man replied that they do exist, 
his challenger asked, “Is your liver big or smal l?” The man refused to answer saying he did not 
want to debate with a child. However, the next day he did not return to the meeting. 
 In short, all happinesses and sufferings arise from a particular and unmistaken cause. 
Therefore, we need to understand that a certain kind of result arises from a certain kind of 
cause. To gain certainty with respect to this is to have a correct view of the law of actions and 
results, that is, that results accords with their causes. Since this understanding is praised as the 
foundation of all white dharmas, that is, all good qualities and al l happiness, we need to try to 
gain certainty with respect to the relation ship between actions and their results.  
 
Friday morning, 18 March 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 99) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-2 The great increase of karma 
Second: There is nothing among external causes and results that resembles the 
increase of internal causes and results, for even from a small virtuous karma there 
arises the result of enormous happiness while even from a small non-virtuous 
karma there arises the result of enormous suffering.  
 
Karma or action increases such that even a sma ll virtuous action can bring the result of great 
happiness, and even a small non-virtuous acti on can bring the result of great suffering. 
Similarly, we see that in our external world wh en a tiny seed, for example, an apple seed, is 
sown in the ground it gives rise to a large tr ee with many branches laden with many apples. 
Also just as if an external seed is planted in the ground but is then ea ten by a bird or insects 
or rots in the ground or is burnt by fire, it wi ll not bring a result, similarly if we confess and 
purify our non-virtuous actions by applying th e four opponent forces, they will not bring a 
result. Also, just as fire destroys a seed, the vi rtuous actions that we created in the past are 
destroyed by very strong anger, particularly that developed toward a holy being or a holy 
object, whereby they will not bring the result of happiness. In this way, we should examine 
external analogies in order to understand that ju st as from a small seed comes a big result, so 
too from a small action comes a big result. For ex ample, if we were to kill an ant or mosquito 
today and did not purify it, tomorrow it would be  twice as great in strength, the next day it 
would be four times as great in strength, and so  forth, that is, each day the strength of the 
action would be multiplied exponentially.   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
327 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In the Udanavarga  it says:  
 
Even committing a small negativity 
Will bring about great fear and great Disaster in future worlds, 
Like poison that seeps through to the core. 
 Even committing small merit Will bring about great happiness in future worlds, Causing greatly meaningful things, Like grains that ripen in the excellent. 
 
If we ingest even a small amount of poison it can be very dangerous since it can make us very 
sick and even take our life. Likewise, even a sm all negativity can bring us great fear and great 
disaster in the next world (literally, the next tr ansitory basis). Therefore, we should strive not 
to create such actions in the sa me way that we try to avoid inge sting poison (unless we want to 
commit suicide!) through fearing that it will kill us . Our greatest fear is that of losing our life, 
it being much greater than the fear of losing ou r belongings or even our friends and relatives, 
due to which we are careful not to in gest the smallest bit of poison.  
 On the other hand, even small merit or virtue  can bring great happiness in our future lives 
and enable us to achieve great aims, just like so wing a small barley seed in the ground brings 
the excellent result of a barley plant. For this reason, we should avoid thinking that it is not 
important to create small virtuous actions, an d since they will bring a great and meaningful 
result we need to strive to create them. In sh ort, in our daily life we must strive to avoid 
creating even small negativities and strive to  create even small virt uous actions, without 
thinking that they are not important or do not matter.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-3 You do not meet with karma you have not created 
Third: {100} If you have not accumulate d karma that will become the cause for 
experiencing happiness or suffering, you wi ll never experience the happiness or 
suffering that is its result. Also, thos e who enjoy the effects of the Teacher’s 
accumulation of an incalculable collection [of merit] do not need to accumulate 
all its causes, however they need to accumulate a part of them129.  
 
If we do not accumulate an action, virtuous or non-virtuous, we will not experience its respective result of happiness or suffering. Thus , without creating an action, there will never 
                                             
 
129 Geshe Thubten Ngawang (Tibetan Centre, Hamburg) offered the following explanation for this passage: 
Buddha Shakyamuni, apart from accumulating the coll ection of merit necessary for attaining buddhahood, 
also spent some time accumulating fu rther merit which he dedicated to the goal that his followers meet with 
the necessary living conditions. However, according to  the laws of karma, they can only experience the 
corresponding results if they themselv es accumulate a part of the cause. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
328 be the result of happiness or suffering. It is similar to the fact that if a farmer does not sow 
seeds in his field, he will not experience the result of crops, and if a gardener does not plant flower seeds, he will not experience the result o f  f l o w e r s .  S i m i l a r l y ,  i f  w e  h a v e  n o t  c r e a t e d  
virtuous or non-virtuous actions, we will not ex perience the result of happiness or suffering.  
 The Teacher, that is, Buddha Shakyamuni, a ccumulated merit for three countless eons and 
thereby achieved buddhahood. He then gave te achings or turned the wheel of Dharma. We 
fortunate beings can enjoy or utilize the result of his having turned the wheel of Dharma by 
studying his teachings and meditating on them. However, to do this, we too need to have 
created merit in the past since if we did not create merit in the past, we will not meet the 
teachings. Due to having accumulated merit,  we can study the Buddha’s scriptures, think 
about them, and meditate on them. In this w ay we are able to generate the path in our 
continuum: the path of accumulation, path of  preparation, path of seeing, path of 
meditation, and path of no-more-learning. We can also enjoy or train in the higher training in 
morality, higher training in concentration, and higher training in wisdom. We can also enjoy, 
that is, we can develop, the th ree principal aspects of the path  – renunciation or definite 
emergence, the uncontrived conventional mind  of enlightenment or bodhichitta, and the 
correct view of emptiness – in our mind whereb y we can attain buddhahood . All this is due to 
being able to enjoy the Buddha’s teachings du e to having created merit in the past and 
continuing to create merit in the present. By doing this, even when the doctrine of this 
buddha vanishes, we will be able to meet with  the teachings of Buddha Maitreya and achieve 
the final result. This is because Buddha Maitre ya made a promise that those who follow the 
teachings of Buddha Shakyamuni but do not at that time attain higher realizations, will attain 
the state of a foe-destroyer at the time of his doctrine and pass into nirvana. Thus, if we do 
not attain nirvana or enlightenm ent in this lifetime, we should pray to be able to achieve 
enlightenment within sixteen lifetimes. We shou ld make a determination to practice, whereby 
we will be able to achieve this result.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-4 Karma you have created does not dissipate 
Fourth: The virtuous and non-virtuous ac tions that have been done issue forth 
pleasant and unpleasant results. In the Praise to the Particularly Noble  it says:  
 
Brahmins say they can transfer 
Virtues and negativities as though giving and taking them. You said, what is done won’t vanish, What is not will not be met. 
 A virtuous action brings a pleasant result, wher eas a non-virtuous action brings an unpleasant 
result. This is a natural rule. It can also be said  that they respectively bring forth the result of 
happiness and the result of suffering.  
 The Praise to the Particularly Noble  says that while brahmins say that the results of actions 
can be transferred to someone else, the Buddha sa id that if we have cr eated virtuous or non-
virtuous actions they will not go to waste but will bring a result, and that if we have not 
created a particular action we will not meet it s result. Thus, although there are brahmins who 
assert that our actions can be given to someon e else, like giving them our rosary, watch, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
329 clothing, and so forth, this is not correct. We cannot give our happiness or suffering to 
others. If this were possible, the holy beings  would give us happiness and take away our 
suffering. But since we cannot give others our happiness nor take away their suffering, we 
cannot transfer our karma to others. If we have  created karma we will experience its result, 
and if we have not created karma we will not ex perience its result. If we create a negative 
action, we should purify it so that it cannot brin g a result. If we do not, at some point we will 
have to experience its result since it will not go  to waste. While it may not bring a result either 
in this life or in our next life, in some di stant future life the result will eventually be 
experienced.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And from the King of Concentration  [Sutra ]: 
 
Plus you cannot but touch your deeds, 
What others did you will not feel. 
 
And from the Foundation of  [Vinaya ] Scriptures : 
 
Karmas do not go to waste 
Even in hundreds of eons; when 
They find the host [of conditions ] and time, 
They will become effects for beings130. 
 
If we create an action, it is we ourselves who wi ll come into contact or m eet with its result. On 
the other hand, we will not experience the result  of happiness or suffering of actions that have 
been done by others.   E v e n  i f  w e  c r e a t e d  a n  a c t i o n  a  h u n d r e d  e o n s  a g o ,  i t  w i l l  n o t  g o  t o  w a s t e .  W h e n  t h e  conditions and time come together, we will experience its result. In other words, when 
conditions come together and the time is right, a karma created even a hundred eons 
previously will bring its result. However, in order for a result to ripen certain conditions are necessary and the time must be right. In terms of  time, if, for example, we were to sow a seed 
in the ground during the winter wh en it is very cold and the wind  is strong, it will not bring a 
result. On the other hand, if we plant a seed in  the summer and water it and so forth, it will 
bring the result of a sprout. Likewise, although a seed is healthy and not rotten, if we plant it 
in the ground but do not water it, it will not br ing a result. Therefore, just as the conditions 
and the time must be right to bring the result of  a sprout, so too is it similar in the case of 
karma.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B Considering the specific divisions 
                                              
130 Lit. “ lus can rnams ” – “those endowed with bodies” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
330 1 Indicating that there are mainly ten paths of action 
2 Establishing actions and effects 
The second one has two points: indicating  that there are mainly ten paths of 
action and establishing actions and effects. 
 
Ten paths of actions – ten virtuous paths of ac tions and ten non-virtuous paths of actions – 
are presented in the Buddha’s sutras as well as in the commentaries written by Indian pandits. 
The ten non-virtuous pa ths of actions are: 
7. the three created by the body – killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct, 
8. the four created by the speech – lying, divisi ve speech, harsh words, and idle talk, and 
9. the three created by mind – covetousness, malice, and wrong view.  
Similarly, there are ten virtuous paths of ac tions that are the abandonments of killing, 
stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisive speech, harsh words, idle talk, covetousness, 
malice, and wrong view. These ten actions include most of the coarse actions of body, speech, 
and mind.  
 Then in the next section actions and their resu lts are settled, there being four main results.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-1 Indicating that there are mainly ten paths of action  
A Explanation that there are ten in the sutras and treatises 
First: Thus you should first generate cert ainty concerning the ways of actions and 
results through realizing that happiness an d suffering results are certain to have 
their individual causes, that karma increa ses greatly, that you do not meet with 
anything you have not created, and that karma does not dissipate. Now, if you ask 
about what [actions] to adopt and what ones to reject, [it is as follows ]. In general, 
the gates for engaging in good conduct an d faulty conduct are determined to be 
three. Although not all virtues and non-vi rtues of the three doors are included in 
the ten paths of action, the more obviou s or coarser virtues and non-virtues are 
[included in them ]. The Bhagavan, summing up the essential points, stated that 
those that are the great foundation of mi sdeeds are the ten black paths of action. 
Having seen that, when they are given up , the most significant points are also 
included in ten, he taught them to be  the ten white paths of actions {101}.  
 
The two results are happiness and suffering, the two causes are virtue and non-virtue. Thus, 
the result of a karma is definite, karma increase s, if we have not created a karma we will not 
experience its result, and if we have created a karma it will not go to waste. Understanding 
how actions and results function, we should ne xt examine which actions are to be abandoned 
and which actions are to be adopted.   There are three doors for engaging in good conduct and faulty conduct – the door of the 
body, the door of the speech, and the door of the mind. By means of these three doors, we 
engage in all the different kinds of actions. In  other words, all virtuous actions and all non-
virtuous actions are created by our body, speech,  and mind. Are all these actions included in 
the either the ten non-virtuous paths of action or the ten virtuous path s of action? Although 
they are not, most of them, especially the coarser ones, are included in them. Buddha 
Shakyamuni set out ten black paths of action, and their opposites or abandonments, the ten 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
331 white paths of action. By abando ning the ten black paths of ac tion, we create the ten white 
paths of action.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In the Treasury  it says:  
 
Through summarizing the most obvious among them, 
The virtuous and non-virtuous  Were stated as ten paths of action. 
 
Also, in the Scripture on Discernment  it says:  
 
Guarding one’s speech and completely restraining one’s mind, 
Refraining from non-virtuous deeds with the body, 
Once you have purified the three paths of action, You will attain the path that was taught by the seers. 
 
The Treasury of Manifest Dharma  says that there are ten virtuous  and ten non-virtuous paths of 
actions: 
 
The non-virtues of the body and so forth,  
Are asserted to be the three faulty conducts.  
Although covetousness and so forth are not actions,  They are the three types of faul ty conduct of mind.  [4.65] 
 Their opposites are good conduct. Through condensing the mo st obvious among them,  
The paths of actions, the virtuous and  Non-virtuous in kind, were taught to be ten.   [4.66] 
 We need to guard or protect our speech by no t saying much. In other words, we should 
control our mouth as otherwise we tend to say things that make others unhappy, cause them 
pain, or disturb them. Therefore,  by controlling our mind we n eed to protect our speech. We 
also need to strongly restrain our mind. In addition, we need to stop creating non-virtuous actions of body by controlling our mind. Whenever we beat others or say bad words to them, these actions originate from our mind. Therefore,  we need to make a strong promise to not 
speak bad words, to not lie, and so forth and to not kill and so forth. By controlling our 
mind, we will be able to engage in the ten wh ite paths of actions. Having purified the three 
paths of actions of the three doors,  we will attain the path taught by seers or sages, that is, by 
holy beings.   We should try to listen to Dharma teaching s and read Dharma books, to keep our mind 
quiet, and to generate the motivation to not enga ge in non-virtuous actions of body by killing, 
stealing, and sexual misconduct and to not engage  in non-virtuous actions of speech by lying, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
332 using divisive speech, saying harsh words, and engaging in idle talk or gossip. By making this 
promise and not engaging in non-virtuous action s, we can purify our negativities of body, 
speech, and mind and achieve an actual path.  
 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
  
STUDENT : When we die, how does the I continue such that in the next life it can become the 
experiencer of our past actions? Since it seems that the person of the next life can be very 
different, perhaps the future person is not even I.  
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : In this life we can be a man and in the next life a woman! If we do not 
experience the result of a particular karma in this  life, we can experience it in our next life or 
in any other of our future lives. Although it is  not the same person who experiences the result 
of the past action, it is the same  continuum. There are said to be  four types of “I”: the I that 
comes from the previous life to this life, the I of  this life, the I of the next life, and the I that 
continues throughout all these lives. This latter I is the I on which all the karmic imprints of 
this and previous lives has been deposited and th at travels to future lives. Presently we are 
studying the Dharma, making offerings, doing pr ostrations, making mandala offerings, and so 
forth, the results of which we may experience in this life with this body, or in our next life with another body, or in a more distant future li fe with another body. In either case, there is 
an I that continues and that experiences the result.   
STUDENT : What is the difference between merit an d virtue? When a cat, for example, is 
carried around a stupa, although it probably receives some merit does it also create virtue even 
though it has no intention to go around the stupa? 
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : I think that merit and virtue are the same. The cat does not have any 
motivation or thought to go around the stupa,  but the human being who carries it around the 
stupa will create both merit and virtue through wi shing to benefit the cat.  In short, virtue is 
merit. This is my opinion! 
 
STUDENT :  W h e n  i s  i t  p r o p e r  t o  t a k e  d o w n  f o o d  o f f e r i n g s  f r o m  t h e  a l t a r  a n d  w i t h  w h a t  
attitude should they be taken down so that it does not become stealing? 
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : Taking down food offerings from one’s altar is not stealing. Having 
offered food on the altar, we can take it away  even after one day. We  should think that the 
holy beings have taken the offerings and ble ssed them, and then we can then ask them to 
return them to us. Likewise, if it is our job to take care of a temple, clean it, and make 
offerings on the altar, when we remove the o fferings it is not stealing. However, we can 
mentally ask the holy beings to return the offerings to us after having blessed them.  
 
STUDENT : We have some questions about the pure lands:  
• What does it mean that a place like Akanisht a is located in the fourth concentration?  
• Is it a place in cyclic existence? 
• Is it a true suffering?  
• Is it a place in samsara for a being in samsara but a place in nirvana for a being who has 
attained nirvana?  
• Can ordinary beings see it? 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 14-18 March 2005 (07) 
333 GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : If, for example, a being of nirvana were present in this assembly hall, 
he would see it as a pure land, whereas for us beings who are not of ni rvana it is a place of 
suffering. There are five pure lands included in  the fourth concentration. The word “pure” 
indicates that only arya beings can take rebirt h there, that is, ordinary beings do not take 
rebirth there. Therefore, Akanishta or Not Low is not a place of cyclic existence or samsara, so 
perhaps it can be considered to be a place of ni rvana. Previously I said that Akanishta is like 
the Vatican City which is located inside Rome; Vatican City being like a pure land and Rome 
being a city of suffering where there are many demonstrations, a lot of fighting, cheating, and 
so forth.  
 
STUDENT : How does a buddha know all phenomena of the three times directly , if all 
phenomena are imputed by the minds of sentient beings?  
• If he knows them by knowing the minds of sentient beings , he would not know them directly. 
• If he knows them by directly perceiving the object , does that mean he sees the water, pus, and 
nectar which are imputed by a human, a hungry  ghost, and a god at the same time on the 
same basis? 
• How does he see future phenomena , which are not even imputed by anyone yet?  
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : A buddha, without doubt, sees all phenomena directly. He can also see 
others’ minds directly, what they are thinking an d so forth. It is said that a human being who 
has created virtuous actions, a god who has crea ted virtuous actions, and a hungry ghost who 
has created non-virtuous actions, will see a cup of water differently. Why is this? If a hungry 
ghost takes up the cup, by the force of his karm a the liquid will transform into pus. This is 
not a mere imputation but is due to the hungry  ghost’s karma. If a go d takes it up, by the 
force of his karma the liquid will transform into  nectar, since he always drinks nectar. If a 
human being takes it up, it will remain water. Th is is all due to karma; it is not due to a god 
imputing nectar, a hungry ghost imputing pus,  and a human being imputing water. Karma is 
very strange. It is even possible that a woman can transform into a man and vice versa. While 
such events happened in the past, I don’t kn ow whether they still happen spontaneously. 
Perhaps this only happens these days by way of an operation!  
 
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
334 Monday afternoon, 4 April 2005 
 (Note: There were no teaching s from 19 March to 3 April du e to the BP retreat and exam 
followed by the Easter holidays.) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 101) says:  
B Explanation of cherishing the adoption and abandonment of the ten [paths of action]  
Therefore, the meaning of the praise to the ethical discipline of abandoning the 
ten non-virtuous [paths of action] from the Sutra on the Ten Grounds  is summarized 
in Entry to the Middle Way :  
 
For certain goodness and the high status 
Of ordinary beings, those born from [the Buddha’s ] speech,131 
Of those with the definite nature of self-enlightenment132, 
The Jinas’ children133 – the cause is not other than discipline. 
 
We need to take care of and cherish the practi ce of the morality of abandoning the ten non-
virtuous paths of actions and practice the ten virtuous paths of actions. Ordinary beings, 
those born from Buddha’s speech, that is, the hearers, those who achieve self-enlightenment, 
that is, the solitary realizers, and the children  of the Conquerors attain definite goodness and 
high status based on the cause that is morali ty. Therefore, we too need to practice the 
morality of abandoning the ten non-virtuous pa ths of actions. In ot her words, whether we 
wish to attain the small enlightenment of th e hearers, the middling enlightenment of the 
solitary realizers, or the great enlightenment of  the buddhas we must do so on the basis of 
keeping morality. Therefore, morality is very impo rtant. In short, we need to practice or adopt 
the ten virtuous paths of actions and abando n or discard the ten non-virtuous paths of 
actions. In our daily life we need to try to keep  our mind more disciplined, that is, to generate 
the mind of abandonment that wishes to abandon all non-virtuous actions. We need to 
abandon the three non-virtuous paths of actions of the body – killing, stealing, and sexual 
misconduct, and the four of speech – lying, di visive speech, harsh words, and idle talk. We 
also need to abandon the three non-virtuous paths of actions of mind. Thus, we need to 
abandon the covetousness that is attached to others’ excellences and wishes to possess them. 
We also need to abandon malice or harmful intent that wishes to harm others. We ordinary beings usually cherish our friends and relative s but wish to harm and create problems for 
those whom we consider to be our enemies and rejoice when they experience difficulties. We 
need to abandon this kind of attitude. We also need to abandon wrong views, although in general we do not have them. In conclusion, we must strive to abandon the ten non-virtues as 
much as possible.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
                                             
 
131 Synonym for “shravaka”, the “hea rers” of [Buddha’s teachings]  
132 Synonym for pratyekabuddha – solitary realizer 
133 Synonym for bodhisattva 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
335 C Giving up hypocrisy 
That being so, it would be quite disgrace ful if someone who does not guard even a 
bit of ethical discipline through relying on  the mind of restraint again and again, 
were to say: “As for me, I am a Mahayanist.” In the Kshitigarbha Sutra  it says:  
 
By means of these ten virtuous paths [of actions] you become a buddha. 
On the other hand, if one who does not guard even a single virtuous 
path of action throughout his life and yet says: “I am a Mahayanist. I 
seek unsurpassed, perfectly complete  enlightenment,” that person is a 
thorough hypocrite and a great liar, deceiving the world in front of all the bhagavans and propounding nihilism . At the time of death, he will 
be deluded and go to the wrongly fallen. 
 “Wrongly fallen” should be understood as a synonym for the bad migrations in 
their entirety. 
 We need to give up hypocrisy. Otherwise, if we do not even try to abandon the seven 
abandonments, the three of body and four of sp eech, by thinking not to commit them again 
and generating the wish to keep morality, yet say “I am a Mahayanist,” this would be 
hypocritical. There are even people who do ne gative actions claiming to do them for the 
benefit of others! They think that  i t  i s  f i n e  t o  e v e n  k i l l  s o m e o n e  i f  i t  i s  f o r  t h e  b e n e f i t  o f  
others! However, this is not right and it woul d be better for them to say that they are not 
religious practitioners but that they are, for example, Communists and therefore against 
religion. In short, making such cl aim is utterly mistaken since it will cause others to engage in 
criticizing the Mahayana by saying that it is no t a teaching of the Buddha. In fact, there are 
people who say that the Buddha only taught Hi nayana and not Mahayana and that tantra is 
not part of Buddhism but comes from Hinduism.  
 The Kshitigarbha Sutra says that if we practice the ten virtuous paths of actions we will 
become a buddha in the future. On the other hand, if we do not even guard a single virtuous 
action while we are alive yet boastfully say, “I  am a Mahayanist. I seek unsurpassed, perfectly 
complete enlightenment,” we will be a hypocrite and a great liar. For example, if we were to 
receive an empowerment and claim to be a Mahayan ist but still go on creating non-virtue we 
would be a liar and would deceive the Buddha an d the entire world. Such behavior is very 
ignorant or deluded and will caus e us to take rebirth in the lower realms. At the time of death 
we will not be able to do anything about to pr event this and will fall into the bad migrations. 
Therefore, we should avoid such lies and practice as much as we can in our daily life. If, on 
the other hand, we tell such lies we will definitely fall into the lower realms. Monks and nuns who have received different levels of vows need to safeguard their vows, while everyone needs to try to abide by the natural rule of abandoning  the ten non-virtuous paths of actions, or at 
least one, two, three, and so forth of them. To  do this, we need to understand the different 
types of killing and so forth and then abandon them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2 Determination of actions and their effects 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
336 A Negative actions and their effects 
B Positive actions and their effects 
C Indication of other divisions of actions 
The second one – determination of actions and their effects – has three points: {102} 
negative actions and their effects, positive  actions and their effects, and indication 
of other divisions of actions. 
 
Black or negative actions are non-virtuous acti ons. They are called “bla ck” because they bring 
the bad result of suffering and difficulties. White or positive actions are virtuous actions. They 
are called “white” because they bring the good  result of happiness. There are also other 
divisions of actions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A Negative actions and their effects 
1 The actual negative paths of action 
2 Differences in weight 
3 Indication of their effects 
The first one has three points: the actual negative paths of ac tion, differences in 
weight, and indication of their effects. 
 
Black actions and their results are discussed unde r three points: actual black paths of actions, 
the differences in lightness and heaviness, and their results.   Black actions consist in the ten non-virtuous paths of actions: 
1. the three of body – killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct, 
2. the four of speech – lying, divisive sp eech, harsh words, and idle talk, and 
3. the three of mind – covetousness, malice, and wrong views.  
 White actions are their respective abandonments: 1. the abandonment of killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct, 
2. the abandonment of lying, divisive speech, harsh words, and idle talk, and 
3. the abandonment of covetousness, malice, and wrong views. 
In the Treasury of Manifest Dharma  and in the Hundred Actions Sutra  many other divisions of 
actions are set forth.   With respect to each non-virt uous path of action, there are those that are lighter and those 
that are heavier. For example, with respect to killing, the action of killing one’s father or 
mother is very heavy while that of killing an insect, such as an ant,  is much lighter. The 
heaviness of the action depends on the complete ness of the four branches – basis, attitude, 
performance, and completion.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1 The actual negative paths of action 
A The actual paths of action 
B Distinction between action and path 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A The actual paths of action 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
337 1 Killing 
2 Stealing 
3 Sexual misconduct 
4 Lying 
5 Divisive speech 
6 Harmful speech 
7 Meaningless speech 
8 Covetousness 
9 Harmful intent 
10 Wrong views 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1 Killing 
A Basis134
 
B Attitude 
C Performance135
 
D Completion 
 
These are the four branches of killing.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1A Basis 
As for the first one, the basis of killing is another sentient being. 
 
The basis of killing is a being with mind (a sent ient being) who is other than oneself. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1B Attitude 
1 Discrimination 
The attitude has three points, the first of  which is discrimination, which [again] 
has four points:  
1. With regard to the basis, a sentient bein g, the discrimination of it as such,  
2. the discrimination of it is as not a sentient being, 
3. the discrimination of what is not a sentie nt being as not a sentient being, and  
4. the discrimination of it as a sentient being. 
The first and third discriminations are unmistaken, while the second and fourth 
are mistaken. That is, if you have the motivation, for instance, thinking to kill 
Devadatta alone but, when it comes to the performance, you mistakenly kill 
Yajnadatta there is no negativity to do with the actual basis since, for that, an 
unmistaken discrimination is necessary . However, if, at the time of the 
performance, you have the general motivation  thinking to kill whoever is at hand, 
an unmistaken discrimination is not nece ssary. You should be aware of this rule 
also with regard to the remaining nine as appropriate.  
 
The first division of th e attitude or thought ( bsam pa ) is discrimination. With respect to the 
basis that is a sentient being, one can discriminate  it as a sentient being or discriminate it as 
not a sentient being. With respect to a basis that  is not a sentient being, one can discriminate 
                                              
134 In this context the term “basis” ( gzhi) refers to the object of the action. 
135 JN: sbyor ba , also translated as “preparation” or “execution” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
338 it as not a sentient being or as a sentient being.  To discriminate what is not a sentient being as 
a sentient being is mistaken, for example, to disc riminate a scarecrow in a field that appears to 
be a human being as a sentient being or when  walking in the forest to imagine hearing 
footsteps behind one and to discriminate the pres ence of a sentient being although no one is 
there.  
 This implies that if we wanted to kill Sa dam Hussein, for example, and tried to kill him 
but instead killed someone else, it would not be a complete non-virtuous path of action. This 
is because in order to complete the action, we n eed to correctly discriminate and then actually 
kill the person we intended to kill. On the ot her hand, if we want to kill Devadatta but are 
also happy to kill anyone at all and then actual ly kill someone else, we would create an actual 
non-virtuous path of action of killing. Likewise, if a hunter wants to kill a specific animal but then kills whatever moves nearby, such as a bi rd or rabbit, he commits an actual path of 
action of killing.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Mental affliction 
The mental affliction is any of the three poisons.  
 
The mental affliction behind the action of ki lling can be any of the three mental poisons. 
Thus, we can kill out of attachment, for exampl e, to the skin, bones, and so forth of an 
animal, we can kill out of anger, and we can kill out of ignorance. In this way, any of the three 
mental poisons can induce the action of killing.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Motivation 
The motivation consists in the wish to kill. 
 
The motivation is the wish to kill that thinks “I want to kill…”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1C Performance 
1 The performer 
It is the same whether you yourself do  the performance or  whether you cause 
someone else to do it.  
 
In terms of the performance or preparation of killing, there is no difference whether we do 
the performance ourselves our make someone else do it. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The entity of the performance 
The entity of the performance is that it can be done by means of either a weapon, 
poison, or knowledge-mantra.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
339 The performance can involve kill ing with a weapon, poison, knowledge-mantra (black magic), 
and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1D Completion 
The completion consists in the death [of the other being] due to the condition of 
the performance, at that ti me or at another time but before you yourself die.  
 
The completion or conclusion is that the other bein g dies, that is, his or her life is cut, before 
we ourselves die. Thus, if we shoot someone wi th the intention to kill but that person shoots 
and injures us due to which we die first, all fo ur branches will not be complete because we 
d i e d  b e f o r e  o u r  v i c t i m .  I n  t h i s  w a y ,  w e  w i l l  n o t achieve an actual path  of action of killing 
because for this to happen the completion is nece ssary, that is, the other being must die first.  
 In short, all four branches are necessary in or der for the action of killing to be complete – 
the basis, attitude, performance, and completion. Whether we kill a being ourselves or cause 
others to kill, if all four branches are present, we achieve an actual path of action of killing. 
On the other hand, if one or more branches is  missing, while we will not achieve the actual 
path of action of killing, we still create some negativity and will experience its result. However, 
if we do purification by means of relying on the four opponent powers, we will not need to 
experience its result. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2 Stealing 
A Basis 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2A Basis 
The basis of stealing is any substance that  is thoroughly held by someone else.  
 
A complete action of stealing also consists  of the four branches of basis, attitude, 
performance, and completion. The basis of steali ng is anything that belongs to someone else. 
Therefore, if we take anything that belong s to others without permission, for example, 
clothing, a watch, a car, an anim al, and so forth, it is stealing. In addition, if we take that 
which is prohibited by law and punishable by law,  we engage in stealing. Thus, even if we just 
take a handful of rice but do so day after day, wh en it comes to have a certain value it will be 
stealing. Likewise, if we steal one cent today, th en take another cent the next day, and so on, 
when the total comes to have a certain value it will be considered stealing.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2B Attitude 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
340 As for the attitude, among the three, the discrimination and mental affliction are 
as above136.  
{103} The motivation consists in the wi sh to take something away from another 
[person] without it having been given. 
 
There are four discriminations as before:  1. discriminating that which is another’s possession as being another’s possession, 
2. discriminating that which is another’s po ssession as not being another’s possession, 
3. discriminating that which is not another’s possession as being another’s possession, and 
4. discriminating that which is not another’s po ssession as not being another’s possession, 
 The discrimination must be correct: that is the discrimination of another’s possession as 
another’s possession. The affliction can be the a ttachment that wants to have something. It 
can also be anger, for example, the wish to ha rm someone by taking his belongings, including 
his wife, child, horse, car, and so forth. So metimes when we are not able to harm someone 
directly, we steal something from him in order to  cause harm indirectly. We can also steal out 
of ignorance, this happens when  we steal without intending to steal. The motivation is the 
wish to separate an owner from his possessions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2C Performance 
1 The performer 
As regards the performance, the perfor mer is as [was explained] above.  
 
We can do the action of stealing ourselves or ma ke someone else do it by ordering him or her 
to steal. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The entity of the performance 
As for the entity of the performance, it is the same whether you take something by 
force or steal it sneakily. In addition, being deceitful with respect to a debt or a 
trust and using other fraudulent methods also constitutes stealing. Also whether it 
is done for one’s own or someone else’s purpose or to harm someone etc., it is 
stealing. 
 
The entity of the performa nce can be either to take something by force or to take it by stealth 
or ambush. For example, there are those who ro b others by holding a gun to their heads and 
threatening, “If you do not give me your belong ings, I will kill you,” whereas others steal by 
stealth, for example, robbers who enter a house at night. Then there are those who steal by 
deceit saying, for example, “You have a very nice  watch. Can I see it?” The thief then puts it 
                                              
136 That is, as regards the discrimination , the basis must be correctly discriminated. As regards the mental 
affliction, one or several of the three poisons may be pres ent. This is how the following references (“as above”) 
should also be understood. (Oral explanation by Geshe Soepa.) 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
341 on his arm and runs off with it. There are also pickpockets who distract someone by bumping 
into him or her and then taking off with his or  her wallet or purse. This often happens in 
Connaught Place in Delhi as well as  here in Italy. Once when I was taking the train to Venice, 
I saw a transvestite run off with someone’s purse.  There are many ways to steal, for example, 
we can ask someone to borrow money but then  not return it. It can also happen that 
someone asks us to take care of his things but when he returns we do not want to give them 
back! There are different ways of cheating others. However, if we take things in any of these 
ways, we steal. Thus, there are different ways of stealing, for example, sometimes banks fail 
and do not return people’s money, and someti mes companies go bankrupt and do not return 
the investors’ money.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2D Completion 
The completion consists in the arisal of  the thought that one has obtained it. 
However, if you have caused someone else to rob or steal, it is en ough [for t hat  
thought] to arise in him. This is like wh en someone kills someone else due to one’s 
order and, even without one’s knowledge, when the latter dies, the negativity of 
the actual [path of action ] befalls the one who gave the order to kill.  
 
When we think “Now it is mine,” this completes the path of action of stealing. Also if we 
order someone else to steal something, when th e thief obtains the object and thinks “Now it 
is mine,” simultaneously we too achieve a comple te action of stealing even though we do not 
think “Now it is mine.” Similarly, if we order someone else to kill, when that person kills the victim, we simultaneously achiev e a complete action of killing even though we do not know 
that the victim has died.   Tuesday morning, 5 April 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 103) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3 Sexual misconduct 
A Basis 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3A Basis 
1 Persons you should not have intercourse with  
Among the four bases of sexual misconduct , the first is those you should not have 
intercourse with: your mother etc.137, women under the care of their mothers 
etc.138, all men139, eunuchs, and ordained women.  
                                              
137 i.e., your mother or other close relatives 
138 In the corresponding passage of his Great Treatise of the Stages of the Path , Je Tsongkhapa also mentions 
women under the care of their families in general, as well as the wives of other men. 
139 Following common practice at the time, the text ad dresses male readers. Contemporary Tibetan scholars 
point out that to women, the opposites apply.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
342  
There are four bases in relation to sexual  misconduct: an inappropriate partner, an 
inappropriate bodily part, an inappropriate place, and an inappropriate time. 
 The first, an inappropriate partner, is, for ex ample, for a man to have intercourse with his 
mother, sister, or daughter, with women who ar e still under the care of their mothers, and 
with men, eunuchs, and ordained women. Fo r women, an inappropriate partner would be 
her father, brother, or son, monks, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Inappropriate body parts 
Inappropriate body parts are those other th an the entrance to the womb, such as 
the mouth.  
 
An inappropriate body part is anything other than the vagina, such as the mouth, anus, and 
so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Inappropriate places 
Inappropriate places are the vicinity of gu rus, places with stupas, and the like.  
 
An inappropriate place is near one’s guru, near st upas, in temples, in front of statues, and so 
forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 Inappropriate times 
Inappropriate times are pregnancy, ab iding in the one-day vows, etc.  
 
An inappropriate time is to have intercourse with a pregnant woman even if she is one’s wife, 
and when one has taken the one-day lay vows or the eight mahayana precepts.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3B  Attitude 
1 Three positions of scholars on discrimination 
Among the three [aspects] of attitude , with respect to discrimination: 
1. the first [position] is that the Compendium states  that the discrimination of 
that as that must be unmistaken, 
2. the second [position] is that the Vinaya states that with regard to the defeat of 
impure conduct, it is the same whether the discrimination is mistaken or non-
mistaken, 
3. the third [position] is that the Commentary on the Treasury explains that if 
you approach someone else’s wife140 discriminating her to be yours, this will not 
                                              
140 chung ma  – wife, mate, consort, partner 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
343 constitute the path of action [under disc ussion], and that there are two ways in 
which getting involved with someone’s wi fe through discriminating her to be 
the wife of someone else may or m ay not [constitute such a path].  
 
The attitude or thought consists, as usual, of : the discrimination, affliction, and motivation. 
The Compendium  s a y s  t h a t  i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  s e x u a l  m i s c o n d u c t  i t  i s  n o t  n e c e s s a r y  t h a t  t h e  
discrimination be unmistaken with respect to one’s partner, the body part, and so forth. 
However, the Vinaya says that in the case of impure conduct a correct discrimination is not 
necessary, whereby if a monk has sexual inte rcourse with someone he breaks a root vow 
regardless of whether or not he has correctly identified the object. The Commentary on the  
Treasury of Manifest Dharma  s a y s  t h a t  h a v i n g  s e x u a l  i n t e r c ourse with a friend’s wife, for 
example, while discriminating her to be someon e else’s wife, may or may not constitute the 
path of action of sexual misconduct.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Mental affliction 
{104} The mental affliction can be any of the three poisons.  
 
The affliction can be attachment, hatred, or ignorance.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Motivation 
The motivation is the wish for interc ourse by means of impure conduct.  
 
The motivation is the wish to have sexual intercourse.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3C Performance 
The performance consists in ende avoring for the sake of that. 
 
The performance is to strive or make efforts to engage in sexual intercourse, for example, by 
embracing someone and so forth, but to not ye t actually engage in sexual intercourse.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3D Completion 
The completion consists in the coming  together of the two by the two.  
 
The completion is the union of the two organs, for example, the union of the male organ and 
an anus, the union of the male or gan and a mouth, and so forth.  
 There is much more detail in the Vinaya Su tra about sexual misconduct. For example, it 
says that even if a monk does not engage in un ion with one of the organs (a vagina, anus, or 
mouth), he commits a remainder just by ejaculating.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
344 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4 Lying 
A Basis 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
 
The action of lying also consists  in the four branches: basis, a ttitude or thought, performance 
or execution, and the completion or conclusion.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4A Basis 
1 Basis of expression 
Among the two bases of lying, the basis of expression is the fo ur – that which one 
has seen, heard, distinguished, or become fully aware of – as well as their four 
opposites.  
 
In the case of lying, the basis is that having se en something, to say that one has not seen it or 
has seen something else; having heard somethin g, to say that one has not heard it or has 
heard something else; having distinguished someth ing, to say that one has not distinguished it 
or has distinguished something else; and having fully understood something, to say that one 
has not fully understood it or has fully underst ood something else. For example, it would be a 
lie if someone were to ask us whether we saw a ma n and, in spite of having seen him, we were 
to say “I saw a dog.” In general, if we say that  we did not see what we have seen, did not hear 
what we have heard, and so forth, it is a lie. However, in the case of a hunter who is chasing a boar, if having seen the boar we were to say to him “I saw a man,” it would only be a little lie. 
 In short, to lie is also to say “I saw” when we did not see; to say “I heard” when we have 
not heard; to say “I distinguished” when we ha ve not distinguished; and to say “I understand” 
when we have not understood. These are the four possible bases of expression.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Object that  comprehends 
The object that comprehends is the othe r person who understands the meaning.  
 
In order for it to be a lie, it is necessary for the other person to understand the meaning. If he 
does not, for example, if someone tells a lie in  Tibetan to an Italian who does not understand 
Tibetan, it does not become a lie.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4B Attitude 
Among the three [aspects associated with ] the attitude, the discrimination consists 
in making something that one has seen into something that one has not been 
seen, etc. The mental affliction is any of the three poisons. The motivation consists 
in the wish to say something thro ugh changing the discrimination. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
345  
The discrimination consists in changing the disc rimination of the seen to the not seen and so 
forth. The affliction is any of the three poison s. The motivation is th e wish to change the 
discrimination of the other person regarding what is true even if this is not done directly with 
words.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C Performance 
1 The actual performance 
2 Clearing up doubts 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C1 The actual performance 
The performance consists in indicating some thing by saying it, by making sure not 
to say anything, or through body language. 
 
The performance can be done by saying someth ing, by not saying something, or by one’s 
expression or a gesture of the body such as a no d or shake of the head, a raising of the hands, 
and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C2 Clearing up doubts 
A Clearing up the doubt that it depends on the purpose 
[B Three approaches concerning the distinction between the path of action being complete or not if you 
enjoin someone else to lie]  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C2A Clearing up the doubt that it depends on the purpose 
Moreover, [in the scriptures] it says that it  is the same whether you say it for your 
own or someone else’s purposes. 
 
There is no difference whether we li e for our own or others’ purpose.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C2B Three approaches concerning the distinction between the actual path of action 
being incomplete if you enjoin someone else to do it 
1 The approach of the Treatise on the Grounds  
Here it is stated that with respect to ly ing, divisive speech, and harsh words, even 
through you enjoin [someone else to do them], these three will come about.  
 
According to the Vinaya we must do actions of  speech ourselves in order for them to be 
complete, whereas they are not complete if we order others to do them. However, according 
to the Treatise on the Grounds by Asanga one achieves a complete  action even when one orders 
or makes others engage in lying, divisive speech, and harsh words.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
346 2 Vasubandhu’s approach 
In the Treasury , the root text and its commentary it is explained that all four 
associated with speech become paths of ac tion through enjoining [someone else to 
perform them].  
 
According to Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Manifest Dharma  and its commentary all four actions 
of speech – lying, divisive speech, harsh words,  and idle talk – become complete paths of 
action when one orders others to do them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The approach of the Vinaya is to join them to the downfalls  
In the Vinaya it is stated that in or der to produce a complete downfall, you 
yourself must speak.  
 
T h e  V i n a y a  s a y s  t h a t  i n  o r d e r  t o  i n c u r  a  c o m p l e t e  d o w n f a l l  o f  l y i n g  a n d  s o  f o r t h ,  i t  i s  
necessary to express the words oneself. Theref ore, this does not happen when one orders 
others to lie and so forth. Thus, there are different assertions in different texts.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4D Completion 
1 The actual completion 
The completion is that it is understood by the other person. 
 
The completion is that the other pers on understands what one has said.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Clearing up doubts 
The Commentary on the Treasury  explains that, if it is not understood, it becomes 
merely idle talk. This is also the same  for divisive speech and harsh words.  
 
The Commentary on the  Treasury  says that if one lies to some one but the other person does not 
understand what one has said, it becomes merely idle talk. It is the same for divisive speech 
and harsh words. Divisive speech is, for example, to say to one person “He said this,” and to 
another person “She said that,” motivated by the wish to create di sharmony between these 
two people. However, if we speak in order to divide people but the other person does not 
understand the meaning of what we  said, then it does not become an actual path of action of 
divisive speech. The same is true of harsh words.  Similarly, if we engage in divisive speech or 
harsh words with respect to a big rock or in an empty room, it does not become an actual 
path of action of divisive speech or harsh words.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-5 Divisive speech 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
347 A Basis 
The basis of divisive speech are sentient beings who are in agreement and those 
who are in disagreement with each other.  
 
The basis of divisive speech can be people who are in harmony or agreement, such a wife and 
husband. With respect to them, one says to the husband “Your wi fe did this” and then to the 
wife “Your husband did this,” in order to crea te disharmony between them. In this case one 
creates disharmony where initially there was ha rmony. However, the ba sis of divisive speech 
can also be those who are already in disharmony if one seeks to create further disharmony by 
saying to them “He or she did this and that.”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Attitude 
Among the three [aspects associated with ] the attitude, the discrimination and 
affliction are as above. {105} The motivation  consists in the wish to divide sentient 
beings in agreement and the wish that th ose in disagreement not to be reconciled. 
 
The discrimination is as above. The affliction can be either a ttachment, hatred, or ignorance. 
The motivation is the wish to divide those in  harmony or agreement or the wish that those 
already in disharmony not be reconciled. For ex ample, one can strive to create a division 
between a husband and wife who are in harmony or to create a further division between a 
husband and wife who are already in disharmony. Likewise, one can do the same between a mother and her daughter or a father and his son,  saying, for example, “You have this problem 
because your mother did not take care of you. She did not love you enough,” and so forth, or 
“You have this problem because your father  did not treat you well” and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Performance 
The performance consists in expressing either pleasant or unpleasant subject 
matter with either true or untrue word s and to say them for either one’s own 
others’ purpose.  
 
The performance is to speak either pleasantly or  unpleasantly, and either  truly or falsely, for 
one’s own or others’ purpose. For example, if  a man who has fallen in love with someone 
else’s wife, in order to obtain her, says to he r husband “Your wife no longer believes in you. 
She wants to leave you,” and so forth, he enga ges in divisive speech for his own purpose – to 
create a separation between husband and wife in order to obtain the wife for himself. Likewise, it is possible to create a division for others’ purpose.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D Completion 
The completion consists in the divisi ve words that were expressed being 
understood.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
348 The completion is that the other people unders tand the meaning of the divisive speech. Thus, 
in order to complete the action it is not nece ssary that an actual division occurs. When all 
four branches are complete, one achieves a comp lete path of action of divisive speech.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-6 Harsh words 
A Basis 
The basis of harsh words is a sentient bein g who has become the basis for the arisal 
of a hostile attitude.  
 
Harsh words come from malice, the wish to ha rm someone. In other words, out of malice, 
one says something in order to hurt someone else. The basis of harsh words is a sentient 
being, specifically a human bein g who can understand one’s words that one does not like. On 
the other hand, an insect, for example, would not understand our words.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Attitude 
 [Among the three aspects associated wi th] the attitude, the discrimination and 
affliction are as above. The motivation is  the wish to speak with harsh speech.  
 
The discrimination can be either mistaken or  unmistaken. The affliction can be either 
attachment, hatred, or ignorance.  The motivation is the wish to speak harsh words that can 
hurt others’ minds.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Performance  
The performance consists in speaking unplea santly by means of either the truth or 
untruth about [the person’s] faults of extraction, body, ethical discipline, or 
behavior.  
 
The performance is to speak unpleasantly eith er truthfully or not about the faults of 
someone’s lineage or extraction, body, morality , or behavior. For example, one can say that 
someone’s lineage is bad, that his or her body is  ugly, that his or her morality is not good, or 
that his or her behavior is not correct. For ex ample, harsh words can be  to say something to 
someone who comes from the lower caste of cleane rs, washers, and so forth that hurts his or 
her mind.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D Completion 
The completion consists in the one to  whom it was said understanding the 
meaning.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
349 The completion is that the other person unders tands the meaning of on e’s words. If all four 
branches are complete, one achieves a complete path of action of ha rsh words. Instead of 
engaging in harsh words, we shou ld always speak nicely to others. If we do this, saying “You 
are very nice. Your body is very beautiful,” an d so forth, their minds will be happy. On the 
other hand, if we say to someone “You are very bad. You are very ugly. You are very hard and 
unkind,” they will feel pain in their mind and be disturbed.   
STUDENT : Is writing harsh words also included in harsh words of speech?  
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : I think that harsh words refers to actual speech, not to writing. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-7 Idle talk 
A Basis 
The basis of idle talk is a meaningless topic.  
 
Idle talk is to blah-blah-blah about nothing in particular. However, if motivated by attachment 
to wealth or fame, we recite the Sutra of Golden Light  or a sadhana of Yamantaka, 
Guhyasamaja, Chakrasamvara, Vajrayogini, and so  forth, it too becomes idle talk. This is 
because the Treasury of Manifest Dharma  says that if we recite a Dharma text motivated by 
attachment to worldly things it becomes idle talk.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Attitude 
Among the three [aspects associated with] the attitude, although with regard to 
discrimination, nothing has been stated othe r than “It is the discrimination of that 
as that,” here it is to talk having disc riminated the very topic that one wishes to 
express as that, because for this there is no need for someone’s understanding. The 
mental affliction is any of the poisons.  The motivation is the wish to talk 
disconnectedly and randomly.  
 
The discrimination is to discrimi nate that which is meaningless as  meaningless. In the case of 
idle talk, there is no need fo r someone to understand one, it  is enough to just talk. The 
affliction can be either attachment, hatred, or ignorance. The motivation  is the wish to talk 
unrelatedly and randomly.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Performance 
The performance consists in sett ing about uttering idle talk. 
 
The performance is to speak blah-blah-blah. Fo r example, we can sigh to ourselves, “What 
should I do? I am so sad…” and so forth,  without actually talking to someone.  
 
Tuesday afternoon, 5 April 2005  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
350 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D Completion 
The completion is to finish uttering the idle talk.  
 
The completion is to finish saying that which is meaningless. There is no need for someone 
else to have listened or underst ood, it is enough for oneself to ta lk nonsense. This is similar to 
someone talking in their sleep! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-8 Covetousness 
A Basis 
The basis of covetousness is a possession or provision of someone else.  
 
The basis of covetousness is something – wealth or property – that belongs to someone else. 
With respect to that which belongs to someone else, one thinks “I too want to have such 
clothes” and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Attitude 
Among the three [aspects associated with] the attitude, the discrimination consists 
in the discrimination of that basis as that. The affliction is any of the three 
poisons. The motivation is the wish to make it one’s own.  
 
The attitude or thought consists of the three: 1. discrimination – the discrimination of th e basis as that basis, for example, the 
discrimination of a watch owned by someone else as that very watch owned by someone 
else,  
2. affliction – either attachment, hatred, and ignorance, but mainly the attachment that, 
thinking that something is nice, wants to obtain it; and 
3. motivation – the wish to make something one’s  own, for example, to make something my 
wife, my husband, my child, my wa tch, my country, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Performance 
The performance consists in making an e ffort for the object of that thought.  
 
The performance is to make a mental  effort to obtain the object.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D Completion 
The completion is the thought: “May that possession etc. become mine!” 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
351 The completion is the thought “May this thing that belongs to someone else become mine,” 
without actually doing anything to obtain it. One just thinks, “How nice it would be if it were 
mine!”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-9 Harmful intent 
A/B Basis and attitude 
The basis, discrimination, and affliction of  harmful intent are similar to those of 
harsh words. The motivation is the wish to  hit etc., {106} thinking “How nice it 
would be if [this person] were to killed or  bound or if his resources were to decline 
by themselves or through someone else” and the like.  
 
The basis of harmful intent or malice is in ge neral another sentient being. However, in some 
cases it can be a thing, for example, sometimes we get angry and beat our car or furniture, 
throw things on the floor, and so forth. Howe v e r ,  t h e  m a i n  o b j e c t  o f  h a r m f u l  i n t e n t  i s  
another sentient being. The discrimination is to  correctly identify the object of the harmful 
intent, for example, to correctly identify Tashi as Tashi. The affliction is mainly hatred or 
anger, although it can in general be any of th e three mental poisons – attachment, hatred, or 
ignorance. The motivation is the wish to beat someone, the wish  to kill someone, the wish to 
tie someone up, and so forth. It can also be the wish that others’ wealth or resources be taken 
away by others or that they degenerate naturall y so that the person becomes poor. One thinks, 
“How nice it would be if this were to happen.” Harmful intent is a mental action, therefore it 
does not need to be accompanied by a physical action.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Performance 
The performance consists in applyi ng oneself to this thought.  
 
The performance is to think about how to ha rm others. Due to such thoughts, we later 
actually engage in harming others.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D Completion 
The completion consists in the decision to hit and the like.  
 
The completion is the mental decision to beat someone, kill someone, bind someone, and so 
forth. In China at the time of Mao Tse Tung there were many problems and it was difficult 
for people to find food for their children. Du e to this, sometimes people would take their 
children for a dangerous hike in the mountain s in search of food, whereupon one of them 
would fall from a cliff and die. This was seen to be preferable to allowing their children to die 
of starvation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
352 2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10 Wrong views 
A Basis 
B Attitude 
C Performance 
D Completion 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10A Basis 
The basis of wrong views is an object that exists.  
 
The basis of wrong views is some thing that exists, for example, the law of actions and results, 
that one then holds to not exist. Likewise, whil e past and future lives exist, one holds that 
they do not exist. Or one holds that the Three Jewe ls do not exist. In short, a wrong view is to 
think that something that exists does not exist.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10B Attitude 
Among the three [aspects associated with] the attitude, the discrimination consists 
in discriminating the object that is denied as true.  
 
The discrimination is the discrimination of an ob ject that is denied is true. In other words, 
one thinks that it is true that some thing that exists does not exist.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The affliction is any of the three poisons.  
 
The affliction can be either attachment, hatred , and ignorance. Attach ment is the wish to 
have something, hatred is the wi sh to harm, ignorance is of di fferent types, for example, the 
ignorance of the nature of phenomena, the lack of true existenc e, due to which one 
apprehends true existence; the ignorance of actions and result s, the ignorance of past and 
future lives; the ignorance of th e Three Jewels, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The motivation is the wish to deny [the object].  
 
The motivation is the wish to deny th e existence of something that exists.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10C Performance 
1 The actual performance 
[2 Divisions] 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10C1 The actual performance 
The performance consists in setting abou t applying oneself to such a thought.  
 
The performance is to apply on eself to such a thought.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
353  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10C2 Divisions 
In this regard there are four [divisions]:  
A Denying causes 
Denying causes consists in [the view]: “Excellent conduct and faulty conduct do 
not exist.” 
 
This wrong view denies the existence of causes by thinking that excellent and faulty conduct, 
which are causes, do not exist. In other words,  one thinks that virtuous and non-virtuous 
actions do not exist.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Denying effects 
Denying effects consists in [the view]: “F ully ripened effects of those two do not 
exist.”  
 
This wrong view denies the existence of results by  thinking that there is no result of engaging 
in excellent conduct and faulty conduct.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Denying activities 
Denying activities has three points:  
1. Denying the activity of planting and reta ining the seed consists in [the view]: 
“There is no planting of a seed by the father and no retaining of a seed by the 
mother.141” 
2. Denying the activity of coming and going consists in [the view]: “There is no 
coming from a former existence to this one and no going from this to a future 
one.”  
3. Denying the activity of being born cons ists in [the view]: “There is no 
intermediate state miraculously  born sentient beings.”  
 A child is produced through the mind enters th e mixture of the white seed from the father 
and the red seed from the mother. However, there are those who deny  that the seed is 
planted by the father and held by the mother.  To deny coming and going is to deny that we do not come from a past life to this life and 
do not go from this life to a future live, that is , to deny the existence of past and future lives.  
 T o  d e n y  t h e  a c t i v i t y  o f  b e i n g  b o r n  i s  t o  deny the existence of miraculously born 
intermediate state beings. Birth can be from heat  and moisture, from an egg, from a womb, or 
                                             
 
141 In this regard, Geshe Thubten Soepa explains that all these aspects of denying existent phenomena are 
associated with the problem of nihilism, the refusal to a ccept certain conventional tr uths. In this context each 
of them has its special significance. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
354 miraculous. The intermediate state being is said  to be miraculously born. If one does not 
accept the existence of past and future lives, one would not accept the intermediate state.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D Denying existing things 
Denying existent things consists in [the vi ew]: “Arhats and so forth do not exist.”  
 
To deny things that exist is to think that foe-destroyers and so forth do not exist. Foe-
destroyers are those who have destroyed the foe or enemy that  is the afflictions such as 
attachment and hatred. This view also consists in denying the existence of complete buddhas.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10D Completion 
The completion is certainty with respect to one’s denial.  
 
The completion is to be certain with respect to  what one denies, that is, one is certain that 
something that exists does no t exist. There are many such wrong views, however they are 
dangerous in that they cut our roots of virtue. While most of us do not have wrong views, we 
do engage in the other non-virtuous actions.  
 
(Oral transmission 7:05-7:30 PM) 
 Wednesday morning, 6 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 106) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1B Distinction between actions and paths of action  
Among them, the intention in the mind is an action but not a path of action. The 
seven actions of body and speech are actions as well as paths of action since they 
are also the basis of operation for the in tention. The three, covetousness and so 
on, are paths of actions but not actions142.  
 
Among the ten, the seven actions of body and speech – killing, steali ng, sexual misconduct, 
lying, divisive speech, harsh words, and idle talk – are both actions and paths of actions 
because they are the basis of operation for the intention. The three of mind – covetousness, 
harmful intent, and wrong view – are paths of action but not actions. Thus those done by 
body and speech are actions whereas those done by the mind are not. Vows, for example, are 
made in relation to actions of body and speec h but are not made in relation to the mind 
because they are unable to block the mind. Acti ons of body and speech are considered to be 
                                              
142 Despite the precise distinction drawn here, the general term “ten non-virtuous  actions” has become 
common in English. Tibetan texts also frequently refe r to “actions” in less specific contexts, although, 
according to the definition proposed here , the last three of the “ten non-virtues ” do not constitute actions. 
Thus “action” should often be understood more loosely as a term that only requires specification in certain 
contexts. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
355 form due to which, just as a dam can stop the flow of a river, in a similar way vows can stop 
non-virtuous actions of body and speech. Different types of form are set forth in the Treasury 
of Manifest Dharma  including revelatory form and non-reve latory form. Non-revelatory form is 
a form that is not matter which is composed of  eight particles of eart h, water, fire, wind, 
form, odor, taste, and tangibility.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2 Differences in weight 
A The weight of the ten paths of action 
B Incidentally, a summarized indication of the gates of strong karma  
The second one – differences in weight – has two points: the weight of the ten paths of 
action and incidentally, {107} a summary indi cation of the gates of strong karma.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2A The weight of the ten paths of action  
First: In Actual Basis of the Levels  six ways of being weighty are stated.  
 
The ten paths of actions can be of  different weights or gravity, that is, heavier or lighter. The 
Actual Basis of the Level  sets out six ways in an action becomes heavy.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
1 Intensive action 
The strongly compounding are actions mo tivated by the strong presence or 
absence of the three poisons.  
 
Non-virtuous actions motivated by strong attachment, hatred, and ignorance are heavy, and 
likewise virtuous actions motivated by non- attachment, non-hatred, and non-ignorance are 
heavy. Virtuous actions motivated by strong compassion or the mind of enlightenment are 
also heavy.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Habituation 
Habituation is to have resorted to virt uous and non-virtuous actions for a long 
time and to have familiarized with them many times.  
 
Virtuous and non-virtuous actions become heavy due to having familiarized with them for a 
long time and done them frequently. In general due to having familiarized with non-virtuous 
actions in our past lives and still continuing to engage in them in this life, they are heavy. 
However, if we familiarized with meditation on  love, compassion, the mind of enlightenment, 
emptiness, a deity, and so forth in  the past and continue to medita te on them in this life, they 
too become very powerful.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
356 3 Entity [of the action] 
As for their entity, each of the former of the seven of body and speech is weightier 
than the later, whereas for th e three actions of mind the later is weightier than the 
former. 
 
Among the seven actions of body and speech the former are heavier than the later. Hence, 
among killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct, killing is the heaviest, especially killing a 
human being; stealing, taking others’ belongin gs without permission, is the less heavy; and 
sexual misconduct is the least heaviest. “Heavy” means that it brings a great result. Among the 
actions of speech, the heaviest is lying, follow ed by divisive speech, followed by harsh words, 
followed by idle talk. The heaviest of lies is to say that one has realized emptiness although 
one has not, that one has realized impermanence  although one has not, that one has attained 
calm abiding although one has not, and that one has attained the clairvoyance that sees 
everything or knows others’ minds although one ha d not. Divisive speech is to speak in such a 
way as to create a division between people. Because harsh words do not happen very often 
and do not last long, divisive speech is heavier th an them. Idle talk is by nature not very heavy 
but, because we often engage in it, it becomes heavy.  Among the paths of action of mind, wrong view  is the heaviest, follow ed by harmful intent, 
followed by covetousness. Wrong view is the heav iest because it cuts the roots of virtue, that 
is, it makes them unable to bring a result. Beca use harmful intent or malice is the wish to 
harm others and thoughts about how to do this , whereby it leads to non-virtuous actions of 
body and speech, it is the next heaviest. Cove tousness is the mind that wants something and 
is therefore the lightest of th e paths of action of mind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 Basis 
The basis is benefit and harm to, for instance, the Buddha, the Dharma, the 
Sangha, and the gurus. 
 
Due to their being special objects, if one harms or benefits the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, the 
gurus, and so forth, the action becomes heavy. In this way, the action becomes heavy due to 
the basis being heavy. Thus, even  though we do not harm an actual buddha, if we destroy a 
statue of a buddha it becomes a heavy action. Also if we destroy texts or criticize the teachings, 
the action becomes heavy. Likewise if we harm the sangha, it becomes a heavy action. On the other contrary, if we think of images of buddha s as actual buddhas and generate faith in and 
respect for them, it becomes a heavy virtuous action.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 One-sided fixation on the discordant side  
A one-sided fixation on the discordant side  consists in spending one’s whole life 
adopting non-virtuous actions with one- sided determination and not even doing 
one single virtue.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
357 I f  w e  c r e a t e  o n l y  n o n - v i r t u o u s  a c t i o n s  i n  o u r  d a i l y  l i f e ,  f o r  e x a m p l e ,  b y  t a k i n g  a  n o n - v o w  
through making the promise “I will be a butche r and kill animals for my entire life,” it 
becomes a heavy non-virtuous action. Thus, if we constantly engage in non-virtue due to 
taking such a non-vow and do not create any virt ue, we will create extremely heavy non-virtue. 
Similarly, if one swears to be a soldier, which implies killing other people, one creates very 
heavy non-virtue.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
6 Elimination of the discordant side 
To eliminate the discordant side is to give up the side of non-virtue, to become 
free from attachment, and to trai n in virtuous actions. In the Letter to a Friend  it 
also says: 
 
Persistence, strong adherence, no antidote,  A basis with foremost qualities – actions that spring from [Them] are the five great types of virtue and non-virtue. 
From them, endeavor in virtuous behavior! 
 
Moreover, there are five because of the division [of the basis ] into two: (1) a basis 
endowed with good qualities, such as the Three Jewels, and (2) a basis of benefit, 
such as one’s parents. 
 If eliminate the discordant side that is the si de of non-virtue, separate from attachment, and 
train in virtuous actions, our actions will become heavy virtue. Nagarjuna’s Letter to a Friend  
says that an action becomes heavy by doing it constantly, by doing it with strong adherence, 
by not applying its antidote, and by doing it wi th respect to a basis that possesses qualities. 
This basis is divided into a basis endowed with  good qualities, this being the Three Jewels, 
and a basis of benefit, this being one’s parents. In this way, there are five factors that make 
actions, whether virtuous and non-virtuous, heav y. Thus, we should no t act against the Three 
Jewels and our parents but instead generate re spect for them; for example, when our mother 
asks us to do something we should not angrily refuse but should try to do as she asked.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B Incidentally: a summarized indication of the gates of strong karma 
1 Great strength by way of the field 
2 Great strength by way of the support 
3 Great strength by way of the thing 4 Great strength by way of the attitude 
The second one has four points: great strength by way of the field, great strength 
by way of the support, great strength by w ay of the thing, and gr eat strength by way 
of the attitude 
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-1 Great strength by way of the field 
A The field of the Three Jewels  
First: the Three Jewels, gurus, those who ar e like a guru, parents, and so forth [are 
gates of strong karma] because even if the thoughts toward them are not intense 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
358 and the benefit or harm done to them is  small, the merit {108} and misdeed are 
great. In this regard, it says in Establishment of Mindfulness  that the karma of stealing 
even a little thing from the Three Jewels is  purified – in the case of the Buddha 
and the Dharma – if it is returned. 
 
With respect to the Three Jewels – the Buddh a, Dharma, and Sangha, gurus, those who are 
similar to a guru, one’s father and mother, and so forth, even if one’s motivation is not 
strong, when one performs a slight benefit one creates great merit and when one does slight 
harm one creates a great misdeed.  
 The Sutra of the Close Placements of Mindfulness  says that if we take a small object belonging 
to the Three Jewels without permission but late r on return it or give something similar to 
them, we can purify the non-virtue created wi th respect to the Buddha and Dharma. In other 
words, if, having stolen something from the Thre e Jewels, later on we ma ke an offering to an 
image of a buddha or to a Dharma text, we can purify the negative action. However, this is 
not the case with the Sangha.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The field of the Sangha 
However, in the case of the sangha, it does not get purified until feeling is 
experienced. Furthermore it is stated that  if it was a means of providing for the 
mouths of the sangha, one will be  born in the great hell and,  if it is other, one will 
born in the great darkness surrounding Without Respite.  
 
If one takes something belonging to the Sangha, one will necessarily experience the feeling of 
suffering. In other words, if one takes the po ssessions or belongings of the Sangha without 
permission, the action will be very heavy and ca nnot be purified such that no result will be 
experienced. In other words, one will necessarily  have to experience some result. If without 
asking one takes food belonging to the Sangha, ve getables, rice, bread, fruit, and so forth, it 
becomes a very heavy negative karma that acts as  a cause for taking rebirth in the great hell, 
the hell of Unrelenting Torment. If one takes ot her things that are not food from the Sangha, 
one will be reborn in a dark place surrounding  the hell of Unrelenting Torment. Because of 
this, we need to be careful in our daily life. Since the community of a Dharma center is 
similar to the Sangha, we need to be carefu l not to take the property of the community 
without asking permission, as this too would beco me a heavy non-virtue. Stealing in general is 
non-virtuous, but when it is done with resp ect to the Sangha it becomes even more non-
virtuous.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C The field of bodhisattvas 
Bodhisattvas are an extremely powerful field of virtue and non-virtue. In the Sutra 
of the Seal of Engageme nt in the Generation of the Power of Confidence  it says that 
compared to someone who, out of anger, puts all the sentient beings of the ten 
directions into a dark prison, if someone else, out of anger, turns his back on a 
bodhisattva and says “I will not look upon this horrible person [again],” he 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
359 generates incalculably greater negativity. Also compared to someone who has 
destroyed and burnt down stupas as numero us as the sand [grains] of the Ganges 
River, if someone else generates anger and harmful intent towards a bodhisattva 
a n d  s a y s  u n p l e a s a n t  t h i n g s  t o  h i m ,  i t  i s  l i k e  b e f o r e .  I n  t h e  Sutra of the Seal of 
Entering Certainty and Uncertainty  it says that compared to someone who with a 
mind of love makes eyes develop again in the sentient beings of  the ten directions 
whose eyes were plucked out, and who rele ases the previous sentient beings from 
prison and establishes them in th e happiness of a universal monarch143 or Brahma, 
if someone else with clear faith looks at and with clear faith wishes to look at a 
bodhisattva who aspires to the Mahayana and proclaims his praise, he generates 
incalculably greater merit. Also in the Sutra of the Magic of th e Complete Certainty of 
Total Peace  it says that compared to killing all the sentient beings of Jambudvipa or 
seizing all their possessions, someone who obstructs even as little as the virtue of a 
bodhisattva of giving a handful of food to  an animal, generates incalculably greater 
negativity. {109} Therefore, you should be ve ry careful with respect to these objects.  
 Bodhisattvas are objects or fields of virtue an d non-virtue. Therefore, if one generates very 
strong faith in a bodhisattva, it becomes very vi rtuous whereas if we generate even slight anger 
toward a bodhisattva it destroys a great amount of virtue. For example, if we were to put all 
the sentient beings of the ten directions in pr ison we would create heavy non-virtue, but the 
non-virtue created by generating anger even fo r a short moment toward a bodhisattva is much 
heavier. Likewise, generating anger at a bodhisattva and speaking unpleasantly to him is heavier than destroying stupas equal in number to the grains of sand of the Ganges River. 
Likewise, if we destroyed and burnt many temple s this would be very bad, but the negative 
karma of generating anger toward a bodhisattva is much heavier.  
 If all the eyes of the sentient beings of the ten directions had been plucked out and motivated by the mind of love we were to rest ore them, this would be very virtuous. Likewise, 
if we released all the sentient beings of the ten directions who had been put in prison and 
established them in the happiness of a wheel-turni ng king or Brahma, this too would be very 
virtuous. However, we would create much more  merit by generating clear faith toward a 
bodhisattva, wishing to look at him,  and proclaiming praise to him.  
 Also if we were to kill all the sentient be ings of Jambudvipa, the southern continent, or 
steal all their wealth and belongings, this would be a very heavy non-virtuous karma. However, 
if we were to obstruct even one bodhisattva from giving a single handful of food to an animal, this would be much heavier. Therefore, we need to be very careful with respect to 
bodhisattvas as just by obstructing their ac tions we create very heavy negative karma. 
However, we do not even know who is a bodhisattva and who is not.  
 There is a story about several monks in Ti bet that happened some years ago. One monk, 
now called Langdol Lama Rinpoche but previously called Crazy Langdol, went from Sera Monastery to Lhasa with some other monks. Al ong the way they stopped to rest and in the 
course of the conversation asked each othe r, “Among the four of us, which one is a 
bodhisattva?” One said that it definitely was not Crazy Langdol and that perhaps it was the 
                                             
 
143 ’khor sgyur  (’khor los sgyur ba’i rgyal po ) – lit. “wheel-turning king” – lege ndary universal monarchs ruling by 
means of a wheel made from go ld, silver, copper, or iron. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
360 monk who was richer and had ni cer robes called Chodzin (Dha rma-Holder). Another of the 
monks agreed with him that it was not Langdo l. While Langdol did not say anything, he was 
in fact the bodhisattva. It is recounted that some time after he had entered the Lower Tantric 
College, a family asked for a monk to be sent to their home to do the Offering in Three Parts . 
The disciplinarian sent Langdol to do this. Howe ver, instead of performing that puja, he just 
made the torma, recited the Heart Sutra , and told someone to thro w the torma outside. One 
monk told the disciplinarian about what ha d happened, due to which he expelled Langdol 
from the monastery. Langdol then went to Sera Monastery to study. Later on the same family 
asked the Lower Tantric College to send the same  monk back to them to once again perform 
a puja, saying that after he had done the prev ious puja all their problems, their daughter’s 
sickness and so forth, had been resolved. However, they were told that in the meantime he 
had been sent out of the monastery. He was then found to be staying in Lowa Kangtsen in a 
very dark room. One time when he was foun d to have some flowers in his room, the 
disciplinarian told him that he could not keep  them and threw them onto the land of the 
kangtsen next door. This was later said to be an auspicious sign that there would be learned 
monks from Gelu Kangtsen, and in fact some  became the Ganden throne-holder. Another 
time when Langdol Lama defecated in the debate  courtyard of Sera Me Monastery, the monk 
who found it threw the excrement at the wall of the neighboring kangtsen. From it there grew 
a very fragrant tree similar to sandalwood with beautiful flowers. Later on another lama said 
that if the excrement had been left in the deba te courtyard, the monks of Sera Me would have 
been very learned. This story shows that we do not know who is a bodhisattva and therefore 
need to be very careful in our actions!  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-2 Great strength by way of the support 
A The difference between the skillful and the unskillful  
Second: Even a small lump of iron sinks to the bottom, but a container made from 
it floats on the surface. Similarly it has been set out that the negativities committed 
by the unskillful and the skillful are heavy an d light. In fact, it is said that for the 
skillful who regret previous negativities, restrain themselves in the future, do not 
keep them secret, and apply their virtuous  antidotes, they are light, whereas for 
those who arrogantly assume they are sk illful and do not do this but out of 
contempt deliberately engage in them, they are heavy.  
 
Actions become heavy or light due to the skill of the person who committed them. For 
example, if even a small lump of iron is thrown  into the ocean it sink s to the bottom, whereas 
a pot made out of iron floats on  its surface. Similarly, if some one who is skillful creates non-
virtue it becomes light, whereas if someone who is  stupid creates non-virtue , even if initially it 
is not heavy, it becomes heavy because he or sh e does not apply its antidote. Thus, a skillful 
person who creates non-virtue is one who immedi ately regrets it by thinking that it was not 
right, determines to not to do it again in the fu ture, does not keep it secret but reveals it to 
others, and purifies it by relying on its antidote . In this way the negative  karma created by this 
person becomes light. On the other hand, if someone does not do this and instead thinks 
that it does not matter because he is skillful or  learned, the action becomes very heavy. Thus, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
361 for someone who knows that it is a negative acti on but, thinking proudly that he is learned, 
deliberately engages in it, the action becomes very heavy.  
 
In short, whenever we create a non-virtuous  action, we should generate regret for it, 
determine not to do it again, go for refuge and generate the mind of enlightenment, and 
recite a mantra such as the hundred-syllable mantra of Vajrasattva, the Sutra of the Confession of 
Downfalls of a Bodhisattva , the General Confession , and so forth. In this way we can immediately 
purify the negativities we create in our daily life. In fact, every evening we should examine 
what kind of actions we did duri ng the day and, if we find that  we did non-virtuous actions, 
we should develop regret for them, resolve to no t do them again, go for refuge and generate 
the mind of enlightenment, and meditate on em ptiness and so forth. This will make our life 
meaningful and ensure that in the next life we will have a good rebirth and be a qualified 
practitioner.  
 
Wednesday afternoon, 6 April 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 109) says:  
B The actual strength of the support 
In the Jewel Heap Sutra  it also says that if all the sentient beings of the billion 
universes, having entered the Mahayana, were to possess the kingdom of universal 
monarchs and each of them were to offe r butterlamps in vessels the size of an 
ocean with wicks the size of Mount Meru to a stupa of a buddha, this would not 
match even the hundredth part of the me rit a bodhisattva who has left his home 
and who holds up a little bit of wick smeare d with butter in front of a stupa. This 
makes clear the strength of the support144 even though there is no difference in the 
attitude and the field and even if the thing [offered] is very different. This 
reasoning also makes clear that depend ing on whether or not the support has 
vows, and, if it does, whether one has one,  two, or three, th e cultivation of the 
path will be the more effective the more he  has. There is a great difference in the 
strength of the roots of virtue whether, fo r instance, a householder, at the time of 
giving donations etc., acts on the basis of  keeping vows, such as the one-day vows, 
or whether he acts without any vows.  
 The heaviness in this case does not depend on th e strength of the object or the strength of the 
field but depends on the support, that is, the body  of the being. If the sentient beings of the 
billion worlds were to enter the Mahayana pa th and become wheel-turning kings and offer 
butterlamps the size of an ocea n with wicks the size of Mount Meru to a stupa of a buddha, 
they would create a huge amount of merit. Howe ver, if an ordained bodhisattva were to offer 
even a tiny thing, such as a me re wick, in front of a stupa, th e merit would be much greater. 
Thus, there is a great difference in the merit created by one who has vows and one who does 
not, given that the merit create d by one with vows is much more . This is due to the body or 
support possessing vows. For example, having taken the one-day vows, whatever virtuous 
                                             
 
144 In this context “support” refers to the vows of ethical discipline.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
362 actions are done that day one creates much greate r merit than on those days that one does the 
same actions but does not have the vows. Even by  just offering a single butterlamp one creates 
much more merit when one has vows than when one does not. For this reason, it is also very 
good to take the Eight Mahayana Precepts, wh ich are also taken for twenty-four hours, as 
much as possible.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C The faults of discipline being adulterated 
In the Sutra of Annihilating Adulterations of Discipline  it says that {110} compared to a 
human being possessing the ten non-vi rtues who, for a hundred years, 
continuously and uninterruptedly accumula tes negativity, a fully-ordained monk 
who has [completely] broken his [vows of] discipline and who for one day dresses 
in the victory banner of sages145 and enjoys that which has been offered to him 
with faith, [accumulates] far more nega tivity. Again by way of the support, 
negativity has greater strength. In the Scripture on Discernment  it also says: 
 
It is better to eat lumps of iron 
Blazing with tongues of fire Than, unrestrained and undisciplined, 
To eat the alms-food of the area. 
 
This has been stated with regard to both  adulterated discipline and slackness in 
training. The Teacher’s statements that compared to negativities associated with the Dharma, the negativities of the ten non-virtues are small appear to be true.  
 
If someone possessing all ten no n-virtuous actions were to co ntinuously do them for one 
hundred years, he would create much negativi ty. However, a fully-ordained monk who has 
broken his vows by receiving a defeat due to killing a human being, stealing, engaging in 
sexual misconduct, or telling a great lie, yet co ntinues to wear the robes of a monk and enjoy 
the offerings made with faith to the sangha, crea tes far more negativity. Why is this? It is due 
to the support, in that negativities become grea ter due to the support or body. In other words, 
if a fully-ordained monk who has broken his vows still dresses in robes, gives teachings, and 
e n j o y s  t h e  o f f e r i n g s  m a d e  t o  h i m ,  h e  w i l l  c r eate great negativity. This was taught by the 
Buddha in the sutra that says that it is better to eat lumps of blazing iron, which only burn 
the stomach, rather than not safeguarding one’s  vows and still going for alms and eating the 
food that one is offered. This is heavier in th at, although the food do es not immediately burn 
one’s stomach, later on one will be reborn in hell where one’s body and the burning fire will 
be inseparable in nature. This will happen to both those who have broken their vows and 
those who are slack in guarding their vows. Th e Buddha said that negativities created in 
relation to the holy Dharma become very heavy, whereby co mpared to them the ten non-
virtues appear to be small and insignificant.  
 
                                             
 
145 Synonym for monastic robes. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
363 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-3 Great strength by way of the thing 
Third: With regard to giving gifts to se ntient beings, giving the Dharma [is far 
more excellent], and with regard to making  offerings to the buddhas, offering one’s 
realizations is far more excellent than gi fts and offerings of material things. From 
that example, you should also understand the [differing strength of] other [things ].  
 
In terms of the giving of gifts of material thin gs to sentient beings and the giving of Dharma 
to sentient beings, much more merit is accu mulated through giving them the Dharma. In 
terms of making offerings to the buddhas, the offe ring of our attainments or realizations (the 
mind of enlightenment, love, compassion, renu nciation, emptiness, and so forth) is far 
superior in strength to offering them butterlam ps, biscuits, flowers, and so forth. This is 
because the object offered – one’s realizations – are far better than the offering of material 
things.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-4 Great strength by way of the attitude  
A Greatness by way of the intensity of the attitude, its duration, etc.  
Fourth: In the Heap of Jewels Sutra  it says that compared to each one of the sentient 
beings of the billion universes creating a buddha stupa as massive as Mount Meru 
and all those who are objects of respect paying respect to them for ten million 
eons, a bodhisattva undivorced from th e mind of omniscience who throws one 
single flower [generates] more merit. That  being so, you should understand this in 
terms of the differences in attitude – whethe r the object to be attained is superior 
or inferior, whether you observe your own be nefit or that of others, and so forth – 
as well as the intensity and duration. When  it comes to faulty conduct, a strong 
afflicted attitude {111} and long du ration also have more strength.  
 
An action becomes heavier in dependence on the strength of the attitude  or thought, whether 
one has the attitude continually or not, whethe r one has it for a long time or a short time, 
and so forth. If each of the sentient beings of the billion universes were to build a stupa to the 
Buddha as large as Mount Meru and were to take  care of it, clean it, and so forth for ten 
million eons, they would create much merit. Ho wever, if with the mind of enlightenment not 
separated from the mind of omniscience, one were  to offer a single flower to the image of a 
buddha, one would create much more merit. In this case, the action becomes heavier by way 
of the attitude – the mind of enlightenment or the wish to attain enlightenment, which is a 
very powerful mind. In addition, the action becomes heavier in dependence on whether the objective is superior or inferior, whether one thin ks of only oneself or of all sentient beings, 
and so forth. Thus, if one does an action thinking only of oneself, it will be weaker than if one does the same action in order to benefit a ll sentient beings. The strength of the action 
also depends on the intensity of the mind of en lightenment, whether it is strong or weak, and 
for how long one cultivates it. For example, the merit created with the aspiring mind of 
enlightenment is less than that created with th e engaging mind of enlightenment. Also one 
creates more merit when one continually thinks  to attain enlightenment for the benefit of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
364 other sentient beings than when one only medi tates on the mind of enlightenment from time 
to time.  
 Non-virtuous actions are similar in that they  als o  beco m e heav ier  in  depen den ce o n  t h e  
intensity of the afflictions and the duration of  the action, that is, those done with strong 
afflictions and those done for a long time are heavier than those done with weak afflictions 
and only briefly or infrequently.  
 In short, when doing any action we should continually cultivate love, compassion, and the 
mind of enlightenment, as well as the unde rstanding of emptiness, impermanence, and so 
forth. We should not meditate very occasionally  and very briefly and then give it up! There 
are many people who meditate with great effo rt for a few days and then become tired and 
completely stop. This is a faul t of many human beings. Whatever  practice we do, we should 
try to do it continually and with a strong virtuous mind. We should avoid having an afflicted attitude, that is, having a primary mind that  is concomitant with attachment, hatred, or 
ignorance. A virtuous primary mind is one that is concomitant with virtuous mental factors, 
whereas a non-virtuous primary mind is one that  is concomitant with any one of the six root 
afflictions – attachment, anger, ignorance, pride, doubt, or wrong view. There are afflicted 
minds that are stronger than others; for exampl e, a mind that is concomitant with anger or 
hatred is very strong, whereas a mind that is concomitant with ignorance is less strong. 
However, the strength also depend s on the duration of the mind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B How anger is particularly strong 
Also among [the mental afflictions], anger is particularly strong. In Engaging in 
[Bodhisattva ] Behavior  it says:  
 
Whatever good conduct was amassed 
In a thousand eons by giving and worship To the sugatas and the like, All is destroyed by one [flash of] anger. 
 In this regard, anger towards those whose conduct accords with purity weighs very 
heavily, and anger towards the conquero rs’ children more heavily still.  
 Among the three mental poisons, anger is the st rongest. Why is this? Because even an instant 
of anger can destroy the merit created by practi cing generosity and making offerings to the 
tathagatas, practicing morality, and meditating for a thousand eons. In other words, the merit 
that arises by way of generosity and morality ca n be destroyed by an in stant of anger toward a 
bodhisattva. That it is “destroyed” means that it becomes unable to produce its good result.  
 While becoming angry with our companions who are striving to become a buddha is heavy, 
it is even heavier to become angry at a bodhisattva because ju st a single instant of anger 
toward a bodhisattva destroys all the merit created by practi cing generosity and morality. 
Therefore, anger is very heavy and for this reason  we need to strive to avoid getting angry at 
bodhisattvas and at our Dharma friends with whom  we study, meditate, and so forth. If we do 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
365 get angry at them, we should ask their forgiv eness and determine not to get angry at them 
again. In this way, especially if the person accepts our apology, we can purify the anger.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In the King of Concentration  [Sutra ] it says:  
 
If one has harbored harmful intent for another, 
Discipline and hearing cannot save one, Nor can concentration or an isolated place, Nor can gifts or worship of the Buddha. 
 Someone who has harmful intent, anger being the nature of a mind of harm, toward another 
being cannot be protected by his morality, by his wisdom arisen from hearing, by 
concentration, by abiding or hiding in an isol ated place such as a hermitage, by generosity, 
and by making offerings to the buddhas. In ot her words, if one has mind of harm, one will 
not be protected by making offerings to a statue  of the Buddha and so forth as virtue will not 
arise in one’s mind. There are those who, when involved in an angry court case, ask that a 
puja be done in order to help them win it! Howeve r, it is unlikely that they will receive this 
help.  This concludes the discussion of karma from the po int of view of the cause. Next is the result.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A3 Indication of their effects 
A The fully ripened effect  
B The effect in conformity with the cause  
C The conditioning or empowering effect  
The third one –  the effects of these [actions] – has three points: the fully ripened effect, 
the effect in conformity with the caus e, and the conditioning or empowering 
effect. 
A The fully ripened effect 
First: As each of the ten pa ths of action depends on th e basis, the three poisons, 
and whether it is great, intermediate, or small, the fully ripened effect is also 
threefold. In Actual Basis of the Levels  it says that through each of the ten, a great 
[act of] killing and so on, one is reborn as a hell being, through each of the ten 
intermediate ones one is reborn as a hu ngry ghost, and thro ugh each of the ten 
small ones you are reborn  as an animal. In the Sutra on the Ten Levels  the effects of 
small and intermediate ones are said to be the other way round.  
 
The fully ripened or fruitional result refers to th e type of rebirth one takes due to a particular 
action. An action also has a result similar to the cause or in conformity with the cause. The 
empowering or environmental result refers to th e type of place in which one is born or in 
which one lives. Each of the te n non-virtuous paths of action s has these three results. The 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
366 result is correspondingly small, middling, or great in dependence on the basis, the three 
mental poisons, and the strength of the action.  
 Thus, if killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, ly ing, divisive speech, harsh words, idle talk, 
covetousness, malice, and wrong views are great or  strong, the fully ripened result will be to 
take rebirth in one of the hell realms – th e hot hells, cold hells, neighboring hells, or 
occasional hells. If they are middling in streng th, the fully ripened result will be to take 
rebirth in the hungry ghost realm as a hu ngry ghost with outer obstructions, inner 
obstructions, or obstructions to food and drink. If they are small in strength, the fully ripened 
result will be to take rebirth in the animal realm as one of the many animals found in the 
depths of the oceans or one of the animals that  live amongst human beings. In this case, even 
if one is cared for by human beings, one will sti ll be unable to practice and will think only of 
eating, killing other animals, and so forth. The Sutra on the Ten Levels , on the other hand, says 
that great non-virtue brings the result of re birth in the hell realm, middling in the animal 
realm, and small in the hungry ghost realm. The reason for the latter exposition is that it 
asserts that the animal realm is  worse than the hungry ghost realm because animals are almost 
always stupid, whereas hungry ghosts are more intelligent and can therefore learn and even practice the teachings of the Buddha and purify  their negative action s. On the other hand, 
the Actual Basis of the Levels  says that the hungry ghost realm is worse because the suffering 
there can last even for eons whereas the life span as an animal can be very short.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The effect in conformity with the cause 
Second: The effects in conformity with the cause are that even having left the bad 
migrations and taken rebirth as a human bein g, respectively your life will be short, 
you will be lacking in possessions, you will  not keep your partner, there will be a 
lot of slander, you will be separated from loved ones, you will hear unpleasant 
sounds, others will not listen to your wo rds, and the three, attachment, hatred, 
and delusion will predominate.  
 
The result similar to the cause is  that, after having been reborn  in the lower realms when one 
once again takes rebirth as a human being: 
1. due to killing, one will have a short life; 
2. due to stealing, one will be poor and deprived of necessities such as food, shelter, and so 
forth; 
3. due to sexual misconduct, one’s partner, wife or husband, will not remain with one;  
4. due to lying, one will be criticized and will not have success;  
5. due to divisive speech, one will be separated from dear ones;  
6. due to harsh words, one will hear unpleasant sounds;  
7. due to idle talk, others will not listen to one’s words;  
8. due to covetousness, one will have strong attachment;  
9. due to malice, one will have strong anger and hatred; and 
10. due to wrong view, one will have confusion and be unable to understand.  
 
Thursday morning, 7 April 2005 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
367 Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 111) says:  
C The conditioning or empowering effect 
Third: The conditioning effect:  
1. of killing is that in future worlds, food and drink, medicine, harvests, and the 
like will have little power;  
2. that of stealing, great droughts and rains and {112} poor harvests etc.;  
3. that of sexual misconduct, swamps, much filth, unpleasant experiences, etc.;  
4. that of lying, that field work and work to do with boats will not succeed, etc.;  
5. that of divisive speech, that the loca tion [where you live] will be bumpy and 
uneven, it will be difficult  to travel, and so on;  
6. t h a t  o f  h a r s h  w o r d s ,  t h a t  t h e  l o c a t i o n  [ w h e r e  y o u  l i v e ]  w i l l  b e  f u l l  o f  l o g s ,  
brambles, rocks, pebbles, potsherds, etc.;  
7. that of idle talk, that fruit trees do not be ar fruit, bear fruit out of season, etc.;  
8. that of covetousness, that everything ex cellent deteriorates year by year, month 
by month, and day by day, etc.;  
9. that of harmful intent, a lot of epidemic s, injuries, infections, disputes, wars 
with enemy troops, etc.; and  
10. that of wrong views, that in the vessel wo rld the best resources will decline, etc.  
 Each of the ten non-virtuous paths of acti ons has its own empowering or environmental 
result: 1. that of killing is that external things such as  food, drink, medicines, harvests, and so forth 
will have little power; 
2. that of stealing is that in th e place in which one lives, there will droughts, strong winds and 
rains, poor harvests, and so forth – due to a la ck of rain, the trees and plants will die, and 
due to strong wind and rain, the blossoms on trees will be destroyed and will not bear fruit; 
3. that of sexual misconduct is that in the place in which one lives there will be many 
swamps, it will be very filthy, one will have unpleasant experiences, and so forth due to 
which one will not be happy there but due to karma one will have to stay there; 
4. that of lying is that one will not be successf ul in whatever one does whether one sows seeds 
in a field or works on boats; 
5. that of divisive speech is that the place in wh ich one lives will be bumpy and uneven due to 
which it will be difficult to walk and so forth; 
6. that of harsh words is that the place in which one lives will have many thorn bushes, 
brambles, stones, broken tiles and clay pots, and so forth; 
7. that of idle talk is that fruit trees, such as ol ive trees, will not bear fruit or will not bear fruit 
at the right time but instead will bear it at the wrong time and it will not be good due to which it will not be useful;  
8. that of covetousness is that all one’s excellences will deteriorate year by year, month by 
month, and day by day, whereby one will eventu ally come to lose everything and becomes 
poor; 
9. t h a t  o f  m a l i c e  o r  h a r m f u l  i n t e n t  i s  t h a t  o n e  w i l l  b e  a f f l i c t e d  b y  e p i d e m i c s  s u c h  a s  t h e  
plague, injuries, infectious dise ases, conflict in one’s family and with neighbors, wars, and 
so forth, whereby one’s mind will always be  worried and uncomfortable, like the people 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
368 living in Iraq who can never be happy or re laxed due to the fear caused by constant 
bombing; 
10. that of wrong view is that the res ources, su ch as jewels and minerals, in the country in 
which one lives will decline.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2B Positive actions and their effects 
1 White actions 
2 Their effects 
The second one has two points: the actions and the effects.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2B1 White actions 
A Brief indication by means of scripture 
F i r s t :  T h e y  a r e  t h e  a c t i o n s  o f  b o d y  o f  c o r r e c t l y  a b s t a i n i n g  f r o m  k i l l i n g ,  s t e a l i n g ,  
and sexual misconduct due to possessing a virtuous mind having thought about 
their disadvantages and of carrying this abst ention to its conclusion. Similarly, this 
is to be applied to the four of speech and the three of mind, the difference being 
t h a t  t h e y  a r e  c a l l e d  “ a c t i o n s  o f  s p e e c h ”  a n d  “ a c t i o n s  o f  m i n d . ”  T h i s  i s  w h a t  i s  
stated in Actual Basis of the Levels .  
 
White actions are virtuous actions. If we ha ve a virtuous mind that thinks about the 
disadvantages of killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct, we will try to avoid committing 
these non-virtuous actions by having a mind of abstaining from them. Likewise, thinking 
about the many disadvantages of lying, divisive speech, harsh words, and idle talk, we try to 
abstain from these actions. Similarly, coveto usness, harmful intent, and wrong views have 
many disadvantages, thinking about them we turn away from and abstain from them. 
Thinking about the disadvantages of the ten no n-virtuous paths of actions, we will refrain 
from engaging in them  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Extensive explanation 
This should therefore be related to the basis, attitude, performance, and 
completion as appropriate. When applied to the path of action of abandoning 
killing, the basis is another sentient being.  The attitude is the wish to give it up 
through seeing its disadvanta ges. The performance is to put effort into completely 
abstaining from killing. {113} The comple tion is the action of body of correct 
abstention having been completed. The ot her [paths of action] should also be 
understood in this manner.  
 
The virtuous paths of actions also have a basi s, attitude, performance, and completion. In 
relation to the path of action of abandoning killing, the basis is another sentient being, this 
being mainly a human being or an animal as we are not able to perceive other types of 
sentient beings. However, while some beings canno t be killed by way of the body, they can be 
killed by black magic and so forth. The attitude  is through seeing the disadvantages of killing 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
369 to wish to abandon it. The performance is to pu t effort into abandoning the action of killing. 
The completion is to completely abstain oneself from killing.  
 The other nine paths of action s should be understood in the same way. For example, with 
respect to the white action of  abandoning stealing, the basi s is another’s belonging. The 
attitude is through seeing the disadvantages of stealing to wish to abandon stealing others’ 
belongings. The performance is to put effort in to completely abstaining from stealing, for 
example, taking others’ things with our hands. The completion is to mentally resolve to not 
steal others’ things. Likewise, with respect to sexual misconduct the basis is a man or woman 
who belongs to someone else and so forth. The a ttitude is through seeing the disadvantages of 
sexual misconduct to mentally abandon sexual misconduct, thinking “I will never engage in 
sexual misconduct.” The performance is to put e ffort into completely abstaining from sexual 
misconduct. The completion is to completely ab stain from it both mentally and physically.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2B2 The effects 
Second: From among the three [effects of virtuous paths of action], the fully 
ripened effect is to be born as a human, a desire realm god, and a god of the two 
upper realms due to a small, intermediate , and great virtuous action. As for the 
effect in conformity with the cause and the conditioning effect, the opposites to 
the [respective effects from] non-virtuous actions apply.  
 
The fully ripened or fruitional result of a small virtuous action is rebirth as a human being, 
that of a middling virtuous action is rebirth as a desire realm god, and that of a great virtuous 
action is rebirth as a god of the form or form less realms. With respect to human beings, there 
is rebirth as a human being in any one of the four continents. With respect to desire realm 
gods, there is rebirth in one of the six levels of the Four Great Kings, the Thirty-Three Gods, 
Free from Combat, Joyous Land, Enjoying Eman ations, and Controlling  Others’ Emanations. 
The form realm is divided into four concentrat ions which are further divided into seventeen 
levels – the first, second, and third concentratio ns are each further divided into three, and the 
fourth is divided into three places of ordinary  beings and five pure lands. The formless realm 
consists in Infinite Space, Infinite Consciou sness, Nothingness, and Without Discrimination 
Not Without Discrimination or the Peak of Ex istence. In order to achieve rebirth in the 
upper realms it is necessary to achieve the ca lm abiding included in the preparation of a 
concentration or formless absorption, which then acts as the projecting karma to be reborn 
there.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C Indication of other classifications of actions146
  
1 The classification of throwing and completing ones  
2 The classification of what will definitely be experienced and what will not  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C1 The classification of throwing and completing ones  
                                              
146 cf. note 10 (see separate root text) 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
370 1 [Presentation of the first classification]147
 
The third one has two points, the first of which is the classification of throwing 
and completing [actions].  
Throwing actions for [rebirth in] the happy  migrations are virtuous [actions] and 
throwing actions for [rebirth in] the bad migrations are non-virtuous [actions]. The 
completing ones are uncertain, however, even in the happy migrations, incomplete 
limbs, minor body parts, or sense powers , hideous looks, a short life span, many 
illnesses, poverty, and so forth are caus ed by non-virtue. Also for animals and 
hungry ghosts, perfect prosperity is caused by virtue.  
 Among the classifications of actions there is  a l s o  t h r o w i n g  o r  p r o j e c t i n g  k a r m a  a n d  
completing karma. When the throwing karma is virtuous it will cause rebirth in the happy 
migrations, whereas when it is non-virtuous it  will cause rebirth in the bad migrations. In 
other words, virtuous actions ar e throwing karma that throw one into the higher realms – the 
human, antigod, and god realms – and non-virt uous actions are throwing karma that throw 
one into the lower realms – the hell, hungry ghost, and animal realms.   With respect to completing karma, having taken rebirth as a human being, for example, 
due to non-virtuous completing karma one coul d have an imperfect bo dy such as lacking a 
limb, a minor body part such as  a finger, o r a sense power, one’s body could be very ugly, one’s lifespan could be short, one could be affl icted by many illness, one could be poor and 
unable to find the necessities of life, and so fo rth. All of these are due to having created non-
virtuous actions that act as completing karmas . On  t he o t her han d , h av in g be en  bo rn  as  a 
hungry ghost or animal due to non-virtuous th rowing karma, one could be very wealthy or 
prosperous due to virtuous completing karma.  For example, due to virtuous completing 
karma even though a naga rebirth is included  among the animals many of them are rich, 
likewise there are hungry ghosts who are rich. We  also see, for example, dogs and cats that 
belong to rich people who have good food, clot hing, a pleasant place to live, and so forth. 
Their throwing karma is non-virt uous due to which they have ta ken rebirth as an animal such 
as a dog, but their completing karma is virtuous  due to which they obtain good food and so 
forth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The four possible combinations of virtuous and non-virtuous throwing and completing actions  
Thus, there are four alternatives:  
- projected by virtuous throwing [action] and also completed by virtuous 
completing [action], 
- projected by virtuous throwing [action] and completed by non-virtuous 
completing [action], 
- projected by non-virtuous throwing [action] and completed by non-virtuous 
completing [action] 
                                              
147 Trijang Rinpoche is proposing an addi tional classification of Je Tsongkhapa’s first item into five sections 
some of which however overlap with Je Tsongkhapa’s se cond item. Trijang Rinpoche’s points three to five 
belong to Je Tsongkhapa’s second item and thus do not form a sub-division of the first one. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
371 - projected by non-virtuous throwing [action] and completed by virtuous 
completing [action].  
 
An example of one with virtuous throwing karma and virtuous completing karma is we 
ourselves who have been born as a human bein g and have sufficient wealth, all necessities, 
and a good body endowed with the eighteen qualities.  
An example of one with virtuous throwing karma but non-virtuous completing karma is 
someone who has been reborn as a human being but is very poor and unable to find food, clothing, shelter, and so forth. This is caused by having practiced morality but not generosity, 
that is, having been unable to gi ve others what they asked for. 
An example of one with non-virtuous throwing  karma and non-virtuous completing karma is 
a being born as an animal that is also unable to find food, shelter, and so forth due to which 
it is in risk of dying of hunger and thirst.  An example of one with non-virtuous throwing  karma but virtuous completing karma is a 
being born as an animal, such as  a dog or cat, that has good f ood, a good place to live in, is 
taken care of by a human being like a son or daughter, and so forth. This is due to having practiced generosity in past lives but not having created virtuous throwing karma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C2 The classification of what w ill definitely be experienced and what will not  
3 [Presentation of the second classification] 
With respect to what will definitely be ex perienced and what wi ll not, what will 
definitely be experienced is what has been done intentionally and accumulated. 
What will not definitely be experienced is what has [not] been done intentionally 
and has not accumulated. 
 
There is definite karma and indefinite karma. An action that is definite is one that will 
definitely bring a result. A karma that will defini tely be experienced is an action that was done 
intentionally and was accumulated. An indefinite  karma to one that is not done intentionally 
and is not accumulated; for example, to kill an ant accidentally by stepping on it while 
walking, or to kill a dog or cat accidentally when driving a car. In both cases we did not have the wish to kill, we did not mentally intend to kill, and we did not accumulate the action. 
Similarly, when a dog is brought around a stup a, the dog does not have the intention wishing 
to circumambulate the stupa but still it crea tes some virtue. The commentary on the twelve 
links in the Ocean of Sport  has a more detailed explanation ab out karma that will definitely be 
experienced and divides it into that which will definitely be experienced in this life, that 
which will definitely be experienced in the ne xt life, and that which will definitely be 
experienced in some future life.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 Classification of what has been done and what has been accumulated 
The difference between what has been done and what has been accumulated [is as 
follows]. What has been done is what has b een intended or what has manifested 
through the body or speech after having been intended. What has been 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
372 accumulated are actions apart from the ten [exceptions] such as those done in a 
dream. What has not been accumulated are the ten types such as those done in a 
dream.148 
 
There is karma that has been done and karma th at has been accumulated. An action that has 
been done means that one mentally intended or  thought to do an action or, having thought 
about it, did it with the body or speech. In ot her words, one mentally wishes to do something 
and then actually does it by body or speech, whereby this becomes an action that has been 
done. Actions that have been accumulated excl ude the actions of killing, stealing, sexual 
misconduct, and so forth and the abstention from  killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, and so 
forth that are done in a dream and so forth. In other words, the actions, virtuous or non-
virtuous, done in a dream and so forth are not done and not accumulated. All other such actions, the three of body and four of speec h, done during waking are accumulated.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 [Further classification of that which will definitely be experienced] 
{114} That which will definitely be experien ced is [divided into] three [categories] 
in terms of the time when th e result is experienced:  
1. That which will be experienced as a vi sible phenomenon is an action whose 
effect will be experienced in this life. 
2. That which will be experienced after taking rebirth is [an action] whose effect 
will be experienced in the following149 life.  
3. T h a t  w h i c h  w i l l  b e  e x p e r i e n c e d  a t  a n o t h e r  t i m e  i s  w h a t  w i l l  b e  e x p e r i e n c e d  
from the next but one life onwards. 
 Actions whose results will definitely to be expe rienced can be divided into three in terms of 
time. The first is actions whose results will be experienced in this life, for example, 
Angulimala who killed 999 people after his teacher told him to kill 1000 people and to cut off one of their fingers and string it on a rosary in order to purify. It is recounted that after 
Angulimala had killed 999 people and could not fi nd anyone else to kill, given that, terrified, 
everyone had disappeared, he thought to kill hi s mother even though he did not want to kill 
her. However, while he was contemplating th is, the Buddha appeared in front of him and 
walking slowly away from him,. Angulimala call ed out to him to wait, to which the Buddha 
replied, “You are always going. I am always st aying still.” The Buddha then gave Angulimala 
teachings whereby his mind changed. However, because of the heavy negative karma he had 
created previously, when he was alone in his room he experienced the suffering of being 
burned by fire. In fact, when the Buddha told someone to stick an iron rod through a hole in the wall in order to verify this, the rod melt ed! Angulimala experienced this suffering as a 
                                             
 
148 The ten exceptions are set out in Je Tsongkhapa’s Great Treatise of the Stages of the Path : Actions carried out 
(1) in a dream, (2) unknowingly, (3) unconsciously, (4) without intensity or long duration, (5) mistakenly, (6) 
forgetfully, (7) without meaning to, (8) actions that are naturally neutral, (9) that have been purified through 
regret, or (10) through antidotes. 
149 Lit. “second” life. The “third life” was rendered as “next but one life” below. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
373 result of having killed 999 people, but later on, having purified his karma, he became a foe-
destroyer.   
Thursday afternoon, 7 April 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 114) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2 Specific considerations on karma  
A The way in which it is necessary to achieve a fully qualified basis 
[B Divisions] 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2A The way in which it is necessary to achieve a fully qualified basis  
Second: Through abandoning the ten non-virtues you do indeed obtain a good 
basis. However, if you achieve a fully qualified basis for accomplishing 
omniscience,150 it will be quite unlike others [with respect to] covering ground in 
meditating on the path. Therefore, you should attain that basis.  
 
By abandoning the ten non-virtuous actions, we will obtain a good basis or good rebirth, that 
is, a good body. However, it is necessary to achieve the particular basis for accomplishing 
omniscience – a precious human rebirth posse ssing the eighteen qualities of the eight 
freedoms and ten endowments. With such a body it  is easier to attain buddhahood since, by 
meditating on the path, one will quickly achieve enlightenment. With any other kind of body, 
even that of a god of the desire realm, form realm, or formless realm, it will take longer and 
not be easy to achieve omniscienc e. Although they are good rebirt hs, it takes longer for one to 
achieve buddhahood on this support because these beings have more enjoyments that distract 
them and make them have little in terest in achieving buddhahood.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B [Divisions] 
1 The fully ripened positive qualities and their functions 
2 The cause of the fully ripened [effects] 
This one has two points: the fully ripened positive qualities and their functions 
and the cause of the fully ripened [effects].  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-1 The fully ripened positive qualities and their functions 
A Excellent life span 
B Excellent complexion 
C Excellent extraction 
D Excellent power 
E Respectable words 
F Renowned as being very powerful  
G Being male  
H Having strength 
The first one has eight points: excellent li fe span, excellent co mplexion, excellent 
extraction151, excellent power, respectable word s ,  f a m e  a s  b e i n g  v e r y  p o w e r f u l ,  
being male, and having strength.  
                                              
150 JN: rnam mkhyen , literally, “knower of all aspects” 
151 This quality is not listed in the Sera edition of the text, however, it may be found in the Asian Classic Input 
Project version and in Je Tsongkhapa’s Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path . The present translation follows 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
374  
There are eight fruitional or fully ripened qualities: 
• having an excellent life span, 
• having an excellent complexion, 
• having an excellent extraction, 
• having excellent power, 
• others respecting one’s words, 
• being renowned as very powerful, 
• being male, and 
• having strength. 
Each of these qualities ha s its respective cause.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
A Excellent life span 
The first one is that due to an earlier thro wing [action], a long life has been thrown 
and one lives accordingly. Due to that, you undertake actions for the purpose of 
yourself and others and accumulate a lot of virtue for a long period of time.  
 
The cause of a long life is having created virtuous actions in previous lives by safeguarding 
others lives and so forth. Due to having a long  life, we can undertake actions for our own and 
others benefit and accumulate a lot of virtue for a long period of time.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Excellent complexion 
The second one refers to good complexion  and shape, complete sense powers, and 
balanced proportions. Due to this, disciple s, having been delighted at one’s very 
sight, are gathered and listen to one’s words.  
 
Due to having a good complexion and shape, complete sense powers, and good proportions, when other people see us they will like us, wh ereby we will be able to gather disciples and 
when we talk or teach them they will listen well.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Excellent extraction 
The third one is to be born into an exal ted and well-known family respected by the 
world. Due to this, one’s commands will be accomplished and not transgressed.  
 
Due to being born into a noble family that is respected by and renowned in the world, when 
we give commands to others they will not tr ansgress them but will accept them and carry 
them out. 
 
                                                                                                                                                      
the latter because otherwise the list of eight positive qualities would be incomplete . Apart from that it is 
included in the subsequent explanation of the qualities of the Sera edition as well. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
375 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D Excellent power  
The fourth one consists in massive resource s, friends, and followers. Due to this, 
one gathers a lot of sentient beings and ripens them. 
 
Due to being wealthy and having good relative s and surrounding beings, we will be able to 
gather many sentient beings and ripen their minds.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E Respectable words 
Fifth: As you do not deceive others th rough body or speech, sentient beings 
uphold your words. Due to this, you gather  sentient beings with the four [ways of] 
gathering [disciples], and ripen them.  
 
Due to not deceiving or cheating others by mean s of our body and speech, that is, not lying by 
means of our body language or by means of our speech, others will respect our words. By way 
of the four means of gathering di sciples, we will be able to gather sentient beings and ripen 
their minds. In other words, first we give th em material things, then we talk to them 
pleasantly, then we explain how to practice, an d then we too practice as we teach whereby 
others will believe us.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
F Renowned as being very powerful  
Sixth: Due to possessing positive qualities such as diligence in generosity and so 
forth, you become an object of veneration  of great beings. {115} Due to this, they 
help you with all activities, whereby they  acknowledge your deeds and quickly heed 
your commands.  
 
Due to having good qualities such as putting e ffort into the practice of the six perfections, 
generosity, morality, patience, and so forth, we will become an object of veneration of great 
beings. Due to this, they will help us in whatev er we do, listen to what we say, and quickly 
follow our commands.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
G Being male  
The seventh one is to possess a male organ. Thereby you become a vessel152 for all 
good qualities and, through aspiration and effort, a vessel for expanding wisdom. 
You will not be afraid among people, and no one will prevent you from going together with all sentient bein gs or living in seclusion. 
                                             
 
152 As has been noted above in the context of the teacher-disciple relation ship, the term vessel ( snod) refers to 
someone fit for receiving instructions etc. In Je Tsongk hapa’s – and to some extent even contemporary – Tibet 
these were mainly men. The social determination is obvious from the following explanation of advantages 
associated with this quality. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
376  
Due to being a male, we will be a vessel of all good qualities and a vessel for expansive wisdom. As a man we will be able to abide in isolated places without fear, whereas in such 
places women experience fear of being raped and so  forth. This is said from the point of view 
of sutra, however according to tantra men and women have the same possibility to practice 
and achieve enlightenment in this very life. Howe ver, from the point of view of sutra there are 
differences that are related to the culture that existed in India at the time of the Buddha’s 
teaching. So don’t worry, okay?! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
H Possessing strength 
Eighth: By the power of previous actions,  there naturally being few harms and no 
disease, one will have great enthusiasm that arises from the conditions of this life. 
Due to that, you will not get discouraged by whatever goals you or others may 
have, and in dependence on intense enth usiasm you will attain the power of 
individual investigation whereupon supernormal cognitive powers153 will quickly 
[develop].  
 
Due to the power of our previous actions of meditating and so forth, we will naturally 
experience little harm and illness and we will  have great delight that arises from the 
conditions of this life. We will not get discoura ged or weary with respect to our own or others 
welfare, and we will attain the power of indivi dual investigation and thereby quickly achieve 
clairvoyance.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 115) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2 The causes of  the fully ripened [effects] 
A Division of the causes in eight 
B Threefold division 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2A Division of the causes in eight 
The second one has eight points, the first of  which is to not harm to any sentient 
being and to cultivate an attitude of non-harm. Furthermore, it says: 
 
Through freeing those caught in places of slaughter 
And likewise helping through [giving] life, Through reversing harming creatures You will gain longevity. 
 
From a doctor’s respect for the ill, From the administration of medicine, From not harming creatures with sticks Or lumps of earth, you will be without illness. 
 
                                             
 
153 JN: mngon shes , clairvoyance  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
377 There are eight causes of the ei ght fruitional or fully ripened results. The cause of the first, 
having an excellent life span, is  to not harm any sentient being and to rely on a mind of non-
harmfulness. Due to saving animals that a butc her is leading to slaughter, through helping 
others in danger, through turning away harm to others’ lives, and so forth, we will have a long 
life. Likewise, if we take care of the sick, give  them medicines, and so forth, we will have a 
long life. Similarly, through not harming others with lumps of earth, sticks, and so forth, we 
will be free from illness and thereby have a lo ng life. Due to having a long life and good 
health, we can achieve whatever we wish, whereas if we are often sick and have a short life or 
are mentally depressed we will not be able to achieve much.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The second one is to offer light, such as butter lamps, and new clothing. Apart 
from that:  
 
From the absence of anger as basis 
And offering jewelry – a good physique. From lack of envy [you will gain] Good fortune as fruit, it is explained. 
 If we eliminate the darkness with candles, butte rlamps, and so forth in order to help others 
and give them new clothing, shoes, cushions , and so forth, we will obtain the second 
fruitional results – a good complexion and a clea r mind. As the verse says, by relying on non-
anger and giving others ornaments or jewelry such as earrings, necklaces, and so forth, we will 
obtain a good body. As a result of being free fr om jealousy, we will have good fortune or good 
luck, that is, everything will go well for us, both mentally and physically.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The third one is to overcome one’s pride and respect gurus and others like a 
servant.  The fourth one is to give food, clothing , and so forth to those who ask for it and 
to also benefit [others] without being asked, and, while lacking necessities, to give 
away to the suffering and to those who are fields of positive qualities.  
 {116} The fifth one is the habit of aban doning the four non-virtues of speech.  
 The sixth one is to make aspirational prayers to accomplish all kinds of positive qualities in the future and to make offe rings to the Three Jewels, one’s parents, 
shravakas and pratyekabuddhas,
154 abbots, masters, and gurus. 
 The seventh one is to rejoice in the good  qualities of men, without rejoicing to 
see the disadvantages regarding women, to  oppose the inclinations of those who 
wish for a female body, and to liberate those whose male organs are to be cut. 
 The eighth one is to carry out yourself what others cannot do at all, to help them with what they can do together with you,  and to give food and drink to others.  
                                             
 
154 JN: nyan rang , hearers and solitary realizers 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
378  
The cause of the third fruitional result, having an  excellent extraction, is to destroy our pride 
and to respect our gurus and other beings like  a servant. The cause of the fourth, having 
e x c e l l e n t  p o w e r ,  i s  t o  g i v e  b e g g a r s  f o o d ,  c l o t h i n g ,  m o n e y ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h ,  t o  h e l p  t h o s e  w h o  
need help even though they have not asked for it, to give to those who are suffering, and to 
make offerings to those who are fields of good qualities. We should give without hoping for a 
reward.  
 The cause of the fifth, others respecting one’s  words, is to abandon the four non-virtues of 
speech – lying and so forth. The cause of the sixth, being renowned as very powerful, is to 
make prayers to accomplish various good qualitie s in our future lives and to make offerings to 
the Three Jewels, our parents, hearers, solita ry realizers, abbots, masters, and gurus.  
 The cause of the seventh, being male, is to de light in the good qualities of men and to not 
delight in women but to see the disadvantages of  doing so (for example, attachment to her 
body, which is soft to th e touch and so forth, that brings th e bad result of committing a defeat 
and so forth), to oppose the aspiration of th ose who desire a woman’s body, and to free those 
whose male organs are to be castrated. In In dia there were people who were castrated and 
turned into eunuchs, whereas here in Italy male  dogs and cats are taken to a veterinarian to 
be castrated as a form of birth control. In Ti bet the nomads would castrate the male goats, 
sheep, and so forth in the springti me as this would make their meat  taste better. In the past in 
Tibet there was a king who castra ted several men like animals bu t, unlike the animals, they 
died from the operation due to which a law wa s passed forbidding the castration of human 
males! 
 The cause of the eighth, possessing strength, is  to do ourselves what others are unable to 
do, to help others by adding our strength to th eir strength, and to give others food and drink. 
In other words, we can either do others’ work for them if they are unable to do it, or we can help them by putting our strength  together with theirs in order,  for example, to move a table. 
If they ask for our help but we are unable to help them, we should at least apologize for our 
inability to help them. We should not get an gry when others ask for our help and make 
excuses that we are too busy or need to go somewhere!  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B Threefold division  
When those eight causes are conjoined with three [more] causes, their fully 
ripened effects will be outstanding. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B1 The first cause: a perfectly pure mind 
A Aspects related to oneself 
B Aspects related to others 
As for the three causes, [the first one,] a perfectly pure mind, has two aspects 
related to oneself. 
A Aspects related to oneself 
They are: 1. to dedicate the virtues of accompli shing those causes to unsurpassed 
enlightenment without hoping for a fully ripened effect, and 
2. to accomplish the causes intensely from the bottom of one’s heart.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
379  
The first of the three causes is a completely pu re mind. It has two aspects related to oneself: 
1. to dedicate virtues to enlighte nment without hope of reward, 
2. to make a strong determination from the botto m of one’s heart to achieve these causes and 
to achieve enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Aspects related to others 
The two aspects related to others are: 
1. to give up envy, competitiveness, an d scorn at the sight of the highest, 
intermediate, and least [practitioners] in agreement with the Dharma and to 
rejoice,  
2. even if you do not manage to do that  [completely], to examine many times a 
day what to do.  
 
There are two aspects related to others. With re spect to those who are superior, middling, and 
inferior, we should respectively abandon jeal ousy, competitiveness, and scorn and instead 
rejoice in whatever they do. In addition, we sh ould examine ourselves ma ny times a day to see 
whether when we see people who are superior je alousy arises, when we see people who are our 
peers whether competitiveness arises, and when we see people who are inferior whether scorn 
or disdain arises. If we see that any of these atti tudes arise, we should try to eliminate it since 
in this way we will gradually improve.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B2 The second cause: pure performance 
A Related to oneself 
Pure performance related to oneself implies long duration, continuity and 
intensity. 
 
Pure performance related to oneself means to do  it for a long time, without interruption, and 
very intensely.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Related to others 
Related to others, [pure performance ] is to cause someone who has not correctly 
taken [the rules of ethical discipline] to do  so, to express praise for those who have 
taken them so that they gene rate delight, to make them do so continuously, and to 
make them not abandon them. 
 
Pure performance related to others is that when others have not correctly taken vows to 
encourage them to take vows such as the Eigh t Mahayana precepts, the one-day lay vows, and 
so forth. Then when others have taken them, we should praise them in order to make them delight in this, make them do  so continuously, and make them not give them up. For 
example, if we know someone who once a week on the weekend engages in some practice, we 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
380 should encourage that person to try to do th at practice everyday. On the other hand, if 
someone is thinking to give up practicing even  just once a week on the weekend, we should 
encourage him or her to keep doing it every weekend and to not give it up.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B3 The third cause: a pure field 
Since the very two – the attitude and perf ormance – produce plenty of good fruit, 
they resemble a field. 
 
Because our attitude and performance are pure they will bring many good results, due to 
which they are like a field in which we can sow seeds that bring the result of plants. 
 
Friday morning, 8 April 2005 
 
(Oral transmission 10:50-11:10 page 117-124)  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 117) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3 After these considerations how to engage [in virtuous actions] and oppose [the 
non-virtuous] 
A General presentation 
B Specifically how to purify by means of the four powers 
{117} The third one – after these considerations how to engage [in virtuous actions] and 
oppose– has two points: general presentation and specifically how to purify by 
means of the four powers. 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3A General presentation 
1 How to bring forth a mind cultivating this perpetually, day and night  
First: In Engaging in [Bodhisattva ] Behavior it says:  
 
Suffering springs from what is non-virtuous. 
‘How to reach certain freedom from it?’ 
It is appropriate, day and night, 
Always to think about nothing but this. 
 
And: 
 
The root of everything that’s virtuous Is aspiration, the Muni said. Again, the root of that is always To meditate on fully ripened effects. 
 
In accordance with this statement, you should come to understand positive and 
negative actions and their effects and then meditate on them over and over again, 
for [the karmic process] is a very hidden phenomenon which is why it is extremely difficult to gain certainty about it.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
381  
Due to having created many non-virtuous action s, specifically the ten non-virtues, suffering 
will definitely arise. Therefore, we need to think day and night about how to become free 
from these non-virtuous actions, in other words,  how to purify them. In short, we need t o 
think again and again about the fact that havi ng created negative actions they will bring 
suffering, until a clear understanding of this arises and we generate the mind determined to 
abandon or stop creating non-virtuous actions.  
 Buddha Shakyamuni said that the root of all that  is virtuous is belief or confidence in the 
law of actions and their results. We need to  think about what the Buddha taught and to 
generate faith in it, whereby we will engage in virtuous actions and strive to avoid non-
virtuous actions. Thus, we need to think about the fruitional or fully ripened result of non-
virtuous actions, which is rebirt h in the bad migrations, and that of virtuous results, which is 
rebirth in the happy migrations . Understanding this clearly, we should strive to abandon 
creating non-virtuous actions and strive at all times to create virtuous actions. We need to 
think again and again about white actions an d their results and black actions and their 
results, and to do analytical me ditation on this. The law of acti ons and their results is not easy 
t o  u n d e r s t a n d  n o r  i s  i t  e a s y  t o  g a i n  c e r t a i n t y  with respect to it because it is a very hidden 
phenomenon. In fact, the law of actions and re sults cannot be understood on the basis of 
logic or reasoning but only on the basis of what  the Buddha taught it, that is, on the basis of 
scriptural authority. Unlike fire, which is no t a hidden phenomenon, it cannot be understood 
by inference based on reasoning such as “There is fire because there is smoke.” Also unlike 
impermanence, it cannot be understood base d on reasoning such “Things are impermanent 
because they change momentarily.” The detail s of the law of cause and result cannot be 
understood by reasoning but only by relying on the scriptures of the Buddha. In other words, 
only by having faith in the Buddha’s teachings ca n we understand the law of cause and result.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The vital importance of gaining conviction concerning the Buddha’s statements about how actions 
[bring about] effects 
In this regard the King of Concentration  [Sutra ] says:  
 
Even if the moon and stars fell down, 
The earth collapsed with mountains and with towns, And if the heaven’s aspect was transformed – Still no word you said would be untrue. 
 You should thus develop conviction in th e words of the Tathagata and sustain it. 
Unless you have gained uncontrived certai nty regarding them, you will not gain 
the certainty with regard to any Dhar ma that gladdens the Conqueror.  
 We need to develop conviction in the Buddha’s teachings about actions and their results. The 
King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra  says that even if the moon  and stars were to fall down, 
even if the earth together with the mountains an d villages were to be destroyed, and even if 
the aspect of space were to change into so mething else, still Buddha Shakyamuni words would 
not become untrue. In other words, since he neve r lies but always tells the truth, we need to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
382 develop belief in him and in his teachings. If we do not understand this correctly, we will not 
gain conviction in the Tathagata’s teachings.  O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d ,  i f  w e  g a i n  b e l i e f  a n d  
certainty in them, we will delight the Conque ror. In other words, by gaining faith and 
certainty in the Dharma, the Conquerors, who ar e omniscient and know everything, will be 
delighted. If, on the other hand, we fight with  others, steal from them , speak harsh words to 
them, and so forth, while the buddhas will not become unhappy, neither will they delight. 
Rather they will think th at they cannot help us because our mi nd is not yet ripe since we only 
engage in negative actions. Although the Buddh a has given teachings, only if we, from our 
own side, put them into practice can our inner realizations grow. If we do not have much 
confidence in the Buddha’s teachings, do not understand them deeply, and do not practice 
them much, there will still be some result but it will be much less. Therefore, we need to 
understand the meaning of the Buddha’s scriptures.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Meditation on emptiness becomes helpful for gaining certainty with respect to actions and their 
results  
Some profess to have gained certainty with respect to emptiness and do not have 
certainty with respect to actions and their results nor care about it, however they have arrived at a mistaken understandin g of emptiness for if you understand 
emptiness, having seen it to be the me aning of dependent relation it becomes 
helpful for generating certainty with re spect to actions and their results.  
 
By meditating on emptiness we can gain cert ainty with respect to the law of actions and 
results. This is because in order to understand  emptiness, we need to understand dependent-
arising or dependent-relation. If we understand  dependent-relation, we will understand that 
in dependence on good causes good results will arise, and that in dependence on bad causes 
bad results will arise. Thus, non-virtuous action s, which are bad, bring about the bad result of 
suffering, whereas virtuous actions, which are g ood, bring about the good result of happiness. 
The more we meditate on emptiness, the more we will come to understand this because in 
order to meditate on emptiness it is necessary to meditate on dependent-arising. In this way 
we will come to understand the law of cause and result and gain certainty with respect to it.  
 If someone, on the other hand, says that they have gained cert ainty with respect to 
emptiness but do not take care of the law of ac tions and their results, this shows that they 
have not understood the law of actions and re sults and have a mistaken understanding of 
emptiness. Such people think that they have realized emptiness but in fact they have a 
completely mistaken understanding of it. This is because if someone understands emptiness, 
he or she necessarily understands dependent-aris ing. In fact, emptiness is understood by way 
of reasonings such as: the table is empty of inherent existence because it is a dependent-
arising. In other words, because it is empty,  it is a dependent-arising. By understanding 
emptiness, we understand dependent-relation. Thus, meditation on emptiness is a favorable 
condition for understanding the law of actions and their results. Here we are not talking 
about meditating on an empty stomach or an empty room, we are talking about the emptiness 
of true existence or inherent ex istence. Why is something empty of inherent existence? It is 
empty of inherent existence because it depends on causes and conditions, because it depends 
on parts, and so forth. By means of such re asonings we meditate on emptiness. There are 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
383 those who call themselves Mahayanists but, not understanding the meaning of emptiness, 
contemplate a nothingness, a lack of all phenom ena, and try to stop thoughts from arising. 
This, however, is mistaken.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
From the same sutra:  
 
Like an illusion, a bubble, a mirage, or lightning, All phenomena are like the moon in water. Although human beings who pass to another world  After death don’t perceive this,  {118} Actions once done do not disappear; 
White or black they cause like effects to ripen. 
The logical approach is good, but the Jina’s  Object is subtle and hard to see. 
 All phenomena are like illusions, bubbles, mirage s, lightening, and the reflection of the moon 
in water in the sense that they  are not inherently or truly existent. Illusions or magical 
emanations are not true, they arise due to the power of substance and mantra. However, even 
though they are not true, they appear to be true. Bubbles, on the other hand, appear to be 
solid but are not; they easily disappear. A mirage is a vision  of water on a summer day in a 
location where no body of water exists. Phenom ena are also like lightning. After sentient 
beings die they pass to another world, that is, th ey do not go to another country in this world 
but go to another realm. When we die, we do  not cease to exist. While our contaminated 
body of flesh and bones which came from our parents is left behind, our feeling, discrimination, compositional factors, and cons ciousness aggregates remain and seek another 
body.   Actions that were done before do not become non-existent. White and black karma 
respectively bring white or happy and black or  suffering fruitional results. This way of 
reasoning is good, but the law of actions and th eir results can only be understood slightly 
from reasonings since the way in  which actions bring results is very subtle and difficult to 
understand. It cannot be seen by the eyes, and is only an object that is seen directly by the 
Conqueror.   In short, the results of actions are difficult to understand. Karma needs conditions in order 
to bring its result, only when they come together will it bring a result. Thus, if the karma exists but the conditions do not come together, it will not bring its re sult. Both causes and 
conditions are necessary in order to bring fort h a result. For example, if a flower seed, the 
cause, exists and we sow it in a field but the conditions of water, heat, and fertilizer are lacking, even though the seed is healthy it wi ll not grow into a flower due to lacking the 
necessary conditions. On the other hand, when th e conditions are presen t the seed will give 
rise to a flower. Thus, a cause alone without co nditions is not sufficient to bring a result. 
Likewise, the many seeds or imprints on our co nsciousness will ripen and produce their result 
only upon particular conditions are met.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
384  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 The uselessness of mere knowledge if you do not think about actions and their results 
Therefore, you should generate certainty wi th respect to the two [types of] karma, 
the causes, along with their effects, and constantly, day and night, cut yourself off 
from the bad migrations by means of examining the three gates. To not be 
proficient at first in the distinctions of cause and effect and to know a bit but to 
still act carefree with regard to the thr ee gates only opens the gate to the bad 
migrations.  
 
If we know only a bit about the law of cause an d result but do not think much about it there 
will not be much benefit. There are two causes , white or virtuous actions and black or non-
virtuous actions, that have two results, happi ness and suffering. We need to understand this 
and gain certainty with respect to it, and then  constantly, day and night, examine the three 
doors of our body, speech, and mind. In other words, we should examine day and night what 
our body is doing, what our speech is saying, an d what our mind is thinking. In this way, we 
will come to understand that by not engaging in non-virtuous actions with our body, speech, 
and mind, we can cut the root of rebirth in  the bad migrations, meaning that we can 
interrupt the taking of rebirth in the lower real ms. On the other hand, if we do not think like 
this, it will be difficult to do.  
 Hence, if someone only understands the law of  cause and result a little bit, is not very 
skillful with respect to it, and does not put much  effort into guarding the three doors but acts 
without conscientiousness, he or she will not be able to block the door to rebirth in the lower 
realms. In other words, such a person will be unable to put a stop to rebirth in the lower realms due to being careless and thereby creating non-virtuous actions, ev en though he or she 
has some understanding of actions and their result s. Because no effort is needed in order to 
create non-virtuous actions, we need to be ca reful regarding the actions of our body, speech, 
and mind. In particular, we need to develop the intention to not engage in non-virtuous 
actions. We should not allow our mind to mo ve toward a motivation to engage in non-
virtuous actions of body and speech. For action s of body and speech a mo tivation is necessary. 
It is intention that moves the m i n d  t o  n o n - v i r t u e  o r  v i r t u e  d u e  t o  w h i c h  w e  c r e a t e  n o n -
virtuous and virtuous actions. “Intention” is co nsidered to be action of mind. We should not 
allow our mind to move toward non-virtuous  actions and instead make it move toward 
virtuous actions of body and speech. If we do th is, we will experience good results, whereas if 
we do not, we will experience bad results. Just as people cannot come into a room if the door is closed, we need to close the door to the lower realms.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In the Sutra Requested by  [the Naga King ] Sagara  it says:  
 
Lord of Nagas, one Dharma of th e bodhisattvas cuts right through 
falling down and being born in ba d migrations. What is that one 
Dharma? It is this: the individual investigation regarding virtuous 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
385 phenomena thinking, “What am I do ing? Am I straying away from 
them or abiding in them night and day?” 
 
That which cuts falling into and being reborn in the bad migrations is one Dharma of the 
bodhisattvas. What is that one Dharma? It is at all times, day and night, to understand that if 
we create non-virtue we will take a bad rebirth wh ereas if we create virtue we will take a good 
rebirth. Not wishing to go to the bad migratio ns, we need to practice virtue. We need to 
understand this by means of doing analytical me ditation on it. Hence, we need to think day 
and night, “What will happen if I create non-virtuous actions? I will go to the bad migrations. 
On the other hand, if I create virtuous actions, I will not.” We need to understand and think 
about this and stop engaging in non-virtuous acti ons. In this way, we will close the door to 
rebirth in the lower realms, that is, we will interrupt or cut rebirth in the lower realms.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 How to turn away from faulty conduct through such considerations  
As for how to turn away from faulty cond uct through such considerations, it says 
in the Chapter of the Truthful One :  
 
O King, do not commit the act of killing. 
For every being life is a great loss, Therefore, we all wish to keep it long. Even deep down you should not consider killing. 
 Like this, you should familiarize with rely ing on the mind of restraint a lot without 
your motivation even moving towards mi sdeeds like the ten non-virtues and the 
like. 
 With respect to how to turn away from faulty conduct through such th oughts, the Buddha in 
this sutra tells the king to not kill, saying that for all beings it is a great loss to be killed since 
everyone cherishes their life, that therefore ever yone wishes to remain alive for a long time, 
and that he should not have the slightest mental thought wi shing to kill. We too should 
abandon engaging in misdeeds such as killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisive 
speech, harsh words, idle talk, covetousness, malice, and wrong view. We should not allow 
even the slightest motivation or intention to aris e in our mind to kill, to  steal, to engage in 
sexual misconduct, to lie, and so forth. Mentally  we should not allow such thoughts to arise, 
b u t  i f  t h e y  d o  w e  s h o u l d  s t o p  t h e m  i m m e d i ately and familiarize with the thought to not 
engage in any non-virtuous actions. By doin g this, we will become able to abstain from 
creating non-virtuous actions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
6 The principle of action in accordance with statements of the former Kadampas  
Khamlungpa said to Puchungpa: “Geshe [Drom Ton]pa taught that only actions 
and their results are of vital importance , however, nowadays explaining this, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 4-8 April 2005 (08) 
386 listening to it, and meditating on it are ma de out to be worthless. I wonder is this 
just because it is difficult to practice?” and Puchungpa said: {119} “It is just so.” 
 
Khamlungpa, a Kadam geshe whose present incarn ation is a layman with a wife and child 
who stays together with Geshe So pa in the United States, said  to Puchungpa “The virtuous 
friend said that the law of cause and result is very important but nowadays there are those 
who think that explaining it, list ening to it, and meditating on it are worthless. Is that just 
because it is difficult to practice?” Puch ungpa replied saying, “It is like that.”  
 
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
387 Monday afternoon, 11 April 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 119) says:  
 
 Dromtonpa said: “Followers of Jowo [Atisha], audacity is totally inappropriate, 
dependent origination is subtle.” Puchun gpa said: “In my old age I am [at last] 
getting on with the Sutra of the Wise and the Foolish155.” And Sharawa said: “The 
Buddha taught that whatever errors and fa ults come about, they should not be 
blamed on a bad direction or a bricklayer’s  work; it is simply that ‘This action 
having been done, this is produced.’” 
 
The way in which karma – a dependent-arising – functions is very subtle, therefore we must 
be careful to avoid creating even very slight  negative actions. Puchungpa, a Kadampa lama, 
said that in his old age he would read and familiarize himself with the Sutra of the Wise and the 
Foolish . We too should study this sutra that se t out how karma works. Geshe Sharawa said 
that the Buddha taught that every error and faul t that arises, come from our actions. Having 
done a non-virtuous action, the result of bad rebirth in the lower realms and so forth will 
come about. For this reason, we should not bl ame other people, saying that our problems are 
their fault. We need to understand that they  are our fault since it is we who did the non-
virtuous actions of killing, stealing, sexual mi sconduct, and so forth. Due to the many non-
virtuous actions that we have created, suffering is produced. Why do beings take rebirth in the bad migrations? Does someone throw them  there? No, only their own non-virtuous 
actions throw them there. In other words, such rebirths are the result of their own actions. 
Understanding this, we must strive as much as possible not to create negative actions. We should not think that small non-virtuous acti ons do not matter since they too will bring the 
unpleasant result of suffering. Therefore, we need to be careful at all times.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B Specifically how to purify [non-virtues] by means of the four powers 
1 How negativities and downfalls need to be purified by various means in accordance with the 
statements of the Teacher Buddha 
[2 How to redress downfalls 
3 How to redress negative actions 
4 How the four powers are complete with all the antidotes  
5 The manner of purification  6 How it is necessary to strive not to be tainted by faulty conduct from the start] 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-1 How negativities and downfalls need to be purified by various means in accordance with 
the statements of the Teacher Buddha 
Second: If despite your effort not to be ta inted by such faulty conduct, some fault 
occurs under the influence of non-consci entiousness or the multitude of mental 
afflictions, etc., it is inappropriate to let the matter rest without giving it any 
consideration. It is, therefore, necessary  t o  m a k e  a n  e f f o r t  a t  t h e  m e a n s  f o r  
redressing it taught by the compassionate Teacher.  
 
                                              
155 This sutra consists of numerous life stories il lustrating the karmic consequences of actions. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
388 We need to put effort into not being stained by  faulty conduct, but when faults arise due to 
non-conscientiousness, many afflictions, and so forth, we should think that this is not good 
and put effort into purifying them by applyi ng the methods, such as the four opponent 
powers, that were taught by Buddha Shakyamuni.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-2 How to redress downfalls  
More specifically, as regards redressing down falls, this should be done as explained 
according to the three individual [types of] vows. 
 
While “the three vows” could refer to the lay vo ws, novice vows, and vows of full ordination, 
here they probably refer to the vows of indivi dual liberation, the bodhisattva vows, and the 
tantra vows. When, for example, we transgress one the eight types of vows of individual 
liberation, we should purify them in accordan ce with the explanations of how to redress 
them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3 How to redress negativities 
A The power of remorse  
B The power of thorough application of antidotes 
C The power of preventing faults in future 
D The power of the support 
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3A The power of remorse 
Redressing negativities should be done by means of the four powers. Among them, 
the first power is the power of remorse,156 which is much regret for the non-
virtuous deeds one has done since beginningless time. For it to arise, it is necessary 
to meditate on how the three [types of] effects, such as the fully ripened ones, are produced. When applying this [power], you should do it through the confession in 
the Sacred Golden Light Sutra  and the confession by means of the thirty-five 
buddhas. 
 To purify our negativities we need to apply the four opponent powers: 1. the opponent power of regret, 
2. the opponent power of the resolve not to do it again, 
3. the opponent power of applying an antidote, 
4. the opponent power of relying on the basis – going for refuge and generating the mind of 
enlightenment that wishes to attain enlightenm ent for the benefit of all sentient beings.  
The opponent power of repudiation or regret is  generated by thinking about the fact that 
from beginningless time until now we have cr eated such non-virtuous actions and thereby 
generating strong regret or remo rse for them. In order to genera te sincere regret, we need to 
understand that every action ha s three types of results: a fully  ripened or fruitional result, a 
result similar to the cause, and an environmen tal or empowering result. The fruitional result 
of non-virtuous actions is to be reborn in the lower realms as a hell being, hungry ghost, or 
                                             
 
156 JN: sun ‘byin pa’i stobs , more literally “power of repudiation” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
389 animal. When this karma has been somewhat ex hausted, we once again take rebirth in the 
human realm where we will still have to experi ence the result similar to the cause and the 
environmental result. We need to think about and meditate on how this happens. Then we 
need to do the confession found in the Sutra of Golden Light  or the confession in relation to 
the thirty-five buddhas ( Confession of the Downfalls of a Bodhisattva ). 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B The power of thorough application of antidotes  
1 Based on the profound sets of sutras 
2 Aspiration for emptiness 
3 Based on recitation 4 Based on images 
5 Based on making offerings 
6 Based on names 
The second one, the power of thorough ap plication of antidotes, has six points: 
based on the profound sutras, aspiration for emptiness, based on recitation, based 
on images, based on making offerings, and based on names.  
 
The power of thorough application of antidotes is of six types: 
1. the power of the antidote based on  the profound sets of sutras, 
2. the power of the antidote of aspiration for emptiness, 
3. the power of the antidote based on recitation, 
4. the power of the antidote based on images, 
5. the power of the antidote based on making offerings, and 
6. the power of the antidote based on names.  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B1 Based on the profound sets of sutras 
The first one is to absorb the words of th e sets of sutras like the Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutras, retain them, read them, and so forth.  
 
With respect to the power of the antidote based on the profound sets of sutras, in order to 
purify negativities we can recite, for example, from among the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, 
the Diamond Cutter Sutra , retain or memorize it, and read it. We can also recite other sutras, 
for example, the Eight Thousand Verse Perf ection of Wisdom Sutra , memorize parts of it, and read 
it. We can also recite, memorize, and read the Heart Sutra . The subject matter of all these 
sutras is emptiness, and we need to understand and meditate on emptiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B2 Aspiration for emptiness 
The second one is to engage in the realit y that is selflessness and clear light {120} 
and to be convinced with respect to primordial purity.  
 
W e  c a n  a l s o  p u r i f y  n e g a t i v i t i e s  b y  d e v e l o p i n g  a n  a s p i r a t i o n  f o r  o r  a n  a p p r e c i a t i o n  o f  t h e  
reality that emptiness or selflessness or clear light.  There is a both a clear light that is an object 
and a clear light that is an object-possessor or su bject (that is, a mind). The clear light that is 
an object is the emptiness of all phenomena of  true or inherent existence, that is, the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
390 emptiness of phenomena of existing from  their own side. Since all phenomena are 
dependent-arisings, they are empty of inherent existence. We can meditate on the selflessness 
of persons thinking that the self does not exis t independently, permanently, or without parts, 
or that it is not self-sufficient substantially ex istent, or that it is not truly or inherently 
existent. We can also meditate on the selflessne ss of phenomena in relation to the aggregates. 
We have five aggregates that are the basis on wh ich the person or self is imputed. These five 
are the form aggregate, feeling aggregate, di scrimination aggregate, compositional factors 
aggregate, and consciousnesses aggregate. If we  examine whether or not these five aggregates 
exist from their own side, we will find that the form aggregate does not exist from its own side 
but is a dependent phenomenon. The same is true  of the other four a ggregates. For example, 
the compositional factors aggregate is composed of  forty-nine of the fifty-one mental factors by 
excluding feeling and discrimination which are re spectively included in the feeling aggregate 
and discrimination aggregate. We should examin e each one of the forty-nine mental factors, 
thinking about how they exist and how they functi on. By doing so, we will find that none of 
them exists inherently. Therefore, neither the person, the aggregates, on e’s belongings, and so 
forth exist truly or inherently. Meditating in this  way, we should strive to see the object of 
negation – existence from its own side – and then negate it. Phenomena are empty of true 
existence; this particular absence is what is called “emptiness.” We should focus the mind on 
this emptiness and develop confidence in the fa ct that all phenomena do not exist inherently. 
From the beginning all phenomena are free from inherent existence, th us they never existed 
independently or inherently due to which they are said to be primordially pure. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B3 Based on recitation 
A The need to make an effort at recitation until signs appear that the negativities have been purified  
The third one is the recitation of special dharanis like the hundred-syllable mantra 
according to [the respective] ritual. In [the Sutra ] Requested by Subahu  it says: 
 
As the flames of forest fires in spring, 
Uncontained, burn all the underbrush, Discipline’s wind fans fires of recitation, Burning negativities with the flames of great joyous effort.  
 
As the sun strikes snow with rays of light Which, overwhelmed, does no t withstand its brilliance, 
When discipline’s sun and rays of recitation strike The snow of negativities, it wastes away.  As bringing out a butter lamp in darkness, 
Dispels the darkness so there’s nothing left, 
The darkness of negativities collected in a thousand lives Is quickly dispelled by the lamp of recitation. 
 Moreover, [you should continue the recitati on] until you see signs that negativities 
have been purified.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
391  
We should purify our negativities by reciting  the hundred-syllable mantra and so forth until 
signs that they have been purified arise. One of  the main ways of purifying negativities is to 
recite the hundred-syllable mantra of Vajrasattva,  for which reason it is  often included at the 
beginning of a long sadhana. We should do this purification practice every day together with 
the development of regret for whatever nega tivities we have committed and the firm 
resolution to not commit them again.  
 The Sutra  Requested by Subahu says that in the spring when it is hot and has not rained, even 
a tiny flame can start a huge fire that destroys  an entire forest. Similarly, the fire of our 
recitation burns all our negativities when acco mpanied by the wind of morality, which makes 
our recitation strong and effective. Likewise, just  as the heat of the sun melts the snow on the 
mountains whereby they lose their magnificence as rocks and soil are revealed, likewise the 
sun of our morality and the rays of our recitation purify our negativities. Also, just as a lamp 
dispels darkness, the recitation of the Vajras attva mantra dispels the many negativities 
accumulated since beginningless time. We should engage in purification until signs of purification arise.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The signs 
In the Dharani of Exhortation  the signs are said to be dreaming in dreams of 
vomiting bad food, drinking and vomiting things like yogurt or milk, seeing the 
sun and moon, traveling in the sky, burnin g fire, withstanding buffaloes and black 
people, seeing a sangha of fully-ordaine d monks and nuns, climbing a tree from 
which milk emerges, an elephant, a bull , a mountain, a lion throne, or a fine 
house, and hearing the Dharma.  
 
Signs of purification include dreaming of vomiti ng bad food, drinking and vomiting yogurt or 
milk, seeing the sun or moon rise, traveling in  the sky, burning fire, subduing a black buffalo 
or a black man, seeing a sangha of monks an d nuns, climbing a tree from which white milk-
like sap arises, climbing on an elephant or a bull, climbing a mountain, a lion-throne, or a 
fine house or palace, and listening to the Dhar ma. When we have purified our negativities, 
such signs occur in dreams. On the other hand, if bad dreams ar ise when purifying, it shows 
that we are not doing the purification well  and that we are making some mistake.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B4 Based on images 
The fourth one is, having gained confiden ce in the Buddha, to create images of 
him. 
 
Another antidote is, having generated faith in th e Buddha, to make images, such as tsa-tsas, of 
buddhas. For example, we can make images of  Buddha Shakyamuni, the thirty-five buddhas, 
Vajrasattva, as well as any other image of buddh as. Previously the word “tsa-tsa” in Tibetan 
was used to refer only to small, round clay stupas made from a metal mould. However, 
nowadays all small clay images of buddhas are called tsa-tsas.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
392  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B5 Based on making offerings 
The fifth one is to make various types of  offerings to the Buddha and his stupas. 
 
Another antidote is to make various types of o fferings, such as those usually set out on an 
altar, to the Buddha, to images of the buddhas, and to stupas.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B6 Based on names 
The sixth one is to listen to and retain  the names of the buddhas and the great 
sons of the conquerors.  
 
These are the ones {121} that ar e explicitly mentioned in the Compendium of 
Instructions , however there are many others.  
 
Another antidote that purifies our negativities is to listen to and retain or memorize the 
names of the buddhas and great bodhisattvas an d then recite them. For example, we could 
listen to or recite the names of the thirty -five buddhas, the mantra of Buddha Shakyamuni 
OM MUNI MUNI MAHA MUNIYE SVAHA, or th e names of the eight close bodhisattvas 
such as Manjushri, Vajrapani, Maitreya, and so forth.  
 While these are the antidotes that are taught in the Compendium of Trainings , there are 
many more. For example, we can recite th e mantra of Kalachak ra (OM AH HUM HOH 
HAM KSHA MALAVARAYA HUM PHAT), the mantra of Vajrapani (OM VAJRAPANI 
HUM), the mantra of Manjushri (OM A RA PA CHA NA DHIH), and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 121) says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3C The power of turning away from faults in the future 
1 The actual [power] and its benefits  
The third one – the power of turning away  from faults in the future – is to 
completely restrain yourself fr om the ten non-virtues. In the Essence of the  Sun 
[Sutra ] it says that thereby the actions of the three doors [committed ] by means of 
killing and so on, as well as the afflicti ve obscurations and obscurations to the 
Dharma,157 whatever you have done, caused others to do, or rejoiced in before, are 
destroyed. 
 
We need to restrain ourselves from committing th e ten non-virtuous actions, that is, we need 
t o  s t o p  e n g a g i n g  i n  t h e m  a g a i n .  T h e r e f o r e ,  w e  s h o u l d  g e n e r a t e  a  s t r o n g  r e s o l u t i o n  i n  o u r  
mind not to do them again. For example, we  should resolve never to do again whatever 
negativities we have committed by means of our three doors – killing, stealing, and sexual 
                                              
157 The somewhat unusual term “ chos kyi sgrib pa ” is unclear. According to Geshe Soepa’s oral commentary it is 
either a synonym for “ shes sgrib ” i.e., “obscuration of objects of knowledge” or “ chos spong gi sgrib pa ”, i.e., 
“obscurations [caused] through abandoning the Dharma”. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
393 misconduct by means of the body, lying, divisive  speech, harsh words, an d idle talk by means 
of the speech, and covetousness, malice, and wr ong view by means the mind. We must also 
resolve not to abandon the Dharma again. In a ddition, we must purify those actions that we 
have not done ourselves but have caused others to do and those in which we have rejoiced by 
resolving not to do this again. Even by rejoicin g in the negative actions of others, although we 
did not actually do the action we too accumulate negative karma. Therefore, if we did that in 
the past, we need to purify it by generating re gret for it and making a strong determination or 
promise not to do it again in the future.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The importance of sincere restraint 
The Extensive Commentary  [on Vinaya ] explains that the inte ntion of the question 
asked in the passage “Is there restraint henc eforth?” is that a confession without a 
sincere mind of restraint is nothing but wo rds. Therefore the mind of restraint of 
not doing it henceforth is important. Its development also depends on the first 
power.  
 If we just recite the names of the thirty-f ive buddhas without regret and so forth, our 
confession becomes mere words and does not puri fy our negativities. This is why we need to 
first develop strong regret for our past negative  actions, then a strong  determination not to 
commit them again, and then to strongly apply an antidote. Only by doing this will we be able 
to purify our negativities. Thus, a strong resolu tion to not commit the ne gative action again is 
very important. Likewise, when monks and nuns do the Restoring and Purifying Rite (so-jong) 
in order to restore their virtues and purify their downfalls and faults, they need to make such 
a determination. As a basis for this resolution we  need the regret that thinks, “It is very bad 
that I did such an action. Therefore, I will not do it again.” Following the development of this 
mind, we should recite mantras such as the hund red-syllable mantra, recite sutras such as the 
Golden Light Sutra , the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, the Diamond Cutter Sutra , and so forth, 
or meditate on emptiness.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3D The power of the support 
The fourth one – the power of the support – is to go for refuge and cultivate the 
mind of enlightenment.  
 
In order to purify our negativities, we also n eed to go for refuge to the Three Jewels – the 
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. To do this proper ly we need to generate the two causes of 
going for refuge: (1) fear of the suffering of cycl ic existence in general and fear of the suffering 
of the three lower realms in particular and (2) the confidence or faith that the Three Jewels 
can protect us from this suffering. Having gene rated these two attitudes, we should recite a 
refuge formula such as “I go for refuge to the Buddha. I go for refuge to the Dharma. I go for 
refuge to the Sangha.” Alternatively we can also recite this or similar formulas in Sanskrit or 
Tibetan.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
394  Then we need to generate the mind of enli ghtenment – the wish to attain enlightenment 
in order to be able to take care of all sentient beings.  
 By means of the four opponent powers, we can purify all our negative karma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-4 How all the antidotes to harmful actions are complete within the four powers  
The Conqueror said that in general there is a diversity of ways for beginners to 
purify negativities, however the thoroughly complete antidote is the four powers in 
their entirety. 
 
The Conqueror said that in general there ar e different ways for beginners to purify 
negativities but that the thoroughly complete an tidote is the four powers in their entirety. 
This is important to note because if one or  more of the four powers is missing, our 
purification will not be complete due to which we will not be able to purify all four results of 
our negative actions. For this reason all fo ur opponent powers need to be complete.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-5 The manner of purifying 
A How the karma is not  categorically definite [in dependence on] whether the antidotes are complete or 
incomplete etc. in the one doing the purification  
The manner in which negativities are purified is as follows. Having purified, 
whether the causes for the arisal of th e great suffering of the bad migrations 
become causes for the arisal of minor suffe ring, or despite being reborn in the bad 
realms their sufferings are not experienced,  or they become a mere headache in 
one’s present form, and likewise whethe r something that would need to be 
experienced for a long time becomes some thing short or does not need to be 
experienced at all, is not categorically defi nite since it is also depends on the power 
of the one doing the purification being grea t or small, as well as the antidote – the 
four powers – being complete or incomple te, intense or not intense, the duration 
being long or short, and so on.  
 
Depending on the power of the on e doing the purification being great or small, as well as the 
antidote – the four powers – being complete or incomplete, intense or not intense, the 
duration being long or short, and so on, the ca uses for taking rebirth in the lower realms and 
experiencing great suffering can become the caus e of minor suffering. Alternatively, they can 
be experienced as a small suffering, for exampl e, as a bad headache, a stomach ache, and so 
forth in this very body.   Likewise, although we have created the cause to experience suffering for a very long time, having purified its cause we might experience su ffering only for a very short time or not have 
to experience it at all. In short, we human beings can apply all four opponent powers very strongly, whereby we can purify our negative karm a. On the other hand, if we do not do apply 
four opponent powers very strongly  or do not apply all of them, the result will not be definite.  
 Tuesday morning, 12 April 2005   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
395 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B How even karma that is definite [to be experienced] is purified from the root  
As for the statement in sutra and vinaya “A ctions are not lost even in a hundred 
eons,” {122} the intention is  that that is without cultivating the antidote of the 
four powers. However, in the commentary on the Eight Thousand  [Verse Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutra ] it says that through the antidote of the four powers, if purified in 
accordance with the explanations, even karm a that is definite to be experienced is 
purified.  
 
Both sutra and vinaya say that having created acti ons they do not go to waste even in hundred 
eons. However, this is in the specific case that we do not apply the antidote of the four 
opponent powers. In other words, if the four opponent powers are not applied, actions done 
even a hundred eons ago will not go to waste but will eventually bring their result, whereas 
when they are applied, they will not br ing their result. The commentary on the Eight Thousand 
Verse Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  says that if one applies th e four opponent powers in 
accordance with the explanations, even karma that is definite to be experienced will be 
purified. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Even if the one doing the purification does not completely purify karma of little strength, its effect will 
not come forth due to the full ripening having been weakened  
In Blaze of Reasoning  it says that once you have thus weakened the potential to 
bring forth a fully ripened effect by means of confession, [the resolve to exercise] 
restraint, and the like, the fully ripened e ffect will not come about even if other 
conditions are met. Likewise, the destructio n of roots of virtue by wrong views and 
anger is also similar.  
 
Even if by applying the four opponent powers we are unable to completely purify a negative 
karma, still its fully ripened or fruitional result will be weakened. In other words, by applying 
the antidotes but not doing so very strongly, th e potential of an action to produce a fully 
ripened result will be weakened and it will not be able to bring the full result. For example, 
when a barley or rice seed has been damaged due to rotting or being eaten by insects, it will 
not bring its result even though, having been planted in the ground, it meets the necessary 
conditions. Likewise, the roots of virtue that ha ve been destroyed by wrong view or anger will 
not bring their results. This is mentioned by Bhavaviveka in his Blaze of Reasoning .  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-6 How it is necessary to make an effort from the start not to be tainted by faults 
Although through confession and [the re solve to exercise] restraint you may be 
able to purify [karma] so that nothing at all remains, there is [still] a great 
difference between the purity of not bein g tainted by faults from the beginning 
and the purity after confession. For example, in the Bodhisattva Levels  it says that 
w hen  a ro o t  do w n fall has  o c curre d, it  can  b e res t o red by t akin g t he bo dhis a t t v a 
vow [again], however it will be impossible to reach the first ground in this life. Also 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
396 in the Sutra Gathering All the Threads  it says that once the negativity of abandoning 
the Dharma, which is explained in that su tra, has occurred, if one confesses it 
three times a day over seven years the negativity will be purified, but still it will 
take ten eons even at the quickest to atta in [the level of] tolerance [of the path of 
preparation]. Therefore, purification with out exception means that the production 
of unpleasant effects is purified without ex ception. However, since the arisal of the 
realizations of the path and so forth wi ll be much delayed, you should endeavor 
not to be tainted from the beginning. Also fo r that reason, it says that aryas do not 
knowingly engage even in subtle negativities  or downfalls even for the sake of their 
lives, otherwise, if there was no di fference between purifying them through 
confession and their non-arisal from the beginning, there would be no need to act 
like that. In the world, {123} too, even if  a wounded arm, leg, etc. heals again, it 
still will not be as if from the start it had never been wounded.  
 From the beginning it is best to try not to commit any negativities or downfalls. On the other hand, if we do commit them we can purify them by applying the four opponent powers very strongly, but still it would be better not to have  committed them in the first place rather than 
to commit them and then purify them. These tw o cases are in fact very different. To not 
commit any faults would be the best since, even having purified those that have been created, 
it is not the same as not having  committed them at all. It is li ke, for example, having broken 
an arm or leg, even though the bone is put back  together with metal plates and nails, the arm 
or leg is still not the same as it wa s previous to having been broken.  
 The Bodhisattva Levels  says that we ordinary beings can restore the root downfalls of 
bodhisattva vows by purifying them and retaki ng them, however due to having committed a 
r o o t  d o w n f a l l  w e  w i l l  n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  a c h i eve the first ground in this life. Also the Sutra 
Gathering All the Threads  says that, having abandoned the Dh arma, even if one purifies this 
negativity three times a day over a period of seve n years, at the very quickest it will take ten 
eons to reach the tolerance level of the path of  preparation. Therefore, we must not abandon 
the Dharma by criticizing other religions and so  forth. Although we do not need to follow 
other religions, we must at all cost avoid criticizing them.   “Purification without exception” means that th e action will no longer bring a fully ripened 
or fruitional result, however it will still take longer and be more difficult to generate the 
realizations of the path. Theref ore, from the very start we sh ould try not to commit negative 
actions. Aryas, due to understanding their result , do not engage even in subtle negativities 
and downfalls even at the cost of their life. We , on the other hand, thinking that it does not 
matter, continue to engage in them. However, this  is like, having broken one’s arm or leg, the 
arm or leg does not return to how it was prior to breaking it. Therefore, we need to avoid 
creating downfalls and faults from the very beginning.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 123) says:  
2B4B-2B1B The measure of the attitude [of lesser beings] having been developed  
Second: the measure of those thoughts [of lesser beings] having developed. Previously you 
had an uncontrived interest in this world only, and your interest in future worlds 
was just a [vague] understanding fascinat ed with the words.  Having exchanged 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
397 them, when future worlds have become the main interest and this world is nothing 
but a by-product, [the attitude of lesser beings ] has developed. As this nevertheless 
needs to be made stable, you should strive, that is, train, in it even after it has 
arisen.  
 
The measure of the attitude of a small being ha ving arisen is that one comes to think that 
future lives are more important than this life. Since this life is one whereas future lives are 
many, future lives are more important. At the moment we have an uncontrived aspiration for 
this life, whereas when we think of future live s our aspiration is only mere words and not at 
all deep. Therefore, we need to exchange these two attitudes by coming to think that, between 
this and future lives, our future lives are more important. Then, thinking that this life is not 
important, we need to practice keeping pure morality, generosity, patience, and so forth for 
the sake of future lives. The th ought or attitude striving for fu ture lives is the generation of 
the actual path of special small beings. On the other hand, middling beings are those who, 
understanding that all of cyclic existence is the nature of suffering, generate the wish to 
achieve liberation or nirvana. Then great beings  are those who, seeing that it is not enough 
for themselves to achieve liberation since all sent ient beings are suffering in cyclic existence, 
generate the mind that wishes to take care  of all sentient beings and develop love, 
compassion, and the mind of enlightenment.   In short, small beings are those who mainly enga ge in practice for the sake of future lives. 
When this thought is stab le, they should still cont inue to train in it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1C  Eliminating misconceptions about [the attitude of lesser beings ] 
1 Setting out the assertion 
[2 Its refutation] 
2B4B-2B1C-1 Setting out the assertion 
In the scriptures it says th at it is necessary to turn the mind away from all the 
excellence of cyclic existence, whereby, having become a basis of confusion, some 
[people] think it is inappropriate to deve lop interest in the high status of an 
excellent body, possessions, and so forth beca use they are [part of] cyclic existence.  
 
Here a wrong conception regarding the attitude of lesser beings are set out and then refuted. 
There are those who think that wi th respect to the renunciation  of cyclic existence it is 
mistaken to wish for a high rebirth in cyclic existence with a good body, possessions, and so 
forth. However, this is not right. The thought to attain an excellent body, excellent wealth, 
and so forth in the next life is good since they are necessary in order to be able to practice the Dharma in future lives. In other words, we also need a healthy body and other favorable 
conditions in our future lives as this will make  it easier for us to practice the Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B1C-2 Its refutation 
A How a continuous succession of excellent bodies is necessary 
With respect to that which is to be st riven for, there are both temporary and 
ultimate goals to strive for. Even th ose who strive for liberation from the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
398 excellences of a body and so forth of cyclic  existence need to temporarily strive for 
them since definite goodness is to be  gained in the end from a continuous 
succession of such supports.  
 
There are both temporary and final objects to aspire and strive for. The temporary aim is an 
excellent body of cyclic existence because through relying on such a body we can achieve nirvana and so forth. On the other hand, wi thout obtaining such a body, it will not be 
possible to achieve nirvana. Therefore, initially we need to aspire for a high rebirth as by 
obtaining this we will be able in the end to achieve the definite goodness of nirvana. In other words, temporarily we need to achieve a precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities in order to continue our Dharma practice, whereby we will finally attain the definite 
goodness of liberation.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Refutation looking at ultimately high status  
Not all that is the high status of an excellent body, possessions, and retinue are 
included in cyclic existence, for the culm ination of an excellent body, etc. is the 
form body [of a buddha], the wealth of its field, and its retinue. It is with this 
intention that the Ornament of the Sutras  says that the first four perfections 
accomplish the high status of an ex cellent body, possessions, retinue, and 
undertakings, {124} and that many [other] sc riptures state that they accomplish the 
form body. 
 
Not all that exists in high status, an excellen t body, resources, and retinue, is included in 
cyclic existence because the culmination of an excellent body and so forth is the form body, 
the wealth of its field, for example, that of Akanishta, and its retinue. For this reason the 
Ornament of the Sutras  by Maitreya says that the first fo ur perfections, generosity, morality, 
patience, and effort, are for the purpose of achi eving an excellent body and so forth, whereas 
other texts say that they are the cause of a buddha’s form body.  
 Middle Lam-Rim says:   
This concludes the explanation of mental  training in the stages of the path 
common to lesser beings. 
 This concludes the explanation of the training of the mind in the stages of the path common 
to small beings.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 124) says:  
PART III: INTERMEDIATE SCOPE 
Explanation of the stages of the path common to intermediate beings 
2B4B-2B2 Training the mind in the stages of the path common to intermediate beings 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
399 A Transition 
[B The actual training] 
2B4B-2B2A Transition 
Thus, having become mindful of death and reflected on the way in which you will 
fall into the bad migrations after death, you have turned your mind away from this 
world and developed a striving for th e happy migrations. Then, through the 
common going for refuge and certainty rega rding positive and negative karma and 
its effects, you will give up negativities, and by putting effort into accomplishing 
virtue you will indeed attain the state of  the happy migrations. However, that is 
not held to be sufficient here. Rather, once you have developed the attitude 
common to lesser beings and have develope d the attitude common to intermediate 
beings, which counteracts the adherence to cyclic existence as a whole, in 
dependence on them you will develop the mind of enlightenment and be led into 
the [path of] great beings. The purpose of tr aining in the attitude of intermediate 
beings is that, even though you attain th e state of a god or human being in this 
manner, you will not have passed beyond compounding suffering. Therefore, 
holding to that as happy by nature is mist aken, since in reality they are devoid of 
happiness and in the end they are bad beca use you are certain to fall into the bad 
migrations again. 
 At all times we need to remember that we will die. In other words, we need to constantly think “I am going to die, but I do not know when.” All the sentient beings who have taken 
rebirth will definitely die, however the time of their death is uncertain. Also, at the time of 
death, our relatives, wealth, and body will not be  of any help to us, only the Dharma will be 
of help. Having died, we will probably fall into  the bad migrations. For these reasons, we need 
to give up thoughts of this li fe and generate the th ought wishing to attain a happy rebirth in 
our next life, for example, a precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities, in 
order to be able to continue our Dharma practice . To obtain this, we need to go for refuge to 
the Three Jewels and to understand that white actions and black actions respectively bring a 
good or happy result and a bad or suffering result. Thinking about this, we should then put effort into abandoning non-virtuous actions and accumulating virtuous actions so that in our 
next life we can obtain a high rebirth.  
 H o w e v e r ,  i s  i t  s u f f i c i e n t  t o  a c h i e v e  a  h i g h  r e b i r t h ?  I t  i s  n o t .  T h e r e f o r e ,  w e  a l s o  n e e d  t o  
generate the path common to middling beings thro ugh thinking about the fact that if we take 
rebirth again in cyclic existence we will once again have to experience many problems. From 
the depths of our heart we need to understand th at any rebirth at all in cyclic existence is bad 
and, based on this understanding, gene rate the wish to attain nirvana.  
 Having generated the thought of intermediate beings, we then need to enter the path of 
great beings and develop the mind of enlightenm ent. However, in order to do this, we first 
need to train in the path of middling beings by contemplating the fact  that even if we are 
reborn as a god or human being, still it is the nature of suffering. To grasp at or adhere to the happiness of cyclic existence as being true is inappropriate because it is not real happiness. 
This is because, even having achieved a human rebirth, sometimes we are happy and 
sometimes not. We experience the suffering of change which is that, while initially something 
appears to be happiness and pleasure, by contin uing to enjoy it, it gradually transforms into 
suffering. Thus, even a high rebi rth as a human being, a god of the desire realm, a god of the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
400 form realm, or a god of the formless realm is not real happiness because, having taken such a 
rebirth, eventually we will fall once again in to the lower realms. Therefore, we need to 
generate the wish to strive for nirvana.  
 
(Oral transmission 12:05-12:25)  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 124) says:  
2B4B-2B2B The actual [training] 
1 The actual training in that attitude 
2 The measure of its development 
3 The elimination of misconceptions about it 
4 Determining the nature of the path leading to liberation 
Therefore, the training of the mind in the stages of the path common to 
intermediate beings has four points: the actual training in that attitude, the 
measure of its development, the elimin ation of misconceptions about it, and 
determining the nature of the path leading to liberation.  
Explanation of how to develop the mind striving for liberation  
2B4B-2B2B-1 The actual training in that attitude 
A Identification of the mind striving for liberation 
B The methods for generating [the mind striving for liberation ] 
The first one has two points: identification of the mind striving for liberation and 
the methods for generating it.  
 
In order to train in the mind striving for cycl ic existence, we first need to understand and 
identify the state of liberation whereby we wi ll generate the aspiration to achieve it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1A Identification of the mind striving for liberation 
1 Identification of liberation 
First: “Liberation” is freedom from bond age. Specifically, there are two things 
binding one in cyclic existence, karma an d the afflictions. Through the power of 
these two, from the point of view of real ms, there are three realms, those of desire 
etc.; when divided by way of migrat ing beings, there are five or six,158 such as gods, 
etc.; and in terms of birth-sources, ther e are four, such as a womb. This joining 
with such aggregates is the entity of bondage, therefore freedom from them is 
liberation. 
 
We cannot achieve liberation presently because we are bound in cyclic existence by contaminated actions and afflictions. Therefore, in order to achieve liberation or nirvana, the 
state free from cyclic existence, we need to be come free from these two bonds. To do this, we 
first need to understand the four noble truths . The first one is true sufferings. Rebirth in 
cyclic existence is itself suffering. Sometimes we experience the suffering of suffering and 
                                             
 
158 depending on whether gods and demigods are listed separately or grouped together 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
401 sometimes the suffering of change, whereas at all times and in all places in cyclic existence we 
experience pervasive compounding suffering. Thus, we need to recognize suffering as 
suffering. Then we can ask “Where does suffering come from?” The answer is that it comes 
from true origins, that is, suffering comes fr om contaminated actions, which in turn come 
from the afflictions. In short, the origins or causes of suffering are actions and afflictions. Can 
suffering cease? It can, but for this to happen we need to achieve true cessations. How can we 
achieve them? We can do so by meditating true paths.  
 
Tuesday afternoon, 12 April 2005  Liberation is freedom from actions and affliction s, which are what presently bind us in cyclic 
existence and cause us to be unable to beco me free from it. On the other hand, when we 
become free from contaminated actions and afflicti ons, we will attain the state of liberation.  
 Cyclic existence or samsara as a place is divi ded into three realms in which we take rebirth 
by the power of actions and afflictions. The th ree realms are the desire realm, form realm, 
and formless realm. All sentient beings in cyclic  existence are born in these three realms. In 
terms of migrating beings, there are five kinds: gods or devas, human beings, animals, hungry 
ghosts, and hell beings. In this case the anti-g ods or asuras are included in the god realm. 
Alternatively there are six kinds of migrating be ings: the animals, hungry ghosts, and animals 
of the three suffering migrations and the huma n beings, anti-gods, and gods of the three 
happy migrations. In terms of the abode of birt h or birth-source there are four: birth from 
heat and moisture, birth from an egg, bi rth from a womb, and miraculous birth.  
 This joining with the aggregates of the next life due to actions and afflictions is called 
“bondage.” Similarly, cyclic ex istence is the joining with the aggregates of the next life. 
Freedom from this is called “liberation.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
2 The mind striving for [liberation ] 
The desire to attain that [liberation]  is the mind striving for liberation. 
 
The desire or wish to attain liberation  is the mind striving for liberation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B The methods for generating [the mind striving for liberation ] 
1 Transition 
2 The actual methods 
2B4B-2B2B-1B1 Transition 
Second: Just as the development of the de sire to obtain the pacification of the 
suffering of thirst, for instance, depends on seeing the torment due to thirst as 
undesirable, likewise the development of the desire to attain the liberation that is 
the thorough pacification of the suffering  of the appropriated aggregates, also 
depends on seeing the shortcomings of th e appropriated aggregates of having the 
nature of suffering. Therefore, if, havi ng meditated on the shortcomings of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
402 existence, the mind that desires to reject them does not arise, the desire to attain 
the pacification of suffering will not arise either, because in the Four Hundred Verses  
it says:  
 
One who is not disenchanted here, 
How could he have respect for peace? 
 
Only someone who is suffering from thirst wish es to eliminate or pacify this suffering by 
finding something to drink, such as water, juic e, or any other potable liquid. Similarly, in 
order to generate the wish to pacify the suff ering of the appropriate aggregates and achieve 
liberation, it is necessary to first understand th at the aggregates are the nature of suffering and 
to see their shortcomings, since on ly after that will the desire to  discard them arise. In other 
words, by seeing the faults of the appropriated aggregates by doing analytical meditation on 
them, we will generate the wish to give up such a body or aggregates. If we do not generate 
this mind, the mind wishing to achieve the pacification of suffering will not arise.  
 Likewise, Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses  says that if we do not generate disenchantment 
with cyclic existence, we will not generate respect for peace. In  other words, we first need to 
see the faults of something in order to generate the wish to abandon or give it up. Only if we 
see something as a problem will we want to give it up. On the other hand, if we do not think 
about its faults, we will not generate the mind wishing to give it up.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2 The actual methods 
A Thinking about the shortcomings of cyclic existence – true sufferings 
B Thinking about the stages of entering cyclic existence – origins 
This being so there are two points with  respect to that: thinking about the 
shortcomings of cyclic  existence – true sufferings; an d thinking about the stages of 
involvement in cyclic existence – the origins. 
 
We first need to understand true sufferings – the shortcomings of cyclic existence, that is, we 
need to understand the nature of suffering. Th en we need to understand how we enter or 
engage in cyclic existence, this being by means of true origins.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A Thinking about the shortcomi ngs of cyclic existence – true sufferings 
1 Indicating the intention of stating true sufferings as the first of the four truths  
2 The actual meditation on suffering 
The first one has two points: indicating the intention of stating true sufferings as 
the first of the four truths, and th e actual meditation on suffering. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1 Indicating the intention of stating true sufferings as the first of the four truths  
A Setting out a doubt 
B Reply 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1A Setting out a doubt 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
403 First: If you ask: “If origins are earlier and sufferings later since origins are causes 
and {126} true sufferings are their effect , why is it that the Bhagavan taught: 
‘Monks, this is suffering, truth for an arya. This is the origin, truth for an arya’?”  
 
Among the four truths of arya beings, the Buddha first taught true sufferings. However, there 
can be a doubt as to why he first taught true su fferings and, only after that, true origins since, 
in terms of the order of their arisal, first there arises true origins and then true sufferings. In 
other words, while first there arises the cause (origin) and then the result (suffering), the 
Buddha first taught the result and then the cause,  saying “Monks, this is sufferings, truth for 
an arya. This is origin, truth for an arya.” Th erefore, why did he do this? The reply is as 
follows.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B  Reply 
1 Summarized indication in reply 
2 Extensive explanation 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B1 Summarized indication in reply 
There is no fault in that since the fact th at the Teacher stated cause and effect in 
reverse order has great significance for practice. 
 
The Buddha taught the result first because, ha ving understood the result, we will seek its 
cause. For example, if we want  to achieve success in business in the future, we first think of 
the result, success, and then enga ge in the activities, the causes , necessary for the achievement 
of this result. Likewise, in order to reap the resu lt of crops, we first need to plant the seeds. 
But only through understanding the result, crops,  do we put effort into creating its cause, 
planting seeds. Therefore, althou gh in our daily life we experience many sufferings, we first 
need to recognize them as suffering. Only then  will we ask ourselves “From where do these 
sufferings come?” and look for their cause – true  origins. For this reason, the Buddha taught 
true sufferings and then true origins, as well as  true cessations and then true paths. In other 
words, the Buddha first taught th e result and then the cause, al though the cause arises before 
the result, for the purpose of practice. Therefore,  there is no fault in the Buddha having first 
taught true sufferings and, only after that, true origins.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B2 Extensive explanation 
A The need to teach true sufferings, origins, cessations, and paths one after the other in accordance 
with the scriptures 
If you go on to ask: “How so?” It is like this: If the unerring wish for liberation 
from cyclic existence is not initially gene rated in the disciple himself, how should 
he be guided to liberation while lacking its root? In fact, initially disciples are 
shrouded by the darkness of ignorance and deceived by the misconception that apprehends the suffering excellences of cyclic existence as happiness.  
 There is a purpose to teaching the four noble trut hs – first true sufferings, then true origins, 
then true cessations, and then true paths – in  this order in the scriptures. It is because 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
404 without generating the wish to become free from  cyclic existence and attain liberation, we 
cannot be guided to liberation. Therefore, init ially disciples need to understand how cyclic 
existence is the nature of suffering. However,  due to being obscured by the darkness of 
ignorance, we are deceived by our misconceptio n that thinks that the excellences of cyclic 
existence are happiness.  
 Middle Lam-Rim says:  
 
In the Four Hundred  [Verses ] it says:  
 
If the ocean of this suffering 
Has no limits in any respect, Child, you who are sinking in it, Why are you not gripped with fear? 
 Thus, many aspects of suffering having been taught saying “This, in reality, is not 
happiness but rather suffering,” it is nece ssary to develop disenchantment, due to 
which true suffering were stated first. Th en, having seen that you yourself have 
fallen into the ocean of suffering, if you want to be liberated from it, you see the 
need to ward off suffering. Having come to  understand that if you do not ward off 
its cause you will not avert it, thinking  “What is its cause?” you come to 
understand true origins. That is why true  origins were stated next. Then, once an 
understanding of true origins has arisen – that the suffering of cyclic existence is 
produced by contaminated actions, that  those actions are produced by mental 
afflictions, and that the root of [afflictions ] is the apprehension of a self – {127} 
and you see that the apprehension of a se lf can be opposed, you vow to actualize 
the cessation that puts a stop to suffering . Therefore, true cessations were taught 
next. 
 
Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses  sets out the question: “Since the suffering of cyclic existence is 
like an ocean in that it is has no limits, why do we who are sinking in this ocean not generate 
fear?” In fact, we should generate fear of cyclic  existence. While cyclic existence appears to be 
pleasant and many things, such as our body, appe ar to be happiness, in reality they are all the 
nature of suffering. Because we first need to un derstand the nature of suffering, that is, true 
sufferings, the Buddha taught them first. Th rough understand suffering, we will generate 
disenchantment or sadness with respect to it. Understanding that we have fallen into the 
ocean of cyclic existence, we  will generate the wish to become free from this suffering. 
However, since without eliminating its cause we  will never become free from suffering, we 
then pose the question: “What is the cause of these many sufferings?” We will then come to 
see that their cause is true origins. For this reason, the Buddha taught the true origins of 
suffering next. Through understanding that the su ffering of cyclic existence is produced by 
contaminated actions, that contaminated action s are produced by afflictions, and that the 
root of the afflictions is the conception of a self, we will understand the true origins of 
suffering. Then, through seeing that the concep tion of a self can be eliminated, we will 
generate the wish to actualize the cessation of sufferings – true cessations. The way to actualize 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
405 true cessations is to meditate on the antidote to  the conception of a self – the realization of 
selflessness or emptiness. This is  the actual antidote that elim inates the afflictions and their 
cause, actions, whereby the result, suffering, is ceased. For this reason, the Buddha first taught 
true sufferings, then true origins, then true cessations, and then true paths.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim says:  
B Giving up objections to presenting [the truths] in this order 
You may wonder: “Well then, as the wish for liberation arises when true sufferings 
are presented, it would make sense to present true cessations after true sufferings.” [However,] there is no fault, for, even though, at that point, the wish for liberation 
thinking “If only I achieved the cessation that pacifies suffering” is present, since 
you have not identified the cause of sufferi ng and do not see that the cause can be 
averted, you do not apprehend liberation as  something to be attained thinking “I 
should actualize cessation.” In that manner, once you apprehend liberation, 
thinking “I should actualize cessation,” you will engage in true paths, thinking 
“What is the path leading there?” That is why true paths were stated at the end.  
 Someone might think that as the wish for li beration arises from understanding true 
sufferings, true cessations should be taught after true sufferings. However, there is no fault in 
the Buddha not having done that. This is becaus e without recognizing the causes of suffering, 
one will not apprehend the pacification of su ffering as something that can be achieved. 
Therefore, first it is necessary to understand th e cause of sufferings, true origins, that then 
need to be eliminated in order to achieve true  cessations. Therefore, we must first recognize 
true sufferings and then their causes, true origin s. Then, through seeing that true origins can 
be eliminated, we will come to understand that  we can achieve liberation. Otherwise, without 
understanding true origins, we will not unders tand the possibility of achieving liberation. 
Then, through thinking “I will actualize true ce ssations,” we will come to meditate true paths, 
the cause of true cessations. Since in order to ac hieve true cessations, we must first create its 
cause – meditation on true paths, the Buddha taug ht true paths as the last of the four noble 
truths.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Establishing by means of logic that such an order is necessary 
The four truths are taught many times in this manner throughout the Mahayana 
and Hinayana. Since the Sugata condensed in  them the crucial points of entry into 
cyclic existence and reversal from it, th ey are extremely important for achieving 
complete liberation. Since it is the encapsulation159 of practice, students need to be 
guided in this order. If th e adherence to cyclic existenc e is not reversed and put to 
rest at all by way of reflecting on true su fferings, the wish to achieve liberation will 
become mere words, since whatever you do will become an origin [of new 
                                              
159 Geshe Thubten Ngawang’s explanation of the phrase “ ’gag bsdoms ” (lit. “stop – bind”): imagine a central 
station where all the various tracks come together and where tracks in certain directions can be blocked or 
joined. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
406 suffering]. If you do not come to a good  understanding of the root of cyclic 
existence – karma and the afflictions – by reflecting on origins, you will be like 
someone shooting an arrow who does not see the target, for you will miss the 
crucial point of the path and will hold wh at it is not a path to freedom from 
existence to be that, whereupon your hardship s will be fruitless. And, if you do not 
know what is to be abandoned, sufferings and origins, you will not even identify 
the liberation that is their thorough pacification, whereby your striving for 
liberation {128} will also end up as nothing but an [arrogant] presumption. 
 
The four noble truths are taught many time s in both the Hinayana and Mahayana. Why is 
this? It is because if we wish to achieve the state of complete liberation, we first need to 
understand how we engage in cyclic existence an d how we reverse from it. This is the essential 
point or the condensed meaning of the four noble truths for leading disciples to liberation. If, 
on the other hand, our adherence to cyclic exis tence is not reversed by thinking about the 
nature of suffering, then our wish for liberation  will become mere words and whatever we do 
will become a true origin of suffering. Thus, if we do not understand that the root of cyclic 
existence is actions and afflictions (true origins) , we will be like someone who shoots an arrow 
at a target without seeing the target. For this reason, we need to clearly understand that the 
root of cyclic existence is contaminated actions and afflictions. The root of these in turn is 
ignorance – the apprehension of all phenomen a as existing truly or inherently or the 
a p p r e h e n s i o n  o f  a n  i n h e r e n t l y  e x i s t e n t  s e l f  o f  persons. Hence, in order to cut the root of 
cyclic existence, we need to first identify its ro ot. In other words, we need to understand that 
the object of apprehension of ignorance does  not exist and then we need to develop its 
antidote, the realization of emptiness or selflessne s s ,  a s  t h i s  i s  w h a t  c u t s  t h e  r o o t  o f  c y c l i c  
existence. In short, the r oot of actions is the afflictions, the root of the afflictions is ignorance, 
and ignorance is the root of cyclic existence. It can be cut, but without cutting it we cannot 
attain liberation from cyclic existence.   If we mistake what is not a path to liberation  to be a path to liberation, all our effort and 
hardships to meditate will be useless and will no t bring any result. In other words, if we do 
not understand what is the object of abandonmen t – true sufferings and true origins, we will 
not be able to recognize the liberation that is th eir pacification and our striving for it will only 
be an arrogant presumption. Thus, we need to un derstand that the root of cyclic existence is 
ignorance, and how this ignora nce apprehends persons and phen omena to be inherently or 
truly existent, that is, how it apprehends a se lf of persons and a self of phenomena. This 
apprehension is the very root of  cyclic existence. However, the object of this apprehension is 
non-existent. Therefore, by eliminating this  apprehension we can achieve liberation.  
 Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2 The actual meditation on suffering  
A Considering the suffering of cyclic existence in general 
B Considering the suffering of individual [realms]  
The second one has two points: considerin g the suffering of cyclic existence in 
general and considering the suffering of individual [realms].  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
407 First we need to think about the suffering of cy clic existence in general and then the specific 
sufferings of the different realms. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A Considering the suffering of cyclic existence in general  
1 Considering the eight [types of] suffering 
2 Considering the six [types of] suffering 
The first one has two points: considerin g the eight [types of] suffering and 
considering the six [types of] suffering. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1 Considering the eight [types of] suffering 
A How to meditate by the level of the faculty 
[B How it is necessary to be free from laxity and excitement  C How all the qualities of the three vehicles are accomplished through such meditation 
D The eight types of suffering 
E Advice to cherish [this] manner of meditating on the essence ] 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1A How to meditate by the level of the faculty 
First: With regard to sustaining the ro und of meditation common to intermediate 
beings, here you should also take up th e common points explained in the context 
of lesser beings. With regard to sustaining  those that are not common [to both], if 
you have the mental strength, you shou ld sustain them [in meditation] as 
explained [here], whereas if your mental st rength is small, you should discard the 
scriptural citations and sustain only the en tity of the meaning of whatever falls in 
this context.  
 
With respect to the meditation s that are common to middling be ings, those of sharp faculty 
should also think about the sufferings that are mentioned in the context of the path of small 
beings. On the other hand, those of weak facult y should set aside the scriptural quotations 
and meditate only on the entity, that is, on th e various types of suffering. For example, in the 
context of the eight types of suffering, those of weak faculty should concentrate on trying to 
recognize and meditate on each one of these sufferings without taking into consideration 
quotations from the sutras, Shantideva, Aryadeva, and so forth, but just try to understand the 
main points.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1B How it is necessary to be free from laxity and excitement 
Although these are analytical meditations,  focusing the mind on the object of 
meditation without allowing it to go to  virtuous, non-virtuous, or unspecified 
objects other than it, you should cease exci tement and so forth. Not allowing [the 
mind] to fall under the influence of sleepy drowsiness or laxity, you should 
meditate continuously from a state of extr eme clarity and lucidity, for it was taught 
that the results of all spiritual practice in which the mind is distracted to other 
things are small.  
 
In order to meditate, we need to eliminate the two mental factors of laxity and excitement in 
order to achieve a single-pointed mind. When la xity arises, the object gradually becomes more 
and more unclear until actual sleepiness occurs . When excitement arises, the mind is no 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
408 longer focused on the object but goes to anothe r object, such as a friend with whom we enjoy 
spending time and so forth. These two, laxi ty and excitement, are the main obstacles to 
meditation.  
 In the context of the stages of the path, we  generally do analytical meditation and not 
stabilizing meditation. However, we still need to keep the mind on the ob ject of the analytical 
meditation and not allow it to go to other vi rtuous, non-virtuous, and neutral or unspecified 
objects. Instead we need to focus on the object  and eliminate excitement. We should also not 
allow the mind to come under the power of sleepy drowsiness and laxity, whereby we will 
have a clear and strong mind.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
  
In Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] Conduct  it says:  
 
Recitation, austerities, and things, 
Even though long engaged in, If done with one’s mind distracted elsewhere Are meaningless, the seer taught. 
 When we recite mantras, sadhanas, or prayers, we need to keep our mind on what we are 
doing and not allow ourselves to be distracted . Also whatever practices or austerities we 
engage in, we should do so without allowing our mind to be distracted to other things. This is 
because if we recite something but our mind is distracted even to other sadhanas or mantras, 
there will not be much result, that is, it will become meaningless. Therefore, whenever we do 
anything, we need to so while applying intros pection. If, on the other hand, we allow our 
m in d t o  go t o  an o t her o bject  w he n  w e are doing prostrations, prayers, circumambulations, 
mantras, pujas, and so forth, since the action of body or speech is virtuous there will be some 
good result but it will not be very mu ch due to the mind being distracted.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And in the Sutra on the Development of Confidence in the Mahayana  it says: 
 
Son of the lineage, from this enumer ation it should be understood that, 
in this manner, confidence in the Mahayana of the bodhisattvas and 
anything that arises from the Maha yana, comes from having correctly 
thought about the meaning and the Dhar ma with a mind that is utterly 
undistracted. 
 
In this regard {129} “a mind  that is utterly undistracted ” is a mind that does not 
stray away from a virtuous observed obje ct to something else; “the meaning and 
the Dharma” refers to the meaning and the words; and “correctly thought” is to 
analyze and think with an awareness of in dividual investigation. That shows that 
for all accomplishment of the Dharma of g ood qualities both [a lack of distraction 
and investigation] are necessary. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
409  
The Sutra  on Cultivating Faith in the Mahayana  says that whatever practice we do, we should try 
to not allow our mind to be distracted an d to think about the meaning and the Dharma 
correctly. If we do this, our practice will be ve ry good and perfect. If, on the other hand, we 
read Mahayana texts such as the Heart Sutra  while our mind goes to other things, even though 
there will be some result it will not be perfect.  
 In short, we need a mind that is not distract ed to other virtuous objects. In the context of 
“the meaning and the Dharma,” “the Dharma” re fers to words, that is, to the scriptures. 
“Correct thought” refers to individual inve stigation. For example, the words from the Heart 
Sutra  “Form is empty” are words that are called “t he Dharma.” Their mean ing is that the base 
–  f o r m  –  i s  e m p t y  o f  i n h e r e n t  e x i s t e n c e .  W e  n e e d  t o  u n d e r s t a n d  t h i s  c l e a r l y  b y  d o i n g  analytical meditation that investigates, for exampl e, what is form, how does it abide, what is 
its nature, what does it come from, what is the form aggregate, and so forth. Thus, if we wish 
to achieve the Dharma of good qualities we need to think about the two – the meaning and 
the Dharma, that is, we need to understand the meaning and the words. For example, when 
we say the word “empty,” what kind of emptine ss does it refer to? It mainly refers to the 
emptiness of true existence; it does not refer to an empty cup, empty house, and so forth. 
Hence, we need understand the meaning.   In this context, we are specifically discussi ng true sufferings. For example, the word “true 
suffering” is the Dharma, the meaning is the nature of suffering. How do we suffer? There are many types of suffering, the eight and so forth,  which will be explained below. The eight types 
of suffering are: the suffering of birth, suffering  of aging, suffering of sickness, suffering of 
death, suffering of not finding the desirable, suffering of meeting the undesirable, and suffering of losing the desirable.   Wednesday morning, 13 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 129) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1C How all the positive qualities of the three vehicles are accomplished through such 
meditation 
This being so, it was taught that for the accomplishment of all the positive 
qualities of the three vehicles, two [things] are necessary:  1. actual calm abiding – a single-pointed mind that abides on a virtuous observed 
object without being distracted to anythi ng else – or a facsimile of that, and  
2. actual special insight, which individually  analyzes a virtuous observed object 
and differentiates modes and varieties, or a facsimile of that.  
 
All the good qualities of the three vehicles ar e achieved by such meditation, that is, by 
analytical meditation. Therefore, we need to  put effort into keeping our mind single 
pointedly on one virtuous object. Since it is no t good for our mind to become distracted to 
other objects, when this happens we should try to bring the mind back to the virtuous object 
of meditation, not allowing it to be distracted but trying single-pointedly to do calm abiding 
or a facsimile of calm abiding. In order to ac hieve actual calm abiding it is necessary to 
traverse nine states of mental abiding. We sh ould try to set the mind on an object and to 
focus single-pointedly on it. The virtuous obse rved object of analytical meditation can be 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
410 either modes (thusness) or varieties, that is, ul timate truth or conventional truth. We should 
differentiate between them and try to develop ac tual special insight. If we are unable to 
develop actual special insight, we should try to develop at least a facsimile of it. It is important 
to develop the two, calm abiding and special insight, however if we cannot develop actual 
calm abiding and actual special insight we should  try to develop at least something similar to 
them. Calm abiding is achieved when, by focusing  single-pointedly on an object, we achieve a 
pliancy of body and mind that induces bliss, and special insight is achieved when, by doing 
analytical meditation, we achieve a pliancy of body and mind that induces bliss. These are 
actual calm abiding and special insight, but we sh ould try to at least develop a state similar to 
them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In accordance with that it also says in the [ Sutra ] Unraveling the Intention :  
 
Maitreya, you should understand that  all virtuous qualities, whether 
mundane or supramundane, of hearers,  bodhisattvas, or tathagatas are 
the result of calm abiding and special insight. 
 
If calm abiding and special insight were not divided in the two – the actual and a facsimile to it, there would be no certaint y that all the positive qualities of the 
three vehicles come forth as effects of actual calm abiding and special insight. 
 All the virtuous qualities, whether mundane or  supramundane, of hearers, bodhisattvas, and 
tathagatas arise from or are the result of actu al calm abiding and special insight. Therefore, 
these two are important and we need to meditate in order to achieve them.   Calm abiding and special insight are divided into actual calm abiding and actual special insight and a facsimile of calm abiding and a facsimile of special in sight. While all good 
qualities are not the direct result of calm abid ing and special insight, they are their indirect 
results. Therefore, while it cannot be said that all the good qualities, the mundane and 
supramundane, of hearers, bodhisattvas, and tathag atas are a direct result of these two, they 
are their results.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D The eight types of suffering 
1 The suffering of birth 
2 The suffering of aging 
3 The suffering of illness 
4 The suffering of death 
5 The suffering of meeting with the unpleasant 
6 The suffering of separation from the pleasant 
7 The suffering of seeking what you desire and not getting it 
8 “In brief: the five appropriated aggregates are suffering” 
 
These are the eight sufferings that are often mentioned: 1 the suffering of birth, 
2 the suffering of aging, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
411 3 the suffering of illness, 
4 the suffering of death, 5 the suffering of meeting with the unpleasant, 
6 the suffering of separation from the pleasant, 
7 the suffering of seeking what one desires and not getting it, and 
8 the suffering of the five appropriated aggregates.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-1 The suffering of birth 
Here the considerations on the suffering of birth, the first of eight types of 
suffering, have five points: 
A [Suffering] 
Birth is suffering because it is associat ed with suffering. When the four – hell 
sentient beings, perpetually suffering hungry ghosts, beings born from wombs, and 
beings born from eggs – are born, they are born together with a lot of violent 
suffering feeling.  
 
There are five types of suffering associated with the suffering of birth. For as long as we take 
birth, there will be suffering. For example, havi ng taken birth in the hell realm, there is 
continuous suffering and never any happiness. Al so, having taken birth in the hungry ghost 
realm, there is perpetual suffering. Whether we are born from a womb or born from an egg, 
there is suffering. It is not easy to take birth, for example, when a mother gives birth to a child 
she experiences great pain, may need to be cut op en, and so forth. The baby is also squeezed, 
its bones crushed, as it leaves the womb. Although we no longer remember it, we have experienced this pain. Many animals are born from the womb while others are born from 
eggs.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B [Connection with taking on bad states] 
Birth is associated with taking on bad stat es, therefore, due to connecting with the 
seed for the arisal, abidance, and increase of  mental afflictions, {130} it is unsuited 
for actions that instigate virtue or unsuited to being controlled at will.  
 
Birth has many problems, for example, since it  connects one to the seeds for the generation, 
abiding, and increase of mental afflictions, it is not suitable for engaging in virtue.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C [The basis of suffering] 
Birth becomes the basis of suffering, therefore, in dependence on having taken 
birth in the three realms, the suffering of aging, illness, death, etc. increases.  
 
Birth is the source or basis of suffering because, having been born in any of the three realms – 
desire realm, form realm, and formless realm, th ere will be the experience of the suffering of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
412 a g i n g ,  i l l n e s s ,  d e a t h ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  I n  s h o r t ,  h a v i n g  b e e n  b o r n ,  o n e  w i l l  e x p e r i e n c e  t h e s e  
sufferings. In other words, all these sufferings arise due to having been born, whereas if we 
had not been born we would not have to expe rience the sufferings of aging, sickness, or 
death. In the formless realm there is aging, no t in the sense of the body becoming wrinkled, 
losing its hair and teeth, and so forth, but in  the sense of the lifespan diminishing, due to 
which one will eventually die.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D [The basis of mental afflictions] 
Birth becomes the basis of the mental affl ictions, therefore, once you have been 
born in cyclic existence, the three pois ons of attachment, hatred, and ignorance 
arise with regard to objects. Also due to that, body and mind being thoroughly 
unpacified, they suffer and consequently do not abide in happiness. Thus, body 
and mind are tormented in various ways by the mental afflictions. 
 
Birth is the source or basis for the arisal of th e mental afflictions. This is because, having 
taken birth in cyclic existence,  the three mental poisons – a ttachment, hatred, and ignorance 
– will arise, as well as other afflictions such as  jealousy, miserliness, pride, doubt, afflicted 
view, and so forth. Many afflictions arise in us due to having been born in cyclic existence. 
The afflictions make our body and mind unpaci fied and rough, due to which we experience 
suffering. Physically we experience the suffering s of pain, aging, sickness, and so forth, and 
mentally we experience the suffering of not ob taining an object of attachment, and, having 
found it, the suffering of the fear  of losing it, and so forth. In  this way the body and mind, the 
basis of suffering, are tormented in a variety of  ways by the mental afflictions. Sometimes the 
body suffers, sometimes the mind, sometimes bo th. In this way we constantly experience 
suffering. Since the mental afflictions produce suffering in different ways, there are many 
types of suffering.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E [Involuntary separation] 
Birth is suffering due to the reality of in voluntary separation, in that death, the 
end of everything born, has not been transc ended and is undesirable. It also only 
makes you experience suffering.  
 
You should think about these [points] again and again. 
 Having been born, even though we do not wish to separate from our body, this will naturally 
happen due to which we will experience suffering . Having taken this body, we think of it as 
excellent and do not want to separate from it . However, even though we do not want to 
separate from it and want to keep it, we will defi nitely have to separate from it at the time of 
death. Death is the separation of the body and mind, that is, the cutting off or interruption of 
their relationship. At this time our life comes to an end. This will happen to everyone. We 
need to think about this and to examine how a ll the beings of the past, whether holy beings, 
rich people, kings, or powerful leaders, have died. All that remains now is their names. For 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
413 example, Buddha Shakyamuni passed away, Jesu s passed away, and likewise Mohammed no 
longer exists. All these religious leaders are gone. Likewise, all our paternal and maternal 
ancestors have passed away. Thus, having been born, we will have to die.  
 In short, birth is suffering. There is suffering  at the time of conception, and there is also 
suffering while in the womb due to it being da rk, narrow, and filled with liquid, and even 
though there is the wish to leave, one cannot.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-2 The suffering of aging  
A Extensive explanation 
B Summary of the essence  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-2A Extensive explanation 
Second: The considerations on the suffe ring of aging have five points:  
 
The five sufferings associated with aging are: 
1. the deterioration of the body, 
2. the deterioration of power and strength, 
3. the deterioration of the senses, 
4. the decline in sense pleasures, and 
5. the complete deterioration of life. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
1 [Deterioration of the body] 
The complete deterioration of the fine body is such that your spine becomes 
curved like a bow, your head becomes wh ite like moss flowers, your forehead 
becomes covered in wrinkles like a cutting  board, and so on, whereby the splendor 
of youth deteriorates and you become ugly. 
 
In our youth our body is very fine, but as we  age it degenerates. Our spine becomes curved 
like a bow. Our hair gradually becomes white,  first becoming a mixture of black and then 
becoming entirely white. Our forehead become s covered in wrinkles. Although some people, 
not wanting to get old, undergo plastic surgery such  as facelifts, hair transplants, and so forth 
to hide their age, still they cannot stop the aging process. In spite of all our efforts, our 
excellent body deteriorates and becomes ugly.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 [Deterioration of power and strength] 
The deterioration of power and strength is such that when you sit down, you 
resemble a sack of soil when its rope is  cut; when you get up, you resemble tree 
roots being pulled up; when you speak, you babble unintelligibly; when you walk, 
you are completely bent over and so on. 
 
Due to aging, our power and strength deteriorates . When we sit down, it is like the dropping 
of a heavy sack. When we stand up , it is like pulling up the r oots of a tree. Our speech is no 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
414 longer clear and we babble or mumble. When we walk, we do so bent over. All this is due to 
the body losing its strength.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 [Deterioration of the senses] 
The deterioration of the senses  is such that your eyes and so forth do not clearly 
perceive forms and so forth any more, and your mindfulness and so forth diminish 
as you grow forgetful and so forth.  
 
The sense powers deteriorate whereby, for exampl e, the eyes can no longer clearly see colors 
and shapes. Similarly, the mind also loses its power and we are no longer able to remember 
many things.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 [Decline in sense pleasures] 
The enjoyment of [sense] objects declin e s  s u c h  t h a t  f o o d  a n d  d r i n k  b e c o m e  
difficult to digest, and you can no longer enjoy other pleasures {131}. 
 
Also our enjoyment of objects declines. We no longer enjoy our food and drink and we find 
it difficult to digest, such that we may even vomit. This is due to a decline in the inner energy of the body, whereby even if we want to eat and drink we are unable to enjoy food and drink.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 [Complete deterioration of the lifespan] 
The suffering of the lifespan having dete riorated completely is that, due to the 
lifespan having been largely spent, you face death.  
 
You should think about these [points] again and again. 
 
There is suffering as our lifespan diminishes. Due to being old, we cannot remain for long. 
While some people live to 110, 112, or even 115 years, it is not possible to live longer than 
that. In fact most of us are unable to live fo r 100 years and many do not reach even into our 
90s. In addition, it is the rare exception for peop le at this age to still be independent, to be 
able to make their own food, make their own be d, go to the toilet alone, and so forth. 
Nowadays because most people are busy with thei r work and families, they are no longer able 
to take care of their aging parents and are forced  to put them into a senior citizens home for 
which they pay a lot of money, even though th e care might not be ve ry good. As they get 
older, some people have great difficulty eating, standing, walking, and so  forth, and, thinking 
that they are a burden on their children or gran dchildren, wish to die.  However, in spite of 
this, some have to wait a long time for death to come.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-2B Summary of the essence  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
415 Chennga[wa] said: “The suffering of death is  bad, but brief. This aging [process] is 
also bad.” Kamapa said: “It’s good that old age comes gradually. If it came in a 
single moment, it would be unbearable”. 
 
The suffering of death is great but it only last s for a short time. Aging, on the other hand, is 
of long duration, due to which it causes intense suffering. Kamapa says that it is a good thing 
that aging happens gradually as if it were to ha ppen suddenly, for example, in a single day, the 
pain would be unbearable. We might even have  a heart attack from the shock and die! For 
example, if one day we have a beautiful young fa ce and then the next da y, when looking in a 
mirror, we were to discover that overnigh t we have become old, our complexion has 
deteriorated, our face has become covered in wr inkles, our hair is completely white, and our 
teeth have fallen out, we really might have a heart attack! However, because aging happens 
gradually, it is a little more bearable. However,  we should examine whether we would be able 
to bear it if old age were to arrive suddenly an d we were no longer able to see and hear well, 
unable to remember things, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-3  The suffering of illness 
Third: The considerations on the suffe ring of illness have five points:  
 
The five sufferings associated with illness are: 
• the nature of the body changes, 
• suffering and mental unhappiness increase, 
• the restriction of enjoyments, 
• the need for unpleasant measures, and 
• the separation from one’s life. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
A [Bodily changes] 
The nature of the body changes in that the body flesh becomes loose, the skin 
dries up, etc. 
 
Due to illness, the nature of the body changes and the flesh becomes loose, the skin dries up, 
and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B [Suffering and mental unhappiness increase] 
Suffering and mental unhappiness increase and you predominantly abide in them 
in that the bodily constituents, water and so  forth, become disturbed in strength as 
they lose their proportional balance, pr oducing pain in the body which in turn 
brings mental unhappiness that lasts day and night.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
416 Due to illness, physical suffering and mental  unhappiness increase. The constituents or 
elements in our body become unbalanced as some become stronger and others weaker. For 
example, due to the water element predominatin g, the liver, stomach, kidney, legs, and so 
forth retain liquid that then needs to be drained off. Due to the fire element predominating, 
we experience high fevers and so forth. Due to  the wind element predominating, the mind is 
disturbed and agitated. Due to the earth elem ent predominating, the body becomes heavy 
and it becomes difficult to move. In this way, due to an imbalance in the elements, physically 
there is pain and discomfort, which in turn give s rise to mental unhappiness. Unable to sleep 
and so forth, the mind becomes more and more unhappy.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C [Restriction of enjoyments] 
You lack desire to enjoy pleasant things. Ha ving been told that pleasant things are 
harmful when you are ill, you do not have  the power to indulge in them as you 
wish and, likewise, you cannot do whatever you want.  
 
A l t h o u g h  w e  w i s h  t o  e n j o y  d e l i c i o u s  f o o d  o r  d r i n k ,  h a v i n g  b e e n  t o l d  b y  a  d o c t o r  t h a t  w e  should not eat them as they will  harm our body and worsen our illness, we must refrain from 
eating and drinking them. Therefore, even thou gh we wish to enjoy the desirable we cannot. 
We are also unable to do whatever we want as, otherwise, our illness will worsen. For example, we might be advised not to walk alon e because we could fall and hurt ourselves, we 
might be advised not to drive, not to fly, and so forth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D [Need for unpleasant measures] 
You need to undergo the unpleasant against your will. You have to employ 
unpleasant medicine, food, drink, and th e like. Likewise, you need to rely on 
rough [means of] examination such as be ing burnt with fire, pierced with sharp 
instruments, and the like.  
 
Due to illness, we have to undergo unpleasant things even though we do not want to do so. For example, we need to eat things  that we do not want to eat. We also have to take medicine 
that we do not like. We may need to be treated with moksta  (the heat of burning fire), 
undergo an operation, and so forth even thou gh such treatments are not pleasant and cause 
ulterior suffering. The Chinese often treat illn esses with moksabustion, whereas in the West 
doctors often recommend an operation. Even thou gh we do not want an operation, we accept 
to undergo it due to being worried that the illness may take our life. However, after the 
operation, we once again experience pain and other problems. Also treatments such as 
chemotherapy causes various sufferings includin g the loss of one’s hair and so forth, but 
people are willing to bear such unpleasant experi ences in order to be cured of their illness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
417 E [Separation from life] 
You will be separated from your life. Having seen that the illness is incurable, 
suffering arises.  
You should consider these points in detail. 
 
Due to illness, there is the suffering of separati ng from life. In other words, having seen that 
our illness cannot be cured, we come to realize that we will soon die. 
 
We should do analytical meditation on the suffe ring of illness, imagining what it would be 
like to be sick and to experience such sufferings.   Wednesday afternoon, 13 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 131) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-4  The suffering of death 
Fourth: {132} The consideratio ns on the suffering of de ath have five points: You 
are separated from your excellent possession s, relatives, companions, and splendid 
body,160 and at the time of death you experience suffering and intense mental 
unhappiness. As long as you have not be come mentally disenchanted with these 
[sufferings], you should think about them  again and again. The way in which the 
first four become suffering is that, havi ng seen that you will be separated from 
those four, you suffer. 
 
The suffering of death is presented here very briefly. At  the time of death, we will have to 
separate from our possessions, our relatives, surrounding people, and our body, and we will 
experience strong suffering and mental unhappi ness. Thus, without choice, we will have to 
separate from our family, our parents, brothers, sisters, and so forth, as well as our dear friends and partner. We should think about th is again and again. The first four become 
suffering because, having seen that we will  have to separate from them, we suffer.  
 We need to understand how we suffer: we suffer due to birth, aging, sickness, and death. 
These are our principal sufferings. Among them, the strongest is that of death. Seeing this, we 
should meditate on it again and again, thinking “I will die, and at that time I will have to 
separate from everyone and everything.” By reco gnizing the suffering of death, our mind will 
be moved to practice the Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-5 The suffering of meeting with the unpleasant 
Fifth: The suffering of meeting with the unpleasant has five points:  
                                              
160 Longs spyod rtsa ’jing ’khor lus sdug pa phun sum tshogs  – it is not quite clear whether the two qualifiers 
(“excellent ” and “splendid”) at the end of the phrase refer to the noun they follow – “body” – or indeed to all 
four nouns 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
418 1. by simply meeting, for example, an en emy, suffering and mental unhappiness 
arise, and,  
2. due to that, you are beset by fear of being punished, 
3. fear of bad talk, 
4. fear of a dreadful death, and 
5. fear due to the misgiving that you wi ll go to a bad migration after death 
because of transgressing the Dharma.  
You should think about these [types of suffering]. 
 
When we meet our enemies, we experience suffering and our mind becomes unhappy. We 
experience fear of being punished by them, fear of bad talk, fear of a dreadful death, and fear 
of going to a bad migration after death due to transgressing the Dharma. Enemies are an 
example of undesirable or unpleasant objects that  we do not wish to meet, but are forced to 
meet against our will. For example, when we meet  powerful enemies, we fear that they might 
kill us, that they will cause us to have a bad reputation while we wish for a good reputation, 
and so forth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-6 The suffering of separation from the pleasant 
Sixth: The suffering of separation from th e pleasant has five points. Due to being 
separated say from close ones who are very dear to you: 
1. in the mind, sorrow arises, 
2. in the speech, there is lamentation, 
3. in the body, harm arises, 
4. through remembering the good qualities of  the object and longing for it, there 
is mental torment, 
5. you miss the pleasure of it.  
You should think about these [types of suffering]. 
 
We also experience the suffering of being sepa rated from the pleasant. For example, when we 
are separated from a very dear friend, we experience much suffering. Even when we have not yet separated from this person, we worry about separating from him or her. All this causes 
sorrow to arise in the mind, verbally we lament  about this suffering, and our body is harmed. 
Remembering the qualities of our dear friend, th e mind is tormented by sadness. We miss the 
enjoyment of being with that person. In this we , we suffer when separated from that which is 
dear to us. However, this will continue to  happen due to the nature of impermanence. 
Sometimes we have good relati onships, sometimes bad relati onships, sometimes there is 
separation… This is the very natu re of cyclic existence. We shou ld think about the fact that we 
will separate from our dear friends. Just beca use we are the nature of impermanence, at some 
point we will have to separate from them. When we die, our mind leaves everything behind, even our body. Thinking in this way, when such su ffering arises, it will be easier to bear it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-7 The suffering of seeking what you desire and not getting it 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
419 Seventh: The suffering of seeking what you desire and not getting it has five points 
that are similar to [those associated with] separation from what is pleasant. Seeking 
what you desire but not getting it is the depressing suffering of not getting what 
you have been hoping for despite your effort  in seeking it, such as doing farm work 
but not reaping a harvest and doing business but not accruing a profit. 
 
The suffering of seeking the desirable but not obtaining it is similar to the suffering of 
separating from the pleasant. Se eking the desirable but not finding it is, for example, to have 
sown seeds in the field but to not reap the harvest or to do business but to not achieve 
success. Having put effort into obtaining some thing but not having obtained it, the mind 
suffers and we become sad and depressed. We ex perience mental suffering which in turn can 
produce physical suffering, since body and mind ar e related. In fact most of our sicknesses are 
created by our mind. Despite being careful about what we eat and drink, how we walk, and so 
forth, we still experience suffering, both mental  and physical. Therefore, it is important to 
keep our mind quiet and happy. We should not have much desire for material things or friends. Instead we should try to have less desire  and more satisfaction. In this way, our life 
will be easier. On the other hand, if we ha ve strong desire and little satisfaction or 
contentment, we will continually experience ment al suffering that will also induce physical 
suffering. In this way, we will experience many sufferings.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-8 “In brief, the five appropriated aggregates are suffering” 
A Brief presentation 
B Extensive explanation  
 
That the five appropriated aggregates are suff ering mainly means that our body is suffering. 
There is a brief presentation and an  extensive explanation of this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
A Brief presentation  
Eighth: Thinking about the meaning of the statement: “In brief, the five 
appropriated aggregates are suffering” has five points:  
1. they are a vessel of suffering that will become manifest, 
2. they are a vessel of suffering that is the base for that which has [already] become 
manifest, 
3. they are a vessel for the suffering of suffering, 
4. they are a vessel for the suffering of change, and 
5. they are the nature of compounding suffering.  
You should think about these [points] again and again. 
 The five appropriated aggregates are the form aggregate, feeling aggregate, discrimination 
aggregate, compositional factors aggregate, and consciousness aggregate. All of them are the 
nature of suffering. Our body is a vessel of sufferi ng that will become manifest, that is, it is 
vessel for many sufferings. In other words, our bo dy is like a container or vessel into which 
many sufferings can be put, for example, the su ffering caused by the four hundred types of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
420 illnesses. The body is also a vessel for the suffer ing that is the base fo r that which has already 
become manifest, such as kidney pain, a stomac h ache, pain in the shou lder, in the back, in 
the feet, in the bones, and so fo rth. The body is also a vessel fo r the suffering of suffering, that 
is, our body is the very nature of suffering and on top of that there is the additional suffering 
of pain in the kidneys, head, ears, and so forth.  The body is also a vessel for the suffering of 
change. It is also a vessel for pervasive comp ounding sufferings since, from the crown of our 
head to the soles of our feet, the body is pe rvaded by suffering. This way of explaining 
compounding suffering is in relation to oneself. Another way of explaining this suffering is 
that everywhere, from the Peak of Existence down to the hell  of Unrelenting Torment, is 
pervaded by suffering. In short, our body is the very nature of compounding suffering.   We need to think about the fact that our bo dy aggregate is the nature of suffering. While 
f e e l i n g s  c a n  a l s o  b e  s a i d  t o  b e  t h e  n a t u r e  of suffering, among them there are feelings of 
happiness, suffering, and neutrality. Also while discriminations are the nature of suffering, 
some discriminations make the mind happy an d others make it suffer. Among the many 
compositional factors, many of them are suffe ring. Likewise, the consciousness aggregate is 
often the nature of suffering, but sometimes this  suffering is manifest and sometimes it is 
unmanifest. However, it is still the nature of suffering.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Extensive explanation 
{133} Here the first [point] is that, in dependence on taking these appropriated 
aggregates, the sufferings of the next rebirth onward are induced.  
The second one: the aggregates that have already been established become the 
basis of the illness, aging, etc. that depend on them.  
The third and fourth ones: [the aggregates] give rise to these two types of suffering 
due to their relationship with the negative tendencies161 of the two [sufferings ].  
The fifth one: due to the mere establishm ent of the appropriated aggregates they 
arise in the nature of compounding su ffering, for all compounded phenomena 
under the control of other – previous  karma and mental afflictions – are 
compounding suffering.  
 In dependence on taking the appropriate aggregates  of this life, the suffering of future lives is 
induced. Then, based on the aggregates – the body – that has already been achieved, we experience the sufferings of illness, aging, and death, as well as the many different types of 
sufferings such as heat, cold, hu nger, thirst, and so forth. For example, when it is hot we 
immediately take off some layers of clothing, and when it is cold we immediately put on 
more; we do this only because the body is suffering.   The third, that the aggregates are a vessel for the suffering of suffering, and the fourth, that 
they are a vessel for the suffering of change, ar e related to the negative tendencies. “Negative 
tendencies” are mental imprints deposited at the time of being an ordinary being that cause, 
                                             
 
161 The term implies that the elements of one’s presen t existence have arisen under the power of karma and 
mental afflictions which is why they entail correspon ding tendencies tainting them (cf. Geshe Thubten 
Ngawang in Systematic Study of Buddhism , semester XII, transcript 4/5, p. 8). See also the fourth aspect of the 
suffering of birth. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
421 for example, even foe-destroyers, who have ab andoned the afflictions, to speak badly from 
time to time, to swing from trees like monkeys, and so forth. The fifth, that the aggregates are 
the nature of compounding suffering, mean s that, due to being under the power of 
contaminated actions and afflictions, the aggreg ates are the nature of compounding suffering. 
Our aggregates are not under our control, they ar e under the control of other, that is, actions 
and afflictions. Because beings take rebirth in cy clic existence, that is, they take appropriate 
aggregates by the power of actions and affliction s, they are the nature of suffering and are not 
happiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1E Advice to cherish this manner of meditating on the essence 
If no genuine disenchantment develops to wards cyclic existence, which is of the 
nature of the appropriated aggregates, there is no way for a genuine awareness 
striving for liberation to develop nor for great compassion for the sentient beings 
roaming about in cyclic existence to deve lop. Therefore these considerations are 
extremely important whichever vehicle you enter, the Mahayana or Hinayana. 
 
Cyclic existence is the nature of  the appropriated aggregates. It is the constant circling over 
and over again. We need to generate disencha ntment with respect to cyclic existence since 
without this we will not be able to generate a genuine mind striving for liberation. If we do 
not think about suffering, we will also not be able to generate great compassion for all the 
sentient beings wandering in cyclic existence and experiencing suffering. In other words, in 
order to generate compassion for them, we need  to understand that the nature of cyclic 
existence is suffering. Only through understandin g their suffering will we generate the wish 
for all sentient beings to become free from th e suffering of cyclic existence. Therefore, 
whether we enter the Hinayana or Mahayana, it  is important to recognize suffering as 
suffering and generate the wish to become free from this suffering. In addition, if we have 
entered the Hinayana we need to generate the wish  to attain liberation or nirvana, and if we 
have entered the Mahayana we need to generate the wish to attain enlightenment in order to 
be able to liberate all sentient beings from  suffering. Through generating great compassion, 
we can generate the mind of enlightenment that wi shes to take care of all sentient beings. For 
this purpose, we need to meditate again and ag ain on love and compassion. Thus, in our daily 
life it is important to meditate regularly on love and compassion.   (Oral transmission 7:19-7:34, pp. 133-139)  Thursday morning, 14 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 133) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2 Considering the six [types of] suffering 
A Summarized presentation of the six [types of] suffering 
B Presentation of them condensed in three groups  
C How there is nothing in contaminated feelings that is of the entity of happiness  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2A Summarized presentation of the six [types of] suffering 
Second: The Letter to a Friend  sets out the faults [of cyclic existence]: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
422 1. lack of certainty, 
2. insatiability, 
3. discarding one’s body again and again, 
4. joining again and again, 
5. changing from high to low [states] again and again, and 
1. lacking companions. 
 
Nagarjuna’s Letter to a Friend  sets out the six sufferings: 
• a lack of certainty, 
• a lack of satisfaction, 
• discarding the body again and again, 
• joining with a body again and again, 
• changing from high to low again and again, and 
• loneliness or lack of companions. 
We can see how things change, for example, on e day we are happy and the next day we are 
unhappy. This is because there is no certainty in  cyclic existence. There is also a lack of 
satisfaction, which mentally causes us many prob lems. Then there is the suffering of having to 
give up or discard our body over and over again. We are born and die again and again, 
continually forced to give up our body. There is also the suffering of joining with or taking 
another body again and again, seemingly without end. Then there is the suffering of attaining 
a high position but later on once again falling down. for example, we become wealthy, have a 
high social position, power, and fame but th en something happens and we lose everything 
and even become poor and so forth. We see that sometime very rich people suddenly become poor, and that sometimes those who were very p oor become very rich. We know this reality 
very well. Then there is the suffering of loneli ness. Although there is the suffering of dying 
alone without anyone to accompany us to our next life, here this suffering refers in general to 
loneliness, which can be experienced even wh en we are surrounded by loving family and 
friends.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2B Presentation of them included in three groups  
To sum them up in three [groups]:  
1. in cyclic existence there is nothing reliable, 
2. no matter how much of its happiness one enjoys, there is no final point of 
satisfaction, and 
3. one has been entering into it since beginningless times. 
 
There is nothing in cyclic existence that is  reliable. No matter how much we enjoy the 
apparent pleasures of cyclic existence, they do not bring us satisfaction, but only make us want 
more and more. In addition, we have been suffe ring in cyclic existence since beginningless 
time and it also appears that this suffering will  be endless in the future . However, while cyclic 
existence is beginningless, there is an end to th e cyclic existence of an individual being. In 
other words, by practicing well, we can attain the state of a foe-destroyer or a buddha and put 
an end to our cyclic existence.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
423  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The first one has four points: 
1. the inappropriateness of relying on the body you have attained since you will have to discard your body again and again; 
2. the inappropriateness of relying on benefit and harm [done to you] since there 
is no certainty as to whether your father will become your son; your mother, 
your wife; and your enemy, someone very dear to you; and the like; 
3. the inappropriateness of relying the exce llences you have achieved since {134} 
you fall from high places to low ones; and 
4. the inappropriateness of relying on co mpanions since you have to go on 
without them [in the end].  
 
The third one is that, since you join again and again, an end to the continuity of 
births is not evident.  
 You should reflect in this manner again and again. 
 Even though we have attained a good body, it wo uld be inappropriate to rely on it since it is 
not stable in that we will have to give it up once  again. Also it is not appropriate to rely on the 
benefit and harm done to us because when our father dies he can be reborn as our son, our mother can be reborn as our wife, our enemy can be reborn as a dear friend, and so forth. In 
this way, cyclic existence is unreliable in th at everything constantly changes. It is also 
inappropriate to rely on our excellences, such as our wealth and power, because we can fall 
from the high to the low. For example, there ha ve been presidents who were the dictator of a 
country for many years but later on ended up in prison, alone and without anyone to take care of them. There have also been people who originally were in a low position but later on became prime ministers, ministers, and so fort h. However, they too can once again fall to 
such a state that they even need to escape fr om their country. There are also those who were 
famous and wealthy who later on were taken to court and put in prison.  In addition, it is inappropriate to rely on our companions or friends because, after some 
time, their mind may change and they might say to us, “At the moment I need to think about 
our relationship. For now it would be better for me not to have contact with you.” At first 
such people were our dear friends, but then th eir mind changed and they either gave us up 
entirely or distanced themselves from us. Th is shows that even our dear friends are not 
reliable as they too can change.   We take rebirth, give up our body and take rebirth again. Because after death our existence 
does not finish, we need to take another rebirt h. In this way an end to our future rebirths 
cannot be seen. However, if we realize selfle ssness directly, especially the selflessness of 
persons, we will be able to understand that it is possible to abandon the conception of a self, the root of cyclic existence, an d thereby put an end to rebirth and to cyclic existence. While 
some people can see an end to their rebirths, for most of us it is not possible to see even our 
next life. Because the existence of past and futu re lives is a hidden phenomenon, they must be 
proven by reasonings. For this reason, it is necessary to study logic.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
424  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2C How there is nothing in contaminated feelings that is of the entity of happiness 
Furthermore, at present most of the happy  feelings that increase our attachment 
are minds of happiness that arise with resp ect to a relief of suffering; they are not 
happiness by way of entity that is not re lated to suffering. For instance, if you 
suffer due to having walked too much, th e mind of happiness that arises due to 
sitting down appears to be a happiness that arises gradually while the previous 
great suffering gradually ceases. However, it is not happiness by way of entity, for if you sit too much, once again suffering will arise as before. If they were causes of 
happiness by way of their entity, just as su ffering increases to the same extent as 
you are subject to the causes of suffering , so too should walking, sitting, lying, 
eating and drinking, as well as sun and sh ade, etc. increase your happiness to the 
same extent that you indulge in them. Howe ver, it appears that in the long term 
only suffering is produced.  
 These points are also set out in [the Sutra of Nanda’s ] Entry into the Womb  and the 
root text of the Four Hundred  [Verses] and its commentary.  
 
Out of attachment we generate happy feeling, and even though it is not happiness in entity 
we still perceive it to be happiness. For exampl e, when we eat deliciou s food we experience 
happy feeling that increases our attachment to ea ting but in the end, due to eating too much, 
we experience the suffering of an overfull stomac h. Likewise, if due to liking coffee, we drink 
too much, suffering will arise. Although these things appear to bring happiness, due to our 
overindulging in them we come to experience  suffering, for example, that of high blood 
pressure. There are people who, seeking happin ess, smoke marijuana or hashish, convinced 
that it will bring them happiness, such as the se nsation of flying in the sky, but in the end it 
only brings them suffering and sickness. Whatever we enjoy in cyclic existence, even though it 
appear to be happiness, in reality it is not happiness and only brings us more suffering and 
unhappiness. There is nothing at all that is happine ss by way of entity in cyclic existence. Only 
if we eliminate all sufferings will we naturall y experience happiness. On the other hand, as 
long as we have not eliminated suffering, there is  nothing in cyclic existe nce that is the entity 
of happiness.  For example, if we walk for a long time and, becoming tired, sit down, upon sitting for a long time in a chair, once again there will be suffering. This happen s naturally. Although 
when we first sit down, there is the feeling of ha ppiness, in actuality it is only a reduction or 
relief of the previous suffering that appears to be happiness. Having remained sitting for a 
long time, once again we become uncomforta ble and want to again walk. Then, when we 
once again begin to walk, it too appears to be  happiness due to a reduction of the previous 
suffering of sitting. However, as we walk, the suffering of walking gradually returns. On the 
other hand, just as the longer we experience the causes of suffering, the more our suffering 
increases, similarly, if walking, sitting, and so forth were the nature or entity of happiness, the 
more we engage in them, the more our happiness would increase. However, this does not happen. Likewise, if eating and drinking were the nature of happiness, the more we eat and 
drink, the more happiness we would experience. Si milarly, if lying in the sun were the nature 
of happiness, the more we lie in the sun,  the more happiness we would experience, but 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
425 instead we soon become hot and want to move into the shade. Howeve r, if staying in the 
shade were the nature of happiness, the more we stay in the shade, the more happiness we 
would experience, but as before we soon beco me cool and want to return to the sun.  
 Therefore, because cyclic existence is the natu re of suffering, we should generate the wish 
t o  b e c o m e  f r e e  f r o m  i t  a n d  t o  g o  t o  a  p u r e  l a n d  s u c h  a s  S u k h a v a t i .  H a v i n g  g o n e  t o  s u c h  
places, we will always be happy and never experience suffering. Otherwise, we will not be able to avoid suffering. There exist many conditions for suffering and we also have many internal 
causes for the experience of suffering, the main  cause being the contaminated or non-virtuous 
actions that we have created.  
 This lack of happiness is set out in the Sutra  of Nanda’s  Entry into the Womb  and the root 
text and commentary on the Four Hundred  Verses . The sutra sets out the fact that, having died, 
we are once again conceived in a womb, after which the fetus gradually develops due to the 
movement of various winds over a period of th irty-seven weeks. When the body is complete 
and the mental consciousness is established, th e baby begins to suffer from the darkness and 
tightness of the womb and gene rates the wish to leave it. 
 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B Considering the suffering of the individual [realms]  
1 The suffering of the three bad migrations 
2 The suffering of humans 
3 The suffering of demigods 
4 The suffering of gods 
The second one has four points: the suffe ring of the three bad migrations, the 
suffering of humans, the suffering of demigods, and the suffering of gods. 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B1 The suffering of the three bad migrations 
The first has already been explained. 
 
The sufferings of the bad migrations – the hell s, hungry ghosts, and animals – were already 
explained in the context of the path of small beings. Having contemplated them, we should 
go on to think about the sufferings of human beings, demigods, and gods.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B2 The suffering of humans 
The second one [consists in] the suffering s of hunger and thirst, the unpleasant 
contact of heat and cold, frantic activity , and fatigue. In addition, you should 
understand the seven [types of suffering], bi rth, aging, illness, death, and so forth162 
by means of the previous explanations.  
 
Human beings experience the sufferings of hunger due to a lack of food, thirst due to a lack 
of drink, heat and cold due to unpleasant contact with heat or cold. They also experience the 
suffering of frantically seeking something and not finding it, for example, a boyfriend or 
girlfriend, a job, and so forth. They also suffer  from tiredness or fatigue. In addition, human 
                                              
162 and the suffering of meeting with the unpleasant, the se paration from what is pleasant and seeking what you 
desire and not getting it 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
426 beings experience the seven types of suffering  mentioned before: the suffering of birth, 
suffering of aging, suffering of illness, suffe r i n g  o f  d e a t h ,  s u f f e r i n g  o f  m e e t i n g  w i t h  t h e  
unpleasant, suffering of separating from the pl easant, and suffering of seeking the desirable 
and not obtaining it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Furthermore, in the Discourses of the Collections  it says:  
 
All the sufferings of bad migrations, 
Also appear to exist for human beings. {135} Troubled by suffering like beings in hell, Subjects of Yama by poverty, 
They also have the suffering of animals: 
Powerful ones oppress the weak 
By force, inflicting harm on them. It is like a river [engulfing you]. 
 It appears that human beings also have similar sufferings to those existing in the bad migrations. For example, at times human beings  are oppressed or intoxicated by suffering, 
similar to the beings in the hell realm. However, since the suffering in an actual hell realm is 
much greater, the suffering of human beings is small compared to it.   In terms of poverty, human beings are at time s similar to the beings of the world of Yama, 
that is, to the hungry ghosts. When some hungry  ghosts, wishing to eat, approach a tree laden 
with fruit, upon arriving there the tree is found to be dried up and without any fruit at all. 
For others, when, wishing to drink, they pick up  a vessel of liquid, it appears to them to be 
filled with pus and blood. For others, when they want to drink or eat, the beverage transforms 
into molten iron and the food in to lumps of incandescent iron.  
 Human beings also experience suffering simila r to that of animals who are overpowered by 
other animals or used without choice by huma n beings to carry heavy loads, work in the 
fields, and so forth. For example, some huma n beings, without freedom, are forced to work 
day and night by others who have such power ov er them that they are not permitted even to 
express their suffering. Powerful human beings also oppress those who are weak and inflict 
harm on them.   This experience of suffering arises continuous ly, like the uninterrupted flow of a river.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And in Four Hundred Verses : 
 
Higher ones have mental suffering, 
Lower ones get physical pain. These two types of suffering  Overwhelm the world each day. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
427 You should reflect in accordance with these statements. 
 
Higher human beings, the rich and so forth, ex perience much mental suffering. Why is this? 
It is because they constantly worry about losing their power,  wealth, and so forth, while 
simultaneously aspiring to increase their powe r, wealth, and so forth. On the other hand, 
while the poor experience less mental sufferin g, they experience more physical suffering 
b e c a u s e  t h e y  n e e d  t o  w o r k  h a r d  p h y s i c a l l y  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  T h e y  d o  n o t  h a v e  m u c h  m e n t a l  
suffering because they do not have worries ab out losing their wealth, power, fame, and so 
forth, and they are satisfied with merely findin g enough food and drink and a bed to sleep on. 
However, because they often need to do heav y manual labor, they experience physical 
suffering.  
 When the text says that “The world is destro yed each day by the two types of suffering,” the 
word translated as “world,” in Tibetan jig ten  (‘jig rten ) ,  l i t e r a l l y  m e a n s  “ t h e  s u p p o r t  o f  t h e  
transitory” and refers to our body and mind, which are unstable, constantly changing, and 
harmed by the two types of suffering, mental and physical.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B3 The suffering of demigods 
Third: It is said that the demigods ar e mentally tormented by envy that cannot 
bear the wealth of the gods. When based on that they fight with the gods, they 
experience many sufferings of having their bodies chopped up, split, etc. Although 
they possess wisdom, they have the fully- ripened obscurations and consequently 
cannot see the truth in that basis. 
 
The demigods or antigods, upon seeing the weal th and so forth of the gods, experience the 
mental suffering of great jealousy. Due to this, th ey fight with the gods, that is, they wage war 
against them. However, the gods being more powerful, the demigods then experience the 
intense suffering of having their bodies cut to  pieces with weapons. Also, because they are 
unable to win the battle, they experience su ffering. Although the demigods possess wisdom, 
due to having fruitional or fully-ripened obscuratio ns they are unable to see the truth, that is, 
to directly realize the four noble truths, with that basis or body. In other words, due to the 
obscurations of their body they are unable to achieve the path of seeing. Similarly, due to 
fruitional obscurations, animals, such as horses, donkeys, sheep, goats, pigeons, and so forth, 
cannot achieve the path of seeing, generate bodh ichitta, and so forth due to being stupid and 
only thinking about eating and drinking.   It is also said in sutra that because the youn g female demigods are very beautiful, the gods 
take them away by force to their land, for whic h reason the demigods also wage war against 
the gods but are unable to defeat them.   Thursday afternoon, 14 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 135) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4 The suffering of gods 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
428 A The suffering of the desire [realm] gods 
B The suffering of the gods of the uppermost realms 
The fourth one has two points: the suffering of desire [realm] gods and the 
suffering of gods of the uppermost realms. 
 
Next there is a discussion of the sufferings of the gods of the desire realm and those of the 
gods of the upper realms. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4A The suffering of the desire [realm] gods 
1 The suffering of death-transference and falling 
2 The suffering of despair  
3 The suffering of being chopped up, split, killed, and banished 
The first one has three points: the suffering  of death-transference and falling, the 
suffering of despair, and the suffering of being chopped up, split, killed, and 
banished. 
 
The gods of the desire realm experience great su ffering at the time of death-transference and 
for the fact that after death they will once again fall into the lower realms. Being unable to do 
anything about this, they experience the great su ffering of despair. They also experience the 
suffering of having their bodies chopped to piec es, of their legs, arms, and so forth being cut 
off, of being killed, and of being banish ed when they fight with the demigods.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4A-1 The suffering of death-transference and falling 
A The suffering of death-transference 
B The suffering of falling to a lower place 
The first one has two points: the suffering of death-transference and the suffering 
of falling to a lower place.  
A The suffering of death-transference 
First: At the time of death-transference wh en a god sees the five signs of death, the 
suffering that springs from this is far greater than the happi ness that previously 
arose from indulging in the desirable obje cts of the gods. The five signs of death 
are: (1) a hideous bodily complexion, (2) a dislike for one’s seat, (3) the wilting of 
one’s flower garlands, (4) one’s clothes be coming smelly, and (5) sweat, which did 
not exist previously, appearing on one’s body. 
 
The gods of the desire realm suffer from death-tr ansference and suffer due to seeing that they 
will fall to a lower place. Although they prev iously enjoyed many desirable object, when the 
five signs of their impending death arise they  experience the mental suffering of intense 
unhappiness that is far greater than their prev ious happiness. The five signs of death are:  
1. the complexion or color of their body becomes ugly,  
2. they come to dislike their cushion,  
3. their flower garlands wilt whereas previously they never withered,  
4. their clothes begin to smell, and  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
429 5. sweat arises on their bodies wherea s previously this never happened.  
At that time of approaching death, they experience much more suffering than that 
experienced by human beings, yet they cannot do an ything to avoid it. In this way, the gods of 
the desire realm also experience great suffering.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The suffering of falling 
The second one is just like it says in Letter to a Friend : 
 
As they transfer from the world of the gods 
When there is no remainder of anything virtuous, {136} They change without control into situations  Of animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings. 
 When the gods of the desire re alm do not have any remaining virtue, they fall after their 
death into the hell, hungry ghost, or animal re alms. In other words, they take rebirth as one 
of the different kinds of animals (those in the oceans and those in the places of humans and 
gods), hungry ghosts (those with external obst ructions, those with internal obstructions, and 
those with obstructions to food and drink), and hell beings (those of the eight hot hells, eight 
cold hells, four neighboring hells, and the occa sional hells) due to their karma. Having taken 
rebirth in any one of these places, they will ex perience much suffering. We should meditate 
on the suffering that arises when the desire re alm gods see that they will fall down into the 
lower realms and that they are powerless to change this.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4A-2  The suffering of despair 
Second: For the gods with very extensive heaps of merit the most exquisite sense 
pleasures arise. When the sons of the gods  with small merit see that, they despair 
and experience great suffering and mental unhappiness on that basis.  
 
Among the desire realm gods there are those who,  due to having vast heaps of merit, possess 
great wealth and excellences. When the sons of  the gods with small merit see the gods who 
possess great wealth and excellences, they desp air and experience great suffering and mental 
unhappiness. Even when poor human beings see rich people they do not despair in the same way, but see that the rich created the merit to have this wealth. In other words, they 
understand that if someone is rich it is beca use in a previous life that person practiced 
generosity, whereas those who are poor did not. However, if th ose who experience the result 
of generosity in this life do not continue to practice generosity, they may come to experience 
poverty and problems.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4A-3 The suffering of being chopped up, split, killed, and banished  
Third: When the gods fight with the demi gods, they experience the suffering of 
having their limbs and minor body parts chopped off, the suffering of their bodies 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
430 being split, and the suffering of being ki lled. If their heads are chopped off they 
die, but if their limbs and minor body pa rts are chopped off or split they grow 
back and they survive. As for banishme nt, when there is conflict the more 
powerful gods drive the weaker sons  of the gods out of their abodes. 
 
When the gods fight with the de migods, they experience the suffering of having their limbs 
and minor body parts cut off, the suffering of ha ving their bodies split, and the suffering of 
being killed. When their head is  cut off by the demigods, the go ds die, but when their limbs 
or minor body parts are chopped off, they grow back and they do not die, but go on living. When there is conflict, the more powerful gods  banish or expel the weaker ones from their 
homes. We can only imagine the fighting between  the gods and demigods since we are unable 
to actually see them. We can only see the suffering of human beings and animals, and not 
that of other sentient beings. They can only be seen by omniscient beings and those with 
higher realizations, such as clairvoyance. When we achieve the clairvoyance of divine eye and 
so forth we will be able to see very distant phen omena clearly, just like we presently see things 
placed in front of us. We will also be able to see the different kinds of rebirth that sentient beings, including ourselves, will take and so forth.   Although there is fighting between the gods  and demigods, there is even more fighting 
among human beings, as well as more suffering and mental unhappiness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B4B  The suffering of  the gods in the uppermost realms 
1 [Lack of power to avoid future suffering] 
Although the gods in the two uppermost realms do not have the suffering of 
suffering, in possessing mental afflictions and obscurations, they lack control over 
their death-transference and the [next] state, which is why they suffer through 
taking on bad states. 
 
The gods of the two upper realms also experien ce suffering but not the suffering of suffering. 
What kind of suffering do they experience? Am ong the three types of suffering – the suffering 
of suffering, suffering of change, and pervasiv e suffering, these gods experience pervasive 
suffering. Why is this? It is because they stil l have the mental afflictions and obscurations. 
Therefore, when they die, without power or freedom but due to karma created in the past 
that left an imprint on their consciousness, they will once again experience suffering.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How they have the suffering of fa lling to bad migrations once again  
Furthermore it says in Discourses of the Collections :  
 
Someone in the form or formless realms, 
Having transcended the suffering of suffering, 
Possessed of the bliss of meditative stabilization, Who dwells immovable for eons,  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
431 Is still not certain of freedom at all; 
He will still fall from there again. If he has emerged somewhere 
Beyond the whirlpool of pain of bad realms, 
 
Even with effort he won’t last long there. Like a bird in flight up high, 
Like an arrow shot by a child, 
That one also ends up falling –  Like butterlamps that blaze for long {137} While [actually] perishing moment by moment, He is completely subject to the suffering Called ‘compounding, thoroughly changing.’ 
 The gods of the upper realms also experience the suffering of falling back into the lower 
realms. Having been born as a god of the form realm or formless realm, even though they do 
not have the suffering of suffering, due to possessi ng the bliss of meditative stabilization, and 
do not move from this state for eons, they ar e still not liberated from suffering, from the 
mental afflictions, and from the obscurations. Be cause of this, they will fall once again into 
the bad migrations and experience suffering. It is  not easy to go beyond such bad migrations, 
and even though we apply effort we cannot rema in in the upper realms. Just as a bird cannot 
remain forever in the sky but must once again return to the ground, so too do these gods 
return to the bad migrations. Likewise, like an a rrow shot by a child that goes up into the sky 
but then quickly falls back to the ground, so too do the gods who have  taken rebirth in the 
form and formless realms once again fall into the bad migrations. This is because they have 
exhausted their merit and because on their mental consciousness are the seeds of non-virtuous actions created by them in the past. Also like the flame of a butterlamp or candle 
perishes in each moment and will come to an end, these gods experience suffering. In this 
way, the gods of the form or formless realms also experience mental suffering due to seeing, by means of their clairvoyance, their future re birth in the lower realms. While they do not 
have the suffering of suffering related to their bo dy or mind, they have the suffering of change 
(happiness that transforms into suffering) and pe rvasive suffering. For these reasons, we need 
to examine the fact that even if we are reborn  as a god we will still experience suffering. We 
tend to think that the gods do not experience suffering, but since they are not liberated from 
cyclic existence and still abide in it, they do experience suffering.   We see that human beings, ourselves and ot hers, experience problems day and night. 
While we cannot see the gods, they do experien ce mental suffering. Therefore, wherever we 
take rebirth, in the upper or lower realms, th ere will be suffering. There is nowhere about 
which it can be said that there is never any su ffering. Rather, there is suffering everywhere.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B  Thinking about the stages of entering cyclic existence – origins 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
432 1 How the mental afflictions arise 
2 How karma is thereby accumulated  
3 How there is death-transference and rejoining 
The second one has three points: how the mental afflictions arise, how karma is 
thereby accumulated, and how there is death-transference and rejoining.  
 
How do the mental afflictions arise? We ne ed to examine this. Th en, motivated by the 
afflictions, we accumulate karm a. Due to this, there is death- transference and rejoining with 
other aggregates, that is, with a new body.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1 How the mental afflictions arise 
A How the mental afflictions are chief  
B Identification of the mental afflictions  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1A How the mental afflictions are chief  
Although both karma and mental affliction s are necessary as causes that establish 
cyclic existence, the mental afflictions ar e chief. This is because if there are no 
mental afflictions, even though there exists karma beyond counting that was 
accumulated previously, since the cooperat ive conditions for karma are absent, the 
sprout of suffering is not established – just  like a sprout is not established from a 
seed that is lacks humidity, soil, and so fort h. It is also because if there are mental 
afflictions, even though there may be no  karma accumulated previously, it will 
immediately be accumulated anew and future aggregates will be taken. That is also 
how it is set out in the Commentary  [on Valid Cognition ]: 
 
The karma of those who have completely passed beyond  
The craving for existence, cannot project another,  
For the cooperative condition has been exhausted. 
 
And: 
 
Because if craving is present, it will arise once again. 
 Therefore, it is of great importance to rely on the antidotes to the mental 
afflictions, and that again depends on know ing the mental afflictions, which is why 
you should become skilled in them.  
 There are two causes of rebirth in cyclic ex istence, actions and afflictions. Among them, 
which one is the principal cause? It is the afflic tions because if there are no afflictions, even 
though we have created karma it wi ll not be able to bring its result, just like a barley seed will 
not bring the result of a barley sprout if it lacks water, fertilizer, and so forth. Likewise, 
without the cooperative condition that is the afflictions, karma cannot bring the result of 
suffering. On the other hand, if there are afflic tions, even though we have not accumulated 
karma in the past, we will accumulate new karma that will act as the cause for taking another 
body or rebirth.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 11-14 April 2005 (09) 
433  In short, if there are no a fflictions, just as a seed will not produce a result without the 
cooperative conditions of water, heat, and so forth, likewise karma without the cooperative 
condition of the afflictions will not bring the resu lt of rebirth. On the other hand, if there are 
afflictions, even though there is no previous ly created karma, we will accumulate new karma 
that will become the cause of taking another body.  
 When creating karma, the causal motivation is  an affliction. If the simultaneous or time 
motivation is virtuous, we will create a contamin ated virtuous action that will bring the result 
o f  t h e  b o d y  o f  a  h u m a n  b e i n g  o r  g o d  i n  t h e  n e x t  l i f e .  H o w e v e r ,  i t  i s  s t i l l  a  b o d y  o f  c y c l i c  existence. If, on the other hand, there are no a fflictions, we will not take rebirth because the 
cause, the afflictions, is absent. The Buddha taug ht the twelve links, the first being ignorance, 
which is a projecting cause. In addition, in or der to take rebirth the actualizing causes of 
grasping and craving are also necessary. Therefor e, if the afflictions are absent, we will not 
take rebirth.   Those who have attained the state of a foe- destroyer have eliminated the afflictions and 
have become free from cyclic existence. Sinc e they do not create new projecting karma 
because they have exhausted the cooperative condition of the affl ictions, they no longer take 
rebirth in cyclic existence. On the other hand, as long as there is craving, we will create new actions. Therefore, it is very important to apply the antidotes to the mental afflictions. To do 
so, it is necessary to understand the mental afflictions and their ob ject of the mode of 
apprehension. Therefore, by becoming skilled or learned in the mental afflictions, we will be 
able to abandon them.   What are the mental afflictions? There ar e ten subtle-increasers: attachment, hatred, 
ignorance, pride, doubt, the view  of the transitory collection, th e view holding to an extreme, 
the view holding a bad view – such as the view of the transitory collection or an extreme view 
– as supreme, the view holding bad conduct an d morality as supreme, and wrong view (that 
the law of actions and their result s does not exist, that past and future lives do not exist, and 
that the Three Jewels do not exist).   
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
434 Monday afternoon, 18 April 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 137) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B Identification of the mental afflictions 
1 [The actual] identification of the mental afflictions 
2 The stages by which [the mental afflictions ] arise 
3 The faults of the mental afflictions 
Second: This has three points: [The actual] identification of the mental afflictions, 
the stages by which they arise, and th e faults of the mental afflictions. 
 
What is the root of all the sufferings, problems , and difficulties of cyclic existence? It is 
contaminated actions which in turn are motivated by afflictions. For this reason, we need to 
identify the mental afflictions. An affliction is what makes the mind afflicted and unable to 
understand the true nature of all phenomena. What kinds of mental afflictions are there? 
First we need to identify them, then we need to  understand how they arise, and then we need 
to think about their faults or shortcomings. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1 [The actual] identification of the mental afflictions 
A Desirous attachment 
B Anger 
C Pride 
D Ignorance E Doubt 
F The view of the transitory collection 
G View holding on to an extreme [position] 
H [View] holding on to a view as best  
I [View] holding on to an ethical discipline and ascetic practice as best 
J Wrong views  
The first one has ten points. 
 
There are ten main mental afflictions:  
1. attachment, 
2. anger, 
3. pride, 
4. ignorance, 
5. doubt, 
6. the view of the transitory collection, 
7. the view holding to an extreme, 
8. the view holding to a bad view as supreme,  
9. the view holding on to a bad ethical discip line and ascetic practice as supreme, and 
10. wrong views. 
Attachment, through observing a contaminated ob ject and thinking that it is pleasant or 
attractive, wishes to have it. Anger, throug h observing a contaminated object that is 
unpleasant or unattractive, wishes to harm it. Pride is the thought “I am very learned. I am 
from a high class. I am rich. I am very attracti ve,” and so forth. Ignorance is a non-knowing of 
the nature of phenomena or the apprehension of all phenomena as substantially existent or 
inherently existent. Doubt is a mind that is tw o-pointed and unable to decide. The view of the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
435 transitory collection thinks “I ” and “mine.” The view holding on  to an extreme either thinks 
that if things do not exist inherently they do not exist at all, or that if  things exist they must 
exist inherently. The view holding to a bad vi ew as supreme holds either the view of the 
transitory collection or the view holding to  an extreme to be a supreme view. The view 
holding to bad ethical discipline  and ascetic practice as suprem e holds incorrect behavior as 
the best conduct or incorrect morality as the be st morality. Wrong view holds the law of cause 
and effect, the Three Jewels, past and future lives,  and so forth to be no n-existent. In this way 
there are ten main mental afflictions. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1A Desirous attachment 
The first of those, desirous attachment, obse rves an attractive, pleasant, external or 
internal object and is subsequently attached to it. To illustrate: just as oil that has 
penetrated into cloth is hard to remove, [desirous attachment ] also clings to its 
object and pervades it whereby it separa tes from that object with difficulty. 
 
Attachment observes an attractive and pleasant  observed object, external or internal, and 
becomes subsequently attached to it. Attachment is similar to oil that has penetrated a piece 
of cloth and is difficult to remove, as it too pervades the mind and is difficult to eliminate. Attachment arises in our mind every day, at a ll times, and in whatever we do. Hence, it is 
almost always present. For this reason, it is difficult to separate our minds from attachment.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1B Anger 
Anger, {138} through observing a source of suffering such as sentient beings, 
suffering, weapons, thorns, and so forth, is a hostile attitude, a rough mind, 
intending to inflict harm on the object.  
 
Anger takes as its object sentient beings, for ex ample, and then wishes to harm them. It also 
takes as its object suffering, weapons, thorns, and so forth, and then wishes to inflict harm on 
them. It is a rough mind that wishes to ha rm its object. Anger and hatred are synonyms. 
When we are angry, the anger disturbs the happy  and relaxed state of our own mind and also 
disturbs the minds of the people around us, our family, our companion, and so forth. Our 
anger harms others by making them unhappy. Ange r is also dangerous because it destroys our 
virtue. However, unlike attachment, it does not arise at all times, for example, it does not 
arise when we are enjoying eating, drinking, rela xing, and so forth. It only arises in certain 
situations, for example, when we  meet a particular person. Ange r also does not last for long, 
sometimes just an hour or so, or just a few mi nutes. When, on the other hand, we hold anger, 
it becomes belligerence.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1C Pride 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
436 Pride, through observing one’s external or internal level or qualities based on the 
view of the transitory collection, is a pu ffed up mind that engages that having an 
elevated aspect. 
 
Pride, based on the view of the transitory collecti on, discriminates this is high and this is low, 
this is good and this is bad, and then disting uishes oneself to be higher, better, and so forth. 
Thus, it engages a high or elevated aspect and thinks, for example, “I am from a noble family. 
I am from a high caste. I am be tter” and so forth. If we exam ine our mind, we will recognize 
that we have pride. The Treasury of Manifest Dharma  sets out three, seven, and nine types of 
pride, which you can read about.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1D Ignorance 
Ignorance is an afflicted non-knowing, due to an unclear mind, with regard to the 
nature of the four truths, actions and their results, and the Three Jewels.  
 
Ignorance is a non-knowing, due to an unclear mind, with respect to the four truths (true 
sufferings, true origins, true cessations, and tr ue paths), actions and their results (that virtue 
brings happiness and non-virtue brings suffe ring), and the nature of the Three Jewels 
(Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1E Doubt 
Doubt, through observing those three [objec ts], the four truths, etc. thinks “Do 
they exist or do they not exist?  Are they or are they not?”  
 
Doubt is a wondering with respect to the four noble truths, actions and results, and the Three 
Jewels as to whether they exist or  not, or whether they are true or not. It is a lack of clarity. 
Even thinking “Is this road the right one, or is it that other one?” is a kind of doubt. Due to 
it, we will not even reach our destination. Do ubt is likened wishing to go to India but 
thinking “Maybe I will go to India. Maybe I will  go to the United States. Maybe I will go to 
South America.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1F The view of the transitory collection 
The view of the transitory collection: an afflicted wisdom that, observing the 
appropriated aggregates, views them as a self or of the self thinking ‘I’ or ‘mine.’ 
Here ‘transitory’ means impermanent and ‘collection’ many, therefore the base 
that it views is a mere impermanent and manifold phenomenon. In order to 
indicate “There is no permanent unitary pe rson,” it is given th e name ‘view of the 
transitory collection.’ 
 
The view of the transitory collection is an affl icted wisdom that observes the aggregates, its 
observed object, and thinks “I” and “mine.” Beca use the observed object is transitory it is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
437 called the view of the transitory  collection, and because the aggreg ates are a collection of many 
parts it is called the view of the transitory collection . Thus, its object is an impermanent 
collection, not a permanent and unitary person . Such a permanent unitary person does not 
exist. Thus, the person or being is empty of being permanent, partless, and unitary. Instead it 
exists in dependence on being imputed on  the aggregates which are an impermanent 
collection. Therefore, in order to indicate that  its basis of imputation is not permanent and 
unitary, it is called “the view of the transitory collection.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1G View holding to an extreme  
The view holding to an extreme is an a fflicted wisdom that, observing that self 
apprehended by the view of the transitory collection, views it to be permanent and 
eternal or views it to cease without join ing this [existence] to a future one.  
 
The view holding to an extreme observes the se lf apprehended by the view of the transitory 
collection to be permanent and unchanging, or vie ws it to not join to a future life, that is, it 
views the consciousness or the being as not conne cting to another rebirth. Thus, it is divided 
into the view of the extreme of permanence an d the view of the extreme of annihilation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1H [The view ] holding to a [bad] view as best  
[The view] holding to a [bad] view as best is an afflicted wisdom that, observing 
any of the three – the view of the transi tory collection, the view holding to an 
extreme, or a wrong view – and the aggregat es of the person holding the view that 
arises in dependence on any of them, holds them to be best. 
 
The view holding a bad view as supreme takes as  its observed object either the view of the 
transitory collection, the view holding to an extr eme, or a wrong view as well as the aggregates 
of the person holding the view that arises in dependence on any of them, and holds them to 
be the best.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1I [The view ] holding to [a bad] ethical discipline and ascetic practice as best 
[The view] holding to [a bad] ethical discipline and ascetic practice as best is an 
afflicted wisdom that, observing an ethical discipline of giving up immorality, an 
ascetic practice that sets a dress code, manners, and bodily and verbal behavior as 
definite, and {139} the aggregates that aris e in dependence on either of them, and 
views them as purifying negativities, as li berating from the mental afflictions, and 
definitely releasing one from cyclic existence. 
 
Morality or ethical discipline is the abando nment of immorality or non-virtue. Ascetic 
practice or conduct refers to external behavi ors of body and speech. The view holding bad 
morality and conduct as supreme think that  immorality and bad conduct can purify 
negativities, liberate from the mental afflictions, and definitely release one from cyclic 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
438 existence. An example of this vi ew is to think that undergoing a lot of hardships is the correct 
practice of morality or good behavior of body  and speech and that it can bring realizations. 
Such views are incorrect.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1J Wrong view 
A wrong view is an afflicted wisdom that deprecates saying that past and future 
lives, actions and their effects and the like do not exist, or superimposes the 
concept of Ishvara, a primal substance, etc. as the cause of migrating beings. 
 
A wrong view is a view that holds that the law of actions and results, the Three Jewels, past 
and future lives do not exist, or that holds that  the creator of migrating beings is Ishvara, a 
primordial principal, and so forth. Thus, it de precates the existence of that which exists or 
superimposes existence on that which does not ex ist. There is a school that holds that Ishvara 
is the creator and that just by his thinking ab out something, such as good food, it arises. 
Others, such as the Samkhyas, assert that a prim ordial principal is the creator of the entire 
world  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
These are how the mental afflictions are identified from the common perspective 
of the higher and lower tenet systems. Th e Prasangika Madhyamika system will be 
explained below.  
 
This exposition of the mental afflictions is from the point of view that is common to the 
higher and lower systems.   (Oral transmission 7:05-7:25, pp. 139-148)  Tuesday morning, 19 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 139) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B2 The stages by which [the mental afflictions ] arise 
A The system of the Treatise on the Levels  asserts that the view of the transitory collection and 
ignorance are in opposition to each other 
Second: If the view of the transitory co llection and ignorance are asserted to be 
different [the stages by which the mental afflictions arise must be understood in 
the following manner]. For instance, with regard to a coiled rope, once darkness 
has fallen to some extent, if the mode of ab idance of the rope is not clear, a mind 
apprehending a snake arises. Likewise , through the darkness of ignorance 
obscuring the clear mode of abidance of the aggregates, the aggregates mistakenly 
arise as a self, and from that the other mental afflictions arise.  
 
There are different tenet systems, some that asse rt that the view of the transitory collection 
and ignorance are different and some that assert  that they are synonyms. The Five Treatises 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
439 on the Levels by Asanga assert that they are di fferent saying that, for example, just as in the 
darkness a coiled rope is mistakenly apprehended to be a snake due to not seeing it clearly, 
similarly, due to ignorance obscuring the mode of  abidance of the aggregates, there arises the 
conception that the aggregates are, for example,  a self-supporting substantially existent self. 
Then based on this ignorance, the ot her mental afflictions are produced.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The system of the Madhyamikas and Dharmakirti assert that the view of the transitory collection itself 
is ignorance  
If those two are asserted to be the same, th e view of the transitory collection itself 
is the root of the mental afflictions. 
 
The Prasangika Madhyamikas and Dharmakirti in his Compendium of Valid Cognition  assert 
that the view of the transitory collection and ignorance are the same, me aning that the root of 
all the mental afflictions is the view of the tran sitory collection. How is this? First the view of 
the transitory collection holds to an “I” that  is self-supporting substantially existent or 
inherently existent. On the basi s of this, there arises the view of the transitory collection 
holding to “mine,” and then, from that, attachme nt to what is ours and anger or hatred for 
what is other arise.  
 Asanga instead says that first the ignorance ob scuring the nature of the aggregates or self 
arises, then there arises the apprehension of  I and mine, and then, from this, the other 
mental afflictions are produced. However, si nce in the context of the twelve links of 
dependent-arising it is said that the first link is ignorance, it is from  ignorance that all the 
other afflictions arise.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How the remaining root mental afflictions arise according to the two systems  
Furthermore, when the view of the transi tory collection apprehends a self, an 
arbitrary distinction is made between self and other. Once that is made, 
attachment toward one’s own side and hatr ed toward the other side arise. Also 
conceit arises through observing that self; th at very self is held to be permanent or 
annihilated and is viewed as the self, etc., and the bad activities connected with it 
are held to be the best. Likewise, wrong views that think “The Teacher who taught selflessness, the actions and results taug ht by him, the four truths, the Three 
Jewels, etc. do not exist” are generated,  {140} or, alternatively, the doubt that 
thinks “Do they exist or not? Are they or are they not real?” is  generated. In the 
Commentary  [on Valid Cognition ] it says:  
 
If there is self, there’s awareness of other. Dividing between them brings grasping and anger. Closely connected with those [two] – All the faults will come about. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
440 There are two systems: one that asserts the view of the transitory collection and ignorance to 
be different and one that asserts them to be different. However, according to both systems, 
when the view of the transitory collection ho lds to “I” and “mine,” a distinction is made 
between one’s own side and others’ side. Then, attachment for one’s own side, for example, 
one’s friends and relatives, and hatred or anger for the other side, for example, one’s enemies, 
are produced. Also the pride thinking “I am…” is produced. Then the object of the view of 
the transitory collection, a self-supporting substant ially existent I, is held to either be eternal 
and unchanging or to be non-existent. Then, th e view holding a bad view – the view holding 
the view of the transitory collection, the view of an extreme, or wrong view – as supreme is 
produced. Also, the view holding bad morality or  bad conduct as supreme and as the cause of 
achieving nirvana is produced. Also the wrong vi ew that thinks that the law of actions and 
their results, past and future lives, and the Three Jewels do not exist is produced. 
Alternatively, the doubt wondering whether the law of actions and their results, past and 
future lives, and the Three Jewels exist are not is produced.  
 The Commentary  on Valid Cognition says that first the view of the transitory collection in 
one’s continuum thinking that the I is self-suppo rting substantially existent arises. Then, from 
that, there arises “mine,” after which there arises  attachment to one’s own side and hatred for 
the others’ side. Then, in connection with attachment and hatred, all the other mental 
afflictions or faults arise.  
 Since the mental afflictions arise in this way,  we should not examine what others are doing 
but should examine our own mind to see what ki nd of mind is arising in relation to what 
kind of object. When we see th at attachment, anger, or other mental afflictions have arisen, 
thinking that they disturb us and other people , we should apply their antidotes. If we are 
unable to apply their antidotes, we should at least try to block them so that they do not 
become manifest. All the problems of human beings including disagreements and fighting 
between two friends, which lead to separation, even beating each other, and sometimes even 
killing each other, happen because of the afflicti ons. Also the fact that people try to cheat and 
harm others in order to gain something for themselves comes about due to the mental afflictions. The mental afflictions DO NOT brin g us happiness. If we examine this, we will 
find that it is 100% certain that this does not happen. They only bring us all the sufferings of 
cyclic existence. Therefore, we should not examine others but sh ould examine ourselves. If we 
were government spies and received a salary for spying on others such behavior would be fine, but, since we are not, we should refrain from l ooking at others and instead look inward at our 
own mind.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B3 The faults of the mental afflictions 
A How to see the mental afflictions as enemies due to their great shortcomings  
Third: In Ornament of the Sutras  it says:  
 
The mental afflictions destroy yourself, destroy sentient beings, and 
destroy ethical discipline. 
Once that is debased, you become inferior and guardians and teachers 
revile you. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
441 There will be nasty disputes, you wi ll take rebirth elsewhere in unfree 
states. 
Through the debasement of what you’ ve attained or not [yet] attained, 
there is great mental suffering. 
 
The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras  says that we should see the mental afflictions as our 
enemies in that they destroy us, that is, th ey destroy our mental happiness and may also 
destroy our body by producing sickness in it. The mental afflictions also destroy other 
sentient beings in that they too are overcome by them, due to which they engage in actions 
that lead to the experience of all types of suffe ring. In this way, the mental afflictions destroy 
the happiness of all sentient beings.   The mental afflictions also destroy morality  or ethical discipline. For example, when 
attachment to sexual intercourse arises strong ly in someone who has taken the vows of a fully 
ordained monk or nun or the vows of a novi ce monk or nun, he may break his vows and 
thereby destroy his morality. Due to deteriorating or degenerating our morality, we will become inferior, due to which we will be despised  by our guardians and teachers, that is, they 
will no longer be able to take care of us due to our bad behavior. There will be unpleasant quarrels in this life, and in our next life we wi ll be born in a leisureless state. That which we 
have attained and that which we  wish to attain will degenerate , due to which intense mental 
unhappiness will arise.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And in Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] Behavior : 
 
Enemies such as hatred and craving, 
Do not have arms or legs nor other [limbs], They have no valor ei ther, so why is it 
That they have reduced me to servitude? 
 
Our enemies, attachment and anger and the other afflictions, lack arms and legs and are not 
intelligent, yet in spite of this we have become  their servants. In other words, we follow them 
without the slightest doubt, for example, un der the power of attachment we follow our 
attachment and under the power of anger we foll ow our anger, and so forth to the point that, 
unable to achieve what we want, we may even commit suicide  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
While residing in my mind they keep 
Inflicting harm on me who lets them be. But the patience that’s not angry at them Is unsuitable patience – the object of blame. 
 Our real enemies, attachment, anger, and so fo rth, abide within our own mind and harm us. 
Therefore, if there exists somethin g that we should get angry at, it  is our mental afflictions. It 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
442 is them that we should strive to eliminate.  On the other hand, if having come under the 
control of the mental afflictions, we bear them with patience, this is not real patience. If we 
want to practice patience, it should be with re spect to other sentient be ings, not with our real 
enemy, the mental afflictions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Even if the gods and demigods 
Were all to rise as enemies against me, They would not be able to lead or put me Into the fires of the Incessant Hell. 
 Even if all the gods and demigods were to aris e as our enemies, they would not be able to 
throw us into the hell realm, hung ry ghost realm, or animal realm. In fact, even if all sentient 
beings were to arise as our enemies, they would not be able to throw us into the bad 
migrations. It is only attachment, hatred, and the other mental afflicti ons that can throw us 
into the hell realm, hungry ghost realm, and an imal realm. Therefore, we need to recognize 
who our real enemies are.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
However, the mental afflictions, these powerful foes, 
Within a single moment they throw me in there, Where whatever meets with it, even Mount Meru, [Is burnt such that] nothing is left – not even ashes. 
 The mental afflictions, our powerful enemies, ar e like the fire at the end of the eon, which 
destroys the entire world such that even ashe s do not remain. Because the mental afflictions 
have this power, we should strive to abandon ev en a single instant of them. In this way we will 
one day be able to eliminate them completely.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Compared to those foes of mine, the mental afflictions, 
Which have been with me without beginning nor end, 
None of all the other enemies Would be able to last for such a long time. 
 While the mental afflictions have existed sinc e beginningless time and are without end, no 
other enemies are like this since they do not last for such a long time. While our external 
enemies change and are not always our enemies,  the mental afflictions are at all times our 
enemies. If we examine our mind even for one week to see whether or not the mental 
afflictions arise, we will find that they aris e constantly. However, while attachment is often 
present, anger is more occasional. We get angr y even if someone says “You have a big nose” 
and we do, in fact, have a big nose!  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
443  We should examine whether attachment, anger,  ignorance, pride, doubt, or an afflicted 
view such as the view of the transitory collection,  the view of an extreme, and so forth arise in 
our mind. We should also examine whether the secondary mental afflictions such as 
belligerence, resentment, spite, jealousy, non-co nscientiousness and so forth arise. When we 
see that one of them has arisen, we should apply its antidote. In this way our mental 
continuum will become softer and clearer, our good qualities will increase, and our faults and 
bad behavior will diminish.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Everyone benefits you and makes you happy, 
When you have acted with re verence and in agreement. 
If you have attended to mental afflictions, They inflict harmful suffering on you in return. 
 You should reflect on the shortcomings stated here. {141} 
 If we try to live in harmony with and help and be nefit others, we will be able to live together 
in mutual comfort and happiness. On the other ha nd, if we rely on the mental afflictions, 
t h e y  w i l l  h a r m  u s  a n d  o n l y  l e a d  t o  s u f f e r i n g.  Therefore, the mental afflictions are our real 
enemies, like fire they destroy our good qualit ies. Hence, we should strive to abandon the 
mental afflictions by meditating on selflessness, emptiness, and so forth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Applying the cultivation of antidotes to the words of former saints  
Gonpapa said:  
 
In order to abandon the mental afflictions it is necessary to know their 
shortcomings, their characteristics, their antidotes, and the causes for 
their arisal. Once you have underst ood their shortcomings, you should 
see them as drawbacks, apprehend them as enemies. If you do not 
understand their shortcomings, you will not understand them to be 
enemies. Therefore, you should cons ider them along the lines of the 
statements from Ornament of the Sutras  and Engaging in [Bodhisattva ] 
Behavior . 
 
In order to abandon the mental afflictions we need to understand their shortcomings, their 
definitions or characteristics, th eir antidotes, and the causes for their arisal. Having seen their 
shortcomings, we should see them to be defect s and hold them to be our real enemies. On 
the other hand, if we do not understand the sh ortcomings of the mental afflictions, we will 
not be able to recognize them as our enemies. We should think about th em as set forth in the 
Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras , which was cited above as saying that the mental afflictions 
destroy us, other sentient beings, an d our morality, and as set forth in Engaging in the 
Bodhisattva Deeds , which was cited above as saying that even though the mental afflictions do 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
444 not have arms and legs and are not intelligent, still we are overcome by them and become 
their servants.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And:  
 
In order to know the characteristic s of the mental afflictions, you 
should also study abhidharma, at least the Differentiation of the Five 
Aggregates . Once you have become acquainted with the root and 
secondary afflictions, you will identify attachment, hatred, and so forth as soon as they arise in your cont inuum, thinking “This is that. Oh no! 
It has arisen,” and will fight the mental afflictions. 
 
This kind of understanding is necessary.  
 
We need to understand the definitions or charac teristics of the mental afflictions by listening 
to teachings on and studying the Abhidharma . If we cannot study all the Abhidharma, we 
should at least listen to teachings on or read and study the short text called Differentiation of 
the Five Aggregates . We need to familiarize with the slight ly different presentations of the root 
and secondary afflictions as set out in the two Abhidharmas, the higher and lower. Asanga’s 
Compendium of Manifest Dharma , the higher Abhidharma, sets out six root afflictions – 
attachment, anger, ignorance, pride, doubt,  and afflicted view – and twenty secondary 
afflictions, such as belligerence and so forth. Having become familiar with them, when any of them arises we will recognize it and will fight it  with our wisdom in order to destroy it. This 
should be our main aim. For example, we shou ld meditate on attachment, examining how it 
thinks of the object as nice and beautiful, th at is, how it exaggerates its beauty, and then 
thinks, “It is beautiful. Oh, it is really beauti ful!” To counteract this attachment, we should 
meditate on ugliness by, for example, imagining the body to be a rotten corpse or a skeleton. 
Various ways to do this in relation to different colors and so forth are taught in the Treasury of 
Manifest Dharma . For example, with respect to the medita tion on skeletons, we imagine that a 
piece of flesh falls from between our eyebrows, revealing the bone below, and then slowly all 
our flesh and skin dissolve until we are only  a skeleton. Then we imagine that the bones 
spread out further and further, until the whole world is covered with skeletons. We should 
imagine both our own and others’ bodies as skel etons without flesh, skin, and so forth. This 
meditation can help to reduce our attachment to our own and others’ bodies. Alternatively, 
Shantideva, in the ei ghth chapter of his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds , says that we should 
meditate on the fact that our own and others’ bodies are a collection of thirty-six impure 
substances – the skin being like a bag that co ntains many filthy and undesirable substances! 
By meditating on this, our strong a ttachment to bodies will diminish.  
 When we are angry at another sentient being,  we should meditate on love, thinking “May 
he or she have happiness and the causes of ha ppiness.” All sentient beings are similar in 
wanting happiness and the causes of happiness, and in not wanting suffe ring and the causes 
of suffering. We should meditate on all sentient beings as having an attr active aspect and wish 
them happiness and the causes of happiness, ther eby generating love for them. When love is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
445 manifest in our mind, anger disappears since love is its antidote. Another antidote to anger is 
patience; we also need to develop it.  
 When ignorance arises, we should meditate on dependent-arising or dependent-relation. 
We should think that since all functioning th ings depend on causes and conditions, they 
cannot arise without them. For example, in orde r for smoke to arise, its cause, fire, is 
necessary. In addition, the conditions of wood, fu el, incense, and so fort h are necessary for its 
arisal. Thus, only when the causes and conditions  are complete, does a result arise. Likewise, 
things exist in dependence on th eir parts, for example, a table de pends on four legs and a flat 
support. If one leg is broken, it will not function as a table. Therefore, things depend on their 
parts. Therefore, things are not inherently or  self-supporting substantially existent because 
they arise in dependence. We should try to medi tate on selflessness or emptiness in this way. 
But first we should understand and meditate on dependent-arising.  
 Also, all phenomena depend on being merely imputed by name. In other words, they are 
dependent on being imputed by the mind. In fact, everything is imputed by the mind. 
However, it is important to un derstand that a valid base for the imputation must exist; for 
example, we cannot impute “human being” on th e body of cat, or impute “man” on the body 
of a woman, because they are no t valid bases of imputation fo r those names. In short, all 
phenomena are not inherently, truly, or self-su pporting substantially existent, rather they are 
dependent-relations. Things are not inherently  or self-supporting substantially existent 
because they arise in dependence. We should try to meditate on selflessness or emptiness like 
this.   In this way, we should apply the respective antidotes to the mental afflictions. However, 
the meditation on emptiness is the actual antidote  to all the mental afflictions because it cuts 
the very root of cyclic existenc e – ignorance or the view of the transitory collection; just as, 
only when we cut the roots of a tree, does the tree with all its branches die. Therefore, we 
need to meditate on emptiness. How can we fight the mental afflic tions? We cannot fight 
them with a hammer, nor even with an at omic bomb. While such weapons can destroy 
human beings by separating their mind and body , they cannot destroy the mental afflictions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2 How karma is accumulated by [the mental afflictions ] 
A Identifying the karma that is accumulated  
B How [karma] is accumulated 
The second one has two points: identifyin g the karma that is accumulated, and 
how it is accumulated. 
 
We need to identify the karma that is accumula ted and to understand how it is accumulated. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A Identifying the karma that is accumulated 
1 Action that is intention 
2 Intended actions 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A1 Action that is intention 
First: The action that is intention – the mental factor that makes its concomitant 
mind move and urges it toward an object – is action of mind.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
446  
Intention is action of mind. It is what moves the primary mind that is concomitant with it 
toward an object, for example, toward the side of virtue, toward the side of non-virtue, and 
toward the neutral.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A2  Intended actions 
A The actions that have actually been intended 
First: The actions of body and speech th at are motivated by that intention… 
 
Actions of body and speech arise motivated by intention. These actions of body and speech 
are what are called “intended actions.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Their entity 
… are divided into the revelatory and non- revelatory and posited as only having 
form by the Vaibhashikas. Master Vasuba ndhu refutes that and maintains that 
[actions of body and speech ] are the intentions that operate together with the 
revelatory physical and verbal actions, whereby he explains both actions to be 
intention.163  
 
Actions of body can either be revelatory or  non-revelatory, whereas actions of speech are 
always revelatory. Killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct are non-virtuous actions created by the body, whereas the abandonments of killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct are virtuous 
actions created by the body. Lying, divisive spee ch, harsh words, and idle talk are non-virtuous 
actions created by speech, whereas their abando nments are virtuous actions created by the 
speech. These actions of body and speech are moti vated by intention, that is, by action of 
mind.   The Vaibhashikas assert that actions of body  and speech are form, either revelatory or non-
revelatory form. Revelatory form is that whic h reveals the motivation, good or bad, behind 
the action, for example, a nice, pleasant expre ssion of the face reveals a good motivation, 
whereas a red, angry expression  reveals a bad motivation. In other words, the external 
appearance of the face and body reveals the i nner motivation that ca nnot be seen with the 
eyes. Therefore, non-revelatory form is a form  that does not reveal the inner motivation. 
While it cannot be seen with the eyes, accordin g to the Vaibhashikas it exists. For example, 
they say that in the first instant of vows such as those of full or dination, novices, and so forth, 
a revelatory form arises and in the second  instant a non-revelatory form arises.  
 Tuesday afternoon, 19 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
                                             
 
163 He thereby emphasizes that the karmic action itself which is decisive for its effect consists in the intention – 
see also note 24 [*] for the exceptions of accumulated karma 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
447 C Identifying three kinds of action  
In this regard non-virtuous actions are non-meritorious actions. Meritorious 
actions are virtuous actions included in  the level of the desire realm. {142} 
Immovable actions are contaminated virtuous  actions included in the levels of the 
form and formless realms. 
 
There are three kinds of action s: meritorious, non-meritorious, and immovable actions. Non-
virtuous actions are non-meritorious actions.  Meritorious and non-meritorious actions are 
projecting actions that project rebirth in the desire realm. Immovable actions are projecting 
actions that project rebirth in the form and formless realms, thus they are contaminated 
virtuous actions included in the level of the form and formless realms. In other words, non-
meritorious actions are projecting actions that project rebirth in the three lower realms – the 
hell realm, hungry ghost realm, and animal real m. Meritorious actions are projecting actions 
that project rebirth in the three higher realms as a human being of the four continents or as 
one of six types of desire realm gods. Immovabl e actions are projecting  actions that project 
rebirth in the seventeen levels of the form real m and the four levels of the formless realm.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2B How [karma] is accumulated 
1 Explaining who accumulates the karma to be thrown [into a rebirth] in cyclic existence 
Second: Once you have directly realized selflessness, you can still be reborn in 
cyclic existence under the power of karma and mental afflictions, however you do 
not newly accumulate any throwing karma.  Therefore, those who accumulate the 
karma to be thrown into cyclic existe nce are all ordinary beings up to and 
including those abiding on the great [level of] highest [mundane] qualities of the 
Mahayana path of preparation. 
 
The above statement needs to be examined. Wh ich persons accumulate projecting karma to 
take rebirth in cyclic existenc e? The text says that arya bein gs who have directly realized 
selflessness can take rebirth in cyclic existence by the force of previously created actions and 
afflictions, but they do not newly accumulate pr ojecting karma. It also says that those who 
accumulate the projecting karma for taking rebirt h in cyclic existence are all ordinary beings 
including those abiding on the heat, peak, tolera nce, and supreme mundane qualities levels of 
the path of preparation. Each of these four le vels is further divided into the small, middle, 
and great, due to which there are twelve levels, the last being “the great level of the supreme 
mundane qualities level.” All these beings still cr eate projecting karma to be reborn in cyclic 
existence. However, it is said elsewhere that in the second in stant of the great level of the 
supreme mundane qualities level of the path of preparation, one achieves the path of seeing. 
Since this occurs in the same meditation session , also those who are abiding on the great level 
of the supreme mundane qualities level would no t create projecting karma. Thus, it would 
only be ordinary beings who are abiding on  the middle level of the supreme mundane 
qualities level and below that create projecting  karma. In addition, th ere are also ordinary 
beings who have been reborn in pure lands su ch as Sukhavati who do not create projecting 
karma to be reborn in the places of cyclic existe nce. I think it is like this since in Sukhavati, 
the Blissful Pure Land, not even the word “s uffering” exists, let alone actual suffering.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
448  According to the lower tenets, that is, fr om the Svatantrika Madhyamaka downward, foe-
destroyers with remainder have a contaminated  body made of bones, flesh, and blood, and 
only when they pass away and achieve a nirvana without remainder do they no longer have a 
contaminated flesh body, but attain a mental  body. However, the Prasangika Madhyamikas 
assert a nirvana with remainder and a nirvana without remainder differently. They say that 
those who still have the appearance of true ex istence have a nirvana with remainder, whereas 
those who do not have the appearan ce of true existence, but have a mind that is in meditative 
equipoise on emptiness, like water poured in to water, have a nirvana without remainder 
because they do not have the remainder that  is the appearance of true existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How [karma] is accumulated by that [person] 
If, with that basis, you create non-virtuous  actions by means of the three doors, for 
instance killing, you will accumulate non-me ritorious karma. If you create virtuous 
actions, such as giving gifts and guarding ethical discipline, you will accumulate 
meritorious karma. If you cultivate the calm abiding and so forth included in the levels of the concentrations and form less absorptions, you will accumulate 
immovable karma. 
 That we create actions by me ans of the three doors, body, speech, and mind, means, for 
example, that we engage in killing, stealing , and sexual misconduct by means of the body; 
lying, divisive speech, harsh words, and idle talk by means of the speech; and covetousness, 
malice, and wrong view by means of mind. Ther eby, we accumulate no n-meritorious actions. 
If, on the other hand, we engage in genero sity, safeguard morality, and so forth, we 
accumulate meritorious actions. If we cultivate the calm abiding and so forth included in the 
levels of the concentrations and formless realm absorptions, we accumulate immovable 
karma. In addition, the special insight included in the level of a preparation also serves as a 
projecting action for taking rebirth in the form or formless realms. In other words, in order to 
accumulate immovable karma, we need to ha ve achieved both calm abiding and special 
insight. This is not easy, whereas even now we can practice generosity, morality, patience, and 
so forth. Therefore, we should put effort into these perfections as they are easier to do than 
concentration and wisdom. In this way, we will accumulate meritorious actions that will act as 
the cause for being reborn as a human being or a god of the desire real m. The best of human 
rebirths is the precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities. In fact, a body born 
from the womb and composed of the six constitu ents is said to be the best body for the 
practice of tantra and therefore for the quic k attainment of buddhah ood. The body of a god 
of the desire realm, on the other hand, is not like this. Therefore, am ong the many types of 
rebirth, that of a human being is the best , and among the human beings of the four 
continents, rebirth as a human be ing of the southern continent is  the best. This is because the 
human beings of the other continents have a fixed lifespan due to which it is not easy for them to generate the mind of renunciation or definite emerge nce, whereas the human beings 
of Jambudvipa experience problems and their lifesp an is not fixed, due to which it is easier to 
generate renunciation of cyclic existence and the wi sh to attain nirvana.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
449 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3 How you die-transfer and join  
A Conditions for death  
B The mind of death 
C From where the heat withdraws 
D How the intermediate state is accomplished after death 
E How you take rebirth in a birth-existence 
The third one has five points: conditions fo r death, the mind of death, from where 
the heat withdraws, how the intermediate state is accomplished after death, and 
how you take rebirth in a birth-existence. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3A Conditions for death 
1 Death following the exhaustion of one’s lifespan 
To die due to the exhaustion of one’s lifesp an is to die when the time has come in 
which one’s entire lifespan projected by previous karma is exhausted. 
2 Death following the exhaustion of one’s merit 
To die following the exhaustion of one’s me rit is the same as dying from a lack of 
basic requirements.  
3 Death due to dangers not being avoided  
To die due to not avoiding danger is the same as the nine causes and conditions 
for death, such as due to overeating, set out in the sutras,.  
 
What are the conditions for death? There are three: 
1. exhaustion of our lifespan, 
2. exhaustion of our merit, and 
3. not avoiding danger. 
Some people have a short lifespan. Why is this? It is because in a previous rebirth they died 
before their lifespan was exhausted and then, having taken rebirth again as a human being, 
they have only the lifespan remaining to live. The second condition for death is that one takes 
rebirth as a human being due to having created the merit to do so, but then dies when this merit is exhausted.   The third condition for death is to die due to dangers that take our life such as car 
accidents, a fall from a great height, hurricanes, fl oods, fire, earthquakes, and so forth. In fact 
there are many such conditions that can take ou r life and that we are unable to abandon or 
avoid. For example, we can also die due to in gesting poison put in our food by someone who 
does not like us! Thus, there are many conditio ns that can take our life including the nine 
causes and conditions that can take life, such as overeating, that are set out in the sutras.  
 It is advised that when traveling in Bhutan to  avoid stopping at houses  with a black flag on 
the roof and that if someone from such a house gives you food or drink to not eat or drink it. 
Such people think that by killing a person who still has merit to live, they can acquire their 
merit for themselves. However, this is a misund erstanding. Such people practice the Deity of 
Poison and believe that if they do not succeed in giving the pois on to someone else, they must 
ingest it themselves.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
450  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B The mind of death 
1 The mind of death 
2 Their appearances 
3 For all three minds of death there is joining due to craving  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B1 The mind of death 
A [Virtuous] 
B [Non-virtuous] 
C [Unspecified] 
Both virtuous minds, such as confidence, and non-virtuous minds, such as 
attachment, {143} arise in the mind, in de pendence on one’s own actions or being 
made to recall them by others, as long as gross compositional factors operate. To 
die with an unspecified mind implies th at one did not recall virtuous or non-
virtuous minds by oneself nor was one reminded of them by others. 
 If, when we are dying, we remember by ourselve s or someone else reminds us of our faith in 
the Three Jewels or our spiritual teacher, in a particular practice, and so forth, we will 
generate a coarse virtuous mind. If, on the ot her hand, when we are dying, we remember by 
ourselves or someone else reminds us of an obje ct of attachment, such as our family, wealth, 
and so forth, strong attachment will arise in our mind, whereby the mind of death will be a 
non-virtuous mind. This latter, due to a strong projecting karma, can project us into a rebirth 
in the lower realms.   If we neither remember virtuous or non-vi rtuous minds ourselves and no one reminds us 
of them, our mind of death will be unspecified, that is, neutral. Thus, when we die, although 
the subtle mind of death is always unspecifie d, the coarse mind of death can either be 
virtuous due to generating faith in the Thr ee Jewels and so forth, non-virtuous due to 
generating attachment for our friends, relati ves, wealth, and so forth, or neutral.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2 Their appearances 
A [The appearance due to a virtuous mind]  
B [The appearance due to a non-virtuous mind] 
C [The appearance due to an unspecified mind] 
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2A [The appearance due to a virtuous mind] 
 For those who have created virtue it is like going from thick darkness into light. 
At the time of death, various pleasant dr eam-like forms appear to them, they die 
happily, and even the interruption of life is of very minor severity.  
 
For those who have created virtue, when they di e it is like going from thick darkness into 
luminous light, like seeing very pleasant forms in a dream, the mind is happy like waking up after a good dream, and the suffering of the interruption of life will be very small.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2B  [The appearance due to a non-virtuous mind] 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
451 1 The actual [appearance] 
For those who have created non-virtue, it  is like going from light into thick 
darkness. At the time of death, various dr eam-like repulsive forms appear to them, 
intense suffering feeling arises, and the interruption of life is also very severe. 
 
If we have created non-virtuous ac tions, at the time of death it will be like going from a place 
of light to one of complete darkness. It will also be like seeing forms with a terrible aspect in a dream, due to which our mind is unhappy an d disturbed when we wake up. There will be 
intense suffering feeling but it will be too late to do anything about it . Nowadays, even though 
there are many medical innovations such as inject ions of pain-killers that can relieve our pain, 
still we will experience both physical suffering and great mental suffering at the time of death 
if we have created non-virtuous actions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Clearing up doubts concerning the interruption of life 
The interruption of life exists for all birth-sources excluding the gods and hell 
beings.  
 
The interruption of life (Tib. gnad gcod ) refers to the severe pain that  arises at death. This type 
of suffering does not exist for gods and hell beings. This is because hell beings always 
experience suffering, that is, there is never any interruption to their suffering, whereas the 
gods have a fixed lifespan and therefore thei r lives are not in danger and they do not 
experience this suffering. However, they do have  great mental suffering at the time of death 
due to seeing, by means of their clairvoyance, where they will be reborn. All other sentient 
beings, including animals, hungry ghosts, and human beings,  have this suffering.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2C [The appearance due to an unspecified mind] 
1 The actual [appearance] 
In those who have an unspecified mind, the two, happiness and suffering, that 
were explained above do not arise. 
 
At the time of death, those who have an unspec ified or neutral mind do not experience either 
the happiness or the suffering that were explained before.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 What mind becomes manifest at death  
At the time of death, whichever mind, virt uous or non-virtuous, is most familiar 
becomes manifest, whereas other minds do not subsequently operate. If they are 
equally familiar, that which is recalled first will become manifest, whereas others 
do not subsequently operate.  
 
What kinds of mind becomes manifest at the time  of death? Either a virtuous mind or a non-
virtuous mind can become manifest, and whic h one becomes manifest depends on which one 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
452 is more familiar. At that time other minds do no t operate, that is, are not manifest. If one is 
equally familiar with virtuous minds and non- virtuous minds, whiche ver one is remembered 
first will become manifest and other minds will  not operate, that is, will not manifest.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 All the subtle minds of death are unspecified 
At the time when the mind moves to its subtle part, virtuous and non-virtuous 
minds come to a stop and become an unspecified mind. 
 
The subtle mind of death is always an unspecif ied or neutral mind. In other words, it cannot 
be either a virtuous mind or a non-virtuous mind. Why is this? It is because virtuous and non-
virtuous minds are coarse and therefore cannot act as the subtle mind of death. If, at the time 
of death, someone reminds us of our main medi tational deity, for example, the coarse mind 
of death will be virtuous. Due to this it is 100%  certain that we will ta ke a good rebirth. There 
is a story about a brahmin wh o, when dying, happened to see a very nice elephant kitten  and, 
due to thinking that it was very nice , died and was born as an elephant kitten  to elephant 
parents, even though he had created the karma to be reborn as a human being!  
 
We should strive to take a good rebirth. For example, at the time of death we could imagine 
gods or beautiful human beings and think that it  would be nice to be reborn as one of them, 
whereby we will take a good rebirth. It is like  when we see something terrible during the day, 
and then we also have a nightmare that night.  Or like when we see something good during 
the day, and that night we have a good dr eam. This is all due to familiarity.  
 Wednesday morning, 20 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 143) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B3 For all three minds of death there is joining due to craving 
For all, at the time of death, as long as [the state of] unclear discrimination has not 
been reached, there arises attachment to a self which has long been familiarized 
with. {144} After that, under the influence of  attachment to a self, thinking “I will 
become non-existent,” delight in a body ar ises. It is the cause for the intermediate 
state to come about. While a ttachment to a self also arises in stream-enterers and 
once-returners, they investigate it with wisdom and abandon it, rather than 
acquiescing to it; just like, for instance, a strong person beating someone weak. In 
non-returners that attachment to a self does not arise. 
 At the time of death, as long as the discriminati on is not unclear, attach ment to the self arises 
due to having familiarized with it for a long time. Then, by the power of attachment to the 
self, thinking “I am dying,” delight in a body  arises and becomes the cause for achieving the 
intermediate state. At the time of death, we ge nerate attachment to the self as well as to our 
body, relatives and friends, and possessions. The thought arises “When I die, I will lose this 
body, my relatives, my belongings, everything,” whereby varying degrees of attachment arise in 
different people. This attachment becomes the ca use for taking the body of the intermediate 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
453 state. The arya beings who are stream-enterers and once-returners also have this attachment to 
the self but it is not strong because they have  the wisdom realizing selflessness and so forth, 
which, for example, is like a strong man beat ing a weak man who is unable to retaliate.  
 Non-returners are those who will not return to  the desire realm, th at is, who will take 
another rebirth in the desire realm. They do not have this attachment to the self. In fact, they 
are not attached to the desirable objects of the desire realm. Because non-returners have 
completely abandoned the afflicti ons of the desire realm, they will not return to it. On the 
other hand, stream-enterers and once-returners wi ll take rebirth again in the desire realm. 
There are stream enterers, for example, who ta ke rebirth seven times as a human being or 
seven times as a god of the desire realm. Once -returners are those who will take one more 
rebirth in the desire realm.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3C From where the heat withdraws  
Third: In those who have created non-virtue the heat  first withdraws from the 
upper part of the corpse and dissipates down to the heart. In those who have 
created virtue the heat first withdraws from the lower part of the corpse and 
dissipates up to the heart. [In both cases ] the consciousness transfers from the 
heart. That which the consciousness fi rst entered into in the middle of the 
[mixture of] semen and [menstrual] blood transforms into the heart, and where it 
eventually transfers from is that very place it first entered into. 
 At the time of death, for those who have ma inly created non-virtuous actions the heat 
withdraws from the upper part of  the corpse down to the hear t, whereas for those who have 
mainly created virtuous actions the heat withdr aws from the lower part of the corpse up to 
the heart. Then in both cases the consciousne ss leaves the body at the heart. However, in 
other texts it says that at the time of death the consciousness can leave through the lower part 
of the body, the upper part of the body, or th e heart. Lama Tsongkhapa says that in both 
cases the consciousness transfers from the heart because at the time of  conception the white 
and red fluids of the father and mother mix and later on are found inside the central channel 
at the heart chakra, for which reason the consci ousness later leaves from this same point.  
 The heat of the body, on the ot her hand, is said to dissipate from either the upper part or 
the lower part of the body. If it leaves from the lower part, one will take rebirth in the bad 
migrations, whereas if it leaves from the u pper part, one will take rebirth in the bad 
migrations.   In the case of the practice of transferring the consciousness, one should have previously 
trained in making the consciousness leave from  the upper opening of the central channel in 
the crown.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3D How the intermediate state is reached after death 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
454 1 From where the bardo is accomplished 
Fourth: From the place where the consci ousness transfers as explained above, 
death and the bardo are accomplished withou t a break, just like the swinging of a 
weighing scale.  
 
When we die, at the place where the cons ciousness leaves the body, death and the 
intermediate state are simultaneously accompli shed, like weighing scales in which one pan 
goes up and the other one simultaneously goes do wn when a weight is put on one. If we are 
to be reborn in the desire realm or form real m, there is necessarily an intermediate state 
(bardo) in between. But if we are to be reborn in the formless realm ther e is no need for an 
intermediate state.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The shape of the intermediate state being, etc. 
The intermediate state being moreover has complete sense faculties, such as the 
eyes, and has the aspect of the body of wh atever migrating being it will be born as. 
As long as it does not take rebirth, it s eye is unobstructed like the divine eye,164 and 
the body is also unobstructed as though possessed of magical powers. It is seen by 
intermediate state beings of similar type and by the flawless divine eye arisen from 
mediation. While it is set out in the Treasury  that once the intermediate state of 
any migrating being has been accomplished , there is no diverting it into some 
other rebirth, the Compendium of All  [the Abhidharma ] also explains reversals. 
 
The intermediate state being has complete sense powers, that is, eye, ear, nose, tongue, and 
body sense powers. Its body is similar in shape to the migrating being it will be born as. For 
example, if it is to be reborn as a human bein g, the intermediate state body will have a shape 
similar to that of a human being; whereas if it is to be reborn as a horse, it will be similar in shape to a horse. It is likened to the shadow of our body, which has a shape similar to that of 
our body. As long as it does no t take rebirth, the intermediate state being has the clairvoyance 
of divine eye. Also its body is not obstruct ed but can pass through walls, mountains, and so 
forth, although it is obstructed  by karma to entering the womb of a mother. Its body is similar 
to a mental body in that it can quickly arrive wh erever it wants as if it has miraculous powers.  
 Intermediate state beings are seen by other in termediate state beings of similar type and by 
those human beings who have achieved the cl airvoyance of the divine eye arisen from 
meditation. On the other hand, human beings wh o lack the clairvoyance of the divine eye 
cannot see intermediate state beings.  
 The Treasury of Manifest Dharma  (Abhidharmakosha ) says that having taken the intermediate 
state of a human being, for example, the rebi rth cannot be changed. On the other hand, the 
Compendium of Manifest Dharma  (Abhidharmasamucchaya ) says that the intermediate state body 
of a human being, for example, having been a ccomplished, while there is no rebirth as an 
animal, having taken the intermediate state body  of a donkey, for example, one can then take 
rebirth as another type of anim al. For example, having taken the intermediate state body of a 
                                             
 
164 The special ability to see through matter and over long distance s without obstruction 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
455 bear, one can take rebirth as a dog. The Treasury  says that this is no t possible, that having 
attained the intermediate state body of a dog, one must take rebirth as a dog.  
 It should also be remembered that is possibl e to become a foe-destroyer in the intermediate 
state and not take rebirth at all,  but that is a different case.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 How the appearance of the intermediate existence appears to those who have created virtue and non-
virtue 
The intermediate existence of those who have created non-virtue appears like a 
black cloth or like a dark night, wherea s the intermediate existence of those who 
have created virtue appears like a wh ite blanket {145} or a moonlit night. 
 
Having created non-virtuous actions, the body of the intermediate state being appears to be 
like a black blanket or like a dark moonless nigh t. On the other hand, if the projecting karma 
is virtuous, the body of the intermediate state being appears to be like a white blanket or a 
bright moonlit night.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 How it sees  
It sees intermediate state beings of similar type, as well as their and its own birth-
source.  
 
The intermediate state being sees intermediate stat e beings of similar type, as well as were it 
will take rebirth. It does not see anything else . The intermediate state being, wishing to take 
rebirth, sees the two organs of a man and woman in sexual intercourse. If it is attached to 
rebirth as a male human being, it becomes angr y at the man, whereas if  it is attached to 
rebirth as a female it becomes angry at the woman.  As a result of this anger, it dies and its 
consciousness enters the mixture of the white and red fluids, the semen and menstrual blood. 
Then the skin, blood, and so forth of the fetu s form from the blood of the mother, and its 
bones and so forth from the semen of the father.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 The color 
In the Entry into the Womb  [Sutra ] it says that the intermediate state of hell beings is 
like [the color] of a burnt log, the intermediate st ate of animals is like smoke, the 
intermediate state of hungry ghosts is like  water, the intermediate state of desire 
realm gods and human beings is like go ld, and the intermediate state of form 
realm gods is white165.  
 
The color of the body of intermediate state beings who will become hell beings is like that of a 
blackened burnt log; that of animals is gray like smoke; that of hungry ghosts is like water; 
                                              
165 T h e  c o l o r s  r e f e r  t o  t h e  c o m p l e x i o n  o f  b e i n g s  i n  a given intermediate state (Geshe Thubten Ngawang, 
Systematic Study of Buddhism, semester XII, lesson 8/ 9, as well as oral explanations by Geshe Soepa). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
456 that of desire realm gods and human beings is like gold; and that of form realm beings is 
white. The formless realm is not mentioned here because there is no intermediate state in the 
case of rebirth in the formless realm. Instea d, having died, one is immediately reborn in 
Infinite Space, Infinite Consciousness, No thingness, or the Peak of Existence.  
 Having obtained this precious human rebirt h possessing the eighteen qualities, we can 
achieve higher realizations and no longer have to wander in cyclic existence. However, we 
need to put effort into this now since only with  this particular body can we achieve whatever 
we want.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
6 Distinction of whether there is or is not an intermediate state 
If you are reborn from the formless realm into the two lower realms, there is an 
intermediate state. [However,] if you are born from those two [realms] into the 
formless realm, the aggregates of the formless [realm] are accomplished wherever 
you die, and there is no intermediate state.  
 
Here the text clearly states that when we di e from the formless realm and take rebirth in 
either the form realm or desire realm, there is an intermediate state. On the other hand, if we 
die from the form realm or desire realm and are to be reborn in the formless realm, there is 
no intermediate state because when our consciousn ess leaves the body it the four aggregates of 
the formless realm – the feeling aggregate, disc rimination aggregate, compositional factors 
aggregate, and consciousness aggregate – are immediately accomplished.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
7 How it travels 
It is taught that the intermediate state of gods travels upright, that of humans 
travels straight ahead, and that of those who have done faulty actions, with eyes 
cast downward, travel upside down. The intention is similar for the three bad 
migrations.  
 
How do the intermediate state beings travel? Th e intermediate state beings of gods travel 
upright; the intermediate state beings of humans  travel straight ahead; and the intermediate 
state beings of the beings of lower realm travel  with their eyes looking downward and upside 
down, their legs pointing upward and head down , like people who stand on their heads as a 
form of exercise!   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
8 The lifespan 
The lifespan is that if it does not find th e conditions for rebirth, it abides for as 
many as seven days. If it finds them, [the number of days] is uncertain. Also if it 
does not find them, it exchanges bodies and abides up to seven times seven days. 
However, it does not abide any longer than  that since it will definitely find the 
conditions for rebirth before then.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
457  
The lifespan of intermediate state beings is one week, however if the conditions arise for 
rebirth before this, for example, after just one day,  two days, and so forth, it will take rebirth. 
If the conditions for rebirth have not been fo und within seven days, the intermediate state 
being dies and takes another intermediate state body. This happens over and over again for a 
maximum of seven times, by which time it will definitely have found a place to take rebirth. 
Thus, the lifespan of an intermediate state being is only one week. This refers to a week of a 
human being, for example, from Sunday to Satu rday, not the week of a god, which is much 
longer. Thus, when a human being dies, its inte rmediate state dies after seven days. This 
happens up to a maximum of seven weeks at which time the intermediate state being will 
definitely die and be reborn, for example, in the womb of a human being.   Although the body of the in termediate state is exchanged after seven days, the color and 
shape do not change.   
STUDENT : If the intermediate state being canno t change, what can our prayers do for 
someone in the intermediate state? 
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : The assertions regarding the inte rmediate state being are different 
from the point of view of tantra, whereas here it  is discussed from the point of view of sutra. 
T a n t r a  i s  m o r e  l i k e  m a g i c ,  b y  m e a n s  o f  w h i c h  a  m a g i c i a n  c a n  d o  w h a t e v e r  h e  w a n t s .  F o r  
example, a magician can take a piece of banana, bless it with mantras, give it to Venerable 
Longo to eat, whereby he transforms into… a ni ce horse! Then he ca n mount that horse and 
ride away. There are such stories!  
 Thus, from the point of view of tantra, when  someone is dying a virtuous seed can ripen 
due to our prayers, or someone who is in the intermediate state can change into another 
intermediate state being and take a good rebirt h. On the other hand, from the point of view 
of the Treasury of Manifest Dharma  it is not possible to change re birth, that is, having taken the 
intermediate state of a particular type of rebirth one will necessarily take that rebirth. Perhaps 
from the point of view of the higher Abhidharma, the Compendium of Manifest Dharma , it is 
also possible for the rebirth to change; for example,  to initially take the intermediate state of a 
being of a bad migration, and then, due to others ’ prayers, for a virtuous seed to be activated 
and ripened, whereby the intermediate state bein g dies and takes the intermediate state of a 
human being and is then reborn as a human being. 
 Wednesday afternoon, 20 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 145) says:  
9 The manner of changing into another intermediate state  
Having died and transferred after seven days  in the intermediate state of a god, for 
example, the intermediate state of a god, or  alternatively the intermediate state of a 
human being, is accomplished because th rough the changing activity of other 
karma, the seed of the intermediate st ate changes. It is the same for other 
[intermediate states].  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
458 The intermediate state can change into anothe r intermediate state. For example, having 
stayed for seven days in the intermediate state of a god, one dies and then either the 
intermediate state of a god or that of a human being is accomplished because the seed of that 
other intermediate state ripens due to performi ng other actions. Ther efore, there can be a 
change in the intermediate state after the firs t death, but it could also happen after the 
second, third, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3E How you take rebirth in a birth-existence 
1 How you transfer into an intermediate existence through a mind of attachment and so forth 
Fifth: In Many Levels  it is taught that, when you are born in a womb, a mistaken 
perception arises with regard to the se men and blood of your father and mother: 
in that moment, like an illusion, you s ee your parents to be having intercourse 
even though they are not and you develop attachment to them. {146} However, the 
Commentary  on the Treasury  explains that you see your parents [actually] having 
intercourse. Furthermore, if you are to be born as a female, you desire to be rid of 
the woman, and become attached to the man and want to have intercourse with 
him. If you are to be born as a male, you desire to be rid of the man, and become 
attached to the woman and want to have in tercourse with her. Once this kind of 
desire has arisen, the closer you approach, other body parts of that man and woman not longer appear and you only see the male and female signs. Becoming angry at that, the intermediate existence being dies and transfers and is reborn
166. 
 
How does one take rebirth through generating a mind of attachment? A mistaken perception 
arises with respect to the semen and blood of the father and mother in that they appear to be 
having intercourse although they ar e not. It is like an illusion or  a magical trick, that is, we see 
something that does not exist such as a pebble th at appears to be an elephant or horse. Then 
we generate attachment to them. This is wh at is said in Asanga’s texts, however the 
commentary on the Treasury of Manifest Dharma  says that one actually sees one’s parents 
having intercourse. If we are to be reborn as a woman, we want to be free of the woman and 
develop attachment to the man and wish to have intercourse with him. If we are to be reborn 
as a man, we want to be free of the man and generate attachment to the woman and wish to 
have intercourse with her. As we get closer to our future parents we not longer see other limbs 
or parts of their bodies, such as their head, le gs, and arms, but only see their sexual organs. 
We then become very angry that this has ha ppened, and due to anger we, the intermediate 
state being, die and transfer and are reborn. In  other words, the mind of the intermediate 
state being enters the mixture of the red and white fluids and, from the point of view of 
Buddhism, is reborn, although th is in fact is the moment of conception. At this time the 
mental consciousness, feelings, and discriminati ons are not yet manifest. This first instant is 
called “birth,” whereas the second  instant, in which there is tr ansformation of the two fluids, 
is called “aging.” It is also possible that in th e second instant death occurs, rather than aging. 
                                              
166 According to the Tibetan understanding “birth” signif ies the entry into the maternal womb rather than 
one's exit from it. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
459 If there is death the mind ex its from the union of the egg and sperm and leaves the womb. 
This is in the context of a human rebirth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 What object the consciousness connects with and how  
Furthermore, when there is a situation of intense attachment between father and 
mother at the very end thick fluid emer ges. After that, two drops of semen and 
blood doubtlessly emerge from the two. Through the mixing of the two in the 
birth-source of the mother, [something] li ke, for instance, boiled milk that has 
cooled down and congealed is formed. At  the same time that the intermediate 
existence terminates, by the power of the co nsciousness that joins, the subtle parts 
of the great elements of the sense powers which are other than that [congealed 
mass] and the combination of semen and blood that accord with that mixture arise 
as other along with the sense powers167. The consciousness that enters at that time 
is posited as the basis-of all by those wh o accept a basis-of-all. Those who do not 
accept a basis-of-all assert that it is  the mental consciousness that joins. 
 
When the father and mother have sexual interc ourse with strong attachment, from both of 
them emerges a thick fluid. After that, a drop of semen and a drop of blood arise from the 
two, mix in the womb, and become something li k e  b o i l e d  m i l k  t h a t  h a s  c o o l e d  d o w n  a n d 
congealed. At this time the intermediate st ate being dies and takes rebirth, whereby the 
intermediate state ceases. At this time it is said  “to have joined with its next rebirth,” that is, 
with a new body.   The Chittamatrins, who a ssert eight consciousnesses (an eye consciousness, ear 
consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue cons ciousness, body consciousness, mind-basis-of-
all, and afflicted mentality), say that the mind-bas is-of-all is the basis on which the imprints of 
virtuous, non-virtuous, and unspecified actions ar e deposited. The seed that is deposited can 
be likened to a check which, although it is not real money, functions as though it were money 
to enable tone to buy things. Due to craving and grasping, a seed is activated, ripened, and 
brings rebirth.   At the time of rebirth in the womb, there is only the mental power, then slowly the fetus 
develops and the head and limbs, the inner orga ns, and so forth begin to develop. By thirty-
six or thirty-seven weeks the baby is usually fu lly developed, although sometimes due to inner 
conditions this does not happen. When the ey e consciousness, eye sense power, and form 
meet, the baby finds the womb to be dark, tight, and smelly, due to which it develops the wish 
to leave it. It then changes position, turns up side down, and is then born. The development 
of the fetus is explained in detail in the Nanda’s Entry into the Womb Sutra  as well as in the 
tantric medical texts.   Those who do not assert a mind -basis-of-all say that the mental  consciousness is what enters 
the womb. The eight subtle partic les – the earth element, fire element, water element, wind 
element, form, odor, taste, and tangibility – ar e the basis for the formation of all forms.  
                                             
 
167 According to an oral commentary by Geshe Soepa the consciousness at that point connects with two subtle 
aggregations contained in the mixture of paternal and ma ternal substances: one that will develop into the sense 
faculties and another one that will become the seat of the mental consciousness. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
460  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 You are not born in bad birth-sources unless the bardo being wishes to go there  
If there is no desire to go to a birth-source, [the bardo being] will not go there. And 
if it has not gone there, it will not be bo rn there. Therefore, when the bardo being 
of someone possessing non-vows168 who created and accumulated an action for 
rebirth in hell, such as killing sheep or tr ading in poultry or pigs and the like, sees, 
as if in a dream, sheep and so forth at his birth-source, he rushes there with the 
delight of previous familiarity. {147} Then , having become angry at the form of his 
birth-source, the intermediate existence ends  and he is born in the birth-existence. 
Likewise, rebirth as a hell being, a hungry gh ost with goiter, etc. is similar to this.  
 
Just as when someone is to be reborn in the hi gher realm, there is the desire to be reborn 
there, so too there needs to be desire to be rebo rn in a particular place in order to be reborn 
as a hell being and so forth. Thus, if the interm ediate state being does not desire to go to a 
particular birth-source, it will not go there and therefore will not take rebirth there. 
Therefore, when someone possessing a non-vo w who has created and accumulated the karma 
to be reborn in the hell realm, due to killing sheep, trading in poultry and pigs, and so forth, 
at the time of the intermediate state sees sheep and so forth, like in a dream, at the birth-
source, he will want to quickly go there due to liking this out of previous familiarity. Then, 
seeing the actual birth-source, he becomes angr y and the intermediate state being ceases, that 
is, dies, and he is born in the birth-existence.  In other words, those who, while human beings 
killed sheep, see sheep at the birth-source and wi sh to go there, while those who sold chickens 
or pigs, see these animals and go there, whereupon they are reborn. Rebirth as hell beings, 
hungry ghosts with goiters, and so forth are similar.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 How you are reborn in the bad as an animal etc. 
In the Actual Basis of the Levels  it says that if you are to be born as an animal, 
hungry ghost, human being, or as a god en joying the desire and form [realms], you 
w i l l  s e e  d e l i g h t f u l  b e i n g s  o f  s i m i l a r  t y p e  t o  y o u r s e l f  a t  y o u r  b i r t h - s o u r c e .  T h e n ,  
through generating delight in and desire for that, you go there. Having become 
angry at the birth-source, the intermediate existence ceases and you are born in the 
birth-existence. The way in which some one who has non-vows who does not trade 
in chicken and pigs etc. is born in hell is similar to this. 
 
If we are to be reborn as an animal, we will s ee animals, for example, at the birth-source and, 
thinking they are nice, will go there. We then  become angry at the birth-source, whereupon 
the intermediate state ceases and we are reborn in a birth-existence as an animal. It is the 
same in the case of rebirth as a hungry ghos t, human being, and god. Those possessing non-
vows who do not do business in ch ickens and pigs are also reborn  in hell in the same way, 
that is, they see the bodies of hell beings , go there, get angry, and take rebirth.  
                                              
168 The opposite of the vows “ sdom min ” whereby killing, harming, etc. are given up. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
461  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 From among the four birth-sources, how you are born from heat and moisture and miraculously born 
In the Treasury  “[Others] strongly desire odors and an abode” is mentioned saying 
that if you are to be born from heat an d moisture you are born through desiring 
odors, and if you are to be born miracu lously you are born through desiring an 
abode. Moreover, the commentary explains th at if you are to be born in the hot 
hells you go to an intermediate-existent through desiring heat, whereas if you are 
to be born in the cold hells you go to an intermediate-existent through desiring 
freshness. The Commentary on the  Treasury  explains birth from an egg to be similar 
to birth from a womb.  
 
There are four birth-sources – birth from a wo mb, birth from an egg,  birth from heat and 
moisture, and miraculous birth – by means of which we can take rebirth. The intermediate 
state being is born from heat and moisture du e to a desire for odors, whereas it is born 
miraculously due to a desire for an abode. If on e is to be reborn in the hot hells there is a 
desire for heat, whereas if one is be reborn in the cold hells there is a desire for cold. Desire 
heat one goes to a hot place and desiring cold one goes to a cold place, whereupon one takes 
rebirth in a hot hell or cold hell. The Commentary on the Treasury  says that birth from an egg 
and birth from a womb are similar. Birth from an egg is called “twice born” because the first 
birth is when a hen, for example, lays the eg g, and the second when the chick hatches from 
the egg. In the past there have also been cases of human beings who were born from an egg. It 
is recounted that when a merchant went looking for jewels on islands in the sea, having been 
ship-wrecked on an island he had intercourse with a female cr ane that then laid two eggs. 
When they hatched, two boys were born who studied the Dharma, became monks, and 
eventually became foe-destroyers.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-2 The measure that those thoughts [c ommon to intermediate beings] have arisen 
A Indicating the measure of their having arisen purely 
Second: If you have come to understand th e characteristics of cyclic existence in 
detail from the point of view of the two, sufferings and their origins, and the desire 
to abandon them and the desire to attain their complete pacification have arisen, 
that is indeed the attitude of renunciation,169 however that alone is not sufficient. 
Therefore, you should generate that mind to  the extent of being like the mind that 
does not want to be [stuck] in a house ablaze with fire or stay [locked up] in prison 
and [to the extent] that it desires libera tion from them, and even then it is 
necessary to still increase it. 
 The measure of generating the pure thought of re nunciation or definite emergence is that it 
arises from having understood the characteristics of cyclic existence from the point of view of 
sufferings and the origins of sufferings. All types of suffering are included in true sufferings. 
                                             
 
169 JN: nges ‘byung , definite emergence 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
462 What are their origins or causes? They are the mental afflictions and actions, that is, true 
origins. We need to understand that due to ac tions and afflictions we continually join with a 
new body, due to which we experience the suffering  of birth, suffering of aging, suffering of 
death, and suffering of illness, as well as ma ny other types of sufferings. Where does this 
suffering come from? It originates from the mental afflictions and actions. The mental 
afflictions cause us to engage in virtuous and non-virtuous actions of body, speech, and mind. 
These two, mental afflictions and actions, are called “true origins.” We need to understand 
them in detail, whereby the desire to pacify tr ue sufferings and true origins will arise. That 
itself is the thought of renunciation or defini te emergence, however it alone is not enough. 
We should want to cyclic existence as if we were stuck inside a burning house due to which 
we would want to immediately extinguish the fire  and get out of the hous e. Also the wish to 
leave cyclic existence should be like the consta nt and strong desire, day and night, to get out 
of prison and to achieve freedom. We need to ge nerate this mind and then increase it more 
and more. In this way we will one day achieve th e state of liberation. This is the measure of 
generating renunciation or definite emergence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The development of nothing but an appearance of striving for liberation if nothing but mediocre 
renunciation has developed  
{148} If this attitude, as taught by Shar awa, is nothing more than mediocre, like 
flour dropped into sour milk, also the vi ew that does not want the causes – the 
origins – of cyclic existence will not be come more than that. Accordingly, one’s 
striving for liberation, the cessation that is the ceasing of sufferings and origins, 
will be similar to that. Because of that , the desire to accomplish the path of 
liberation will be mere words, and also , there being no basis for the compassion 
that cannot bear the suffering of other sentient beings who roam in cyclic 
existence, the uncontrived mind of unsu rpassed enlightenment that has the power 
to spur the mind on will not arise. Co nsequently, you become a Mahayanist only 
in your understanding that follows upon  words. For that reason, you should 
cultivate [these thoughts] again and again.  
 
The development of the attitude of definite  emergence needs to be very strong and 
determined due to being based on an understanding of true sufferings and true origins and 
how we take rebirth in cyclic existence. We have to see true origins as undesirable and 
generate the wish to cease them. If this wish is  not strong, the wish to achieve liberation will 
also not be strong; it will only be mere words. Even if we try to meditate on the path, it will 
o n l y  b e  m e r e  w o r d s .  I t  w i l l  n o t  c o m e  f r o m  the heart and will not be based on a strong 
determination to abandon or cease the two truths, true sufferings and true origins, and to 
achieve true cessations by means of strongly gene rating true paths. Also  the compassion that 
cannot bear the sufferings of the sentient beings  who are wandering in cyclic existence will 
not be strong, but will just be mere words.  Also the uncontrived mind of unsurpassed 
enlightenment will not arise strongly, whereby on e will be a Mahayanist only in mere words. 
Therefore, we need to analytical meditation ag ain and again on true sufferings, that is, on 
how we ourselves and all sentient beings suffer. We also need to meditate on how true origins 
function, that is, how actions are produced by afflictions. Thereby, we will develop a strong 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
463 wish to attain nirvana. Then, thinking that al l sentient beings are tormented by suffering and 
unable to bear this, we will generate strong or great compassion, which will then produce the 
wish to attain enlightenment or buddhahood in or der to be able to take care of all sentient 
beings. We need to develop this attitude from ou r heart. In this way, one day we will generate 
uncontrived definite emergence, whereby we  will enter the firs t path, the path of 
accumulation, followed by the path of preparat ion, path of seeing, path of meditation, and 
path of no-more-learning. This is from the po int of view of the Hinayana, whereas from the 
point of view of the Mahayana we will pass thro ugh the ten grounds until we attain the last 
uninterrupted path of the vajra-like meditative stabilization and then in  the next instant we 
will attain the state in which all abandonm ents have been abandoned – the state of 
omniscience. At this point, we will have achieved all our own aims and will also able to be of 
benefit to all sentient beings.  
 Thursday morning, 21 April 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 148) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-3 Eliminating misconceptions about this 
A The manner of misconceptions  
B Their elimination 
2B4B-2B2B-3A The manner of misconceptions  
Third: You may think: “If you cultivate extreme revulsion and disenchantment for 
cyclic existence, like the hearers you will fall into the extreme of peace because of 
your dislike for [re]entering cyclic existe nce. Therefore, while it is becoming for 
Hinayanists to cultivate disenchantment, it  is inappropriate for bodhisattvas to 
cultivate it. That is  explained in [the Sutra of the ] Unfathomable Secret .”  
 
What is the wrong conception that needs to be  eliminated? It is th e thought that if one 
meditates on cyclic existence and generates revu lsion and disenchantment for it and wishes to 
abandon it, one will become like hearers becaus e it is the hearers who do not want to enter 
cyclic existence and fall into the extreme of peace. Therefore, while this is suitable for hearers, 
it is not suitable for those who want to  cultivate the mind of enlightenment.  
 Thus, the wrong conception here is that if Ma hayanists thinking about the fact that cyclic 
existence has many sufferings and problems and generate the wish to leave it and to attain nirvana, they will not think of other sentient  beings. However, this is a mistake because 
Mahayanists actually have a clear understanding of the sufferings of cycl ic existence, of the 
f a c t  t h a t  t h e r e  i s  n o  h a p p i n e s s  i n  c y c l i c  e x istence, and that even that which is called 
“happiness” is in fact the nature of suffering. Due to this, Mahayanists have a strong wish to 
leave this suffering behind.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-3B Their elimination 
1 The meaning of [statements in] scriptures that bodhisattvas are not terrified by cyclic existence 
The meaning of the statement “Thus, a bo dhisattva should not be terrified by 
cyclic existence” is not to point out that he should not be repulsed at the sufferings 
of birth, aging, illness, death, and so on of roaming in existence under the power 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
464 of karma and the mental afflictions. Ra ther, it is that, due to his mind of 
enlightenment, he should not be afraid to  take rebirth in existence for the benefit 
of sentient beings under the power of  aspirational prayers and compassion. 
 
Here this wrong conception is eliminated. Bodhis attvas are afraid of cyclic existence in the 
sense that they are afraid to take rebirth in cyclic existence under the control of actions and 
afflictions and experience the sufferings of birt h, aging, and so forth. On the other hand, 
bodhisattvas are not afraid to take rebirth in cyclic existence under the power of their prayers 
and great compassion in order to be able to ta ke care of and ripen other sentient beings. In 
fact, for this purpose bodhisattvas are fearless and want to take rebirth in  cyclic existence. The 
Lama Chopa  says that even for the sake of a single se ntient being a bodhisattva is willing to go 
to the hell realm and stay there for many eons. Thus, he patiently and willingly bears even 
intense suffering in order to care for other sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How it is necessary to enjoy being reborn in cyclic existence due to compassion but to be terrified of 
rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and the afflictions 
In fact, if roaming in existence under the power of karma and the mental 
afflictions, we are tormented by many sufferings and unable to enact even our own welfare, what need is there to mention en acting others’ welfare? {149} Since it is 
the door to all degeneration, having de veloped more disenc hantment than the 
Hinayanists there is a need to block it, whil e it is necessary to enjoy taking rebirth 
in existence under the power of aspi rational prayers and compassion. In 
accordance with that it also  says in the same sutra:  
 
Bodhisattvas, through taking care of thoroughly ripened sentient 
beings, view cyclic existence to be beneficial – unlike the great passage 
[to peace]. 
 
Thus, a bodhisattva fears taking rebirth in cy clic existence under the power of actions and 
afflictions, being tormented by various type s of sufferings and unable to enact his own 
welfare, let alone others’ welfare. Because this is  the door to or source of all degeneration and 
faults, bodhisattvas develop greater fear of cycl ic existence than do Hinayanists. However, they 
still generate the wish to take rebirth in cycl ic existence by the power of prayer and great 
compassion in order to be able to benefit all sentient beings. Since the main aim of 
bodhisattvas is to ripen sentient beings, they  see cyclic existence as being beneficial for 
generating love and compassion. Due to this, they  remain in cyclic existence in order to help 
sentient beings by ripening those who are no t yet ripe, and liberating those who are ripe. 
Therefore, while bodhisattvas fear the suffering of  rebirth in cyclic existence caused by actions 
and afflictions, they are happy to take rebirth in cyclic existence by the force of prayers such as 
“May I be reborn in such-and-such a place in orde r  t o  b e  a b l e  t o  t a k e  c a r e  o f  a l l  s e n t i e n t  
beings.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
465 3 For those with vows of engagement [in bodhisattva behavior] who express themselves in this manner 
without differentiating between rebirths due to karma and mental afflictions and rebirths due to 
aspirational prayers etc. infractions occur 
In the Bodhisattva Levels  it is set out that if someon e who expresses himself in the 
above manner without differentiating [between them ] has bodhisattva vows, he 
commits an afflicted infraction.  
 
There is a difference between taking rebirth by the force of actions and afflictions and taking 
rebirth by the force of prayers. Because of th is, if someone who has the vows of engaging 
bodhichitta (the bodhisattva vows) does not ma ke this distinction and thinks they are the 
same, he commits an infraction.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 Cherishing the way of conduct without falling into the extreme of peace despite great revulsion for 
cyclic existence 
Having developed revulsion for cyclic exis tence, to see those sentient beings as 
one’s relatives and thus generate the mind  of enlightenment for their sake, is the 
intention of the Four Hundred Verses  and is clearly set out by the great master 
Chandrakirti in his commentary on that [text]. 
 
If we have strong revulsion for c y c l i c  e x i s t e n c e ,  w e  h a v e  t o  be careful not to fall into the 
extreme of peace. Therefore, we need to see al l sentient beings as our dear relatives, for 
example, as our dear mother, father, brother, sist er, and so forth, and for their sake strive to 
generate the mind of enlightenment – the attitu de wishing to attain buddhahood in order to 
be able to take care of all sentient beings. This is said by Aryadeva in his Four Hundred Verses  
and clearly explained by Chandrakirti in his commentary on this text.   Hence, we need to strive at all times to thin k of all sentient beings and to generate love, 
compassion, the extraordinary thought, and the conventional mind of enlightenment. In our 
daily lives we should try to avoid thinking only  of ourselves, and instead strive to think of 
others more than we do ourselves. By doing th is, we will accumulate great merit, our Dharma 
practice will be successful, and our next life will be even better.  
 
(Oral transmission 11:45-12:10, pp. 149-160)  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 149) says:  
Explanation of how the nature of the path  leading to liberation is established  
2B4B-2B2B-4 Establishment of the nature of the path leading to liberation  
A Transition 
[B The actual establishment of the nature of the path] 
2B4B-2B2B-4A Transition 
Fourth: Since meditation on the shortcomin gs of existence as explained earlier has 
generated an intense desire to definitely emerge from cyclic existence, there is a 
need to reverse cyclic existence.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
466 Previously the shortcomings of cyclic existence we re explained; for example, as long as we are 
born in cyclic existence we will experience ma ny sufferings. Since the very nature of cyclic 
existence is suffering, we need to give it up or reverse it. To do this, we must generate a strong 
wish to reverse cyclic existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-4B The actual establishment [of the nature of the path ] 
1 By what kind of basis is cyclic existence averted 
2 By cultivating what kind of path is it averted 
Therefore two points [are being made] in this  regard: by what kind of basis is cyclic 
existence averted and by cultivating wh at kind of path is it averted. 
 
By which beings, that is, in dependence on what type of body, can cyclic existence be averted? 
By meditating on what kind of path is it aver ted? The basis or support refers to the body of 
the being. Among the different types of bases, which one is the best? The best one is a human 
body and, among them, a basis or body possessi ng the eight leisures and ten endowments is 
the very best. Then, between lay people and the ordained, the orda ined have the best 
opportunity to avert cyclic existence because l ay people are generally busy and do not have 
much time to practice in that they need to ta ke care of their families, work and make money 
in order to care for their partner and children, and take care of their animals such as horses, 
sheep, and so forth. The ordained are less busy because they do not have to take care of a 
husband or wife, children, domestic animals, and so forth. Instead they can live alone, taking 
care of themselves alone and thereby practicing  the Dharma. In this sense, the body of an 
ordained person is better than that of a lay person. However, maybe times have changed since 
nowadays monks and nuns are also busy! In our modern world everything has changed in that 
monks are also busy wandering around in cyclic existence, trying to make money, taking care 
of businesses, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-4B1 By what kind of basis is cyclic existence averted 
A The need to avert it at this time when you have obtained a basis of leisures and endowments 
From the Letter to a Friend : 
 
Having obtained a birth of leisure that’s free 
From the so-called defective eight unfree states {150} Make an effort to avert rebirths. 
 As is set out [here], you need to avert it at this time when you have obtained the leisures and endowments, for it has alre ady been explained that in the unfree 
[states] there is no opportunity to avert it.  
 
Nagarjuna in his Letter to a Friend  says that at this time, while we are free from the eight 
leisureless states and have the eight freedoms, we need to make an effort to avert rebirth, that 
is, to not take any more rebirths in cyclic exis tence. Since now is the right time to put effort 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
467 into this, we should not wait until we have ni ne or even ten leisures! An example of another 
non-leisure could be to be addicted to playing with one’s computer due to which one goes to 
bed late, sleeps less, has trouble getting up in the morning, and then needs to go to work…! I 
am joking! However, we should try to practice  the Dharma very strongly while keeping our 
mind more relaxed and free from worries. When we have a problem, we tend to worry a lot 
about it, however this worry then becomes our main problem since it makes our mind 
unhappy. It may even lead to physical pain , which makes us then worry about having a 
dangerous illness, due to which we go to hosp ital to undergo many different examinations, 
and so forth. Then, sometimes, even though the doctors do not know what we have, they still 
advise us to do undergo some treatment such as an operation, which then makes us worry 
about dying… We should not allow this to ha ppen, but should keep our mind free of worry 
and relaxed. 
 Thursday afternoon, 21 April 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 150) says:  
B The need to make an effort now 
The Great Yogi [Jangchup Rinchen] said: “N ow is the time to distinguish ourselves 
from cattle.” Potowa also said: “When we were roaming about previously, it did 
not stop by themselves. Since now it will al so not stop by itself, we must avert it. 
The time to avert it is this time wh en we have obtained the leisures and 
endowments.” 
 
The Great Yogi said that we have to differentiate  ourselves from animals, such as cows, sheep, 
goats, and so forth, that is, we have to do something better than animals who only think of 
eating and drinking. Now that we have obtained a human rebirth, we should strive to do this. 
 Potowa also said that in the past we wander ed in cyclic existence but did not do anything 
to put an end to it. However, now that we  have achieved the eight leisures and ten 
endowments we should make an effort to put an end to cyclic existence, that is, to leave it, 
and to gain realizations.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How on that basis it is good to take ordination 
Even more than that, lay people have many  obstacles to the accomplishment of the 
Dharma and have the drawback of numero us faults. Since those who are ordained 
turn away from them, the ordained have the best basis for averting cyclic existence. 
That is why the wise have a strong  liking for ordination. In [the Sutra ] Requested by 
Ugra it says that lay bodhisattv as should aspire for ordinati on. This mainly refers to 
aspiring for full ordination. In the Ornament of the Sutras  it also says:  
 
Those on the side of the ordained  
Have limitless good qualities. Therefore, those exerting themselves in vows Excel over householder bodhisattvas. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
468  
The basis for averting cyclic existence is a huma n body. Why then is it better to be ordained 
to practice the Dharma than to be a lay person or householder? It is because householders or 
lay people have many things th at they need to do and theref ore do not have much time to 
practice the Dharma. The ordained, on the othe r hand, have more leisure to practice the 
Dharma. Therefore, if we take ordination it beco mes easier to practice the Dharma as we will 
have less work and less responsibilities due to not having a wife or husband and children. 
Due to being busy, lay people have less time to practice the Dharma and, for this reason, it is 
better to take ordination. However if we are ordained but continue to work like a lay person it is possible that even more faults will arise. In  general though, the best  basis to avert cyclic 
existence is that of an ordained body. Therefor e, we should enjoy and like ordination. Even 
lay bodhisattvas should think of the benefits of taking ordination and aspire to and make 
prayers to take ordination in the future. To as pire for ordination mainly means to aspire to 
become a fully-ordained monk or nun. Similarly, the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras  says 
that those on the side of the ordained have ma ny good qualities, due to which, between lay 
bodhisattvas and ordained bodhisattvas, the ordained are superior.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D How it is necessary to respect the [vows of] individual liberation since ordination is also praised by 
both sutra and tantra for the accmplishment of omniscience 
Thus, ordination is not only praised for the attainment of the complete release 
that is liberation from cyclic  existence, but is also presented as being the best basis 
for the accomplishment of omniscie nce by the perfection and tantra [vehicles]. 
The vows of ordination, among the three vo ws, are those of individual liberation. 
Therefore, you should respect [the vows of ] individual liberation, the root of the 
teachings.  
 
From the point of view of both the perfection vehicle and tantra vehicle, ordination is praised 
as being the best basis for both the attain ment of liberation and the attainment of 
omniscience. Among the three vows (the vows of  individual liberation, bodhisattva vows, and 
tantra vows), the vows of ordination refer here to the vows of individual liberation. Among 
the vows of individual liberation there are five  vows of ordained people and three vows of lay 
people, for a total of eight types of vows. Among the three types of lay vows, one is taken for a 
period of twenty-four hours, while the other tw o are to be taken with a strong determination 
to keep them for the rest of one’s life. Even if we do not take vows, we still need to discipline 
ourselves by striving to avoid non-virtuous ac tions and to engage in virtuous actions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-4B2 By cultivating what kind of path is cyclic existence averted 
A Identification of the path – the transition 
B Indication that the other trainings  will be exlained further on  
C In particular how to train in ethical discipline 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2A Identification of the path – the transition 
{151} Second: In the Letter to a Friend  it says: 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
469 Even if your head or clothing were to catch fire 
Give up preventing it; simply make an effort To destroy [the occurrence] of future rebirths. 
There is nothing else that would be better. 
 
Through pure discipline, wisdom, and concentration Attain the immaculate state of peace and taming – 
Nirvana – that’s ageless, deathless, and limitless, 
Free of earth, water, fire, wind, the sun, and the moon. 
 You should train in the three types of prec ious trainings of the path as set out in 
this statement. 
 Nagarjuna says that even if our head or clothing  was to catch fire, we should not do anything 
to put it out but instead we should make an e ffort to put an end to our future rebirths in 
cyclic existence. There is nothin g that is better than this. By means of training in morality, 
wisdom, and concentration, we will attain nirv ana, the state of stainless pacification and 
subjugation, without aging and without death, fr ee from earth, water, fire, wind, the sun, and 
the moon. In other words, having attained liberation, we will be free from all the problems caused by the earth and so forth. Therefore, we  need to train in the three types of precious 
trainings of the path: the higher  training in morality, higher training in concentration, and 
higher training in wisdom.   At the moment we need to practice morality by taking any of the various levels of vows 
and, having taken them, we need to safeguard them. For example, if we have taken the vows 
of a fully-ordained monk, we need to guard the three vows that we possess: the lay vows, 
novice vows, and vows of full ordination. Thus, for a fully-ordained monk to train in morality means to safeguard these vows. In short, we n eed to guard whatever vows – lay vows, novice 
vows, vows of full ordination, or vows of probat ionary nuns – we have taken. For example, a 
fully-ordained monk must guard himself against th e four defeats of the root vows, the thirteen 
remainders, and so forth. Although the numb er of vows differs in the various Buddhist 
traditions, the vows themselves are similar.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-4B2B Indication that the other trainings will be explained further on  
If I were commenting on the path of inte rmediate beings for my own enjoyment, 
an extensive commentary on the three trai nings would be necessary here. However, 
as this is not the case, the training in wi sdom, special insight, and the training in 
the mind, the way to generate calm abiding, will be explained in the context of 
great beings. Therefore, here I will only briefly state the way to train in ethical 
discipline. 
 
With respect to the path of middling beings, it  is necessary to understand the three higher 
trainings in morality, wisdom, and the mind. “The training in the mind” is the training in 
concentration. Since the two latter trainings will  be explained in the context of the path of 
great beings, when calm abiding and special in sight are set out, Lama Tsongkhapa will not 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
470 explain them here. However, he will briefly ex plain how to train in morality or ethical 
discipline.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C How to train in ethical discipline 
1 The benefits of guarding [ethical discipline]  
2 The shortcomings of not guarding it  
3 How the benefits of generating ethical discipline are great these days  
4 The manner of training 
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-1 The benefits of guarding [ethical discipline] 
In this regard, initially, by considering the benefits of ethical discipline again and 
again, you should increase your heartfelt enthusiasm for it through thinking about 
it as stated in the Letter to a Friend : 
 
Rules are the base and foundati on of all good qualities, 
So it says; like the earth fo r the animate and inanimate. 
 
And in the Tantra Requested by Subahu : 
 
Just as crops grow faultlessly depending on the ground, 
Likewise depending on ethical discipline, Moistened by the water of compassion, The most superior wholesome qualities grow. 
 
There are many benefits of guarding morality. We need to think about them again and again, 
until we generate a strong joy in morality from  the depths of our heart. Morality or ethical 
discipline is the basis for the development of all qualities, just as the earth is the basis for all 
that is animate and inanimate, i.e., that which moves and does  not move – sentient beings 
and vegetation, buildings, and so forth. We s ee that all sentient beings, for example, human 
b e i n g s ,  d e p e n d  o n  t h e  e a r t h  i n  o r d e r  t o  g r o w  f o o d  s u c h  a s  r i c e  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  I n  f a c t ,  a l l  
v e g e t a t i o n ,  t r e e s ,  p l a n t s ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h ,  a s  w e l l  a s  b u i l d i n g s ,  s u c h  a s  h o u s e s ,  d e p e n d  o n  t h e  earth. All the five sense objects of the desire realm depend on the earth or on the ground. In 
a similar way, all good qualities grow in dependence on morality. Why is this? It is because if w e  w a n t  t o  t a k e  h i g h e r  r e b i r t h ,  t h e  o n e  a n d  o n ly cause is morality or discipline. For this 
reason, we need to strive to safeguard our morality.  
 Also the Tantra Requested by Subahu  says that we need morality as a basis in order for all 
good or white qualities, that is, virtues, to grow, just as crops grow well in a good field. Just as 
seeds planted in the ground need the condition of  water in order to grow , so too do we need 
the moisture of compassion in order for the supe rior qualities of bodhisattvas to grow in our 
mind. Lacking compassion, these qualities will not develop.   In short, we need to guard our morality by doing what is good. We must try not to deceive 
others by pretending that we have good morality while, behind their backs, engaging in bad conduct. It is also not right to  behave well physically while in  our mind thinking bad things, 
such as planning to steal, harm others , and so forth. This is important.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
471 2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-2 The shortcomings of not guarding it 
Just as guarding the ethical discipline you have assumed bring enormous benefits, 
likewise there are great shortcomings to not guarding it. You should consider the 
shortcomings of not guarding it again and again as taught in the scriptures. {152} 
In the Sutra on Cherishing Monks  it says: 
 
Discipline is happiness for some; 
For others, discipline is suffering. 
For those who have it, happiness; 
For those who breach it, suffering. 
 To break our morality or to be immoral means to take vows but then not guard them. If we 
take vows and then strive to keep them purely, there will be great benefit. On the other hand, 
if we take vows but do not guard them well,  there will be enormous shortcomings. The Sutra 
on Cherishing Monks  says that having taken vows, if we make an effort to keep them well the 
result will be happiness, whereas for those wh o take vows of morality but then break them, 
there will only be suffering. Why is this? It is  because having taken vows, the result of not 
guarding them will be an increase in su ffering. Therefore, we must be careful.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In the Manjushri Root Tantra  it says: 
 
If discipline decays in reciters 
There will be no highest attainments, Nor intermediate attainments, Even the least ones will remain absent.  The Capable Lord did not teach  Mantra attainments for the immoral, Nor do they approach the place That goes to the city of nirvana. 
 
How could there be in such bad children  Any attainments of mantra? For those disregarding ethical discipline How could there be happy realms?  If they do not become higher beings, Nor beings bound for highest bliss, What need to mention their attaining The mantras taught by the Jina? 
 Those who recite mantras such as OM MA NI PADME HUM but do not keep morality 
cannot achieve the supreme attainment or siddh i, they also cannot achieve the middling 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
472 attainments, and they cannot even achieve the ve ry least attainments. In fact the Buddha said 
that if we allow our morality to degenerate, we will not achieve any tantra attainments. 
Therefore, while recitation is important, at the same time we also need to strive to maintain 
our pledges and vows. For example, having ta ken the bodhisattva vows, we must keep the 
eighteen root vows as well as the forty-six se condary vows. We must try to do this from the 
depths of our heart. Because we are ordinary  beings, sometimes we have strong mental 
afflictions, sometimes we are confused, and so metimes we do not want to do something. 
However, in spite of this we must try to  keep our vows as much as possible.  
 If we do not keep our vows there is no point in wishing to go to the city of nirvana since 
w e  w i l l  o n l y  r e m a i n  i n  “ t h e  c i t y  o f  c y c l i c  e x istence.” Here “the childish” refer to ordinary 
beings, not to small children. It is they wh o cannot achieve the atta inments of mantra or 
tantra if they do not keep good morality. Also those who degenerate their morality will not be 
reborn in the happy migrations as gods or hu man beings. They also cannot reach the highest 
states of happiness such as buddhahood or nirv ana. The Buddha said that since this is not 
possible, there is no need to mention that they will not attain the result s of mantra or tantra, 
that is, the state of Vajradhara po ssessing the seven unifications.  
 In short, if we do not safeguard our morality , there will be many unpleasant consequences. 
For this reason, we need to think again and ag ain about what will happen if we do not keep 
pure morality. We should do this until we ge nerate fear of what will happen and therefore 
put effort into keeping our morality by not breaking our vows.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-3 How there are great benefits of generating ethical discipline nowadays  
In the King of Concentration  [Sutra ] it says: 
 
The trainings that I taught to those 
Who wear the laity’s grey clothes, 
At that time, there will not even be Fully-ordained monks who train in them. 
 
At the time when, according to the statem ent, the thoroughly complete guarding 
of the five bases of training taught to l ay vow-holders is not pr esent even in fully-
ordained monks, since striving in the trai nings is special and has more effect, you 
should make an effort. From the same sutra: 
 
Those who, at the time when  the holy Dharma decays 
And the Sugata’s teachings come to an end, 
Practice a single training day and night, 
Their merit will extraordinarily exceed  That of one who for eons like Ganges’ sand grains And with a mind of faith honours billions of buddhas With food, drink, parasols, banners, and garlands of light. 
 There are many benefits to guarding our morality  in this degenerate time in which sentient 
beings have much attachment, strong mental afflictions, and perform very few virtuous 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
473 actions. The King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra  says that at the time of degeneration even 
fully-ordained monks will not guard the five vo ws of lay people, even though they need to 
guard not only the five lay vows, but also the vows of novices and the vows of full ordination. 
Because of this, striving at this time to guard even just the five lay precepts brings a great 
result. Consequently, if we take and guard the novice vows or the vows of full ordination 
there will be even more benefit.   If for eons equal to the number of grains of  sand in the Ganges Ri ver, we were to offer 
food, drinks, parasols, banners, and garlands of  butterlamps to the infinite buddhas with a 
mind of faith, the merit accumulated would stil l be greatly exceeded by, in this time of 
degeneration of the Dharma in which the Sugata’s doctrine is coming to an end, the merit 
accumulated by someone guarding a single vow, such as the abandonment of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, or taking intoxicants for a period of twenty-four hours. This implies 
that in this degenerate time it is very meritorious to keep our vows, therefore we should strive 
to do this. Thus, day and night we should strive  to keep our vows. To do this, in the evening 
before we go to sleep, we should examine what kind of actions of body, speech, and mind we did from the time we woke up that morning. If we find that we created negativities we should 
go for refuge to the Three Jewels, the Buddha , Dharma, and Sangha, and generate the mind 
of enlightenment that wishes to  a t t a i n  b u d d h a h o o d  i n  o r d e r  t o  b e  a b l e  t o  t a k e  c a r e  o f  a l l  
sentient beings; generate regret for the negativi ties created; determine to try not to do them 
again; and recite some mantras, sutras, or a sh ort prayer. Alternatively, meditate a bit on the 
emptiness of the three spheres – the one who di d the action, the action accumulated, and the 
result of the action – and then go to sleep absorbed in that clear light.   Friday morning, 22 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 153) says:  
2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-4 The manner of training 
A Instructions on the four antidotes for abandoning downfalls 
Among the four causes for the occurrenc e of downfalls, the antidote to not 
knowing is to understand the trainings through studying them. 
 The antidote to non-conscientiousness is to train in:  
1. the mindfulness that does not forget the observed objects and aspects of what 
to adopt and what to abandon;  
2. the introspection that individually invest igates the three doors at every moment 
and is aware of the excellent and faulty [actions] being engaged in;  
3. the shame that shuns the faulty from the perspective of oneself or the Dharma;  
4. the embarrassment that shuns the faulty  through thinking that others will 
criticize you; and  
5. the intimidation that fears the full ri pened effects of faulty conduct.  
The antidote to a lack of respect is to  be respectful towards the Teacher, his 
formulated rules, and those wh o perfectly observe the rules. 
 The antidote to many mental afflicti ons is to examine your continuum and 
endeavor to apply the antidote to what ever mental affliction predominates. 
 
There are four causes for the arisal of downfalls: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
474 1. not knowing, 
2. non-conscientiousness, 
3. a lack of respect, 
4. having many mental afflictions. 
They are also called “four doors” because when they are left open they become the cause of 
negative actions. 
 As an antidote to not knowing, we need to  understand the trainings through listening to 
teachings or instructions on them. As an anti dote to non-conscientiousness, we need the 
mindfulness that remembers and does not forget  the objects to be adopted and those to be 
abandoned. We also need the introspection th at examines the three doors of body, speech, 
and mind to see what kind of actions, excellent or faulty, they are engaging in. We also need 
shame which, out of respect for ourselves or th e Dharma, does not engage in faulty behavior. 
We also need embarrassment which, out of re spect and consideration for others, does not 
engage in non-virtuous actions. If both sham e and embarrassment are present, we will engage 
only in virtuous actions. We also need strive  to understand the fully ripened results of our 
negative actions whereby we will develop fear of  their results and thereby want to engage in 
good behavior.   As an antidote to a lack of respect, we should strive to develop respect for the Teacher , Buddha Shakyamuni, his formulated rules, and the companions with whom we practice. As 
an antidote to the many afflictions that aris e in our mind, we should examine at all times 
what kind of mental afflictions are arising in  our mind and then apply the antidote to the 
affliction that tends to predomin ate. Thus, if attachment is the strongest, we should apply the 
antidote [of meditation on ugliness ]; if anger is the strongest, we  should apply the antidote of 
love and patience; and if ignorance is the strong est, we should meditate on dependent-arising 
and try to understand the emptiness of true or  inherent existence. By doing this, we will 
gradually be able to diminish our mental afflic tions and eventually be able to eliminate them 
completely. However, to do this, we first need to examine which mental afflictions arise most 
often in our day to day life. This is importan t because many mental afflictions arise and due 
to them we then create non-virt uous actions that bring the three or four results. Among these 
results, the main one is the fully ripened result  of a bad rebirth, however when we are once 
again reborn as a human being we will also  experience the others. In order to avoid 
experiencing these results we need to apply th e antidotes to our non-virtuous actions – the 
four opponent powers.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Relating this to past events: how it is inappropriate to be careless with respect even to small 
formulated [rules]  
If without putting effort into this you tr ansgress even the minor and think: “It is a 
small mistake,” this engagement in carelessness with respect to the formulated 
rules will only obtain suffering for you because it says in the Classification of  
[Vinaya ] Scriptures : 
 
Those who are unconcerned with  regard to the teachings 
Of the Compassionate Teacher and slightly transgress them 
Will hence come under the influence of suffering, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
475 Just like a mango grove is spoiled through cutting a bamboo grove. 
 Though some here transgress th e royal decrees of the king 
And, if it is not often, do not get punished [at all], 
If they were to transgress the Mu ni’s words in an improper manner 
They would, like the naga El apatra, migrate to the animal [realm]. 
 
We should avoid being non-conscientious or ca reless with respect even to small formulated 
rules, thinking “It does not matter. It is not a mistake.” If we do this and thereby transgress 
them, we will only experience suffering. Buddha Shakyamuni in the Classification of  Vinaya  
Scriptures  said that if we create even small transg ressions through thinking that they do not 
matter, the result will be that we will be overco me by suffering. It is like if a bamboo fence 
surrounding mango trees were to be cut down , whereby the mangoes could be picked and 
stolen by others. Also, while someone who transg resses the rules or decrees of the king or the 
country may not be caught and punished, if we transgress the words of Buddha Shakyamuni 
we will take a bad rebirth like the naga Elapatra . It is recounted that in a previous life, when 
he was the caretaker of a monaster y, he did not take care of th e fruit trees on the monastery’s 
land thinking that they did no t matter. However, due to this he was reborn as Elapatra, a 
naga with a tree growing from its head. One d ay he attended Buddha Shakyamuni’s teachings 
in the form of a magnificent king, but Bu ddha Shakyamuni scolded him and told him to 
come the next day in his real form. The next day a huge snake with a tree growing on its head appeared at the teachings, frightening all the other people there. Buddha Shakyamuni 
explained that he was in fact the magnificent ki ng of the previous day appearing in his real 
form. When Buddha Shakyamuni was asked why he had come to have the form of the naga 
with a tree on its head, the Buddha explained that  it was because he had not taken care of the 
fruit trees but had cut their branches off and damaged them in other ways when he was the 
caretaker of a monastery in his past life.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How there is a need for quick confession if you are stained by faults and downfalls  
{154} Therefore, you should put effort into not being stained by faults and 
downfalls, but if it you do become stained by them, do not leave it at that 
indifferently, but put effort into undoing the transgression or negativity as has 
been taught. 
 
We should strive to not create faults or downfa lls, but if we do create them we should not 
think that it does not matter but instead tr y to purify them immediately by means of 
confessing them. For this reason, every fifteen days monks and nuns perform the Ceremony for Restoring and Purifying (Sojong) to confess any transgression of their vows by applying the 
four opponent powers: generating regret, determ ining not to do them again, going for refuge 
and generating the mind of enlightenment, and a pplying an antidote such as reciting sutras, 
doing prostrations to the thirty-five buddha s, reciting the hundred-syllable mantra of 
Vajrasattva, and so forth. We need to so simila r purification in our every day life, whereby we 
w i l l  b e  a b l e  t o  k e e p  o u r  m i n d  c l e a n .  T h i s  i s  i m p o r t a n t .  J u s t  a s  w h e n  w e  w a k e  u p  i n  t h e  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
476 morning we immediately wash our face and teeth,  take a shower, comb our hair, and so forth, 
so too should we try to clean our mind of the mental afflictions and the non-virtuous actions 
of body, speech, and mind. Unfortunately we cannot clean our non-virtuous actions with 
water, as then it would be very easy! However, there are some traditions which believe that it 
is possible to purify non-virtuous actions of bo dy, speech, and mind by bathing in the Ganges 
R i v e r .  T o  r e f u t e  t h i s  i t  i s  r e c o u n t e d  t h a t  w h e n  A r y a d e v a  a n d  A s h v a g o s h a  w e r e  d e b a t i n g  
together, Aryadeva put some excrement in a golden vase and went to the river where he busily 
washed the outside of the va se. When someone asked him why he was washing the outside 
and not the inside, he replied that he was do ing the same as those people who bath their 
bodies in the river thinking th at they are purifying their inne r negativities! The person who 
had asked the question was unable to argue with this response!  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D The need not just for ordained mantric practitioners but also for lay practitioners of mantra to guard 
the majority of vows  
I f  s u c h  g u a r d i n g  o f  m o r a l i t y  i s  f o r  those who hold the vows of individual 
liberation, it is also similar in the ca se of mantra because it says in the Tantra 
Requested by Subahu : 
 
Of all pure ethical disciplines of pratimoksha 
That I, the Jina, taught, practitioners Of mantra who are householders should abandon 
The signs and rituals while practicing the rest. 
 
If it is necessary for lay practitioners of mantra to behave as set out in the vinaya, except for the signs of ordination, the ritual actions, and some parts of the 
prescribed formulated rules, what need is  there to mention ordained practitioners 
of mantra? 
 
Buddha Shakyamuni taught that the vows or morali ty of individual liberation must be kept 
pure even by lay tantric practitioners with th e exception of wearing monks’ robes, shaving 
their heads, and so forth and the performance of certain rituals specific to the ordained which 
are set out in the Hundred Ritual Vinaya Sutra . However, with these exceptions, they must 
guard all the other vows of the ordained. In ot her words, lay tantric practitioners must guard 
themselves not only from the natural misdeed s but also from most of the formulated 
misdeeds. For example, while lay people can en gage in sexual intercourse, the ordained 
cannot. Since lay tantric practitioners must gu ard these vows, there is no need to mention 
that ordained tantric practitioners must guar d them. However, there are monks who claim “I 
am a tantric practitioner,” grow their hair long, embrace a woman saying that she is a 
qualified consort, and so forth. HA-HA! Such  things happen. I heard of an ex-monk who, 
when he was still ordained, did a retreat in a monastery in Lhadak for one or two years. 
When he came out of retreat, he said to Tri jang Rinpoche that the time had come for him to 
take a consort. Trijang Rinpoche  asked him whether he had atta ined the realizations of the 
completion stage. He said that he had not, but that he had done the re treat well and therefore 
had become a qualified tantric practitioner and so it was time for him to take a consort. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
477 Trijang Rinpoche said that if he  wanted to take a consort it was best for him to first give up 
his vows of ordination! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E It is the position of holy former masters to make ethical discipline and all other practices mutually 
supportive of each other 
Khamlungpa also said: “If a famine brea ks out, everything depends on barley. 
Likewise everything hinges on discipline, therefore, ernestly apply yourself to it. 
Pure ethical discipline also does not come about in someone who has not reflected 
on actions and their effects. Therefore, it is an essential instruction to reflect on 
that.” Sharawa also said: “Generally, also  whatever excellent and faulty happens, 
depend on the Dharma. Also in this regard, if you rely on what is suggested in the vinaya, you need not change anything. You will become sincere, withstand 
investigation, enjoy practice, and have a good end.” Geshe [Drom] Tonpa also 
said: “Many people miss out mantra throug h relying on vinaya or miss out vinaya 
through relying on mantra. {155} Only in my teacher’s tradition does the vinaya 
become the companion of mantra an d mantra the companion of vinaya.” 
 Geshe Khamlungpa said that just as when ther e is a famine everyone depends on barley for 
their survival, and likewise whatever actions we do we need to rely on the basis of morality, 
and therefore we need to strive to keep pure morality and to avoid committing negative actions. However, if we do not th ink about actions and their results,  it will be difficult to keep 
pure morality. In other words, in order to keep pure morality it is necessary to reflect on the 
law of cause and effect. It is an essential inst ruction that by understanding the law of actions 
and their results we will be able to keep pure morality. In other words, we need to understand that, since non-virtuous actions bring the result of suffering, due to transgressing our morality 
we will experience suffering. Through understanding this, we will naturally strive to avoid creating non-virtue and downfalls and at the sa me time strive to keep our morality pure.  
 Geshe Sharawa said that whatever excellent and faulty occurs, we should depend on the 
Dharma, that is on the three baskets or pitaka s of the Buddha’s teaching s. Mainly we should 
rely on the vinaya basket whereby our mind will become clear and pure and our life will 
become better and better. On the other hand, if we  do not strive to avoid creating non-virtue, 
the result in this life and in our future lives will be suffering and many problems. Therefore, 
we should try to live in accordance with what is  taught in the vinaya sutra as the result of this 
will be very good.   Geshe Dromtonpa also said that  the practice of tantra helps our practice of sutra, and the 
practice of sutra helps our practice of tantra . In other words, they mutually help each. 
Therefore, it is not that tantric practitioners do  not need sutra, and sutra practitioners do not 
need tantra. In fact it is wron g to think that sutra and tantra contradict each others. The fact 
is that tantric practitioners need sutra as a ba sis, and sutra practitioners eventually need to 
practice tantra because having reached the tenth bodhisattva ground they need to enter tantra 
in order to achieve buddhahood. Hence, to achi eve buddhahood it is necessary to practice 
both sutra and tantra. When the actual or meanin g clear light, the fourth stage, is achieved, 
the bodhisattva receives empowerment from th e buddhas of the ten directions and in the 
second instant enters tantra and attains enli ghtenment, the state of Vajradhara. Dromtonpa 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
478 said that only his teacher, Atisha, had the lineage that holds that sutra and tantra are 
complementary, whereas other teachers say that they are contradictory.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
F How the great beings in the land of aryas put into the practice the requirement that all activities 
accord with the three scriptural collections 
Jowo [Atisha] said:  
 
With us in India, whenever an important matter or temporary activity 
arose, those who upheld the scri ptural collections convened and 
established whether it did not reject  the three scriptural collections170 or 
did not contradict them, and upon that it was decided. We from 
Vikramashila then had the task [to ex amine] whether it was rejected by 
bodhisattva behavior or in contradi ction to it, and the decision was 
upheld by the entire ordained community.  
 
In India, whenever something happened, the monks upholding the three scriptural 
collections – sutra, vinaya, and abhidharma – would assemble together and read and examine 
whether it was in accord with the scriptures or transgressed them. If something transgressed 
or contradicted what was written in the scri ptures, it would not be done. The monks from 
Vikramashila Monastery would also examine whet her or not it rejected or contradicted the 
bodhisattva conduct, that is, the Mahayana sutras. If it did not, all those who upheld the 
vinaya would follow it.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
That concludes the explanation of training  the mind in the stages of the path 
common to intermediate beings. 
 
This concludes the explanation of training th e mind in the stages of the path common to 
middling beings. The path of middling beings co nsists in gaining an understanding of true 
sufferings, that is, the different types of suffering , and how they arise, that is, the true origins 
that are actions and mental afflictions. Then, mi ddling beings strive to understand the entity 
of actions such as the ten non-virtuous an d ten virtuous actions; meritorious, non-
meritorious, and immovable actions; actions th at are created and accumulated, created but 
not accumulated, not created but accumulated, and not created and not accumulated, and so 
forth. They also try to understand the afflicti ons – the six or ten main mental afflictions: 
attachment, anger, ignorance, prid e, doubt, the view of the tran sitory collection, the view of 
an extreme, the view holding a bad view as supreme, the view holding bad morality and 
conduct as supreme, and wrong view. These ar e the ten subtle increasers set out in the 
Treasury of Manifest Dharma  whereas the six root afflictions ar e: attachment, anger, ignorance, 
                                             
 
170 The three scriptural collections (Skt. tripitaka) often referred to more literally as “three baskets” are vinaya 
(words of the Buddha on monastic discipline) sutr a (his teachings proper) and abhidharma (“higher 
knowledge” – a systematic, philosophi cal presentation of his teachings). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 18-22 April 2005 (10) 
479 pride, doubt, and afflicted view. We need to recognize them and when we see that one of 
them has arisen we need to apply its antidote . We also need to recognize the non-virtuous 
actions of body and speech and apply th e opponent powers to purify them.  
 The path of small beings consists in medita tion on the guru and his qualities, and the 
disciple and his qualities. Small beings al so meditate on the precious human rebirth 
possessing the eighteen qualities, its excellence,  and great meaning. Th ey then meditate on 
the fact that it can easily be lost, that is, on death-impermanence: death is certain, the time of 
death is uncertain, and at the time of death on ly the practice of the Dharma, a spiritual path, 
is of help, whereas our friends, possessions and wealth, and even our body will all be left 
behind. Then small beings contemplate the fact  that due to having created non-virtuous 
actions they will go to the animal, hungry gh ost, or animal realms. They imagine what it 
w o u l d  b e  l i k e  t o  b o r n  i n  o n e  o f  t h e  h e l l s  – the eight hot hells, eight cold hells, the 
neighboring hells, or the occasi onal hells. They try to identi fy them and then meditate on 
them, imagining themselves to be experiencing this suffering, their body the very nature of 
fire, and ask themselves whether they would be ab le to bear this. By means of this meditation, 
there arises a mind of strong dislike for such  suffering. They also imagine experiencing the 
suffering of the hungry ghosts, having a huge body with a tiny neck, unable to swallow food 
or, if it is swallowed, it is never enough to fi ll their bellies. They also imagine being reborn as 
an animal, killing and being killed, being an anim al used by human beings such as horses and 
cows, being beaten, made to work, and so fort h. Even small ants eat other insects and so 
forth. Therefore, animals suffer from eating ea ch other and being stupid. If we were to be 
reborn as a pig, our nose always in the filth, would we be able to bear it? Imagine what it 
would be like to always live in a dirty plac e, searching for food among garbage, and ask 
ourselves whether we could bear it. Since we could not, we need to give up the cause, bad 
actions, and practice good actions. Also we should think about who can help us, whereupon 
we will find that only the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha can help us, can give us refuge. Then 
we examine the law of cause and effect, and try to apply the four opponent powers to purify 
our non-virtuous actions. We need to do this, it is important. Okay! Thank you.  
 END  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
480 Wednesday morning, 27 April 2005 
 (Note: There were no te achings 25-26 April 2005) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 155) says:  
PART IV: 
GREAT SCOPE UP TO CALM ABIDING 
How to train the mind in the stages  of the path of great beings  
2B4B-2B3  Training the mind in the path of great beings 
A The transition  
B The actual path 
 
The subject of the path of middling beings is fini shed and next there is the subject of the path 
of great beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3A The transition  
1 Even for the achievement of one's own entire welfare it is inappropriate to disregard the welfare of 
others, therefore it is necessary to enter the Great Vehicle from the start 
Through meditating in this manner upon the disadvantages of cyclic existence 
from different perspectives over a long ti me, you will indeed see all existence as 
being like a pit of blazing fire, and your mind will be thoroughly overcome by the 
wish to attain the liberation that complete ly pacifies suffering. If, due to that, you 
train in the three trainings, you will atta in liberation from cyclic existence and, 
moreover, will not turn back again even fo r the glory of high status. Nonetheless, 
since extinguishing [your own] faults and achieving good qualities is limited, one’s 
own welfare is not complete. For that very reason, others’ welfare is also 
temporarily neglected and in the end, havi ng been urged to do so by the buddhas, 
you will have to enter the Great Vehicle.  Therefore, it is appropriate for the 
intelligent to enter the Grea t Vehicle from the start.  
 We need to contemplate the faults of cyclic ex istence from many different and valid points of 
view and to meditate on them for a long time . Thereby, we will come to see that cyclic 
existence is like being in a pit of burning fi re in that, having been born, we continually 
experience suffering. Why is this? We need to understand that the main cause is the mental 
afflictions, which in turn produce actions that bring the result of different types of sufferings 
and problems. Therefore, we should develop the w i s h  t o  p a c i f y  a l l  t h e  s u f f e r i n g s  o f  c y c l i c  
existence as well as the mental afflictions, and to achieve nirvana or liberation. Then, in order 
to achieve liberation, we need to train in  the three higher trainings of morality, 
concentration, and wisdom. On the basis of mora lity, we train in developing a single-pointed 
mind and then use it to analyze the nature or reality of phenomena with wisdom. By training 
in the three higher trainings, we can achiev e the state free from the sufferings of cyclic 
existence – liberation. This state is very stable, whereas a rebirth of high status is not. Even 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
481 though we obtain a high rebirth in which everyt hing is enjoyable and perfect, later on we will 
once again fall into the hell realm, hungry ghos t realm, or animal realm. Therefore, a rebirth 
of high status, for example, the human rebirth th at we have presently obtained, is not stable 
since we do not know what our next rebirth will be. In fact, sometimes we take a high rebirth, 
sometimes we take a low rebirth. On the other ha nd, liberation from cyclic existence is stable, 
in that having obtained it we do not return fr om it. However, while we have eliminated faults 
and developed qualities, we have not yet eliminat ed the obscurations nor have we attained in 
a complete way all excellent qualities. Therefore,  we must not think only of achieving our own 
liberation as this is not enough. We need to do more than that. What do we need to do? We 
need to achieve buddhahood. Thinking about this , we will realize that right now we are only 
able to help others a little bit, just temporar ily, whereas we cannot help them in a complete 
way. To do this, we need to enter the Mahayana path. The door  to the Mahayana is 
bodhichitta or the mind of enli ghtenment, the wish to attain  b u d d h a h o o d  t o  b e  a b l e  t o  
benefit sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
{156} In the Summary of the Perfections it says: 
 
Having abandoned forever those two yanas  
Which are without power to bring about all the world's aims, Those whose nature is of on e taste with helping others 
Enter the Jina’s vehicle taught out of compassion. 
 Even if we wish to fulfill the welfare of the worl d, that is, of all sentient beings, we cannot do 
so by means of either the hearer  or solitary realizer vehicles. Although hearers and solitary 
realizers have abandoned all the mental affliction s, they are unable to help sentient beings. 
Therefore, in order to benefit them, we need to  enter the Mahayana path. In other words, we 
need to develop the great compassion that gives rise to the mind of enlightenment, 
bodhichitta, whose nature is one taste with bene fiting others. When this attitude is very 
strong, in order to help even one sentient being we will be willing to abide even for eons in 
the hell realm. This is the kind of mind that we need to develop.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Since accomplishing the welfare of others is worthy of great beings, it is to be accomplished  
Since it is the happiness and magnificence of  beings and the ability of a being it is 
appropriate to take responsibility for the welfare of others because to observe only 
one’s own welfare is something we also sh are with animals. Therefore, the natural 
disposition of great beings is to categori cally strive for the benefit and happiness of 
others. In the Letter to a Student  it says: 
 
When cattle see easily obtainable  mouthfuls of grass they eat it 
themselves, 
And when tormented by thirst they find water, they happily drink. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
482 The magnificence of beings consis ts in the effort they make  
For the welfare of others; this is the noble ability of happy beings. 
 
Travelling, riding across the sky, the powerful sun illuminates all; 
Regardless of the burden, the earth supports the world with everything 
in it. Those without the least self-interest,  equal in nature to the great, 
Totally strive for that singular taste of the benefit and joy of the world. 
 The work of great beings is to enact the we lfare of other sentient beings. Because human 
beings have strength and good qualities, it is  appropriate for them to take upon themselves 
the responsibility of enacting the welfare of sentient beings. On the other hand, to consider 
our own welfare alone is an attitude that is al so common to or shared with animals. If human 
beings only do this, like animals who search for food and water and so forth for their own 
sake, they will not be any better than animals. He nce, we need to strive to think as do the 
great beings by wishing from our own side to be nefit and help other sentient beings. This is 
important. A Letter to a Student  also says that when animals are hungry they eat any mouthful 
of food that they can easily obtain, and when they are thirst y and find water they happily 
drink it. Hence, such behavior is nothing spec ial. Therefore, human beings need to put as 
much effort as they can into enacting the welf are and taking care of other sentient beings. 
Animals are not able to do this, it is only hu man beings who possess this magnificent quality 
that enables them to become much better than animals.   The sun is powerful and strong, it travels and can be ridden across the sky, and its light goes out to all sentient beings equally, not bene fiting some and harming others. Similarly, we 
too need to ensure that all our actions benefit other sentient beings by ripening the minds of 
those who are not yet ripe and libe rating those who are ripe. Thus, we need to be like the rays 
of the sun which, when they strike the ground, cause plants to grow and fruit to ripen. Thus, whatever we do, we need to try to do it for the benefit of others, and not just for our own 
sake. If, on the other hand, we continue to act only for our own sake there is always the risk 
that we will in the end be of harm to others.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 It is worthy of beings and the wise to toil and strive for the sake of protecting others from suffering  
{157} Thus, seeing how migrating beings are tormented by suffering, those who are 
called “a being” (Sanskrit, parusha ) or “wise” should toil for their welfare. In the 
same text it says:  
 
Those who, having seen how the worl dly, confused by the dense smoke 
clouds of ignorance,  Have helplessly fallen into the blazing fire of suffering,  
Mentally toil and work for them as if fire was spreading on their head,  
Are beings; they are also the wise. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
483 We beings need to strive to quickly protect se ntient beings from suffering. The word “being” 
in Sanskrit, parusha  (Tib. skyes bu ), has the meaning of “being able.” Seeing how all sentient 
beings are tormented by suffering, we should put effort into enacting th eir welfare. It is not 
that we just see this and then not do anything ab out it, rather we must put effort into actually 
helping them.  
 Worldly beings, confused by ignorance which is like dense clouds of smoke obscuring the 
vision, have fallen powerlessly into the blazing fi re of suffering. Just as  if our head were to 
catch fire, we would quickly and vi gorously strive to put it out, in the same way we should put 
effort, quickly and earnestly, into freeing sentie nt beings from their suffering. We should not 
do it slowly or lazily, thinking to do it tomorrow, or the day after, or next week, or next year… W e  n e e d  t o  h e l p  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  r i g h t  n o w  b y  d e v e l o p i n g  g r e a t  c o m p a s s i o n ,  l o v e ,  t h e  extraordinary attitude, and the mind of enligh tenment. Then we should practice the six 
perfections and the four means of gathering disc iples. We should practice the six perfections 
ourselves and also set other sentient beings in th e practice of them. If we are not yet able to 
teach all sentient beings, we should at the very  least try to teach other human beings how to 
meditate in order to eliminate their unhappiness and agitation. In the beginning we can just 
teach them some simple meditation or even some  yoga exercises. Initially we should talk to 
them nicely so that they generate more interest  in what we have to say, after which we can 
slowly begin to teach them the Dharma. It is no t possible to help sentient beings in any other 
way. If we are rich, perhaps we can give others some of our money to help them but still this 
will not relieve their mental suffering. Whatever knowledge we have, we should share it with 
others by teaching them what we know.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 Having generated delight that there exists an entrance to the path that accomplishes all one's own 
and others’ welfare, it is necessary to enter it 
There exists an entrance to the Great Ve hicle – the source of all one’s own and 
others’ excellence, medicine removing all problems, the great path traveled by all 
wise beings that nurtures all migrat ing beings through seeing, hearing, 
remembering, and touching – that posse sses the great skillful means that by 
working for the welfare of others accomplishes, by the way, one’s own welfare 
without any incompleteness. Thinking, “O h, I have found exactly what I was 
looking for!” you should engage in this best  of vehicles with whatever ability of a 
being you have. 
 With delight we should enter th e path that accomplishes both our own and others’ welfare. It 
is the source of all good qualities, it eliminat es all problems, is the path traveled by all the 
wise. It also nurtures all sentient beings through seeing, hearing, remembering, and touching. For example, when a skilled doctor examines a patient, he checks the person’s eyes, ears, 
tongue, and so forth while asking questions abou t his pain or sickness. “Touching” means, for 
example, that the doctor checks the person’s pulse, feels and pats his body, and so forth, 
whereby he is able to diagnose the sickness an d then eliminate it by giving the person the 
right medicine. Unlike the wrong medicine whic h can make an illness worse, the Mahayana 
path is a perfect medicine that is always able  to cure the mental i llness of the afflictive 
obscurations and obscurations to knowledge. In other words, by hearing the Great Vehicle 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
484 teachings taught by the Buddha, by thinking ab out them, and by meditating on them, we will 
generate the Mahayana path and thereby achi eve buddhahood. At this time we will have 
destroyed or abandoned all obscurations and comp leted all qualities, including the ability to 
help others. Therefore, we need to develop the thought to benefit other sentient beings from 
our heart. In this way, we will act to help them and our mind will be happy and rejoice, 
thinking “That I can benefit them in this way is excellent!” Thus , we should be very happy to 
have the possibility to enter the Mahayana path. However much  ability and intelligence we 
have, we should use them to  enter the Mahayana path.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B The actual path 
1 Demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway to the Great 
Vehicle 
2 How to generate such a mind  
3 Having generated the mind of enlightenment how to train in the conduct 
Now, there are three [points] concerning th e training the mind in the stages of the 
path of great beings: demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is 
the only gateway to the Great Vehicle; ho w to generate such a mind, and, having 
generated the mind of enlightenmen t, how to train in the conduct. 
 
The actual path of the Great Ve hicle is divided into the three sub-topics: the door to the 
Great Vehicle, how to generate the mind of enli ghtenment, and how to train in the conduct.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
Demonstrating that generating the mind of  enlightenment is the only gateway  
to the Great Vehicle including an  explanation of its benefits 
2B4B-2B3B-1 Demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway to the 
Great Vehicle 
A Ascertaining the Great Vehicle as the two – the sutra and mantra vehicles – and generating the mind 
of enlightenment is the only gateway to it 
First: Therefore, as it is necessary to enter the Great Vehicle, you come to think 
about how it is to be entered. There is no Great Vehicle apart from the two – the 
Perfection and Mantra Vehicles – taught by the Conqueror. Whichever of the two 
you may enter, the only gateway is the mind of enlightenment. 
 
The door to the Great Vehicle or the Mahayana  is only the mind of enlightenment. While 
there are two Great Vehicles, the Perfection or Sutra Vehicle and the Tantra or Mantra 
Vehicle, the mind of enlightenment is the d oor to both of them. Here “the mind of 
enlightenment” refers to the conventional mind  of enlightenment, not to the ultimate mind 
of enlightenment. The Ornament for Clear Realizations  sets out the conventional mind of 
enlightenment saying that the mind generation is  the aspiration for the welfare of all sentient 
beings and the aspiration to achieve enlightenmen t. Thus, it consists of two aspirations: one 
wishing to enact the welfare of other sent ient beings and one wishing to achieve 
enlightenment. The primary mind concomitant wi th these two aspirations is called “the mind 
of enlightenment” or “bodhichitta.” Having  generated this mind, we enter the Mahayana 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
485 path and become Mahayanists or Mahayana practi tioners. Similarly, the door to becoming a 
Buddhist is to go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, and to not go for final 
refuge to any other objects of refuge. Thus , when we generate this mind, we become 
Buddhists or Buddhist practitioners. Likewise, when we generate the conventional mind of 
enlightenment, we enter the Mahayana path and become Mahayanists. On the other hand, 
the door to tantra is to receive empowerment,  this being the main cause for entering the 
practice of tantra. However, prior to this, in or der to enter tantra it is necessary to generate 
the mind of enlightenment. This is because in  order to practice tantra we need a strong 
determination to achieve enlightenment very quickl y, even in this very life and even within a 
period of three years and three lunar phases (for ty-five days), in order to be able to quickly 
liberate all the sentient beings who are tormented by suffering.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Being posited as a practitioner of the Great Vehicle also depends only on this mind 
Whenever it is generated in the continuu m, even though nothing else has arisen, 
one is posited as a Great Vehicle practiti oner, whereas whenever one is separated 
from it, whatever good qualities one has, such as the realization of emptiness and 
so forth, {158}  one will fall to the level of hearer  and the like and degenerate from 
the Great Vehicle. This is taught in numerous texts of  the Great Vehicle and is 
also established by reasonings. Theref ore, whether one is a Great Vehicle 
practitioner is determined by wh ether one has this mind or not. 
 
When we generate the mind of enlightenment we  become a Mahayanist. Thus, even if we do 
not have a realization of emptiness, just by ge nerating the mind of enlightenment we become 
a Mahayanist. Nothing more than that is necessary . Hence, even if we were to separate from 
the realization of emptiness, we would not fall from the level of Great Vehicle practitioner. 
On the other hand, if we degenerate the mind of  enlightenment, we will fall into the Hearer 
Vehicle and so forth. We should study the many Mahayana texts that say that when we 
degenerate bodhichitta, even though we have the realization of emptiness, we will fall into the 
Lesser Vehicle. Thus, whether we are a Mahayanis t or not depends on having or not having 
the mind of enlightenment. In other words, if we have genera ted the mind of enlightenment 
in our continuum we are a Mahayanist, whereas if we have not generated it, that is, we do not 
wish to attain enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings, we are not Mahayanists. In 
this case, if we have generated a path in our continuum, it is necessar ily a Hinayana path. In 
brief, to be a Mahayanist the mind of enligh tenment must be present in our continuum.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Only those who have generated the mind become a son of the conquerors and outshine the hearers 
and solitary realizers  
Thus, in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  i t  s a y s  t h a t  a s  s o o n  a s  t h i s  m i n d  h a s  
arisen, you become a son of th e conquerors. Likewise, in the Biography of Maitreya  
it says: 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
486 “Son of the lineage, it is like this. For example, a diamond, even 
broken, outshines gold jewelry, however refined; does not lose its name ‘diamond’; and still averts all povert y. Son of the lineage, likewise the 
diamond that is the mind generated in the omniscient, even free from 
effort, outshines all the golden jewelr y that is the good qualities of the 
hearers and solitary realizers; does not lose the name ‘bodhisattva,’ and 
averts all the misfortune s of cyclic existence.” 
 If that mind exists even in someone untrained in conduct, he will be said to be a bodhisattva.  
 Having generated the mind of enlightenment, we are called “a son of the conqueror” and 
outshine all the hearers and solitary realizers. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  also says that as 
soon as we generate the mind of enlightenmen t in our continuum, all the buddhas of the ten 
directions immediately say “In such-and-such a place, such-and-such a person has generated 
the mind of enlightenment and become a son of the conquerors.” Thus, even our 
contaminated, appropriated body aggregate, composed of skin, bones, and flesh and the 
nature of suffering, immediately becomes an obje ct of veneration of all the gods and human 
beings when we generate the mind of enligh tenment. We also become a protector of all 
sentient beings. Due to this, having generated the mind of enlightenment, we outshine the 
hearers and solitary realizers even though they are high in terms of their lineage. It is like, for 
example, when a son of a king is born, even th ough still a baby he is respected and venerated 
by all the older and more learned ministers just because of the fact that he has been born in 
the royal lineage. Similarly, when we generate the mind of enlightenment we become a son of 
the conquerors and come to outshine all the hear ers and solitary realizers by the power of our 
lineage, and not by the power of our knowledge since they may have more knowledge than us.  
 Similarly, even a tiny fragment of a diamond outshines all other precious jewels, and, though small, is still of great value and ca n eliminate poverty. Similarly, bodhichitta 
eliminates the poverty or misfortunes of cyclic  existence since, by means of it, we achieve 
higher qualities and thereby become rich in inner qualities. Therefore, we too need to develop the mind of enlightenment in order to be  able to take care of all sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D It is not sufficient for the Dharma that is entered to be Mahayana and it is necessary to generate the 
mind that is more than mere words  
Therefore, it is not sufficient for the Dharma to be the Dharma of the Great 
Vehicle, rather it is important that th e person has entered the Great Vehicle. 
Whether you become a practitioner of th e Great Vehicle depends on the mind of 
enlightenment itself. If that mind is  nothing more than an intellectual 
understanding, you will be a facsimile of a Great Vehicle practitioner. On the 
other hand, if you have a fully qualified mind [of enlightenment ], you will also 
become a completely pure Great Vehicle practitioner. Therefore, you should strive 
in that. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
487 It is not enough to verbally recite Mahayana or tantra sadhan as without generating the mind 
of enlightenment in order to become a Mahayan a practitioner. Thus, in order to become a 
Mahayanist we must develop the mind of enlightenment from deep within our mind. In 
other words, if we wish to enter the Mahayana, we must generate the mind of enlightenment. 
If we just listen to a few Mahayana teaching s and gain a bit of intellectual understanding 
about the fact that if we generate the mind of enlightenment we will enter the Mahayana, but 
do not actually generate the mind of enligh tenment in our continuum, we will only be a 
facsimile of a Mahayanist. On the other hand, if we generate a fully qualified mind of 
enlightenment, we will become a completely pure Mahayanist. Therefore, we need to put 
effort into generating the mind of enlightenmen t in our continuum since it is not enough just 
to gain a bit of intellectual understanding regardin g it without actually generating it. If that is 
a case, we will only be a Mahayanist in mere words and not a real Mahayanist.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E [The mind of enlightenment] is like a seed since it only gives birth to a buddha  
With respect to this, it says in the Gandavyuha : “Son of the lineage, the mind of 
enlightenment is like the seed of all Dhar ma of the Buddha.” {159} Since certainty 
regarding this must be obtained, it will be explained. 
 
The seed that gives birth to the buddhas is the mind of enlightenment. Thus, this sutra says 
that the mind of enlightenment is the seed of all the Dharma of the Buddha. In other words, 
the mind of enlightenment is the seed that gives rise to buddhahood. Since we must gain 
certainty regarding this, that is, since we mu st understand it, it will be explained. 
 If a seed is health, the sprout that it gives ri se to will also be healthy. On the other hand, if 
the seed is not good, it will give rise to an unhealthy sprout or to no sprout at all. The mind of enlightenment is the seed of all the many g ood qualities of the body, speech, and mind and 
enlightened activities of th e buddhas. Therefore, withou t generating the mind of 
enlightenment we cannot achieve buddhahood , nor will these qualities arise in our 
continuum.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
F The way in which generating the mind [of enlightenment ] is even more fundamental than the view of 
emptiness, etc. for giving birth to a buddha alone 
Since water, manure, heat, soil, etc. act as  a cause for a rice sprout when combined 
with a rice grain, and act as a cause for sp routs of wheat, pulses, and so forth when 
combined with their respective seeds, th ey are common causes. Since a barley seed, 
even though the conditions are gathered to gether, is not suitable as a cause for a 
rice sprout and so forth, it is the un common cause of a barley sprout, while the 
water, manure, and so forth that cooperate with it are [the common cause ] of the 
barley sprout. Similarly, among the causes for a buddha sprout, the mind of 
unsurpassed enlightenment, like the s eed, is the uncommon cause, whereas the 
wisdom realizing emptiness, like the wate r, manure, and so forth, is the common 
cause of the three enlightenments. That  is also why the statement in the  Supreme 
Continuum  “The aspiration to the supreme vehicle is the seed; wisdom is the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
488 mother that gives birth to the Dharma of the Buddha,” says that the aspiration to 
the supreme vehicle is like the father’s s eed and the wisdom realizing selflessness is 
like the mother. For instance, since a Ti betan father cannot beget a son who is 
Indian or Mongolian, the father is the ca use that determines the lineage. On the 
other hand, a Tibetan mother is like th e common cause [presented above] since 
she can give birth to different sons. 
 
Between the mind realizing emptiness and the mind of enlightenment which one is 
fundamental for giving birth to a buddha? It is the mind of enlightenment.  
 Water, manure, heat, and so forth are common causes for sprouts because they are necessary in order for any seed that has been sown in a field to give rise to a sprout. Thus, if water, manure, heat, and so forth are combined  with a wheat seed, a wheat sprout will grow. 
On the other hand, if water, manure, heat, and so forth are combined with a pea, a pea sprout will grow. Therefore, they are common co nditions for the growth of sprouts. On the 
other hand, a barley seed, when it meets these conditions, will bring the unique result of a barley sprout, it will not bring about a rice sp rout, wheat sprout, and so forth. In the same 
way, the mind of enlightenment is the unco mmon cause of buddhahood, whereas the wisdom 
realizing emptiness is the common cause, like wa ter, manure, heat, and so  forth for a seed, of 
the three enlightenments: the small enlightenm ent of hearer foe-destroyers, the middling 
enlightenment of solitary realizer foe-destroye rs, and the great enlightenment of buddhas.  
 The Sublime Continuum  says that the aspiration for the Mahayana is like the father’s seed, 
and the wisdom realizing selflessness is like the mother. For example, the son of a Tibetan 
father and a Mongolian mother is considered to be Tibetan, and likewise the son of a 
Mongolian father and a Tibetan mother is consid ered to be Mongolian. Thus, if a mother has 
five sons with five fathers, one from France, one from Britain, one from China, one from Japan, and one from Italy, then the five sons will respectively be French, British, Chinese, 
Japanese, and Italian! This is because in the pa st the nationality of the mother did not matter 
in determining the nationality of her son. Simila rly it was the custom th at if a couple who had 
two children, one boy and one girl, separated, the mother would take the daughter and the 
father would take the son. Likewise, if th ere was only one daughter, when the couple 
separated the mother would take her, whereas if there was only one son the father would take 
him.  In short, we should strive to generate th e mind of enlightenment! Nothing else matters! 
 Wednesday afternoon, 27 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
G The Great and Lesser Vehicles are also distinguished in terms of conduct, the generation of the mind 
and the like, and are not distinguished in terms of the view 
In praising the perfection of wisdom [with the following verse ], Nagarjuna also 
says that hearers and solitary realizers rely on it: 
 
That definitely relied on by the buddhas, as well as 
The solitary realizers and hearers, The path to liberation, is just one. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
489 Apart from you, there is certainly no other. 
 
That is why the perfection of wisdom is also said to be “the mother.” Since it is the 
mother of the sons of both  the Great and Lesser Vehicles, it is not the wisdom 
realizing emptiness that distinguishes th e Great and Lesser Vehicles. {160} Rather 
it is the mind of enlightenment and the va st conduct that distinguish them. In the 
Precious Garland  they are also taught to not be di fferentiated by the view but to be 
differentiated by the conduct: 
 
How could someone from the Hearers’ Vehicle become a bodhisattva, given that it does not explain the bo dhisattvas’ aspirational prayers and 
their fully dedicated conduct? 
 The Mahayana and Hinayana, th at is, the Great Vehicle and the Lesser Vehicle, are 
differentiated not in terms of the view but in  terms of the mind of enlightenment and the 
bodhisattva conduct. This is because in order to achieve liberation all the buddhas, solitary 
realizers, and hearers rely on the same path, th at is, on the wisdom realizing emptiness. Thus, 
Nagarjuna’s praise to the perfection of wisd om says that the hearers achieve the small 
enlightenment of a hearer foe-destroyer by me ans of the wisdom realizing emptiness, the 
solitary realizers achieve the middling enlighte nment of a solitary realizer foe-destroyer by 
means of the wisdom realizing emptiness, an d the buddhas achieve the great enlightenment 
of buddha by means of the wisdom realizing emptiness. Therefore, the Great Vehicle and 
Lesser Vehicle are distinguished by the genera tion of the mind of enlightenment and the 
bodhisattva conduct of the six perfections and the four means of gathering disciples. Thus, 
they are differentiated by method and not by wisdom.  
 Also Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland  says that the Hinayana script ures do not teach the mind 
of enlightenment nor the bodhisattva conduct of the six perfections and so forth. They only 
contain an explanation of the wisdom realizin g emptiness. Therefore, the Great and Lesser 
Vehicles are not differentiated in terms of the vi ew, the realization of emptiness, but in terms 
of the bodhisattva conduct, that is, the activities of bodhisattv as. What differentiates them is 
the practice or method, that is, the mind of  enlightenment and the practice of the six 
perfections of generosity, morality, patience , joyous effort, concentration, and wisdom. 
Therefore, a Mahayanist or a bodhisattva is on e who engages in practicing them, whereas a 
Hinayanist mainly develops the thought of defi nite emergence and strives to eliminate the 
afflictive obscurations, whereby he abandons the afflictive obscurations and achieves the small 
or middling enlightenment of a foe-destroye r. Thus, generating the wisdom realizing 
emptiness is not sufficient to achieve buddhahood , as the side of method is also necessary. 
Because of this, we need to develop both sides by accumulating the collection of merit and 
the collection of wisdom. With them as a ca use, we will definitely achieve buddhahood.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
H The inappropriateness of not familiarizing oneself mainly with the mind of enlightenment, but rather 
familiarizing oneself with secondary factors other that it 
Therefore, if even the wisdom realizing emptiness is not an uncommon path of the 
Great Vehicle, what need is there to me ntion other paths? For that reason, it 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
490 necessary to train in the mind of enlighte nment, having made instructions on it 
one’s main concern. 
 
Our main object of meditation should be the mind of enlightenment. Thus, if we were to 
focus on other secondary meditations, this wo uld not be right. Even if we meditate on 
emptiness and gain the wisdom realizing emptine ss, this is still not an uncommon path of the 
Mahayana. We need to develop the mind of en lightenment, which is the uncommon path of 
the Mahayana. This should be our main object of  practice, that is, we should train in it. In 
other words, we should transform our mind in to the wish to attain  enlightenment for the 
benefit of all sentient beings. We should generate this mind and then focus on it, whereby we 
will train our mind in the mind of enlightenmen t. Meditation on the mind of enlightenment, 
like meditation on compassion, consists in tran sforming the mind into the entity of the mind 
of enlightenment or compassion. We should stri ve to develop the mind of enlightenment and 
great compassion in our continuum by meditating on them in this way.  
 On the other hand, in the case of meditati on on emptiness, we take emptiness as our 
object of meditation, analyze the lack of inherent  existence, and then focus on this emptiness. 
This meditation is similar to the meditation on deity yoga or impe rmanence. On the other 
hand, when we meditate on definite emergence,  the mind of enlightenment, or compassion, 
we must transform the mind into their very en tity, that is, into an uncontrived mind of 
definite emergence, an uncontrived mind of enlightenment, or uncontrived great compassion. We should train in them in this way and try to generate them in our mind.  
 (Oral transmission 6:30 -7:05 PM, pp. 161-172) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 160) says:  
The explanation of how to genera te the mind of enlightenment 
2B4B-2B3B-2 How to generate this mind 
A The stages of training in the mind of enlightenment 
B The measure of its arisal  
C The way to take it through a ritual 
The second one has three [points]: the stages of training in the mind of 
enlightenment, the measure of its arisal, an d the way to take it through a ritual.  
 
In terms of how to generate the mind of enligh tenment there is a discussion of the stages of 
training in the mind of enlightenment, the me asure of its arisal, and how to adopt it by 
means of ritual. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A The stages of training in the mind of enlightenment 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
491 1 The sevenfold instruction on cause and effect  transmitted from the great Jowo Atisha 
2 The training in dependence on that which occurs in the texts by Shantideva, son of the 
conquerors 
The first is subdivided in two [points] : the sevenfold instruction on cause and 
effect transmitted from the great Jowo Atisha and the training in dependence on 
that which occurs in the texts by Shantideva, son of the conquerors. 
 
There are two lineages regarding the stages of training in the mind of enlightenment: that 
which stems from Jowa Atisha – the sevenfold ca use and effect instruction, that is, the six 
causes and one effect, and that stemming fr om Shantideva – equali zing and exchanging 
oneself with others. The first way has come do wn to us from Buddha Shakyamuni, Maitreya, 
Asanga, and so forth to Atisha, and the second from Buddha Shakyamuni, Manjushri, Nagarjuna, and so forth to Shantideva.   The six causes are: 1. recognizing all sentient beings  as having been our mother; 
2. remembering their kindness, 
3. wishing to repay their kindness, 
4. attracted love – the wish for all mother sentie nt beings to have happiness and the causes of 
happiness, 
5. compassion – the wish for all mother sentient  beings to be free from suffering and the 
causes of suffering; 
6. the extraordinary attitude – the determination to  take the responsibility upon oneself to set 
all sentient beings in happiness and the causes of happiness and to free them from suffering and the causes of suffering. However, although we have made this promise, we are not yet able to do this. Who can do this? Only a buddha can do this.  
These six causes lead to the seventh point, the result: 7. the mind of enlightenment, the wish to attain enlightenment fo r the benefit of all sentient 
beings. 
 Shantideva’s texts, on the other hand, set ou t the disadvantages of self-cherishing and the 
advantages of cherishing others. We examine th em by thinking about them carefully, whereby 
we will generate the wish to exchange these tw o attitudes, that is, to abandon self-cherishing 
and practice cherishing others. Having generated this mind, we then engage in the meditation 
on taking-and-giving. Motivated by great compassi on we take others sufferings upon ourselves, 
and then motivated by love we give them all our happiness. To gether with the inhalation of 
the breath, we image that all th e sufferings, problems, and so fo rth of sentient beings exit 
from their right nostrils in the aspect of black sm oke. It enters our left nostril and descends to 
our heart where there is a heap of black dust in  the nature of the self -cherishing mind. When 
it comes into contact with the black heap, it completely destro ys it. Next, motivated by love 
we imagine giving others our excellent body, our wealth, the roots of virtue we have created in 
the three times. While exhaling through our righ t nostril, we imagine that white light or air 
exits from our right nostril and enters their left nostrils. It fills their bodies, whereby they experience happiness and receive whatever they n eed. In this way, we should train in giving-
and-taking combined with the inhalation and exhalation of the breath, whereby we abandon 
our self-cherishing and practice cherishing others . This will lead to a co mplete change in our 
present mental attitude, that is, we will give up cherishing ourselves and develop the attitude 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
492 of cherishing others. In this manner we will develop the extraordinary attitude and then, as a 
result, the mind of enlightenment. In this case the mind of enlightenment that is developed is 
said to be even stronger than that developed by means of the sevenfold instruction on cause 
and effect in that we wish to attain enlightenmen t in order to liberate all sentient beings from 
suffering and set them in the state of happiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
The way to train the mind by means of the sevenfold instruction on cause and effect 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1 The sevenfold instruction on caus e and effect transmitted from the great Jowo 
Atisha 
A Short presentation  
B Extensive explanation 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1A Short presentation  
The sevenfold cause and effect is the seven: 
1. a complete buddha is born from the mind of enlightenment;  
2. this mind from the extraordinary attitude;  
3. this attitude from compassion;  
4. compassion from love;  
5. love from the wish to repay the kindness; 
6. the wish to repay the kindness from remembering the kindness; and  
7. remembering the kindness from seeing them as one's mother. 
 
A complete buddha arises from the mind of enli ghtenment, the mind of enlightenment arises 
from the extraordinary attitude, the extraordinar y attitude arises from great compassion, great 
compassion arises from attracted love, attrac ted love arises from the wish to repay the 
kindness, the wish to repay the kindness arises from remembering the kindness of all sentient 
beings, and remembering their kindness arises from recognizing that all sentient beings have 
been our mother. Here the seven points are set ou t in the reverse order, whereas usually it is 
said that we need to: 
1. recognize all sentient beings as having been our mothers,  
2. remember their kindness,  
3. develop the wish to repay their kindness,  
4. repay their kindness by developing love and compassion,  
5. generate the extraordinary attitude wishing to ta ke the responsibility of setting all sentient 
beings in happiness and the causes of happine ss and freeing them from suffering and the 
causes of suffering,  
6. generate the mind of enlightenment, and  
7. become a buddha.  
 Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B Extensive explanation 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
493 1 Generating certainty concerning the stages  
2 The actual gradual training  
There are two [points]: Generating certai nty concerning the stages and {161} the 
actual gradual training  
 
We need to generate certainty regarding the st ages and then actual train in them gradually. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1 Generating certainty concerning the stages 
A Demonstrating that compassion is the root of the Great Vehicle 
B The way in which the other causes and effects become causes and effects of that 
[compassion ] 
The first one has two [points]: demonstratin g that compassion is the root of the 
Great Vehicle and the way in which the ot her causes and effects become causes 
and effects of that [compassion ].  
 
The root of the Mahayana is grea t compassion. Why is that? It is because in order to become a 
Mahayanist we need to develop the mind of en lightenment (bodhichitta), and in order to 
develop the mind of enlightenment we need to  develop its main cause – great compassion. 
Due to this, compassion is said to  be the root of the Mahayana. It  is also said to be important 
at the beginning, in the middle, and at the end.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A Demonstrating that compassion is the root of the Great Vehicle 
1 The importance [of compassion] at the beginning 
2 The importance [of compassion] in the middle 
3 The importance [of compassion] at the end 
The first has three [points]: the importan ce [of compassion] at the beginning, the 
importance [of compassion] in the middle,  and the importance [of compassion] at 
the end. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A1 The importance [of compassion] at the beginning 
A The responsibility for liberating migrating beings depends upon [compassion ] 
First: When the mind is moved by great compassion, one will definitely resolve to 
get all sentient beings out of cyclic exis t e n c e .  H o w e v e r ,  i f  one’s compassion is 
inferior, deeds that accord with that will  not come about. Therefore, whether you 
take responsibility for liberating all migrating beings without exception depends on 
that, and, if you do not take that re sponsibility, you will not enter the Great 
Vehicle. That is why compassion  is important at the beginning. 
 
The cause for taking the responsibility to libe rate all migrating beings upon ourselves is 
compassion. Thus, when the mind is moved by compassion, we will definitely determine to 
liberate all sentient beings from suffering, that is , to get them out of cycl ic existence. We need 
to make such a promise or determination. On the other hand, if our compassion is weak or 
inferior, our determination to do this will al so be weak and there will be little resulting 
activity. Thus, a strong determination to liberate  all sentient beings from cyclic existence has 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
494 great compassion as its cause. If we do not genera te the wish to take care of all sentient beings, 
we will not enter the Mahayana and we will no t be included among Mahayanists. Therefore, 
compassion is important at the beginning du e to being the main cause of the mind of 
enlightenment. For this reason, we need to ge nerate great compassion at the beginning in 
order to enter the Mahayana path. We need to un derstand this and to strive to generate the 
wish to develop the mind of enlightenment and for this purpose to develop great compassion. 
Hence, we should train in great compassion – the attitude that wishes all sentient beings to be 
free from suffering and the causes of suffering. We must try to develop this attitude in our 
heart and maintain it strongly. To do so, we n eed to transform our mind into the very entity 
of great compassion. At this time the only mind that is manifest is great compassion. We need 
to strive to develop such a mind.  
 Thursday morning, 28 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 161) says:  
B [Compassion ] is the preliminary of all the paths of the Great Vehicle 
In the Akshayamati Nirdesa Sutra  it says:  
 
“Venerable son of Sharadvati, more over the great compassion of the 
bodhisattvas is inexhaustible. Why is that? It is because it is a 
preliminary. Venerable son of Sharadvati, it is like this. For example, 
just as the inward and outward flow of the breath is a preliminary for 
the human life-force faculty, like wise the great compassion of the 
bodhisattvas is a preliminary for perfectly accomplishing the Mahayana.” 
 Great compassion is a preliminary for all the paths of Mahayana. This was explained by the 
Buddha in the Akshayamati Nirdesa Sutra  in which he says that th e great compassion of the 
bodhisattvas is inexhaustible because it is a prel iminary, that is, it is a preliminary for all the 
paths of the Mahayana. For example, when we  develop the mind of enlightenment in our 
continuum we become a Mahayanist or Mahayana  practitioner. However, prior to this we 
need to develop great compassion, its main ca use. Therefore, all th e Mahayana paths – the 
path of accumulation, path of pr eparation, path of seeing, path of meditation, and path of no-
more-learning – must be preceded by the develo pment of compassion. For example, just as in 
order to inhale and exhale it is necessary to firs t have the life-force faculty as without it there 
will be no inhalation and exhalation of the brea th, likewise in order to achieve the qualities of 
the Mahayana we first need to develop great compassion. Great compassion is the basis for 
the Mahayana. Just as there cannot be a child without a mother, since a father alone cannot 
give birth to a child, so too there cannot be the Mahayana without great compassion.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
  
C [Compassion ] is the beginning of the conduct of bodhisattvas 
In the Gavagori [Sutra]  it says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
495  
“Manjushri, what is the beginning of the conduct of bodhisattvas. 
What is its domain?” Manjushri replied: “Son of the gods, the 
beginning of the conduct of bodhis attvas is great compassion. Its 
domain is sentient beings.” 
 
Gavagori is perhaps the name of a mounta in near Bodhgaya. In this sutra Buddha 
Shakyamuni asks Manjushri “What is the beginni ng of all the conduct of the bodhisattvas 
and what is domain?” Manjushri replied that th e beginning is great compassion because it is 
due to great compassion that we engage in the six perfections in order to ripen our own 
continuum and engage in the four means of gathering disciples in order to ripen other 
sentient beings’ continua. The four means of ga thering disciples are giving material things, 
talking nicely, giving teachings, and acting in  accordance with what one teaches. Having 
developed great compassion, we take other sent ient beings as our object or domain. For 
example, in order to practice generosity we n eed other sentient beings to receive our gifts. 
Likewise, the practice of morality also depends on other sentient beings, as does the practice 
of patience. In this way all the bodhisattva cond uct depends on other sentient beings. In this 
sense sentient beings are the domain of grea t compassion. By practicing the bodhisattva 
conduct we develop our inner qualities more and more.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A2 The importance [of compassion] in the middle 
A If one does not cultivate co mpassion again and again, one will fa ll into the Hinayana  
Second: Although having generated a mind like that one time you enter the Great 
Vehicle, if you become discouraged upon seeing  
1. the great number of sentient beings and their bad actions,{162}  
2. the great difficulty of the trainings,  
3. the need to do them for a boundlessn ess and also limitless time scale,  
you will fall into the Lesser Vehicle.  
 
If we do not continually meditate on great compa ssion there is the risk of that we will fall into 
the Hinayana path. Even thou gh we have generated the mind of enlightenment and are 
engaging in the bodhisattva conduct, there is th e danger that due to th inking about the great 
number of sentient beings, many of whom are bad or evil, thinking that the trainings are 
difficult, and thinking that they  need to be done for a long time, we become discouraged, 
thinking that we are unable to practice the bodhisattva conduct, and give up the mind of 
enlightenment.  
 It is recounted that Buddha Shakyamuni had a disciple who could have achieved the state 
of a foe-destroyer if he had been given teachings on the Hinayana path. However, Manjushri 
gave him teachings on the profound path, after which this disciple criticized the Mahayana. 
Due to this, when he died, he was reborn in th e hell realm. Seeing with his clairvoyance that 
this would happen, Shariputra said to the Buddha, “Today Manjushri committed a very grave 
error. If I had taught this disciple, he woul d have attained the state of a foe-destroyer. 
However, Manjushri taught him profound empt iness due to which he will criticize the 
Mahayana through generating the view of an extr eme that holds that if things do not exist 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
496 inherently they do not exist at  a l l .  B e c a u s e  o f  t h i s ,  h e  w i l l  b e  r e b o r n  i n  t h e  h e l l  r e a l m . ”  
Buddha Shakyamuni replied, “Shariputra, pay atte ntion to me. Manjushri is very skilled in 
teaching others, whereas you are not. Even thou gh that person will take rebirth in the hell 
realm due to Manjushri having taught him th e profound, he will not stay there long and 
when he is once again reborn as a human being he will achieve the higher realizations of the 
Mahayana due to having heard the Mahayana te achings and having these imprints on his 
mind. He will quickly attain the seventh ground  of a bodhisattva. On the other hand, if you 
had taught him, he would have achieved the state of a Hinayana foe-destroyer and remained 
in meditative absorption for eons, whereby he  would have taken much longer to achieve 
buddhahood.” 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B One does not despair with respect to others’  welfare and easily completes the collections 
Due to having familiarized increasingly  with great compa ssion rather than 
generating it just once, you will not look at your own happiness and suffering and 
will not despair with respect to the welfar e of others. Due to that, you will easily 
complete all the collections. 
 Having generated great compassion and the mind of enlightenment, we need to continue to 
familiarize with them in order to make them st ronger and stronger. If we do this, we will not 
look at our own happiness and suffering but will  o n l y  w i s h  t o  t a k e  c a r e  o f  o t h e r  s e n t i e n t  
beings. In that way we will easily complete the two collections of merit and wisdom, whereby we will quickly achieve buddhahood. For this reas on, great compassion is also important in 
the middle of our practice. For example, when we  sow a seed in the ground, at the beginning 
we need a good seed and in the middle we need water, manure, heat, and so forth in order to 
bring the result of crops. Compassion is like the seed as well as the water and so forth since it 
is also necessary in the beginning and in  the middle in order to bring a result. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3 The importance [of compassion] at the end 
A The actual importance at the end 
B In particular, the advice to make the mind of enlightenment the focus of the instructions 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3A The actual importance at the end 
1 [Difference between buddhas and hearers]  
Third: The fact that, even when the buddhas have achieved their result, they do 
not abide in peace like the Hinayanists but enact the welfare of however many 
sentient beings there are throughout spac e, is also due to the power of their 
compassion, for, without it, they would become like hearers. 
 
Compassion is also important at the end, that  is, even once we have  achieved buddhahood. 
Why is this? It is because when the buddhas attain their result, buddhahood, they do not 
abide absorbed in the state of solitary peac e but instead, by the power of their great 
compassion, they enact the welf are of however many sentient beings there are throughout 
space. If the buddhas, on the other hand, did not possess this great compassion, they would 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
497 be like Hinayana hearers who abide absorbed in solitary peace. The Treasury of Manifest 
Dharma  says that the buddhas out of compassion look upon all sentient beings during the 
three parts of the day and the th ree parts of the night, examining who is ready to be ripened. 
Then, when they see sentient beings who are re ady to be ripened, they send emanations to 
teach them the Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 All three external analogies symbolize compassion alone 
Glorious Chandrakirti said: “For the harves t, what is important in the beginning is 
the seed, in the middle the water, and in the end the maturation. Likewise, for the 
harvest of buddhahood, what is important in the beginning, the end, and in the 
middle is compassion.”  
 
In order to reap a harvest, in the beginning good seeds are necessary, in the middle water is 
necessary, and in the end the mature crops. In  a similar way, for buddhahood, compassion is 
important in the beginning, middle, and end. Th is is was is said by Chandrakirti at the 
beginning of his Supplement to the Middle Way  w h e n  h e  c h o o s e s  t o  p a y  h o m a g e  t o  g r e a t  
compassion although there are many other possi ble objects of veneration. Why does he do 
this? He chooses to prostrate to great comp assion prior to composing his text because 
compassion is important at the beginni ng, in the middle, and at the end. 
 
STUDENT : Is it correct to also have compassion fo r ourselves? I think that it depends on the 
person, whereby it would not be correct for a Mahayana practitioner who is developing 
bodhichitta and guarding the bodhisattva vows.  It also would not be right for a tantric 
practitioner who should have the di vine pride of being the deity.  
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : When we generate ourselves as the deity, we need to have the clear 
appearance of ourselves as the deity and the divine pride that thin ks “I am the deity.” 
However, this does not contradict the Mahayana , as compassion is the basis of all Mahayana 
qualities. When we practice tantra, we need the mind of enlightenment as a motivation, and 
this is produced by great compassion. Theref ore, even tantric practitioners who generate 
divine pride must take care of themselves as well as others. If we do not take care of ourselves, 
we will experience problems such as sickness and may even die, whereupon we will not be 
able to do anything for anyone anymore. While we need to take care of ourselves, we should 
still think to eat healthy food in order to be able  to take care of other sentient beings. If, by 
doing this, we achieve the state of a buddha, for example, Tara , we will then be in a much 
better position to help other sentient  beings. I think it is like this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3B In particular, the advice to make the mind of enlightenment the focus of the instructions 
1 The need to make it the essence of one’s practice 
Shang Nachung Tonpa said: “Although I aske d Jowo [Atisha] for oral instructions, 
nothing came of it other than: ‘Abandon worldly thought. Cultivate the mind of 
enlightenment!’” Geshe Tonpa derided him and said: “You got the central point 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
498 of Jowo’s oral instructions! He unders tands the key point of the teaching, the 
Dharma.”  
 
Atisha told Shang Nachung (Small Nose) to gi ve up the eight worldly dharmas or concerns 
and to cultivate the mind of enlightenment.  Shang Nachung asked Geshe Drom Tonpa why 
Atisha had given him this response. Geshe Drom  Tonpa told him that he had received the 
central point of Atisha’s oral instructions as  Atisha had understood the key point of the 
Dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Since it is difficult to gain certainty [about this], it  is necessary to rely on accumulation, purification, 
and the scriptures 
As it is also difficult to gain certainty about this, you must accumulate and purify 
again and again and seek firm certainty th rough studying the scriptures, such as 
the Gandavyuha  and others, and the commentaries on them. It is as Glorious 
Ashvagosha says [referring to the Buddha]: 
 
“Your exalted mind is precious, The seed of complete enlightenment; 
Only you, heroic one, know  it to be the essence. 
{163} Other beings do not guess that.” 
 
Since it is difficult to gain certainty with resp ect to the importance of compassion, we need to 
accumulate merit, purify our negativities and obscurations, and study and read the scriptures 
of the Buddha, such as the Gandavyuha Sutra  and others, and the co mmentaries on them. By 
doing this, we will gain this certainty.  
 Ashvagosha was also called “Trusting Father ” and “Trusting Mother” because he listened 
to whatever his father and mother advised. In  this verse he says that Buddha Shakyamuni’s 
exalted mind, the mind of enlightenment, is a precious jewel and the seed of complete 
enlightenment, and that only the Buddha, the he roic one, understands it  to be the essence, 
whereas other beings do not. As hvagosha is the author of the Jataka Tales , that is, the Life 
Stories of the Buddha , as well as many beautiful poems that contain many analogies.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B The way in which other caus es and effects become causes and effects of 
compassion  
1 The way in which the understanding as mothers through love are causes 
2 The way in which the extraordinary attitude and generation of the mind [of enlightenment] 
are effects 
With respect to the second there ar e two [points]: the way in which the 
understanding as mothers through love are causes, and the way in which the 
extraordinary attitude and generation of the mind [of enlightenment] are effects. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B1 The way in which the understanding as mothers through love are causes 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
499 A How to develop the intense wish to free sentient beings from suffering  
First: If you think again and again about th e suffering of a sentient being, this will 
generally give rise to the mere wish that it be free from suffering. However, for this 
mind to arise easily and for it to arise as ve ry strong and stable, to start with it must 
be a sentient being who has the aspect of being attractive and valuable. For, when 
suffering arises for someone close to us, we cannot bear it; when suffering arises 
for our enemies, we enjoy it; and when su ffering arises for someone who is neither 
a friend nor an enemy mainly an equanimity that neglects him arises.  
 The four steps of recognizing all sentient beings as having been our mother, remembering their kindness, generating the wish to repay their kindness, and repaying their kindness by 
developing love for them are said to be causes , whereas the last two steps – the extraordinary 
attitude and the mind of enlightenment – are sa id to be results. However, usually there are 
said to be six causes and on e effect. The six causes are: 
recognizing all sentient beings as having been our mother,  
remembering their kindness generating the wish to repay their kindness,  developing love for them, developing compassion for them, and developing the extraordinary attitude. The seventh, the effect, is the mind of enligh tenment. However, in this context both the 
extraordinary attitude and the mind of en lightenment are said to be effects.  
 We need to generate a strong determination to free all sentient beings from suffering. To 
do this, we need to think again and again about the fact that all sentient beings are suffering. 
To meditate on this one time is not enough, it  has to be done again and again. However, for 
this mind to arise easily and to be strong and stable, we first need to see all sentient beings as attractive and nice, whereby we will develop love for them and want to take care of them and cherish them. For example, when we see that our friends and relatives are suffering, we too 
suffer and are unable to bear it. On the ot her hand, when we see that our enemies are 
suffering, we are happy and rejoice. when we see that strangers are suffering, we remain 
indifferent or equanimous. Due to this, we firs t need to develop equanimity, not only with 
respect to strangers, but also  with respect to our friends and enemies. By developing 
equanimity, we will come to see all sentient beings  as equal. Then on this basis, we can begin 
to think that all sentient beings have been ou r relatives, such as our mother, father, and so 
forth. We should see all sentient beings as having been like our beloved mother of this life, or our father, sister, brother, grandfather, gr andmother, and so forth. Then, we should 
remember their kindness. Having seen their kindne ss, we should develop the wish to repay it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The difference of generating or not generating attraction toward friends, enemies, and the in between 
Regarding that, since the former is attrac tive to our mind, the more we cherish 
him, the more his suffering will be unbearable to us, and the more [compassion ] 
will arise for him. If we cherish him littl e or middling, our inability to bear [his 
suffering] will also be small. On the other hand, if we cherish someone very much, 
we are not able to bear it at all when he  meets with only slight suffering. When we 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
500 see our enemy suffering, not only does the wi sh that he be free from it not arise, 
but rather the thought occurs to us “May [his suffering ] become greater and may 
he not be free from it.” That is our re action to someone we find unattractive. 
Moreover, Our joy at his suffering will al so be greater or smaller depending on 
how unattractive he is. With respect to the suffering of someone who is neither a 
friend nor an enemy, it is neither that we are unable to bear it nor that we enjoy it. 
That is our reaction when someone is neither attractive nor unattractive.  
 
When we see a dear friend or relative suffering, we are unable to bear it and think about what we can do to help him or her. On the other hand , when they are happy, we rejoice in this and 
are also happy ourselves. On the other hand, when we see our enemies suffering, we enjoy it and wish them even more suffering  and do not wish them to be free from their suffering. This 
happens due to familiarity with hatred for enem ies, whereas for our friends and relatives we 
are familiar with attachment. Due to them, thes e two different attitudes arise. When we see 
strangers suffer, neither are we unable to bear it nor do we rejoice in it. This is because we do 
not have either a feeling of closeness or dist ance with respect to them. We do not care 
whether they are happy or suffering. This is du e to ignorance. Thus, th e three mental poisons 
produce different attitudes in our mind. We need  to recognize them and to understand that 
these three always make problems for us. For exampl e, in this life they make us unable to bear 
the suffering of our relatives and rejoice in the suffering of our enemies. We need to examine these attitudes in our own mind and see how they arise when the three mental poisons, 
attachment, hatred, and ignorance, overcome ou r mind. When they aris e, we need to apply 
their respectively antidotes. For example, when attachment arises we need to meditate on the 
object of attachment as having the aspect of ugliness; when hatred arises we need to meditate on love; and when ignorance arises we need to meditate on dependent-arising. In this way our 
mental poisons will initially diminish and th en, by continuing to meditate on dependent-
arising, we will come to understand the emptine ss of inherent existence we will be able to cut 
the root of the mental poison s. Thus, the meditation on em ptiness is the main antidote. 
Since all the afflictions have ignorance as thei r root, when we cut ignorance we also put an 
end to all the other afflictions, such as attach ment, hatred, and so forth. Therefore, in our 
daily life we need to examine our own mind and not others. We should take care of ourselves 
in this way.  Thursday afternoon, 28 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 163) says:  
C How to generate great love and great compassion by establishing them as greatly attractive by means 
of the three – recognizing them as our mothers, remembering their kindness, and wishing to repay it  
If this is done, meditating on sentient bein gs as our relatives is for the sake of {164} 
making them attractive to us. However, si nce the absolute of our relatives is our 
mother, the three – meditating on them as having been our mother, remembering 
their kindness, and wishing to repay this kindness – establishes them as dear and 
attractive. The love that holds sentient beings as delightful as an only child is the effect of these three. It produces compassion. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
501 In order to generate love we need to see al l sentient beings as having been our mother, 
remember their kindness, and wish to repay this  kindness. When these are strong, all sentient 
beings will appear as attractive, whereby we will generate love for them. Therefore, by 
meditating on all sentient beings as having been  our relatives or friends, we come to see them 
as being attractive and close to us. However, si nce the person closest to us is our mother, we 
try to see all sentient beings as having been  our mother and then remember their kindness 
and wish to repay their kindness. By doing this we  will see them as attractive and thereby wish 
to take care of and cherish them. For example, if a mother has an only child, she will have 
great love for it and only think about how she can take care of it and nourish it. Similarly, we 
too need to see sentient beings as if they were our only child and wish to take care of them. 
Of course, not all parents treat an  only child or their children in the same way, but the point 
is to see all sentient beings as attractive and nice, whereby we generate love for them. In this 
way, love is the result of the three: recognizing all sentient beings as having been our mother, remembering their kindness, and wishing to repay their kindness. 
 Great love produces great compassion – the wish that all sentient beings be free from 
suffering. Due to the arisal of love, we will wish to take care of sentient beings.  
 Middle Lam-Rim says:  
D With respect to mere love and compassion it is not certain which is the cause and which is the effect 
With respect to the love that wishes th em to meet with happiness and compassion, 
there does not seem to be any certainty as to which on e is the cause and which one 
is the effect.  
 
Love is the wish that all sentient beings meet  with happiness and compa ssion is the wish that 
all sentient beings be free from suffering. With re spect to mere love and mere compassion it is 
not certain which one is the cause and which one is the effect. Sometimes we generate 
compassion for someone and this produces love, and sometimes we generate love for 
someone and then this produces compassion. Ther efore, the order is not certain as to which 
one comes before the other.   Middle Lam-Rim says:  
E Whose system are these instructions  
To meditate on sentient beings as our re latives as the cause producing the mind [of 
enlightenment] has been explained by Acharya Chandrakirti, Venerable Chandra, 
and Acharya Kamalashila. 
 
In order to generate compassion we need to me ditate on all sentient beings as having been 
our close relatives. The system of these instructions comes to us from Acharya Chandrakirti, 
Venerable Chandra, and Acharya Kamalashil a. Chandrakirti mentions this in his Supplement 
to the Middle Way , Venerable Chandra in a text whose name I do not remember, and 
Kamalashila in his Stages of Meditation . Chandrakirti says that we need to develop compassion 
for all sentient beings and to do this we need  t o  s e e  a l l  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  a s  c l o s e  f a m i l y  
members. In order to develop the conventional mind of enlightenment we need its causes – 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
502 love and compassion. Love means to see all sentient  beings in an attractive aspect or as a close 
relative or friend.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2 The manner in which the extraordinary attitude and the generation of the 
mind [of enlightenment] are effects 
A Doubt 
B Response 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2A Doubt 
Second: It should really be sufficient if, compassion having arisen due to having 
gradually trained the mind, the wish arises  to attain enlightenment for the welfare 
of all sentient beings. So why is the extr aordinary attitude inserted between them?  
 
Someone thinks that when we generate compassi on by meditating, after that we will generate 
the mind of enlightenment that wishes to atta in enlightenment for the welfare of sentient 
beings. Based on this he asks why is it necessa ry to generate the extraordinary attitude in 
between compassion and the mind of enlightenmen t. In other words, this person doubts that 
the extraordinary attitude is necessary in that great compassion alone should be sufficient to 
induce the mind of enlightenment.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2B Response 
1 Although there is immeasurable compassion, there may not be the extraordinary attitude that takes 
the responsibility upon oneself 
Although hearers and solitary realizers also have the immeasurable love and 
compassion that thinks, “If only sentient  beings were to meet with happiness and 
were free from suffering!,” still, those who are not Mahayanists do not take the 
responsibility to accomplish happiness for al l sentient beings and to eliminate their 
suffering. Therefore, it is necessary to generate the extraordinary attitude, the 
special attitude of those with courageous hearts. You should understand this from 
a quotation of the Sutra Requested by Sagaramati in the commentary on the 
Uttaratantra.  
 
Although hearers and solitary realizers have i mmeasurable love and compassion they do not 
take upon themselves the responsibility for all sentient beings. For example, although 
immeasurable compassion observes immeasurable sentient beings and wishes them to be free from suffering, it does not think “I myself will accept the responsibility to free them from 
suffering.” Thus, although the lo ve that wishes that sentient beings meet with happiness and 
the compassion that wishes them to be free from  suffering also exist in hearers and solitary 
realizers, they alone are not sufficient. We need to have a much stronger thought, that is, we 
need to not only wish them happiness and freedom  from suffering but in addition we need to 
take the responsibility upon ourselves to acco mplish this. Therefore, in addition to great 
compassion we need to generate the extraordin ary attitude. This is mentioned in a citation 
from the Sutra Requested by Sagaramati  in the commentary on the Uttaratantra . We need the 
strong compassion that takes upon our shoulders the responsibility to set all sentient beings 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
503 in happiness and free them from suffering. When th is attitude is strong, it produces the mind 
of enlightenment that wishes to attain enligh tenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. 
Therefore, between compassion and the mind  of enlightenment, one extra cause, the 
extraordinary attitude, is necessary.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How the extraordinary attitude induces the generation of the mind [of enlightenment ] 
Once the mind of freeing sentient beings has arisen in this manner, owing to your 
current situation you could not complete even the welfare of one sentient being. 
Not only that, even if you were to atta in the state of the two [kinds of] foe-
destroyer, {165} you would only be able [to complete the welfare ] o f  v e r y  f e w  
beings and their welfare would be to me rely accomplish liberation. Since they 
cannot set them in omniscience, who co uld complete the temporary and final 
welfare of limitless sentient beings? If yo u reflect in this vein, having come to 
understand that only a buddha is able to do this, you will generate the wish to 
attain buddhahood for the we lfare of sentient beings. 
 
How does the extraordinary attitude induce th e mind of enlightenment? Having generated 
the extraordinary attitude, the thought to take the responsibility to free all sentient beings 
from suffering and set them in happiness, we th en realize that at the moment we are unable 
to achieve this. In fact we are not even able to accomplish the complete welfare of a single 
sentient being. Then, even if we were to attain the state of a hearer foe- destroyer or a solitary 
realizer foe-destroyer, still we would only be a b l e  t o  h e l p  a  f e w  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  t o  a c h i e v e  
liberation, but we would not be able to set all sentient beings in the state of omniscience. 
Therefore, who is it that can do this? Who can fulfill the te mporary and final aims of all 
s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s ?  W e  s h o u l d  s e a r c h  f o r  t h i s  p e r s o n  u n t i l  w e  c o m e  t o  r e a l i z e  t h a t  o n l y  a  complete buddha is able to do this. Therefore, th inking that only buddhas are able to do this, 
we should generate the wish to achieve buddhah ood for the benefit of all sentient beings. In 
this way we generate the mind of enlightenmen t. We think “First I will attain enlightenment 
for the benefit of all sentient beings.” Thus, we  generate the mind of enlightenment. By doing 
so, we will be able to help all sentient beings. Therefore, we must strive to generate 
bodhichitta. Chitta  means primary mind, bodhi  means enlightenment. Bodhichitta is a 
primary mind that is concomitant with the caus al aspiration to attain enlightenment and the 
accompanying aspiration to free all sentient be ings from suffering. Therefore, there are two 
aspirations: the aspiration to attain enligh tenment oneself and the aspiration to free all 
sentient beings from suffering and set them in  nirvana, the state gone beyond suffering. The 
final welfare of sentient beings is the achiev ement of enlightenment or non-abiding nirvana, 
in which one does not abide either in cyclic exis tence or in solitary peac e. We need to set all 
sentient beings in this state and thereby fulfill their welfare.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2 The actual gradual training 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
504 A Training the mind to strive for the welfare of others 
B Training the mind to strive for enlightenment 
C The result of the training: identifying the generation of the mind [of enlightenment] 
The second – the actual gradual training – has three [points]: training the mind to 
strive for the welfare of others, training the mind to strive for enlightenment, and 
the result of the training: identify ing the generation of the mind [of 
enlightenment]. 
 
We need to train the mind in striving to enact the welfare of others, train the mind in striving 
for enlightenment, and recognize the result of tr aining which is the mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A Training the mind to strive for the welfare of others 
1 Laying the foundation for generating this mind 
2 Actual generation of that mind 
Concerning the first there are two [points: ] Laying the foundation for generating 
this mind and actual generation of that mind.  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1 Laying the foundation for generating this mind 
A Producing an equanimous mind toward sentient beings  B Establishing them all in having an attractive aspect 
The first has two [points]: Producing an eq uanimous mind toward sentient beings 
and establishing them all in having an attractive aspect. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A Producing an equanim ous mind toward sentient beings 
1 The preparatory steps 
2 How to meditate on equanimity 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A-1 The preparatory steps 
First: The preparatory steps etc. as expl ained before in the context of small and 
middling beings should also be adopted and sustained here. 
 
First we need to train our mind to strive to enac t the welfare of others. To do this we need to 
establish or lay the basis or foundation for genera ting this mind and then we need to actually 
generate this mind. To establish the basis mean s to develop equanimity toward all sentient 
beings by looking at them without attachment and anger. There are many reasons to see all 
sentient beings as equal. There are reasons fr om our own side and reasons from the side of 
others. By seeing all sentient beings as attracti ve, we generate love for them. To do this, there 
are the preparatory steps that which were al ready explained in the context of small and 
middling beings. Since they have already been ex plained, we will not go into detail about 
t h e m  h e r e .  H o w e v e r ,  i n  b r i e f ,  f i r s t  w e  n e e d  t o  r e l y  o n  a  t e a c h e r .  T o  d o  s o ,  w e  n e e d  t o  
understand what kind of qualities he needs and what kind of qualities we, the disciples, need. 
Having found a qualified teacher, we should rely  on him in thought and action by generating 
respect for him and so forth. Then we need to meditate on the precious human rebirth 
possessing eighteen qualities, the fact that we  have obtained it now, that it is highly 
meaningful, and that it can quickly be lost . We then meditate on death-impermanence 
thinking about the fact that death is certain, th e time of death is uncertain, and at the time 
only the Dharma will help us. Having died, we  will have to take rebirth in either the bad 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
505 migrations or the happy migrations. Seeking protec tion from suffering, we go for refuge to the 
Three Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. Having done so, we need to abide by the 
respectively trainings and also guard the law of ca use and effect. If, in spite of our efforts, we 
create non-virtuous actions, we need to pu rify them immediately by applying the four 
opponent powers. This is brief overview of the path of small beings. 
  In the context of the path of middling beings , we meditate on true sufferings, for example, 
the eight, six, and three types of sufferings th at occur even in the higher realms. Then we 
meditate on their causes, true origins, which are actions and afflictions. Actions have the 
afflictions as their causal motivation, whereas th e time motivation can be either virtuous or 
non-virtuous whereby our actions of body and speech become respectively virtuous or non-
virtuous. Then we reflect on the fact that we must eliminate the cause of true sufferings and 
achieve true cessations of suffering. How can we achieve them? By meditating on true paths. 
To do so, we need to train in the three high er trainings of morality, concentration, and 
wisdom. Among them, morality is the basis of concentration and wisdom. By training in the 
three higher trainings we can achieve the small enlightenment of a hearer foe-destroyer or the 
middling enlightenment of a solitary realizer foe-destroyer. In both cases we achieve the 
abandonment of the afflictive obscurations wh ereby we ourselves are liberated from cyclic 
existence. However, this alone is not enough in that we have neither accomplished our own 
complete welfare nor have we accomplished others ’ welfare. Therefore, seeing its qualities, we 
must enter the Mahayana path.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A-2 How to meditate on equanimity 
A The need for an equanimous mind by stopping attachment and hatred  
To start with, if you do not accomplish an  equanimous mind by stopping the bias 
of attachment toward some sentient beings  and hatred toward others, any love and 
compassion that arise will be generated to gether with partiality. As this does not 
occur if you observe them without partiali ty, you should meditate on equanimity. 
 
We need to equalize sentient beings in our mi nd because at the moment we have attachment 
to some, our friends and relatives, and hatred for others, our enemies. We need to stop the 
attachment and hatred that make  us biased due to which we think “my side” and “the other 
side.” If we do not have an equanimous mind toward sentient beings, we will not be able to generate love and compassion for all of them .  O r ,  e v e n  i f  w e  g e n e r a t e  s o m e  l o v e  a n d  
compassion for them, it will not be actual love and compassion as it will be biased. To have 
love and compassion only for those on our own side is not enough. Since we need to 
completely eliminate our biased attitude, we need to meditate on equanimity.   There are different kinds of equanimity, for example, the equanimity that is a feeling, 
which is between happy feeling and suffering feelin g. This equanimity is not what we need to 
develop here. There is also an equanimity that  is a compositional factor, but the equanimity 
of this context is also not this equanimity. Here  we need to develop the equanimity that sees 
all sentient beings as not different and has the same attitude towa rd all of them. This 
equanimity does not divide people into friends, enemies, and strangers but sees all of them as 
equal. We need this kind of equanimous mi nd. We should meditate on it in order to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
506 eliminate attachment for friends, hatred for en emies, and ignorance for strangers, whereby we 
will come to see all sentient beings in the same way.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B What kind of equanimity needs to be meditated 
Among the two types of equanimous minds that have been taught, one that has 
the aspect of establishing sentient beings  as lacking mental afflictions, such as 
attachment, hatred, and so forth, and one in which oneself is free from attachment 
and hatred towards sentient beings, here it is the latter. 
 
There are two types of equanimity. The first has the aspect of establishing all other sentient beings in freedom from attachm ent and hatred, however this is not the equanimity of this 
context. Rather it is the second type, the equa nimity in which we ourselves have eliminated 
attachment for some sentient beings and hatred fo r others. We need this attitude that is equal 
toward all sentient beings. Hence, the thought “How nice it would be if all sentient beings were to abide in equanimity free from attachment  for the close and hatred  for the distant” is 
not the equanimity here. Rather we ourselves have  to take all sentient beings as our observed 
object and, by freeing our mind from attachment and hatred, come to see all sentient beings as equal whereby we come to have the same a ttitude toward them. This is the attitude in 
which we need to train.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C  The order of the meditation 
Since this is the order of meditation by which it will easily arise, initially you 
should take a person who has neither done you harm or benefit as your object of 
meditation, {166} and, through eliminatin g attachment and anger, accomplish an 
equanimous mind. When you have accomplished an equanimous mind toward 
that [person], you then need to accomplish an equanimous mind with respect to 
friends and relatives. A non-equanimous mind  toward them is to be biased due to 
attachment and hatred or to not be equanimous due to lesser or greater 
attachment. When you are equanimous toward that [person], you should cultivate 
an equanimous mind toward your enemies. The lack of equanimity toward them is 
due to hatred that derives from seeing them as totally incompatible [with yourself]. 
Having become equanimous toward them, you should cultivate an equanimous mind toward all sentient beings.  
 Initially we should meditate on equanimity wi th respect to those for whom we do not have 
either attachment or hatred. In other words, we  should first take a stranger as our observed 
object and try to generate equanimity with respec t to that person. This will make it easier for 
equanimity to arise in our mind. By eliminating attachment and hatred for the stranger, we will develop an equanimous mind toward him or her.   When we are able to do this with strangers,  we should then try to generate equanimity 
toward our friends. We need to develop an eq uanimous mind toward them, if we are unable 
to do this it is because we divide people into the two groups of friends and enemies or 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
507 because we have strong or weaker  attachment toward them. Due to this we need to strive to 
equalize our mind toward our friends, that is, to develop a mind in which there is neither 
attachment or hatred. Having accomplished th is, we should develop an equanimous mind 
toward those people whom we think of as our enemies. Why do we not have an equal mind 
toward enemies? It is because, thinking that th ey are totally incompatible with us, we generate 
hatred or anger toward them. Hence, we also need to develop an equanimous mind toward 
our enemies.  
 In meditation, we should imagine three people , a friend, an enemy, and a stranger, as if 
t h e y  w e r e  s e a t e d  i n  f r o n t  o f  u s .  W e  s h o u l d  first develop an equanimous mind toward the 
stranger, then toward the friend, and then towa rd the enemy. When we are able to generate 
the same attitude toward these three people, we should then extend this attitude and apply it 
to all sentient beings, for example, first to al l the people surrounding us, then to all human 
beings, then to animals, and then to other bein gs. We need to develop this equanimous mind 
toward all sentient beings, rather than having the attitude that holds some close and others 
distant. We should meditate on equanimity in this way.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D By meditating on what are attachment and hatred stopped 
Moreover, the following two thoughts are taught in [Kamalashila’s] Middling Stages 
of Meditation  (Bhavanakrama ):  
1. “Since from their side all sentient beings are the same in wanting happiness 
and not wanting suffering, it would be inappropriate for me to benefit some w h o m  I  c o n s i d e r  c l o s e  a n d  h a r m  o r  f a i l  t o  b e n e f i t  o t h e r s  w h o m  I  c o n s i d e r  
distant.” 
2. “Since from my own side there is not any sentient being who in beginningless 
cyclic existence has not been my relative  hundreds of times, who should I have 
attachment for and who should I have hatred for?” 
Also with regard to attachment to our relatives, the Sutra Requested by the Noble 
Daughter Chandr[ottama]  says: 
 
I have killed all of you in former times, 
I have also been chopped and cut to pieces by you in former times. 
All beings have been enemies and murderers unto each other. 
Therefore, how can a mind of at tachment possibly arise in you? 
 As was explained above in the context of the fault of uncertainty, think about the 
way in which friends and enemies quickly change. Due to this, avert both anger 
and attachment. 
 By means of meditating, we need to stop the a ttachment that holds some close and the hatred 
that holds others distant. From their own side  all sentient beings are the same in wanting 
happiness and not wanting suffering. Because they have the same desire or aim, it is not 
correct to hold some sentient beings close an d then want to benefit and help them and to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
508 hold other sentient beings distant and want to harm them or not want to benefit them. This 
is not at all right since sentient beings from their own side are equal. 
 In addition, from our own side we have been wandering in cyclic existence from 
beginningless time until now and there is no sentient being who has not been our dear friend 
or relative hundreds of times. Therefore, it is  not right to be attached to and want to help 
some while hating and wanting to harm others.  
 The Sutra Requested by the No ble Daughter Chandrottama  also says “In the past I have killed 
all of you and you have also chopped and cut me into pieces. We have killed each other. 
Therefore, why are you attached to some?” In short, since in the past all of us killed and 
chopped each other up why are we now attached to some and not to others? We should think 
about the fact that sometimes friends transf orm into enemies, so metimes enemies into 
friends, and sometimes friends and enemies into st rangers. Cyclic existence is like this, there 
is no certainty at all. Sometimes we kill each other, sometimes we take care of each other. 
This was already explained in the context of the six shortcomings of cyclic existence, one of 
which is the shortcoming of uncertainty, i.e., that friends become enemies, enemies become 
f r i e n d s ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  W e  n e e d  t o  t r y  t o  u n derstand this and to eliminate attachment and 
hatred toward all other sentient beings. We need to strive to do this. This is our 
responsibility! It is our job! 
 Friday morning, 29 April 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 166) says:  
E Ceasing attachment and hatred, although the mind of friend and enemy has not ceased  
{167} Since we need to consider them as  friends or enemies through apprehending 
them to be the basis of respec tive features, what is to be stopped is the mind that is 
biased due to attachment and hatred thro ugh taking as a reason “He/she is an 
enemy or friend” while the mind of friend and enemy does not need to be averted. 
 
In relation to considering someone to be friend or enemy, what we need to do is to change our mind. Due to thinking of someone as a friend  or an enemy there arises attachment to the 
friend and hatred or anger toward the enemy, whereupon we divide people into two distinct 
groups. This is the attitude that we need to st op or block. How can we do this? We should try 
to see all sentient beings as having an attractive aspect.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B Establishing them all in having an attractive aspect 
1 Meditating them as one's mother 
2 Remembering their kindness 3 Meditating on repaying their kindness 
The second one has three [points]: medita ting them as one’s mother, remembering 
their kindness, and the meditating on repaying their kindness. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-1 Meditating them as one's mother 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
509 A The thought that they have been one’s mother in the past 
First: In the sutras it is taught that sinc e cyclic existence is beginningless our births 
are also beginningless. Being incessantly born  and dying, there is no body in cyclic 
existence that we have not taken, no pl ace in which we have not been born, and 
no one who has not been a relative such as our mother and so forth. 
B The thought that they are presently one’s mother 
Moreover, this is not only true of the pa st, they will again be that in the future. 
Therefore reflecting in that way, you shou ld try to gain unshakable certainty that 
they have been your mother, for, once th at certainty arises, it will be easy to 
remember their kindness and so forth. On the other hand, if it does no arise, there 
will be no foundation for remembering their kindness and so forth. 
 We need to first meditate that all sentient be ings have been our mother, then we need to 
remember the kindness of our mother sentient beings, and then we need to wish to repay 
their kindness. In the past each  sentient being has been our mo ther innumerable times and in 
the future they will once again be our mother. Wh y is this? It is because we have been taking 
rebirth since beginningless time in cyclic existe nce whereby even our rebirths as human beings 
alone are infinite. Having died and taken birth again and again, we cannot say that we have 
not been born with a certain body, that we have not been born in a certain place, for 
example, in the west but not in the east, an d that we have not had such a being as our 
mother. Because we have taken so many bodies all sentient beings have been our mothers. 
Because we have taken rebirth in all the ten di rections, all sentient beings have been our 
mothers and relatives in these rebirths. Therefor e, all sentient beings have been our mother. 
There does not exist one sentient being who has not been our mother. No such sentient 
being can be found. Therefore, we need to th ink that all sentient beings have been our 
mother, father, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, grandfather, grandmother, great grandmother, 
great grandfather, son, daughter, and so forth. A l l  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  h a v e  b e e n  j u s t  l i k e  o u r  
relatives of this life. In addition, our mother and father of this life have also been our mother 
and father countless times. Therefore, all sent ient beings have been our mother. We should 
think about this. There is no one about whom we can say “He/she has not been my mother,” 
nor is there anyone who will not become our moth er or father once again. As long as we do 
not become free from cyclic existence we will cont inue to take rebirth and to do this we need 
a mother and father. Therefore, in the future sentient beings will once again be our mother 
and father. Thinking in this w ay, we should develop a stable understanding that all sentient 
beings have been our mother. We need to ga in stable certainty regarding this fact.  
 When we generate the certainty that all sent i e n t  b e i n g s  h a v e  b e e n  o u r  m o t h e r  i t  w i l l  
become easy to remember their kindness and to generate the wish to re pay their kindness. On 
the other hand, if we do not generate this unders tanding, it will also be difficult to remember 
that all sentient beings have been kind and to generate the wish to re pay their kindness. This 
is because the basis, the recognition that all sent ient beings have been our mother, is lacking. 
Therefore, we first need to generate this reco gnition in order to remember their kindness and 
then wish to repay it. In short, we need a strong recognition of the fact that all sentient beings have been our mother.   Even one sentient being has been our mother so  many times that if th e milk that we drunk 
as her child were to be gathered together it wo uld be a huge ocean that would not fit in this 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
510 world. Thus, there is no one that we can poin t to who has not been our mother. Even all the 
people in this room have been our mother, our father, our sister, our brother, our son, or our 
daughter. Our relationship with them is no longer like this, but it was in the past.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-2 Remembering their kindness 
A The thought that it is skillful and so forth to start with one's mother of this life 
Second: [Geshe] Potowa maintained that if, after meditating on all sentient beings 
as having been your mother, you initially me ditate on your mother of this life, [the 
thought remembering their kindness] will  quickly be generated. You should 
meditate like that. Thinking that your moth er in a clear aspect is in front of you, 
repeatedly reflect: “She has been my moth er not only now, but times past counting 
since beginningless cyclic existence. Wh en she was my mother, she protected me 
from all harm and accomplished all happiness and benefit for me.” 
 
We need to try to understand that all sentient  beings have been our mother by meditate on 
this. We should then remember their kindness. We should begin by thinking that our mother 
of this life has been very, very kind to us. Sinc e we can easily recognize her kindness, it will be 
easier to develop the thought of her kindness. We  should visualize our mother clearly in front 
of us, thinking that she has also been our moth er many, many times in the past. By thinking 
in this way, the recognition of her kindness wi ll arise even more easily as we will also 
remember her kindness in other lives. When sh e was our mother, she st rove to protect us 
from harm and tried to benefit us and to make us happy. We should meditate on everything 
that she has tried to do for us. This will make it easier to recognize her kindness. 
 Perhaps there are some exceptions? HA-HA! I am joking. Nowadays some people, thinking 
that their mother of this life has not been ki nd to them and that she was hard on them, do 
not want to think about her kindness. Those peop le tend to think, “She was not kind to me. 
She was very hard one me.” In this case, what  should we do? We should choose whoever has 
been the most close to us and then think that al l sentient beings have been our father, sister, 
uncle, aunt, grandfather, grandmother, and so forth. We can also choose a good friend and 
then think that just as he or she has been very kind to us so too have all sentient beings been our friends and have been very kind to us. Not only has this friend been our friend in this 
life, but he or she has also been our dear friend in many previous lives. We should recognize his or her kindness in this way, and then extend  it to all sentient beings. Maybe we can also 
meditate in this way if we do not have  a good relationship with our mother.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The way in which she also protected one in this life 
In particular, even in this life, she initially carried you in her womb for a long 
time. Then, when you were born, she pressed your yellow tousled hair against the heat of her body, she swung you on her fi ngertips, nursed you with her milk, fed 
you as an infant from her mouth, {168} wiped away your saliva with her mouth, 
cleaned your filth with her hands, caring  for your untiringly in many different 
ways. In addition, when you were hungry or  thirsty, she gave you food and drink. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
511 When you were cold, she gave you clothing. When you were in need, she gave you 
her possessions that she herself had hard ly used. When even the most basic 
necessities where hard to come by, she bo re great hardship and spared herself no 
negativity, suffering, or bad talk to get it and give them to me. 
 
In particular our mother has taken care of us in  this life. She carried us  in her womb for nine 
months, always taking care of us by avoiding eating and drinking certain food and drink 
through not wanting to harm her baby. Then, when  we were born, she continued to take care 
of us. When we were very small, she kept us warm with her body heat, held us in her arms, 
gave us her milk to drink, and made our food soft by chewing it herself so that it was easy for 
us to digest. She wiped away our snot and saliva . She cleaned our urine and feces. Like this, 
she tirelessly took care of us in many ways. Wh en we were hungry or thirsty, she immediately 
gave us her own food and drink. When we were  cold, she dressed us in warm clothing. When 
we were poor, she gave us her possessions th at she has kept apart for us. When basic 
necessities were hard to find, she bore suffer ing, engaged in negativities, accepted a bad 
reputation, and so forth in order to help us. Ther efore, our mother has been very kind to us.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C A mother cherishes her child more than herself 
Whenever her child suffers from a diseas e and so forth, she wishes from the 
depths of her heart to die rather than for he r child to die, to be ill rather than for 
h e r  c h i l d  t o  b e  i l l ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  W i t h  effort, she does whatever she can to 
eliminate [his suffering]. 
 
A mother cherishes her child more than herself. If her child is suffering from an illness, the 
mother thinks it would be better for herself to di e rather than for her child to die. If her child 
is sick, she thinks “It would be better for me to be sick, rather than for my child to be sick.” 
She thinks from the depths of her heart that it would be better for her to be sick rather than 
for her child to be sick, and that it would be be tter for her to die rather than for her child to 
d i e .  A  m o t h e r  i s  a l w a y s  t h i n k i n g  o f  h e r  c h i l d ,  therefore she is very kind. She also tries by 
whatever action possible to reli eve her child’s suffering of sickness, heat, cold, hunger, and 
thirst. She does whatever she possibly can to remove her child’s suffering.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D How to meditate on the essential points separately 
To summarize, by whatever level of know ledge and whatever level of ability she 
had, she thought single-pointedly about the way in which to accomplish your 
happiness and benefit, and to remove any harm and suffering for you.  
 
The essence is that, in brief, she did whatev er she knew and could do, using every possible 
method, to accomplish our benefit and happiness and to remove all our harm and suffering. She had a single-pointed mind thinking only about how to remove our suffering and harm 
and how to make us happy and benefit us. In ot her words, she constantly thinks how she can 
help her child grow up to be a good, learne d, and humble person. Whatever knowledge she 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
512 has, she tries to teach it to her child. In this way, she constant ly thinks single-pointedly about 
her child, not thinking of anything else . Therefore, the mother is very kind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E Progressing gradually, how to meditate 
If, by meditating in this way, a mind remembering her kindness, that is not just 
words, arises, then you should meditate on recognizing other friends and relatives, your father and so forth, as also having been your mothers. Then, you should also 
meditate on recognizing neutral [persons] as having been your mothers. When you 
have generated a similar mind toward them as that toward your friends and 
relatives, you should also meditate on recognizing your enemies as also having 
been your mother. When you have generate d a similar mind toward them as that 
toward your mother, you should proceed to  meditate on recognizing all sentient 
beings as having been you mother, and th en gradually extend it more and more. 
 Our understanding of the kindness of mother se ntient beings should not be just words on 
our lips, it should be an understanding that comes from our heart and that moves our mind. When we have developed such an understanding, we should go on to think that all sentient beings have been our father and have been kind  to us, just like our present father who has 
taken care of us. If we were sick, he would chose to be sick, and if we were dying, he would prefer to die himself. He helped us when we were hungry by giving us food, when we were 
cold by giving us clothing, when we were thirsty by giving us something to drink, and so forth. 
He tried to take care of us in whatever way he could, therefore our father is also very kind.  
 We should think about the fact that our dear  friends have also been our mother and have 
been very kind to us. We should remember th eir kindness. Then, we should also recognize 
them as having been our mother in the past. Likewise our present enemy has also been our 
mother in the past and at that time was very kind to us. Also those who are our enemies now 
a r e  k i n d  t o  u s  i n  t h a t  t h e y  g i v e  u s  t h e  o p p o rtunity to practice patience, which is a very 
powerful practice. Our enemies are in reality our precious teachers who teach us how to 
develop patience. Thus, we can also meditate on our enemies in this way, that is, as being our 
teacher who helps us to improve our practice of patience.   Imagining a friend, enemy, and st ranger in front of us, we should meditate on the friend as 
having been our mother, on our enemy as ha ving been our mother, and so forth. Then 
extend this attitude outward until we recognize that all sentient beings have been our mother. 
We begin with the people close to us, then extend  this attitude to the other people around us, 
then to all human beings, and then to all sentient  beings, thinking that they have all been our 
mother, father, and so forth. In this way we recognize the kindness of all sentient beings. Then, what do we need to do? We need to repay their kindness, not their harm! It is like, for example, if we have financial difficulties and so meone helps us by giving us money, we think 
that that person is very kind and remember ev en much later that when  we were poor this 
person helped us. In this way, we should think about the kindness of all sentient beings.   Middle Lam-Rim says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-3 The wish to repay their kindness 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
513 A Even though you do not recognize them due to birth and death-transference, it would be shameless to 
neglect them 
Third: There is nothing le ss shameful than carelessly neglecting your suffering, 
protectorless, kind mothers {169} just because you do not recognize them anymore 
due to birth and death-transference, and being preoccupied with freeing yourself 
from cyclic existence. In the Letter to a Student it says: 
 
If I neglect my relatives who have become a part of the ocean of cyclic 
existence and appear to have fallen into an abyss, whom I do not 
recognize due to birth and death-tran sference, and only liberate myself, 
nothing would be more shameless than that. 
 
We do not presently recognize that sentient beings have been our mothers because of the 
continuous transformation caused by death and rebirth. However, since they have been our 
kind mothers and are now suffering and without a protector, it would no t be right for us to 
neglect them through thinking that  they do not matter and that wh at is important is for us to 
become free from cyclic existence. We should not think only of achieving our own liberation 
and neglect other sentient beings. Likewise, Letter to a Student says that our relatives and 
family members are moving about in the ocean of  cyclic existence, taking rebirth and dying, 
due to which we do not recognize them as havi ng been our mother, father, sister, brother, 
and so forth. However, since they have all been our relatives, we need to take care of them. If we do not do this, but instead only wish to q uickly achieve nirvana for ourselves, this would 
be shameful. We do not recognize that sentie nt beings have been our mother due to the 
strong sufferings of death and rebirth, wh ich overcame our mind and made us forget 
everything. This is the cause that made us forget  this, but in fact they have been our mother 
and have been kind to us, therefore we need to repay their kindness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B  To neglect those who have been kind does not accord with the well-mannered  
Thus, through thinking “If neglecting such kind beings is unacceptable even to the 
ill-mannered, how can I reconcile it with  my own ways?” you should take the 
responsibility to reciprocate their kindness. 
 
To neglect those who have been our kind friends is not acceptable even to people who are ill-
mannered. For example, if someone were to take care of us in this life and then we were to abandon him, this would not be considered good  behavior. Instead it would be considered to 
be ill-mannered, bad, and not right. Since this kind of behavior is unacceptable to everyone, we need to try again and again to think of their kindness. We need to recognize their 
kindness, whereby, through understanding this, the wish to repay their kindness will arise 
naturally. Just as if someone were to do someth ing good for us, it would not be correct to no 
longer want to take care of him or her, likewise since all sentient beings have been kind to us, we need to develop respect for them and have good behavior toward them. We should not act 
disrespectfully toward them, but try at all times to  respect them. If we develop this attitude in 
our mind, it will indicate that our good qu alities are developing. On the other hand, if 
outwardly we act nice toward someone but internal ly we wish to harm him, this would not be 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
514 right. Since our mind is negative, it will harm  us. Although it may not harm others, it will 
definitely harm us! While if our negative mind  leads to actions of body and speech we can 
make others unhappy and harm them, just th inking in a harmful way harms us alone and 
does not harm others.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C As it would be inappropriate to repay the benefit with something contaminated, one should liberate 
them from ignorance 
If someone asks: “Well then, how should  I repay the benefit?” Whatever mere 
happiness and wealth of cyclic existence yo ur mothers obtain, they are deceived by 
all of them. Thus, we should repay the be nefit thinking “I, in the past, by the 
power of conceit of the evil spirits of th e mental afflictions, once again produced 
various suffering in those who were alread y suffering by nature, like putting salt 
and so forth on the injured who were already intensely wounded. I will set all 
those who have benefited me out of love in the happiness of liberation, nirvana.” 
 If someone has benefited us and we thin k to repay this kindness with something 
contaminated, this would not be correct. We need to repay thei r kindness by liberating them 
from ignorance. This is the best thing that we  can do for them. Theref ore, we should think 
about how to benefit and repay the kindness of our mothers who have been so kind to us. 
Our mother sentient beings have experienced a ll the happiness, wealth, and good things of 
cyclic existence in the past, but these things ha ve only deceived them. In the past, due to our 
mind being contaminated by the afflictions, we  did many things to injure those who were 
already suffering by nature in many different ways, like putting salt on a wound, thereby increasing their suffering. It is like if someone were injured and we put salt or chili on their 
wounds, whereby instead of helping them we on ly increased their suffering, this would be 
wrong. Similarly, giving whiskey, beer, and so forth to our mother sentient beings would only 
increase their suffering. We need to make sure  that we make our mother sentient beings 
happy and reduce their suffering. In this way, we  can repay their kindness. Therefore, just as 
our mother sentient beings out of love for us benefited us in the past, so too do we need now need to strive to liberate them from all the su fferings of cyclic existe nce and set them in the 
happiness of the state that has gone beyond cyclic  existence. In other words, we need to help 
our mother sentient beings attain freedom fr om cyclic existence and achieve ever-lasting 
happiness. This is how we can be nefit them. Thus, we need to benefit them, not by repaying 
their kindness with material things, but by  helping them to de velop their own inner 
realizations.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D  How to meditate [on the essential points ] separately 
In brief, if even your own kind mother  who, restless and intoxicated, blind and 
without anyone to guide her, is stumbl ing with each step and approaching a 
fearsome abyss, cannot put her hope in her child, who can she count on? If it is 
not for a child to free its mother from fear, who else should do it? Likewise, the sentient beings who have been our mother s, their minds in a state of confusion 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 27-29 April 2005 (11) 
515 due to the evil spirits of the mental a fflictions, intoxicated and without control 
over their minds, lacking eyes that s ee the path to high status and certain 
goodness, without a blind person’s guide of perfect knowledge, in each instant 
{170} stumble due to being distracted by faulty behavior, and wander toward the 
abyss of cyclic existence in general and the bad migrations in  particular. Seeing 
them, consider how these mothers necessari ly put their hopes in their child, and 
that it is also for the child to get his mothers out of there, you will repay their 
kindness by definitely getting them out of cyclic ex istence. In the Compendium of 
Instructions  (Shiksasammucchaya)  it says: 
 
Intoxicated by mental afflictions, blinded by ignorance, 
Stumbling into many abysses with each step along the path, Myself and others are always the basis of sorrow. 
All migrators are the same in suffering. 
 
In view of this, although it is indeed said that it is inappropriate to look for faults 
in others and when seeing the slightest good  quality to hold it in amazement, here 
it is reasonable to relate these statements to misery. 
 If our mother, who is confused, crazy, blind, an d without a guide, is walking toward an abyss 
and is in danger of falling into it, she would ho pe that her child would be  the one to help her. 
She would think “Only my child can help me. May he help me.” Also from the side of the c h i l d ,  i t  i s  h i s  r e s p o n s i b i l i t y  t o  f r e e  h i s  m o t h e r  f r o m  f e a r .  H e  s h o u l d  t h i n k ,  “ T h i s  i s  m y  responsibility. I must do it.” He should then lead his mother to a place free from the danger 
of falling into the abyss. Th e child must take this resp onsibility upon himself.  
 Like this, all mother sentient beings’ mind s are tormented by the mental afflictions, 
disturbed by spirits, and unable to make decisi ons. They are like craz y people. They are also 
without the eyes to achieve a high rebirth su ch as a human being, and they are without a 
guide. Due to this, they engage in faulty conduct and bad activities, such as creating 
separations, beating others, and so forth. As a result, they are in danger of falling into the 
abyss of the bad migrations. Seeing that our moth er sentient beings are in this situation, we 
must take care of and help them. We should do this as if we were their own child. We should take the responsibility upon ourselves to free ou r mother sentient beings from cyclic existence 
and set them in liberation. In this way, we sh ould make a strong determination to lead all 
sentient beings out of cyclic ex istence. In short, thinking that  our mother sentient beings are 
like crazy people and in the danger of falling in to the bad migrations, we need to extract them 
from cyclic existence and set them  in the state of liberation whic h is beyond cyclic existence.  
 END  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
516 Monday afternoon, 2 May 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 170) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2 Actually generation of t he mind striving for the welfare of others 
A Meditating on love 
B Meditating on compassion  
C Meditating on the extraordinary attitude 
The second has three [points]: meditating on love, meditating on compassion, and 
meditating on the extraordinary attitude. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2A Meditating on love 
1 The observed object  
First: The observed object of love is se ntient beings who do not have happiness. 
 
The observed object of love is sentient beings who do not have happiness. Love is the mind 
wishing all sentient beings to have happiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The aspect [of love] 
Its aspect is the thought: “How wonderful it would be if they were to meet with 
happiness. May they meet with happiness! ” And: “I will make them meet with 
happiness!” 
 
The aspect of love is the thought “How wonderful it would be if sentient beings were to have happiness. May they have happiness. I will make them have happiness.” In general love is the 
wish for sentient beings to have happiness and th e causes of happiness. Here it is the specific 
thoughts “How wonderful it would be if th ey were to have happiness. May they have 
happiness.” This is followed by the determin ation “I will make them have happiness.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The merit is even greater than constantly making offerings to the buddhas 
As regards the benefit, it says in the King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra :  
 
If one were to constantly offer immeasurable offerings  
Of great variety to the supreme beings in myriads of pure fields,  
This would not compare to a fraction  Of the amount [of merit] of the mind of love. 
 
This is to say that the merit is much greater than that of constantly making 
offerings to the field that is the fi nal object with very vast things. 
 
If we generate love there are many benefits or advantages. For example, although if we were to make offerings to all the buddhas of the three times with various kinds of offerings we would 
accumulate much merit and it would be of great be nefit, if we develop love for sentient beings 
this is of much more benefit and accumulate s much more merit. In other words, through 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
517 offering material things at all times to all th e buddhas, we would create a lot of merit but it 
could not be compared to the merit created by de veloping love for sentient beings. This is the 
benefit of generating love for all sentient beings; we should think about it.  
 However, while it is difficult to make offering s at all times to all the buddhas, we can try to 
develop a mind of love toward all the suffering sentient beings by trying to make those who 
lack happiness meet with happiness. This mind of love is of much more benefit and creates 
much more merit than making offerings like th at, but at the same time not much effort is 
needed to develop it. For example, we can meditate  on love for ten minutes a day, or even just 
five minutes. Of course, we can do even mo re – twenty minutes, thirty minutes, forty 
minutes, or one hour.   In order for sentient beings to have happine ss certain causes and conditions are necessary. 
Without them, happiness will not arise. This is because in order for any functioning thing to 
come into existence, particular causes and cond itions are necessary. This is a law of nature. 
Therefore, we should try to develo p love for all sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 4 If one cultivates love in this field, [the merit ] will exceed even the former 
Also, in Arraying the Buddha Field of Manjushri  it is explained:  
 
In the world sphere called “Thousan d Ornaments” of the great king 
Buddheshvara, at the northeastern bo rder, {171} sentient beings possess 
a happiness similar to the happiness of monks who have entered 
cessation. If a mind of love towards all sentient beings that is generated in this field for as little as the du ration of a finger snap produces far 
more merit than practicing pure co nduct there for a hundred thousand 
millions of years, what need is th ere to mention that of abiding in [that 
mind] day and night?  
 The sentient beings in the field called Thousand Ornaments experience the happiness of fully-ordained-monk foe-destroyers who are abso rbed in self-peace. Thus, they have great 
happiness. However, the pure cond uct of these sentient beings practiced over millions of years 
is exceeded by the merit created in this realm by the love genera ted toward sentient beings for 
the duration of a finger snap. This being so, wh at need is there to mention how much merit is 
created by someone who abides day and night in the meditation on love, wishing all sentient 
beings to have happiness?   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 Achievement of the eight benefits such as being loved by gods and human beings  
In [Nagarjuna’s] Precious Garland (Ratnavali ) we also find: 
 
With respect to merit, just one short moment of love  
Exceeds several times over,  
That produced by giving, three times a day,  Three hundred little bowls of delicious meals. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
518  
You are loved by gods and men  And protected by them. 
You have mental happiness and much happiness, 
Become invulnerable to poison and weapons, 
 Achieve your aims without any effort 
And will be reborn in the world of Brahma. 
Even if you do not attain liberation, You will attain the eight qualities of love. 
 If you have love, you are loved by gods and men and they naturally gather around you. Since even the conquerors defeat the hosts of maras by the force of love, it 
becomes the best of protections and so forth.  
 Eight benefits are obtained by meditating on love. By offering delicious foods three times a 
day, we would accumulate the merit of practici ng generosity. However, the merit created by 
generating love even just for a short moment toward sentient beings is much greater. In addition, due to this, we will be loved by, ta ken care of, and protected by human beings and 
g o d s .  W e  w i l l  h a v e  m e n t a l  a s  w e l l  a s  p h y s i c a l  h a p p i n e s s .  W e  w i l l  n o t  b e  h a r m e d  e i t h e r  b y  poisons or weapons. We will effortlessly achiev e whatever aims we wish to achieve. In our 
next life we will be reborn in the world of Brah ma, that is, in the first concentration. Even if 
we do not attain liberation in this live, we  will attain the eight qualities of love.  
 Thus, if we have love, both gods and human beings will naturally gather around us and remain close to us. Also all the conquerors dest roy the hosts of maras by the power of love, it 
is the best of protections because, due to it, we cannot be harmed by demons or maras. Here 
“mara” refers to the outer maras or demons, not to the inner demons of the mental afflictions 
and so forth.  
 We need to recognize that the mara of the i nner mental afflictions also harms us, since we 
tend to think that the mental afflictions are ve ry nice! However, by th eir very nature they 
harm us. Another inner mara or demon that harms us is our body, this contaminated 
appropriated aggregate, which is called a demon because, based on it, we experience the many 
sufferings of illness, insect bites, wind, fire, and so forth. In addition, there is the inner mara 
of death. However, in this context “mara” refers to external beings who want to harm us. By meditating on love, these beings will not be able  t o  h a rm  us an d we will be able t o  def eat 
them. Since meditation on love is the best of pr otections, there is no need to ask a lama to 
protect us from our problems!   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
6 The stages of meditation on love 
The stages of meditation on love ar e to respectively meditate initially [on love] for 
your friends and relatives, then for neut ral persons, then for your enemies, and 
then for all sentient beings. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
519 How should we meditate on love? First we sh ould meditate on love for our friends and 
relatives. Then we should meditate on love to ward people who are strangers. Then we should 
meditate on it toward the people we consider to  be our enemies. Having done this, we should 
then gradually extend our meditation on love to all sentient beings.  
 We can do this by imagining three people in front of us, a close friend, an unknown 
stranger, and a person who we consider to be  our enemy. Then we generate the thought 
toward our friend “How wonderful it would be if he were to have happiness. May he have 
happiness. I will make him have happiness.” Th en we do the same toward the stranger, 
thinking once again, “How wonderful it would be  if he were to have happiness. May he have 
happiness. I will make him have happiness.” Then we do the same toward our enemy, 
thinking, “How wonderful it would be if he we re to have happiness. May he have happiness. I 
will make him have happiness.” We should medi tate in this way and then gradually extend 
this attitude to the people around us, to the people in the same area, to the people in our 
country, to all the people in the world, to anim als, and then to all other sentient beings. We 
should try to meditate gradually in this way.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
7 The way in which to meditate on [love] 
The way in which to meditate [on love is as follows ]. Just as compassion arises 
when you reflect again and again on how sentient beings have the suffering of 
suffering, likewise you should reflect again and again on how sentient beings lack 
contaminated and uncontaminated happine ss and are devoid of happiness. Once 
you have familiarized yourself with this, the wish for them to meet with happiness 
will arise naturally. In addition, through directing your mind to the various kinds 
of happiness, you will then {172} pr ovide sentient beings with them. 
 
How should we meditate on love? By thinking again and again that all sentient beings are 
tormented by suffering, compassion arises. Likewise, since sentient beings lack even contaminated happiness, there is no need to  mention that they lack uncontaminated 
happiness. In fact, they are devoid of happiness.  By thinking about this again and again, our 
mind will become familiar with this attitude and we will come to generate the wish for all 
sentient beings to have happiness. We shou ld then think about the various kinds of 
happinesses and mentally give such happiness to  sentient beings. For example, to those 
people who become happy when they are given material things such as food, drink, clothing, and so forth, we should mentally give them  such contaminated happinesses and also wish 
them uncontaminated happiness. although at the moment we can only do this in our 
imagination, we should still do this meditation as  much as we can. If we develop this attitude 
very strongly, there will definitely come a result.   (Oral transmission 19:10-19:30, pp. 172-186)  Tuesday morning, 3 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 172) says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
520 2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2B Meditating on compassion 
1 The observed object [of compassion ] 
Second: The observed object of compassion  is sentient beings who are suffering 
due to any of the three kinds of suffering. 
 
Next the topic of how to meditate on compassion is discussed. The observed object of 
compassion is the sentient beings who are suffer ing due to any of the three kinds of suffering: 
the suffering of suffering, suffering of change, and pervasive suffering. In other words, it is 
they who are the object of our compassion – th e wish that all sentient beings be free from 
suffering.   The suffering of suffering is illustrated by th is contaminated body, which is the very nature 
of suffering. This suffering includes kidney pa in, headache, back pain, stomach ache, and so 
forth. In fact, all kinds of pain, both mental and physical, are the suffering of suffering. In this 
case, on top of that which is already the nature of suffering, our body, there is the addition of 
manifest suffering or pain. The suffering of chan ge, on the other hand, refers to the pleasures 
or happiness of cyclic existence which, when experienced for an extended period of time, 
transform into suffering, either mental or phys ical. An example of a physical suffering of 
change is that when we lie in the sun for too long, we come to experience the suffering of 
heat. Then, in order to relieve it, we go to lie in the shade but, after some time, we begin to 
feel cold and once again want to return to the warmth of the sun. Anot her example is that by 
continuing to indulge in the pleasure of eating  we eventually come to experience a stomach 
ache.   Pervasive suffering refers to the fact that from  the top of our head to the soles of our feet 
our entire body is pervaded by suffering. Alternativ ely, it refers to the fa ct that all of cyclic 
existence from the hell of Unrelenting Torment up to the Peak of Existence is pervaded by 
suffering. Another meaning is that all beings, from the lowest beggar on the streets to the 
president of a nation, are pervaded by suffering. Thus, cyclic existence is  the very nature of 
suffering.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The aspect [of compassion ] 
The aspect is the thought: “How wonderful it would be if they were free from these 
sufferings,” “May they be free from them,”  and “I will free them from them.” 
 
The aspect of compassion is th e thought “How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings 
were free from suffering,” “May they be free from  suffering,” and “I myself will free them from 
suffering.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The sequence of the meditation [on compassion ] 
The sequence of the meditation is to meditate [on compassion ] first for your 
friends and relatives, then for neutral pers ons, then for your enemies, and then for 
all the sentient beings of the ten directions. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
521 In order to develop compassion, we should first meditate on it toward a dear friend. This is 
because when a dear friend is suffering, we naturally wish him to be free from suffering and 
are unable to bear his suffering. Also in this case, we should visualize a friend, a stranger or 
neutral person, and an enemy in front of us, an d then strive to develop compassion first for 
the friend, wishing him to be free from sufferi ng. When we have developed compassion for 
him, we next do the same toward the stranger , wishing him to be free from suffering. When 
this too has been developed, we do the same to ward our enemy, wishing him to also be free 
from suffering. Then we extend this thought to  the sentient beings of the ten directions 
through wishing all the sentient beings of the ten directions to be free from suffering. We 
should think in this way and meditate on co mpassion again and again, whereby we will be 
able to develop great compassion toward all sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 The main point of meditating in this sequence  
This gradual meditation on equanimity, love, and compassion through dividing 
the objects into specific categories was developed by Acharya Kamalashila through 
following the Abhidharma Sutra . This is a very important point because, if from the 
start, you train in observing [sentient beings ] in general without dividing them 
into specific categories, it will a ppear as though you have generated [these 
attitudes], but when you then think about them in dividually it will appear that it 
has not been generated for any of them. On the other hand, if you experience a 
change in your mind toward the individual [persons] as explained above, and then 
extend it to many, when at the end yo u observe them in general and sustain [that 
attitude] it will be generated purely regardless of whom is observed, whether a 
group or an individual.  
 
This order of meditating is set ou t in by Kamalashila following the Abhidharma Sutra . First we 
should develop equanimity, then, having de veloped equanimity, love; and then, having 
developed love, compassion. Love is the mind  wishing someone to have happiness, whereas 
compassion is the mind wishing someone to be  free from suffering. In order for someone to 
have happiness he or she needs to be free from suffering. However, if rather than dividing 
people into friends, stranger, and enemies, we try to develop these attitudes toward all 
sentient beings in general, although it will ap pear that compassion ha ve been generated, in 
actuality it will not have been generated. In ot her words, having developed compassion in this 
way, if we then take an individual sentient be ing as our object, we will see that we have not 
actually developed compassion. Therefore, righ t from the very beginning we need to take 
these three people as our objects and develop compassion for each of them individually. 
Having done so, we then extend it to more and more sentient beings. After that, if we once 
take an individual sentient being as our ob ject, we will find that we have developed 
compassion perfectly. Therefore,  we should meditate on compassion in this way, first with 
respect to individuals, until it is developed in our mind and our mind has changed; then 
toward all sentient beings; and then once again to ward individuals. In this way we will really 
develop great compassion.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
522 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 The way to meditate 
The way to meditate is in terms of the sufferings that were already explained when 
considering how the sentient beings who have been our mothers have fallen into 
existence and are experiencing the general and specific sufferings. 
 
The way in which to meditate is to think abou t the fact that the sentient beings who have 
been our mothers have fallen into cyclic ex istence and are experiencing the general and 
specific sufferings. These sufferings were alread y explained in the context of the four noble 
truths in relation to the path of middling bein gs, and in the context of the bad migrations in 
relation to the path of small be ings. Thus, here we should think about the fact that sentient 
beings have been our mothers, that they have fa llen into the ocean of cyclic existence, that 
they are experiencing the general sufferings, wh ich are the three types of sufferings, and that 
they are experiencing the specific sufferings of their respective realms, for example, those of 
human beings. In this way we should think about the sufferings of sentient beings and generate the wish to free them from their sufferi ng. If we understand how they are suffering, a 
strong wish to free them from suffering will ar ise. Contrarily, if we do not understand how 
they are suffering, our wish to free them  from suffering will not be strong.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
6 The measure of having generated compassion 
The measure of having generated compassion is taught in the First Stages of 
Meditation (Bhavanakrama ) [by Kamalashila]:  
 
At the point where the compassion th at has the aspect of the constant 
d e s i r e  t o  r e m o v e  t h e  s u f f e r i n g  o f  a l l  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  –  a s  i f  y o u r  o w n  
beloved child was unhappy – operates naturally in you and operates in accordance with your own nature, it is complete. Thereby, it obtains the 
name “great compassion.” 
 {173} [Thus,] if compassion towards all sentie nt beings naturally arises to the extent 
of the compassion generate d by a mother when the ch ild she loves with all her 
heart suffers, it is said to be a fully-qual ified great compassion. Hence, the same is 
true for the measure of the generation of “great love.” 
 
The First Stages of Meditation  by Kamalashila sets out the measure of having developed 
compassion. If our only beloved child was un happy and suffering, we would effortlessly and 
spontaneously wish to free him from his suffering. Similarly, by seeing all sentient beings in a 
similar way, we will also come to spontaneously and effortlessly generate compassion for them. In other words, we will come to no longer  need to think about their suffering in that 
just by seeing sentient beings the compassion that wishes them to be free from suffering will 
automatically arise. At this time, we will have generated great compassion in our mind, that is, 
the compassion in our continuum will th en be called “great compassion.”  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
523  When a mother loves her small child very much , she thinks of him as being very beautiful 
and when he suffers she generates strong co mpassion for him. Having this kind of 
compassion for all sentient beings, naturally and spontaneously, is the measure of having 
developed great compassion, that is, it is a fu lly qualified great compassion. The measure of 
great love is similar, that is, we have great love when upon seeing sentient beings the love that 
wishes them to have happiness and the causes of happiness spontaneously and effortlessly 
arises. It is at this point that we ha ve generated great love in our mind.  
 We need to train in love and compassion. Alth ough all sentient beings naturally have some 
love and some compassion, we need to strive to  increase and strengthen it. Even animals have 
a bit of love and compassion, this being evid enced by the way in which cats and dogs, for 
example, take care of their babies. We see that  when their babies are sick, the mother cat or 
dog becomes unhappy, and when its babies are happy  so to is the mother cat or dog. We need 
to develop love and compassion for all sentient  beings, whereby we will establish the basis for 
developing the extraordinary attitude, which th en establishes the basis for generating the 
mind of enlightenment.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 173) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2C Meditating on the extraordinary attitude 
1 The actual way to meditate [ on the extraordinary attitude ] 
Third: At the end of having meditated on love and compassion in this manner, 
you will think: “Alas! If these sentient be ings who are attractive and pleasant to me 
are thus deprived of happiness and torm ented by suffering, I must make them 
meet with happiness and I must free th em from suffering?” In taking upon 
yourself, at least in mere words, the responsibility to liberate them, your mind is 
trained. 
 
Having developed love and compassion in our mind, we then need to develop the 
extraordinary attitude. To do this, first we need to see all sentient beings as being attractive 
and pleasant to us. Then we need to think ab out the fact that they lack happiness and are 
tormented by suffering. Because of this, it is  not enough to think, “May they meet with 
happiness. May they be free from suffering.” In addition, we need to take upon ourselves the 
responsibility to make them happy and to free th em from suffering. We need to verbally make 
this determination and to mentally train in ta king this responsibility upon ourselves.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Clearing up doubt 
Although this point has already been made  briefly in the context of repaying the 
kindness, it is shown here that the love and compassion that think “How 
wonderful it would be if they were to m eet with happiness” and “How wonderful it 
would be if they were to be free from suffering” are not sufficient. This is because 
it is shown that it is necessary to gene rate the love and compassion are able to 
induce the thought: “I myself will accomp lish the happiness and benefit of sentient 
beings.” This is not to be done just during meditation sessions, but is to be 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
524 sustained continuously through remembering it during all behaviors after the 
sessions and so forth, as is taught in the Middle Stages of Meditation  (Bhavanakrama ). 
 
Having recognized that sentient beings have been our mother and having remembered their 
kindness, on the occasion of wishing to repay their kindness, the thought also arises wishing 
sentient beings to be happy and to be free from suffering. Through seeing that all sentient 
beings are lacking happiness and experiencing suffering, love and compassion spontaneously 
arise, whereby we come to generate great lo ve and great compassion. However, it is not 
enough to merely wish them happiness and freed om from suffering. In addition, we need to 
take the responsibility upon ourselves to set them in happiness and free them from suffering. 
We must think “I will take this responsibility up on myself!” However, it is also not enough to 
generate this thought one time during a medita tion session, we also need to develop this 
attitude between sessions, when we are walking, eating, talking, and so forth, by constantly 
thinking “I will take the responsibility upon my self to set all sentient beings in happiness and 
free them from suffering. This is my job!” We should not just think this in meditation and 
then not do anything more between meditation sessions. Instead we need to familiarize with 
this thought continually, whereby we will actually generate this attitude. On the other hand, if 
we meditate for a few days and then get tired, or our mind gets distur bed and we do not want 
to meditate anymore, we will not be able to de velop this attitude. Rather, we need to try all 
the time, all day long, to think “Since sentient beings need to have happiness and need to be 
free from suffering, I myself will take th e responsibility to accomplish this.” 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2B Training in the mind striving for enlightenment 
Second: When, inspired by the steps explained so far, you see that it is necessary to 
become a buddha for the welfare of others, yo u will also develop the wish to attain 
it. Nonetheless, since that in itself is not sufficient, at the beginning you should 
increase your faith through thinking abou t the good qualities of the exalted body, 
exalted speech, exalted mind, and enlighte ned activities as they were explained 
before in the context of going for refuge. Th en, since that faith is said to act as the 
basis for aspiration, you will generate the wish to attain thos e qualities from the 
bottom of your heart. That will induce cert ainty that the achievement of an exalted 
knower of all aspects is indispensable also for your own welfare. 
 
How should we train in the mind striving for en lightenment? In order to be able to enact the 
welfare of other sentient beings, we need to  achieve enlightenment or buddhahood. Seeing 
this, we will generate the desire to attain buddhahood. However, this alone is not enough. 
What else needs to be done? We need to increase  our faith in the good qualities of the objects 
of refuge, which were explained before. For exam ple, by contemplating the good qualities of 
the Buddha Jewel in terms of the qualities of his exalted body, exalted speech, exalted mind, 
and enlightened activities, we will generate strong  faith in them. This fa ith will then become 
the basis for us to generate the aspiration  to attain those qualities ourselves.  
 Faith is said to be the basis or the cause of a ll good qualities. Just as a mother gives birth to 
a child, nourishes it, teaches her knowledge to it , and so forth, similarly faith gives birth to 
good qualities. Contrarily, just as it is 100% ce rtain that if there is no mother there is no 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
525 child, similarly if there is no faith there will no t be any good qualities. Thus, faith in the good 
qualities of the buddha gives rise to good qual ities in us. The qualities of the Buddha include 
the 112 qualities of the exalted body, the 64 qualities of the exalted speech, the 21 groups of 
uncontaminated wisdom of the exalted mind, an d the 27 types of enlightened activities. We 
should contemplate all of them, whereby we will develop faith in the Buddha.  
 The Buddha teaches us the Dharma. By studyi ng the scriptures we can develop our own 
inner qualities and generate the Dharma of true  paths, which lead to the cessation of all 
sufferings and obscurations. The Dharma is the actual refuge. The Sang ha are our assistants 
on the path. We should think “I  too want to develop the qualit ies of the exalted body, speech, 
and mind, and the enlightened activities of the buddhas!” Even for our own welfare, we need 
to develop omniscient mind (a knower of all as pects). In other words, with this, not only will 
we be able to achieve others’ welfare, we will also be able to accompli sh our own welfare. The 
Buddha’s omniscient mind, the wisdom truth body, is called “the body that fulfills one’s own 
welfare,” whereas the enjoyment body and emanatio n body are called “the bodies that fulfill 
others’ welfare.” Because other sentient bein gs cannot see omniscient mind, the external 
bodies of the enjoyment body and emanation bo dy are necessary, since they can be seen by 
and teach sentient beings. Therefore, a budd ha has a mental body, the truth body, and 
physical bodies, the enjoyment body and emanat ion body. By achieving these three bodies, we 
can fulfill both our own and others’ welfare.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2C The result of the training: identifying the mind generation 
1 The general definition 
Third: The general definiti on is as taught in the Ornament for Clear Realizations  
(Abhisamayalamkara ): “The mind generation is th e desire for perfectly complete 
enlightenment for the welfare of others.”  
 
The mind generation or the mind of enlightenment depends on the presence of two 
aspirations. The causal aspiration  is the wish to benefit all sentient beings, which is similar to 
great compassion. The accompanying aspiration  is the wish to attain  enlightenment for the 
benefit of all sentient beings. The primary mind that is concomitant with these two 
aspirations is the mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Divisions 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior , following the Gandavyuha [Sutra] , teaches the two – 
the aspiring and engaging [mind generations ] saying:  
 
In the same way that the peculiarities of  
The wish to go and going are to be understood, 
The wise should respectively understand The peculiarities of these two. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
526 If there appear to be a lot of inconsiste ncies in this respect, there is also the 
statement in the First Stages of Meditation  that the mind that thinks: “May I become 
a buddha for the welfare of sentient beings ” is the aspiring mind and that, having 
taken the vow, that mind is the engaging mind generation. 
 
The mind of enlightenment is divided into two fr om the point of view of nature: the aspiring 
mind of enlightenment and the engaging mind  of enlightenment. The aspiring mind of 
enlightenment is likened to the wish to go to  Germany without actually putting the thought 
into action, whereas the engaging mind of enli ghtenment is likened to actually engaging in 
traveling to Germany by car, plane, and so fo rth. Thus, the engaging mind of enlightenment 
is that which is conjoined with the practice of the six perfection s, whereas this in the case for 
the aspiring mind of enlightenment. Thus, the as piring mind of enlightenment is to generate 
the mind of enlightenment but to not engage in th e practice of the perfection of generosity by 
giving material things, protection, and the Dharma ; in the practice of morality; in the practice 
of patience; in the practice of  joyous effort; in the practice of developing single-pointed 
concentration; and in the practice of developi ng wisdom. On the other hand, when the mind 
of enlightenment is conjoined with these practice s, it is the engaging mind of enlightenment. 
Hence, in the case of the aspiring mind of  enlightenment it is not accompanied by the 
engagement in the six perfections.  
 In the Ornament for Clear Realizations  the mind of enlightenment is divided into twenty-two 
types. This text also explains the different ways in which these minds of enlightenment are 
generated. However, in this context, just tw o divisions of the mind of enlightenment – the 
aspiring mind of enlightenment and the enga ging mind of enlightenment – are set out. 
 Kamalashila’s Stages of Meditation  also says that the thought “May I attain buddhahood for 
the welfare of sentient beings” is the aspiring mind of enlightenment, whereas, having taken 
the vow, it becomes the engaging mind of enligh tenment. In this case the vow is the promise 
to take care of sentient beings. In other wo rds, one takes the bodhisattva vows, whereupon 
one makes a promise to take care of each an d every sentient being without any exception 
whatsoever. Having taken the bodhisattva vows and generated the mind of enlightenment, 
the mind of enlightenment becomes an engaging mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 174) says:  
Explanation of how to tr ain the mind through  
equalizing and exchanging oneself and others 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2 The training based on the texts by Shantideva 
A Thinking about the advantages and disadvantages of exchanging and not exchanging 
oneself with others 
B Demonstrating that one can generate this mind if one familiarizes with it 
C The stages of meditating on how to exchange oneself and others 
The second – the training based on the te xts by Shantideva – has three [points]: 
Thinking about the advantages and di sadvantages of exchanging and not 
exchanging oneself with others; demonstrat ing that one can generate this mind if 
one familiarizes with it; and the stages of meditating on how to exchange oneself 
and others. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
527  
We also need to train the mind in accordance  with the explanations of Shantideva. To do 
this, we think about the advantages of exchanging ourselves with others, and the 
disadvantages of not exchanging ourselves with others. Through familiarizing with 
abandoning cherishing ourselves and engaging in cherishing others, we can generate this 
mind. This is achieved through the stages of meditation whereby we exchange ourselves with 
others, that is, we change our present attitude  through giving up cherishing ourselves and 
practicing cherishing others, that is, we give up taking care of ourselves alone and strive to 
take care of others. Thus, this is not a case of actually exchanging places with others.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A2A Thinking about the advantages of exchanging and the disadvantages of not 
exchanging oneself with others 
1  To quickly accomplish the two welfares it is appropriate to exchange oneself with others  
First: In Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  it says: 
 
Whoever wishes to protect  
Himself and others quickly, Should practice the secret instruction: Exchanging oneself and others. 
 If we want to quickly achieve the two welfares , we need to exchange ourselves with others, 
that is, we need to change our mind. As Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says, those who wish 
to protect others very quickly should abandon se lf-cherishing and cherish others. This practice 
should be done secretly, that is, it should not be revealed to others. In other words, without telling everyone that we are doing this practice, we should engage in it mentally while trying 
to abandon self-cherishing and develop the though t cherishing others in order to be able to 
quickly protect and benefit other sentient beings.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The advantages of exchanging and the disadvantages of not exchanging oneself with others  
All the happiness there is in the world 
Arises from wanting happiness for others. All the suffering there is in the world, 
Arises from wanting happiness for oneself. 
 
What need is there to say any more? 
The childish work for their own welfare,  
{175} The Munis for the welfare of others.  Look at the difference between the two! 
 If we exchange ourselves with others, what are th e advantages or benefits? If we do not cherish 
others, but continue to cherish ourselves and ne glect others, what are the disadvantages? All 
the happiness that exists in this world comes from the mind wishing that other sentient 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
528 beings be happy. In other words, all happiness ar ises from the cause of cherishing others. On 
the other hand, all the many types of sufferings that exist in the worl d come from the self-
cherishing mind that thinks only of our own happiness. Thus, there is no need to say 
anymore about this.  
 While the childish, that is, ordinary beings, only think of themselves, the Munis, the Able 
Ones, think only of others we lfare. We can see the great difference between these two. 
Although we wandered together with Buddha Sh akyamuni in our previous lives in cyclic 
existence, he generated the stro ng thought wishing to take care  of other sentient beings and 
relieve their suffering, whereby he achieved bu ddhahood and then gave us teachings. We, on 
the other hand, have continued to wander in cycl ic existence, unable to get out. Why is this? 
Because we have not thought about others but ha ve continued to think only of ourselves, “I 
need…,” “My daughter needs…,” “My son needs… ” We only think about ourselves, not about 
others. Therefore, we now need to work to de velop the thought that wa nts to take care of 
others and, at the same time, strive to dimi nish the thought that wa nts to take care of 
ourselves alone. We need to try to gradually exchange these two attitudes whereby we will 
come to be able to cherish others. When this mind is generated, we will have generated the 
mind of enlightenment.  
 How can we actually exchange ourselves with ot hers? It is usually said to do the taking-and-
giving meditation in combination with the brea th. To do this, motivated by compassion we 
imagine taking the sufferings, obscurations, proble ms, and so forth of all sentient beings upon 
ourselves. We visualize all sentient beings in front of us and that from their right nostrils 
comes black smoke that enters our left nostril. It  descends to our heart, where there is a heap 
of black dust in the nature of the self-cherish ing mind. When the sufferings in the aspect of 
black smoke touch the black heap, it is completely  destroyed. It no longer exists. This is the 
way to train in cherishing others and eliminating self-cherishing.  
 Then, motivated by love, we imagine that whit e light in the nature of happiness exits from 
our right nostril and enters the le ft nostrils of the sentient bein gs in front of us. Their bodies 
are completely filled with white light and they  receive all necessities, they become happy and 
relaxed, their minds become intelligent and cl ear, they develop a clear knower, and their 
bodies are transformed into light that is as tr ansparent as crystal. We should try to do the 
taking-and-giving meditation in this w ay. This meditation, referred to in Engaging in the 
Bodhisattva Deeds  as the “secret, holy conduct,” is do ne in order to exchange ourselves and 
others, that is, to diminish the mind of self -cherishing and increase the mind cherishing 
others. We need to try to do this. If we do not try, nothing will happen. On the other hand, 
even if it is difficult, through tr ying to do this meditation even just a little bit every day we will 
gradually improve more and more.  
Tuesday afternoon, 3 May 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 175) says:  
3 Therefore buddhahood etc. are difficult to attain if one does not exchange oneself with others.  
If I do not exchange my happiness 
And the suffering of others correctly, Buddhahood will not be attained and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
529 There will be no happiness in samsara either. 
 
Just as it is expressed here, you should thin k of cherishing oneself as the door to all 
problems and cherishing others as the basis of all excellences. 
 
W e  n e e d  t o  e x c h a n g e  o u r  a t t i t u d e ,  a s  i f  w e  d o  n o t  d o  t h i s  i t  w i l l  b e  d i f f i c u l t  t o  a t t a i n  buddhahood. We should give our happiness to others and take others’ suffering upon 
ourselves. If we do not do this, it will not be  easy to attain buddhah ood and there will be no 
happiness in cyclic existence. In this sense the self-cherishing mind is the door to all 
shortcomings, problems, and sufferings. On the ot her hand, cherishing others is the source of 
all excellences or good qualities. Therefor e, we need to try to change our mind.  
 Until now we have taken care only of ourselves and have not tried to take care of others. 
Because of this, we are still caught in cyclic existence, have not been happy, and have only 
experienced suffering. Therefore, we now need to  try to exchange our attitude by abandoning 
the self-cherishing mind and developing the mind  that cherishes and takes care of others. We 
need to meditate on this in order to gain familiarity with it. Without trying, nothing will 
happen!   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A2B Demonstrating that one can generate this mind if one familiarizes with it 
1 The actual [topic] 
Second: In the same way that fear used to arise in us even upon hearing our 
enemy's name but later on, having come to an agreement, we became friends and 
generated great dislike if he was absent, li kewise, by subsequently familiarizing the 
mind, we can become familiar with seeing  oneself like someone else and others 
like oneself. In the same text it says: 
 
Do not turn away from something because it is difficult. 
Through the power of familiarizing like this, 
We are do not like when someone is not with us Who we used to fear when hearing his name. 
And:  
It is not all that difficult to posit My body as that of others. 
 When someone is our enemy, even  just by hearing his name we can experience fear. However, 
if later on we come to have a harmonious rela tionship with him, he can become such a close 
friend that we are unhappy when he is absent. In a similar way, if we  familiarize our mind 
with exchanging oneself with others, we can co me to think of others as we presently do 
ourselves, whereby we will give up cherishing ourselves and come to ch erish others. We need 
to try to familiarize with this attitude. Even th ough it is difficult to develop, we should not 
give up but strive continually to familiarize ours elves with it very strongly. Due to familiarity, 
even someone whose mere name made us afraid  can later on become a friend whose absence 
makes us unhappy. Our friends can become enem ies, and our enemies can become friends. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
530 Human beings change. Even nations change, sometimes they have a good relationship, 
sometimes a bad one. We ourselves also change , in the morning we can be happy and in the 
afternoon we can be unhappy. Our mind changes in  this way. Therefore,  since it can change, 
we can definitely bring about a change in it. Fo r this reason, everyday we should try to cherish 
others and give up the mind that cherishes ourselves.  
 We can even learn to give up our body. For ex ample, we will become ab le to even give away 
a kidney, an eyeball, and other inner organs wi thout worry. If someone asks us for a part of 
our body, we will be able to give it away. Perhaps we cannot give our heart away as then we will die, but we can give away other parts that do not endanger our life but are needed by other people. Even this becomes easy due to familiarity.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Clearing up doubt 
If you think: “As someone else’s body is not my own body, how could it be 
appropriate to generate the same attitude toward it?” Just as this body is 
accomplished from the semen and blood of  o u r  p a r e n t s  a n d ,  e v e n  t h o u g h  i t  i s  
accomplished from parts of others’ bodies, we hold it to be “I” by the power of previous familiarization; likewise, if we fa miliarize with cherishing others’ bodies as 
if they were our own we will generate [this mind ]. The same text says: 
 
Just as you a drop of semen and blood From someone else  Is held to be ‘”I,” Likewise, we should familiarize regarding others. 
 Through reflecting well on the advantages  and disadvantages along these lines, a 
strong {176} enthusiasm for this meditati on will develop from the depths of the 
heart. Having seen that, if you familiariz e yourself with it, you can generate this 
attitude, you should meditate on it. 
 Someone raises the doubt: “How can we come to think of someone else’s body as our own body?” However, our body, in fact, comes from  our mother’s blood and our father’s semen. 
They are the causes of our body. Therefore, ev en though our body actually comes from parts 
of others’ bodies, we have come to think of  it as “my body.” This has happened out of 
familiarity, whereby we have de veloped the conception of a self  thinking “I” and “ mine” in 
relation to what actually comes from parts of ot hers’ bodies. This shows that we can also come 
to think of others’ bodies as our own body if we familiarize ourselves with this thought.  
 In other words, our mind entered the mixture of blood and semen, which gradually developed into our body. Then, out of familiarit y, we came to think “my body,” “my flesh,” 
“my bones,” and so forth and to ch erish and take care of it. However, in reality, our flesh and 
so forth came from our mother’s blood and ou r bones and so forth came from our father’s 
semen. The mind entered the mixture of the blood  and flesh, and later we came to identify 
the resulting body as “I” and “mine.” Theref ore, through familiarity we have come to 
apprehend what was originally a drop of blood and semen as “I” and “mine.” If this can 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
531 happen, we can also come to think of others’ bodies as “my body.” In other words, just as we 
presently suffer when our body is harmed and re joice when our body experiences comfort, so 
too can we come to suffer when others’ bodies  are harmed and rejoice when their bodies are 
comfortable. At that time we will see our own and others’ bodies as similar and, just as we 
presently take care of our body, we will come to take care of others’ bodies. This is what it 
means to cherish others, including their bodies . It comes about only through familiarity.  
 When the semen and blood mix, six constituen ts – three from the father and three from 
the mother – combine together. The human body composed of these six constituents is the 
ideal basis for the practice of tantra and the achievement of realizations. Likewise, from the 
point of view of sutra this body, composed of the three constituents from the father and the 
three from the mother, is a special basis that ca n be used to develop all good qualities up to 
and including enlightenment. Thus, by means of it, we can achieve omniscience even in this 
life. For this reason, our human body is the best of bodies.   If we think about the many benefits and ad vantages of cherishing others and the many 
disadvantages of cherishing ourselves, and come  to understand them from the depths of our 
heart, we will see that we need to change our attitude. We will then develop enthusiasm 
toward this meditation. Through familiarity we can bring about whatever change we want to 
achieve in our mind and obtain whatever resu lt we want. Our mind can in fact change. 
Therefore, even though initially  meditation may be difficult, by  doing a bit every day it will 
slowly become easier and we will come to want  to meditate more and more. In this way our 
mind will be happy when we can meditate an d unhappy when we canno t meditate. Although 
many of us need to work and take care of a fa mily, we should constantly strive not only to 
care for the few people in our family but also to take care of all sentient beings. We should develop the wish for them to have happiness and the wish for them to be free from suffering, 
and to take upon ourselves the responsibility to ac hieve this. In short, we should strive to give 
up self-cherishing and develop the mind cherishing others.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C The stages of meditating on how to exchange oneself and others 
1 Removing obstacles 
2 The actual way to meditate 
The third has two [points]: Removing obstacles and the actual way to meditate. 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1 Removing obstacles 
A Identifying the mind of exchanging oneself and others 
B Removing obstacles to it  
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1A Identifying the mind of exchanging oneself and others 
First: To say “exchanging oneself and othe rs,” “making oneself into the other and 
making others into oneself” does not mean  to train in the mind that thinks: “The 
other [person] is me” and “His eyes and so forth are my eyes and so forth.” Rather 
it is to exchange the rank of the two – (1) the mind that cherishes oneself and (2) 
the mind that neglects others, and to gene rate the mind that ch erishes others like 
we do ourselves and neglects ourselves like we do others. That is also why it was 
taught that one’s own happiness and othe rs’ suffering should be exchanged. 
Through looking at self-cherishing as our enemy, we will stop considering our own 
happiness to be a priority. Through looking at the qualities of cherishing others, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
532 we will stop neglecting the suffering of others, and it will become a priority to 
eliminate it. In short, we will act for the sake of removing the suffering of others 
without concern for our own happiness. 
 
When obstacles to exchanging ourselves with others arise, they must be removed. To do so, 
we first need to identify the mind of exchangi n g  s e l f  a n d  o t h e r s .  I t  i s  n o t  t ha t  w e  b e c o m e 
others and others become us, nor is it that others’ bodies become “m y body,” others’ head 
“my head,” others’ eyes “my eyes,” others’ hand s “my hands,” and so fort h. This mind is not 
what we need to train in. What we need to tr ain in is eliminating the mind that cherishes 
ourselves and developing the mind that cheris hes others. Thus, we have to exchange our 
attitude, not our body. Just as we presently ch erish ourselves, we should come to cherish 
others. Just as we presently neglect others, we should come to neglect ourselves. We need to 
develop the attitude that other sentient beings  are more important than us, and generate the 
wish to cherish and take care of them whil e thinking that we ourselves do not matter. 
Between self and others, others are more import ant because they are numberless while we are 
o n l y  o n e .  T h i n k i n g  i n  t h i s  w a y ,  w e  n e e d  t o  c h a n g e  o u r  a t t i t u d e  a n d  g i v e  u p  t h e  m i n d  cherishing ourselves and develop the mind cheris hing others. We need to give our happiness 
to others and take their suffering upon oursel ves. This is the meaning of “exchanging.”  
 By looking at our self-cherishing mind as our real enemy, we should stop the thought that 
our own happiness is most important and develop the thought that it is  more important for 
o t h e r  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  t o  b e  h a p p y .  P r e s e n t l y  when we look at other sentient beings, we 
disregard and do not think about their suffering . This is the attitude that we need to 
eliminate. What do we need to do? Instead of  looking at our own happiness, we should look 
at others who are suffering and develop the wish  to eliminate their suffering and then, based 
on this, do the taking-and-giving meditation. In this way we will be able to change our mind 
and we will become really happy. If we become able to take care of and help other sentient beings by removing their suffering, we too wi ll become happy and content. For example, a 
man does whatever he can in order to take care of his wife and child even though it may be 
difficult, such as working in order to earn mone y so as to provide them with all necessities. 
We should think of all sentient beings like our family and eliminate the attitude that neglects 
them and develop the mind that wishes to take c a r e  o f  t h e m .  I f  w e  c o n t i n u o u s l y  s t r i v e  t o  
develop this attitude, one day we will achieve it  such that it will then arise effortlessly and 
spontaneously. We should try to develop this attitude by not looking at our own short-term 
happiness but instead looking at and meditating on the suffering of others.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B Removing obstacles impeding it  
When training in this mind, there are two obstacles. 
 
1 Removing the obstacle of considering oneself and others as distinct individuals 
2 [Removing the obstacle of thinking: “As the suffering of others does not harm me, I need not make an effort to remove it”] 
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B1 Removing the obstacle of considering oneself and others as distinct individuals 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
533 A The actual [topic] 
By separating the two, oneself and othe rs – the basis of one’s own and others’ 
happiness and suffering – into distinct entiti es, like blue and yellow, they are held 
to be established [in this way ]. Then, with respect to the happiness and suffering 
based on them, you think: “Since it is  m i n e ,  i t  s h o u l d  b e  a c c o m p l i s h e d  o r  
removed. Since it is others,’ it is to be neglected.” Therefore, as an antidote to this 
[think]: “Myself and others are not separa te entities by nature. Looking at each 
other, the mind “other” is generated in me, whereas the mind “I” is generated in 
the other [person], ‘the mountain over there’ and ‘the mountain over here.’” For 
instance, although from this perspective wi th respect to the mountain over there, 
the mind “the mountain over there” is generated, when you go to the mountain 
over there, the mind “the mountain over he re” is generated. Therefore, this is not 
the same as the fact that by looking at the color blue {177} the mind of just blue is 
generated, whereas the mind of an other color is not generated.  
 
There are two obstacles to training in the mind of  exchanging self with others. One obstacle is 
to consider ourselves and others as separate or  distinct entities. This thought needs to be 
eliminated.  
 In our mind there can arise the thought that  the basis of our happiness and the basis of 
our suffering, that is, our body, is completely se parate from others, like blue and yellow. Due 
to this, we see our body and others’ bodies as established from their own side. Then when we 
experience happiness in relation to ourselves we want to increase it, and when we experience 
suffering in relation to ourselves we want to  eliminate it. On the other hand, we think of 
others as separate from ourselves and due to th is neglect them. In other words, because their 
bodies are separate from ours we think that it is  fine to neglect them. Th e antidote to this is 
to think that self and other do not exist in this way, that is, they are not separate by nature or 
inherently. Why? Because self and other exist in re lation to each other, that is, they exist in 
dependence on each other. Just as we think of ourselves as “I,” so too do others think of 
themselves as “I.” Therefore, “I” exists in dependence on “other.” For example, we call a 
mountain in the distance “the mountain over  there,” and call a mountain near us “the 
mountain over here,” but when we go to “t he mountain over there” it becomes “the 
mountain over here.” Likewise, a single person can be both father and son because in relation 
to his son he is “father” and in relation to his fa ther he is “son.” Simila rly, tall and short exist 
in relation to each other, for example, a single  person can be tall in relation to someone who 
is shorter and short in relation to someone wh o is taller. Likewise, fat and thin exist in 
relation to each other, whereby a single person  is fat in relation to someone who is thinner 
and is thin in relation to someone who is even fatter. All phenomena are interdependent. 
Thus, big and small, tall and short, long and shor t, and so forth exist in dependence on each 
other. We need to try to develop an understa nding of interdependent relationship – that 
everything depends on something else.   On the other hand, seeing the color blue does  not depend on seeing red, yellow, white, 
green, brown, and so forth. We do not think blue in relation to red, or blue in relation to white, or blue in relation to orange, or blue in  relation to yellow. We only see blue. Thus, this 
is not the same as big and small, tall and shor t, long and short, this mountain and that 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
534 mountain, which exist in dependence on each  other. Blue is just blue. For example, 
sometimes the sky is blue. 
 In short, we need to see that all sentient beings are kind, that we depend on them, that 
they bring us happiness, and that we re main alive in dependence on them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The scriptural source 
In this manner, the Compendium of All Trainings  (Shiksasammucchaya ) also teaches 
that [self and other ] are not established by their own nature, but are merely 
posited in dependence on the point of view: 
 
Through familiarizing with the equality of self and other, The mind of enlightenment becomes stable. ‘Self’ and ‘other’ are relative; 
As fictitious as ‘over there” and ‘over here.’  
 That mountain side is not ‘over there’ in itself; Depending on the perspective it becomes ‘over here.’ If ‘self’ is not established in itself, Depending on the perspective it becomes ‘other.’ 
 
The source of the teaching on exchangi ng self and others is Shantideva’s Compendium of 
Trainings .  T h i s  t e x t  s a y s  t h a t  i f  w e  f a m i l i a r i z e  w i th equalizing ourselves and other sentient 
beings, the mind of enlightenment will become ve ry stable. Self and other exist in dependence 
on each other. When we look at ourselves we think “I” and when we look at others we think 
“other.” However, when others look at themselv es they think “I” and wh en they look at us 
they think “other.” Thus, self and other depend on the point of  view. Similarly, the mountain 
over here and the mountain over there, one on the east and one to the west, exist in relation 
to each other, but if we were go to the mounta in over there, it would become “the mountain 
over here” and the other mountain would become  “the mountain over there.” We therefore 
develop different minds depending on the point of  view. In this same way, self and other can 
change. Everything depends on something el se. Thus, all functioning things are not 
established from their own side, or by their own nature, or by their own entity, or inherently, 
b u t  e x i s t  i n  d e p e n d e n c e  o n  o t h e r ,  s u c h  a s  causes and conditions. Likewise, the “being” 
depends on the five aggregates, that is, it is imputed on the five aggregates. The self depends 
on the body aggregate, feeling aggregate, di scrimination aggregate, compositional factors 
aggregate, and consciousness aggregate. It also  depends on causes and conditions. It also 
depends on parts. It also depends on being imputed by thought and name. In brief, all 
phenomena do not exist from their own side or inherently, but are merely imputed by 
thought, that is, they are merely imputed by  name. Therefore, all phenomena are empty of 
true or inherent existence, existence from their own side, and so forth. These types of 
existence are to be negated.  
 In order to eliminate the conception of a se lf, we need to rely on the wisdom realizing 
emptiness, its main antidote. On the other ha nd, in order to eliminate the self-cherishing 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
535 mind, we need to rely on the mind of enligh tenment, bodhichitta. If we develop these two 
antidotes, we will be able to eliminate all obstacles to the achievement of buddhahood. In 
other words, the obstacles to buddhahood are th e two: the conception of a self and self-
cherishing. However, the latter is the main obst acle. Hence, if we do not eliminate the self-
cherishing mind, we cannot achieve enlightenm ent. To achieve enlightenment we need to 
create its cause – the mind cherishing others. It is  important in daily life to try to do this. It 
does not matter whether or not we actually gain the realization of this, but it is important to 
try. If we try to do this again and again, one d ay we will achieve this realization. Since it does 
not come about immediately, we need to strive to develop it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1B2 [Removing the obstacle of thinking: “As the suffering of others does not harm me, I 
need not make an effort to remove it”] 
Removing the obstacle of th inking: “As the suffering of others does not harm me, 
I need not make an effort to remove it.” 
A The refutation in terms of the actions of a youth and an elderly person 
If this were the case, ther e would be no need to accumulate wealth when young 
out of concern for the sufferings of old age,  as the sufferings of the elderly person 
would not harm the youth. 
 
The second obstacle that needs to be eliminated is to think that we do not need to eliminate 
others’ suffering because it does not harm us . Although such a thought could arise in our 
mind, it is not a correct way of thinking. If this  were the case, there would be no need to work 
in our youth in order to accumulate money for the sake of eliminating the sufferings of old age, such as no longer being able to work, to  accumulate wealth, and so forth, because the 
suffering of old age does not harm the young person.   When we become old we experience the sufferings of it being difficult even to stand up without relying on someone else, of not being able  to move well, of not being able to see well, 
of not being able to digest food properly, and so forth. Also our physical energy diminishes as the energy of our bones, channels, winds, blood, and so forth degenerate. Seeing these 
sufferings, we work even when we are young to avoid them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The refutation in terms of different parts of the body and different times 
It is said: “Likewise, the hand would not remove the sufferings of the foot because 
they are other.” This is a mere illustration; it can also be applied to [the sufferings ] 
of the morning and those of the evening, and so forth. 
 
When we have suffering in our leg, we reliev e it with our hands by applying medicine and 
oils, massaging it, and so forth. However, this too would not be right si nce the suffering of the 
leg is not the suffering of the hand. This is an other way to refute the thought “Because others’ 
s u f f e r i n g  d o  n o t  h a r m  u s ,  w e  d o  n o t  n e e d  t o  e l i m i n a t e  t h e m . ”  I n  f a c t ,  w e  s h o u l d  r e m o v e  others’ suffering just as the hand eliminates the suffering of the leg.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
536  Likewise, the suffering of the morning and th e suffering of the afternoon are not the same. 
To avoid the suffering of the afternoon, we m ay do something in the morning, even though 
the suffering of the afternoon is different from that of the morning. In  other words, we take 
care of ourselves in the morning in order to av oid experiencing problems in the evening, and 
we take care of ourselves in the evening in order to avoid experiencing problems, such as 
sickness, the next morning. Although the times are different, we still strive to eliminate the 
suffering of another time. Thinking in this w ay, we should also relieve others’ suffering.  
 This is an illustration that we should use to understand why it is necessary to relieve others 
sufferings. For example, when a son suffers fr om a broken leg, his parents become unhappy, 
that is, they suffer mentally, and try to eliminat e his suffering and to do whatever they can to 
take care of him, even though the suffering of  the broken leg does not physically harm them. 
Although they could think that it is not necessa ry for them to eliminate their child’s suffering 
because it does not harm them, this would not be appropriate.  
 
Wednesday morning, 4 May 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 177) says:  
C Abandoning the doubt that [these analogies ] are not the same as self and other since they deal with 
the same continuum or same collection 
If you think: “The two, self and othe r, are not the same since the elderly [person] 
and the youth are the same continuum, whil e the hand and the foot are the same 
collection.” ‘Continuum’ and ‘collection’ are designated on many instants and a 
combination of many parts; they lack an  autonomous entity. Since your own self 
and others’ self must be posited on a continuum or collection, they are not 
established by way of their own entity, which is that self and other are not merely 
posited in relation. 
 Here the doubt is raised that while the yo ung person and elderly person are the same 
continuum, and the hand and foot are parts of th e same collection, self and other are neither 
and are therefore different from these two anal ogies. However, that the young person and 
elderly person are one continuum and that our bo d y  i s  a  c o l l e c t i o n  o f  m a n y  p a r t s  i s  o n l y  
imputed by thought. They do not exist by th eir own power but are dependent. In the same 
way, self and other are imputed by thought as “I ” and “other.” Therefore, they are similar in 
depending on each other. For example, if two pe ople are talking, one says “I” with respect to 
himself and “other” with respect to the other person. However, this “I” and “other” do not 
exist independently; they are dependent-relati ons. Therefore, without doubt self and other 
exist in dependence on each other. They exis t by imputation and do not exist by their own 
nature or from their own side. All phenomena do not exist from their own side, do not exist truly, and do not exist inherently. Such ty pes of existence are objects of negation.  
 Since self and other exist in dependence, we  can change our attitude by abandoning the 
thought that we are more important and deve loping the thought that others are more 
important, and then wish to take care of th em. Because other sentient beings are infinite, 
whereas we are only one, others are more important than us.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
537 D By the power of familiari zation, [the mind] cherishing others can also develop 
{178} Nonetheless, since, by the power of familiarizing with it from beginningless 
time, your own suffering is unbearable, so too if you familiarize with cherishing 
others their suffering will also become unbearable.  
 
If we want to develop the thou ght cherishing others we can do so through familiarizing with 
it. From beginningless time until now we have familiarized ourselves with the thought cherishing ourselves through thinking abou t how unbearable are our own problems and 
sufferings. If we now familiarize with the thought that others’ suffering is also unbearable, just 
by seeing other beings who are suffering the mind that is unable to bear their suffering will arise. This can only be developed by familiarizin g ourselves with this th ought. Therefore, just 
as it is presently easy for us to generate the self-cherishing mind due to having familiarized with it since beginningless time, so too throug h familiarity can we come to find others’ 
suffering unbearable. Based on this, we should  determine to eliminate others’ sufferings and 
accomplish their happiness. This co mes about due to familiarity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2 The actual way to meditate 
A Thinking about the disadvantages of cherishing oneself and the advantages of cherishing others 
Second: By the power of attachment, self -cherishing has produced much that is 
undesirable from beginningless time up to now. Despite the fact that you wanted 
to create excellence for yourself, throug h considering your own welfare paramount 
you engaged in unsuitable means. Due to this, neither your own welfare nor that 
of others was accomplished although a gr eat number of eons passed. Not only did 
you not accomplish that, you were tormente d only by suffering. If you had shifted 
the concern for your own welfare to that  of others, you would have become a 
buddha a long time ago and both your own and others’ welfare would have, 
without doubt, become excellent. But, as  you did not do that, the time has been 
spent in meaningless exertion.  
 The actual way to meditate on exchanging self an d others is divided into five sub-outlines. To 
exchange our present attitude of cherishing ours elves for cherishing others, we first need to 
contemplate the many disadvantages of cheris hing ourselves and the many advantages of 
cherishing others. From beginningless time unti l now, out of attachme nt to ourselves, we 
have continually experienced many undesirable sufferings and difficulties in cyclic existence 
and have not achieved our desired aims. Althou gh we wished for all that is excellent, we 
engaged in inappropriate methods to gain it. Due to this, we experienced suffering in the past 
for a great number of eons and are experiencing  suffering now, without achieving either our 
own or others’ welfare. Instead we were only tormented by suffering. We need to understand 
that up to now we have only been striving to take care of ourselves, due to which we engaged in mistaken methods that did not bring the result  of what is excellent but only more suffering 
and problems. Thus, we now need to change th is habit of thinking of ourselves alone and 
begin to think of others. If we had done this in the past we would now be buddhas. However, 
we did not do this, but only thought of oursel ves and did not think of others. Therefore, now 
we need to think that other sentient beings ar e more important than ourselves. By developing 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
538 this attitude, we will achieve buddhahood wher eby we will be able to excellently accomplish 
the welfare of all other sentient beings. There is  no doubt about this, it is certain. However, 
because we have not yet done this, we have passe d our time in meaningless activities and have 
been unable to eliminate even our own sufferi ng. Due to only thinking of ourselves, we 
engaged in mistaken methods that did not free us from cyclic existe nce and the thought to 
definitely emerge from the pleasures of cyclic  existence has still not arises. However, these 
pleasures deceive and cheat us. They cannot bring a good result, but only lead us to 
experience suffering again and again. For this  r e a s o n ,  w e  s h o u l d  n o t  b e  a t t a c h e d  t o  t h e  
excellences and happiness of cyclic existence. We need to abandon them and to wish to 
achieve the state of liberation for ourselves. To  do so, we need to meditate on emptiness and 
so forth whereby we will achieve the state gone  beyond cyclic existence – nirvana. However, 
since all our mother sentient beings are also experiencing suffering, it is not enough for 
ourselves alone to become liberated from cyclic existence. We need to take upon ourselves the 
responsibility to free all sentient beings. To do this, we must generate the mind of 
enlightenment and practice the six perfections an d the four means of gathering disciples. In 
this way, we can ripen and liberate our own continuum and can ripen those who are not ripe 
and liberate those who are ripe. In this way we will simultaneously achieve our own and 
others’ welfare by achieving buddhahood. Thus, we should not be attached to the pleasures of 
cyclic existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The need to put an end to self-cherishing by regarding it as an enemy 
Think: “Now that I have understood this , through relying on the mindfulness and 
introspection that my self-cherishing is my worst enemy, I will make much effort so 
that [the self-cherishing that ] has not arisen does not arise and that which has 
arisen does not last long.” Having made th is certainty stable, you should familiarize 
with it many times. 
 
Seeing that the self-cherishing atti tude is our real enemy, we need to strive to put an end to it. 
In fact our most powerful and worst enemy is our self-cherishing mind, therefore by relying 
on mindfulness and introspection we need to put effort into ceasing it. Whatever self-
cherishing has not been generated we should s t r i v e  t o  n o t  g e n e r a t e  i t ,  a n d  i f  w e  h a v e  
generated it we should try to stop it. We should achieve stable certainty regarding this and then familiarize with the though t that the self-cherishing mind  is our real enemy and that 
which needs to be eliminated. By familiarizing wi th this over and over again, one day we will 
be able to abandon the self-cherishing mind. On  the other hand, if we do not recognize the 
self-cherishing mind as our enemy, we will not strive to destroy it. Therefore, we must first 
recognize it as our enemy.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Generating the mind cherishing others 
Thinking about the advantages of cherishi ng others again and again in this way, 
you will generate strong enthusiasm to do  this from the bottom of your heart. 
Then, the mind that neglects others that  has not arisen will not arise and that 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
539 which has arisen will not last long. By means of generating [the thought ] that 
others are dear, attractive, and pleasant, you should generate the mind cherishing 
others, just as you previo usly cherished yourself.  
 
We need to develop the mind cherishing others  by thinking about its many advantages and 
benefits. When we develop this understanding from the depths of our heart, we will be 
delight in generating this attitude. We must tr y not to generate the mi nd that neglects other 
sentient beings, and if it has been generated we  must put a stop to it. Thinking that other 
sentient beings are dear, attractive, and pleasant, we should generate this attitude in our mind. In this way, just as in the past we ch erished ourselves, now we will develop the thought 
cherishing others and thinking th at they are important. We need to generate this attitude in 
our mind. We must think that others are very important and that we need to take care of 
them. This attitude will enable us to fulfill ou r own welfare as well as others’ welfare without 
effort. If we sow a rice seed in the ground in the spring, we will reap the result of rice in the 
autumn. While this was the main aim of planting  the rice seed, other grasses and weeds will 
a l s o  g r o w  i n  t h a t  f i e l d.  L i k e w i s e ,  b y  f u l f i l l i n g  t h e  w e l f a r e  o f  o t h e r s  f r o m  t h e  d e p t h s  o f  o u r  heart, we will by the way simultaneously fulfill our own welfare. On the other hand, if we only 
think to take care of ourselves, we will no t fulfill either our own or others’ welfares. 
Therefore, we need to develop th e attitude that cherishes others  and to familiarize with it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D How to meditate through remembering the teachings of earlier holy beings 
{179} Jowo [Atisha] said: “The Tibetans know bodhisattvas who do not know how 
to train in love and compassion. Well then , how is that done? It should be done 
through training sequentially from the beginning.” 
 Langri Thangpa said: “Shawopa and I have eighteen human methods and one 
horse method, nineteen altogether. The method of humans is, having generated 
the mind of supreme enlightenment, to train in doing whatever one does for the welfare of sentient beings. The method of horses is the self-cherishing that 
prevents the mind of enlightenment that has not been generated to arise and that 
which has arisen to remain and increase. Therefore, having taught it in passing, 
train in whatever harms it. Having taught  it as the fundamental point, train in 
whatever benefits sentient beings.”  Khamlungpa said: “Due to our acting deviously towards noble sentient beings, sentient beings will also do the same towards us.” 
 
We need to remember the teachings of past holy beings. For example, Jowo Atisha said that 
there are Tibetans who know bodhisattvas wh o do not know how to train in love and 
compassion. This means that there are so-calle d “bodhisattvas” who do not meditate on love 
and compassion. However, we need to meditate on love and compassion as they become the 
cause for generating the mind of enlightenment.  It is only when we develop an uncontrived 
mind of enlightenment that we become “bod hisattvas.” How is that done? We should 
meditate or train in this sequentially by eq ualizing friends, strangers, and enemies and 
developing equanimity for them; recognizing all sentient beings as having been our mothers; 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
540 remembering their kindness; wishing to repay th eir kindness; developing attracted love and 
compassion; developing the extraordinary attitude ; and, as a result, generating the mind of 
enlightenment. When we have developed an un contrived mind of enlightenment, we become 
bodhisattvas. In short, first we need to cultivate love and compassion and then the 
extraordinary attitude, after which we will  generate the mind of enlightenment.  
 Langri Thangpa said that he and Geshe Sh arawa have eighteen human methods and one 
horse-method, for a total of nineteen. The method  of human beings is to generate the mind 
of enlightenment and then train in doing whatev er one does for the benefit of all sentient 
beings. The method of horses is the self-cherish ing mind. It is that which blocks the mind of 
enlightenment that has not been  generated from arising, and blocks that which has arisen 
from abiding and increasing. Seeing this, we n eed to harm the self-cherishing attitude as 
m u c h  a s  p o s s i b l e .  I n  a d d i t i o n ,  w e  n e e d  t o  t r a i n  a s  m u c h  a s  w e  c a n  i n  t h e  m i n d  o f  
enlightenment and the bo dhisattva conduct.  
 Khamlungpa said that if we do not take care of sentient beings, then all sentient beings will 
do the same toward us. This refers to the fact th at whatever kind of action we create, it will 
bring a similar type of result. In other words, if  we harm other sentient beings, they will harm 
us in return. For example, if a father and mother  do not take care of their child, but instead 
beat him, insult him, and so forth, when that  child grows up he will act against his parents 
wishes, due to which they will experience suffe ring. Also due to this, when the child himself 
grows up and has children, they may treat him ba dly. Although he may then realize that he 
treated his own parents badly and may come to regr et this, it will be too late to do anything 
about it.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E The appropriateness of putting effort by many approaches into the methods for generating the mind of 
enlightenment 
It is good if a habit develops that constantly checks to what extent this mind has 
been generated since everything stems fr om it: whether or no t the root of the 
Mahayana has been planted and whethe r or not one is included among 
Mahayanists. Even if it has not been generate d, do not leave it at that but, through 
relying on a virtuous spiritual friend who teaches it, always be accompanied by the 
companion that is mind training. Read the scriptures of the Teacher and their 
commentaries. As its cause, accumulate the collections and purify obscurations. 
Since it is certain that if you train your mind in this way, the seed will be fully 
planted, these actions are of no little import ance and a reason for joy. It is as the 
great Jowo [Atisha] said:  
The arisal of the mind of enlighte nment, which like the sun and moon 
Eliminate darkness and pacify the scorching heat, Is worth even an eon of effort 
By those who wish to enter the gateway to the Mahayana Dharma. 
 
We need to try to generate the mind of enli ghtenment by means of many different methods. 
We need to put effort into this because whether or not the root of the Mahayana is 
established and whether or not we become included among Mahayanists depends on the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
541 generation of the mind of en lightenment. Hence, if we do not develop the mind of 
enlightenment, we will not establish the root of the Mahayana and we will not be included 
among Mahayanists. Therefore, at all time s we need try to generate the mind of 
enlightenment and to increase it. If we have not generated it, we should not give up but 
instead should put effort into meditating on it . We should also rely on virtuous spiritual 
friends who teach how to develop the mind of en lightenment by asking them to help us train 
our mind in developing the mind of enlightenm ent such that it will never be lost. Not only 
should we rely on teachers who teach us ho w to develop the mind of enlightenment, we 
should also find friends who are studying an d training in how to develop the mind of 
enlightenment. We should also read Buddha Shakyamuni’s teachings and their 
commentaries. In addition, in order to genera te the mind of enlightenment we need to 
acquire its cause – the collection of merit and the purification of obscurations. If we have 
done all that is necessary, it will definitely aris e. Thus, if we have planted this seed in our 
mind, we should not worry but rejoice as we  will definitely generate the mind of 
enlightenment.   Atisha said that just as sunlight elimin ates the darkness and moonlight pacifies the 
suffering of heat, if we want to enter the Mahayana we need to generate the mind of 
enlightenment and that it is worth putting effort into generating it, even if we have to do so 
f o r  a n  e o n .  T h e r e f o r e ,  i n  o u r  d a i l y  l i f e  w e  s h o u l d  c o n s t a n t l y  t r y  t o  g e n e r a t e  t h e  m i n d  o f  enlightenment. We should not do this only from time to time or just for a short time, as in this way it will not be possible to generate the mind of enlightenment. To generate it, we need 
to make constant effort at it. The mind of en lightenment is the wish to attain enlightenment 
in order to be able to benefit all sentient be ings. we need to generate this mind in our 
continuum and to familiarize with it until we  achieve an uncontrive d and spontaneous mind 
of enlightenment. Right now we only have a we ak and contrived mind of enlightenment that 
arises when we think about it, but then again di sappears. Thus, we need to strive to generate 
an uncontrived mind of enlightenment.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2B The measure of having generated that mind  
The second: {180} that should be understood from what was already explained 
above. 
 
The measure of having generated the mind of  enlightenment should be understood from 
what was explained above. The mind of enligh tenment is the wish to achieve enlightenment 
for the benefit of all sentient beings. When th is mind becomes uncontrived or non-artificial, 
we are said to have generated the mind of enli ghtenment. On the other hand, as long as the 
mind of enlightenment is contrived or artificial, even though it is called “bodhichitta” it is 
not actual  b o d h i c h i t t a .  I t  i s  l i k e  t h e  r e a l  s w e e t n e s s  t h a t  i s  h i d d e n  i n s i d e  t h e  h a r d  b a r k  o f  
sugarcane.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
Explanation of how to assume the mi nd generation by means of ritual 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
542 2B4B-2B3B-2C The way in which to assume it by means of ritual 
1 Receiving that which has not yet been received 
2 Guarding that which has been received without degenerating it 
3 The method for restoring it if it has been degenerated 
The third has three [points]: receiving that which has not yet been received, 
guarding that which has been received without degenerating it, and the method 
for restoring it if it has been degenerated. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C1 Receiving that which has not yet been received 
A From whom: the object from whom it is taken  
B By whom: the basis that takes it 
C How: the ritual by which it is taken 
The first has three [points]: From whom: th e object from whom it is taken; by 
whom: the basis that takes it; how: the ritual by which it is taken. 
 
If the mind generation has not yet been taken, from whom should it be taken? It must be 
taken from a teacher who himself already ha s the bodhisattva vows.  Having taken the 
bodhisattva vows, we must strive to keep them . The basis that takes the bodhisattva vow is 
those who are gods, nagas, and, of course, hu man beings. They can take the aspiring mind 
generation vow. Then the ritual by which the mind generation is to be taken is set forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1A From whom: the object from whom it is taken 
First: The assertions of the earlier masters accord with Master Jetari that it is not 
enough [for the person from whom the vo w is taken] to possess the aspiring mind 
and to be abiding in the trainings, rath er he must possess the engaging vow. 
 
It is not enough to take the mind generation from someone who merely possesses the aspiring 
mind and is abiding in the trainings. This pers on must have the engaging vow, not just the 
aspiring mind. In short, the person from whom it  is received must have the actual bodhisattva 
vows.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1B By whom: the basis that takes it 
Second: All gods, nagas, and so forth who are physically and mentally suitable to 
generate the aspiring mind are also a s uitable basis for it. The commentary on the 
Lamp on the Path  says: 
 
Repulsed by cyclic existence, mindful of death,  
With wisdom and great compassion. 
 
Thus, it should be someone who has gained a little experience of transforming his 
mind into the mind of enlightenment due to  having trained the mind in the stages 
of the path as explained previously. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
543 The bodily basis or support for taking the vow of the aspiring mind generation is that of gods, 
nagas, and human beings. Therefore, they are a suitable basis for it. In the commentary on 
the Lamp on the Path  by Atisha it says that the basis should be someone who has trained the 
mind in renouncing cyclic existence and in remembering death-impermanence, who possesses 
the wisdom understanding that phenomena ar e empty of inherent or self-supporting 
substantial existence, as well as the great compassion that wishes to liberate all sentient beings 
from suffering and the causes of suffering. Ther efore, we too should train as was explained 
before in understanding the sufferings of cyclic  existence whereby we wi ll no longer want to 
abide in cyclic existence and will generate the mi nd wishing to be free from cyclic existence. 
We should also train in remembering death-im permanence: death is certain, the time of 
death is uncertain, and at the time of death on ly our practice of the Dharma will be of help, 
whereas our friends, relatives, and our body will not be able to help us because we will have to 
leave all of them behind and go on alone. We need to remember death and strive to generate 
bodhichitta as much as possible. In this way, we  will become a suitable basis for generating the 
vow.  
 In short, in order to take th e vow of the aspiring mind generation by means of ritual, we 
need to have some slight experience of transforming our mind into the mind of 
enlightenment. Having taken it, we need to tr ain in the mind generation by abandoning the 
four black dharmas and adopting  the four white dharmas.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C How: the ritual by which it is taken 
1 The preparatory ritual 
2 The actual ritual 
3 The concluding ritual  
The third has three [points]: the preparat ory ritual, the actual ritual, and the 
concluding ritual.  
 
The ritual for taking the aspiring mind genera tion is divided into the preparatory ritual, 
actual ritual, and concluding ritual.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1 The preparatory ritual 
A Special going for refuge  
B Accumulating the collection 
C Training the mind 
The first has three [units]: the special goin g for refuge, accumulating the collection, 
and training the mind. 
 
The preparatory ritual consists in going for refuge, accumulating merit, and training the 
mind. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A Special going for refuge 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
544 1 Decorating the place, displaying representations, and setting up offering substances 
2 Making a request and going for refuge 
3 Stating the trainings of having gone for refuge 
The first is divided into three [point s]: Decorating the place, displaying 
representations, and setting up offering substances; making a request and going for 
refuge; and stating the trainings of having gone for refuge. 
 
We need to decorate the place in which we will take the aspiring mind generation by stringing 
garlands of flowers and so forth. We should al so set out representations of the exalted body, 
exalted speech, and exalted mind. The representati on of the exalted body is a statue of the 
Buddha, the representation of  the exalted speech is a volume of scriptures, and the 
representation of the exalted mind is a stupa. Th en we should arrange a set of five offerings: 
water, flowers, incense, light, and food. Then, we should make a request to the master and go 
for refuge. Having gone for refuge, the master explains the trainings that we then need to 
abide by.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A1 Decorating the place, displaying representations, and setting up offering 
substances 
A General indication concerning the place, the representations, offerings, etc. 
First: Sweep an isolated place, smear it with the five cow substances171, sprinkle it 
with superb fragrant water such as sand alwood and the like, and scatter fragrant, 
fresh flowers. Set out {181} representation s of the Three Jewels – metal statues and 
so forth, texts and so forth, and images of  bodhisattvas – on a throne, table, or a 
raised platform. Do the preparatory ritual with as valuable offering items such as 
canopies, flowers, and so fo rth as possible, as well as music and food. Arrange a 
throne for the virtuous spiritual friend an d also adorn it with flowers. Accumulate 
the collection [of merit] by paying respect to the fo rmer masters, the sangha, and 
giving a torma to the elemental spirits. 
 We should sweep an isolated place and smear it with the five substances obtained from cows: 
butter, yogurt, milk, dung, and urine. These su bstances are considered to be pure in the 
brahmin tradition. In fact, when I stayed together  with a brahmin family for some years, they 
would clean the ground with these substances every morning.   Then, sprinkle the place with perfume such as sandalwood and scatter fragrant flowers 
about. Then set out representations of the Th ree Jewels. The representation of the Buddha 
Jewel is an image of the Buddha, such as a tsa- tsa or statue. The representation of the Dharma 
Jewel is a volume of scriptures. The representa tion of the Sangha Jewel is images of the 
bodhisattvas. These should be put on a raised platform or altar. Above it, hang a canopy. 
Then set out offerings of flowers and so forth, as much as can be obtained. Offer music in the 
form of cymbals, conch shells, and so forth and set out offerings of food.   Arrange a throne for the virtuous spiritual friend and adorn it with flowers. Make offerings to the sangha of food, robes, money, and so forth and give a torma to the elemental spirits 
                                             
 
171 These are products of a cow that has lived in remote  mountain areas for a certain period of time feeding 
only on the pure grasses and herbs of such pl aces (oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
545 (bhuti) by means of performing, for example, the Offering in Three Parts  (Chag Sum ). This puja 
is so-called because a torma composed of three parts is offered to three sets of guests.  
 Wednesday afternoon, 4 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 181) says:  
B Clearing up doubts about this 
If you do not have any offerings, as described in the Sutra of the Good Eon  it can be 
accomplished even with cloth fringes. If you do have offerings, they should have 
been obtained through great effort without deceit, and should be arrayed in such a 
way that your friends cannot help marveling.  
 When Jowo [Atisha] was requested by Tibetan teachers in Mangyul and Samye for the mind generation, he reportedly said that it was not generated by inferior offerings. He said that also as a repres entation a consecrated statue of the main 
master who taught was imperati ve, and also as a text the Abbreviated Perfection of 
Wisdom  on upward should be used. 
 Here the doubt is eliminated regarding the fact that if you have something good to offer, you 
should offer it. On the other hand, if you do not have any offerings, you can offer even as 
little as a piece of cotton cloth. If you have offerings, they shou ld be obtained without deceit. 
We should offer whatever we can, and arranged in such a way that our friends are made to 
marvel. Thus, with respect to offerings there are the two factors: the motivation and the 
s u b s t a n c e .  F o r  e x a m p l e ,  w e  s h o u l d  n o t  o f f e r  t h i n g s  t h a t  w e r e  o b t a i n e d  b y  h i n t i n g  t o  o u r  
benefactor, saying, for example “Last year you gave me such-and-such offerings,” in order to obtain them again. If we make offerings moti vated by the eight worldly concerns this would 
not be right and the offerings thereby become impure. We should offer only what has been 
obtained honestly.   Atisha was asked by the Tibetan teachers  in Mangyul and Samye to give the mind 
generation by ritual. At this time Atisha explai ned that if the offerings made were inferior it 
would not be possible to generate the mind of  enlightenment, and that only good things 
should be offered. Similarly, the Tibetan nomads say that it is not good  to melt rancid butter 
and offer it in a butter lamp. In other words, we  should not offer things that are no longer 
good to eaten or drunk. Atisha also said that  a consecrated statue of the Teacher, Buddha 
Shakyamuni, as well as a text of the Abbreviated Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  on upward, that is, 
either the 8,000, 25,000, 10, 000 Verse Perfection of Wisdom Sutras , should be set on the altar as 
representations respectively of the Buddha Jewel and Dharma Jewel.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C The steps to be performed by the lama and student  
Then, the assembly of aryas is invoked. The student, washed and well dressed with 
his palms joined, is encouraged by the la ma to generate clear faith in the good 
qualities of the merit field from the bottom of his heart. He should then slowly do 
the seven-limb prayer, imagining that he is in front of the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
546  
The assembly of arya beings should be invited.  The student, clean and well dressed, should 
fold his hands together. The lama then makes him remember the good qualities of the merit 
field and to generate clear faith in them. Then, imagining that he is in front of the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas, the student should, with fo lded hands, do the seven-limb prayer in a 
melodious and slow tune. The seven limbs are: prostrating, offering, confessing, rejoicing, 
requesting to turn the wheel of Dharma, that is, to give teachi ngs, exhorting to not pass away 
but to remain, and dedicating the virtue created by doing the previous six limbs as a cause for 
all sentient beings to achieve buddhahood. Ther e is an extensive vers ion of the seven-limb 
prayer in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  and the Samantabhadra Prayer  (King of Prayers ) There 
is also a shorter version in the Guru Yoga of Lama Tsongkhapa , as well as the standard very 
short version: 
 
Respectfully I prostrate with my three doors. 
I present offerings, both those actu al arranged and mentally emanated. 
I confess all negativities and downfalls accumulated since beginningless time. 
I rejoice in all the virtues of ordinary and arya beings. Please remain as long as cy clic existence is not empty, 
And turn the wheel of the profound and vast Dharma. I dedicate my own and others’ virtues to great enlightenment. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2 Making a request and going for refuge 
A Making a request 
B The special going for refuge  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2A Making a request 
Second: Then [the student ], having generated the discrimination of his lama as 
the Teacher, prostrates to him and makes offerings, including a mandala, to him. 
With his right knee on the floor, palms jo ined, he makes a request for the purpose 
of the mind of enlightenment: 
 
Just as the previous tathagata, foe-destroyer, perfectly complete buddhas, as well as the great bodhisa ttvas abiding on the great grounds, 
first generated the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment, likewise so do I, wh ose name is…, request the master to 
generate the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment. 
 Repeat this three times. 
 The disciple discriminates the te acher who will give him the vow of the aspiring or engaging 
mind generation as the Teacher, Buddha Shakyamun i. He then prostrates to him, either by 
doing long or short prostrations or just putti ng his palms together, and then makes offerings 
including a mandala offering saying:  
This ground anointed with perfume and strewn with flowers, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
547 Adorned with Mt. Meru, the four continents, sun, and moon, 
I offer, visualized as a buddha field. May all beings enjoy this completely pure realm. 
 
IDAM GURU RATNA MANDALAKAM NIRYATAYAMI 
 
Then the disciple kneels with his right knee  on the ground, hands folded, and makes the 
request to receive the mind of enlightenment by means of ritual saying the above lines: “ Just 
as the previous tathagata, foe-destroyer, perfectly complete buddhas…” There are ten 
bodhisattva grounds, such as the Joyous, Stainless,  and so forth. We say to the master “Just as 
they perfectly generated the mind of unsurpasse d, perfectly complete enlightenment, likewise 
s o  d o  I ,  w h o  a m  c a l l e d … ,  r e q u e s t  t o  g e n e ra t e  the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly complete 
enlightenment.” In other words, “Just as the buddhas of the past generated the mind of 
enlightenment and just as the bodhisattvas abid ing on the ten grounds generated the mind of 
enlightenment, so too may I generate it. Please  b es t o w i t  u po n m e.” We s ho u ld  m ake t hi s  
request three times, after which we should think that the guru accepts our request.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2B The special going for refuge  
1 The attitude together with the objects 
Then, [the student ] goes for refuge, with the behavior explained before, to the 
objects – the Buddha, the Dharma (true pa ths that mainly bring about cessations), 
and the Sangha (the irreversible arya bo dhisattvas) – with the general attitude 
thinking: “From now until I attain enlighte nment, in order to protect all sentient 
beings [I go for refuge ] to the Buddha, the teacher of refuge; [I go for refuge ] to 
the Dharma, the actual refuge; [I go for refuge ] to the Sangha, those who help to 
achieve refuge”; and with the special attitu de of making the strong aspiration: “I 
will never turn away from this attitude at any time.” 
 
The objects of refuge are the Three Jewels: the Buddha who is an enlightened being; the 
Dharma, mainly true cessations and true path s; and the Sangha, the irreversible arya 
bodhisattvas. The student goes for refuge to them  with the behavior explained before, that is, 
kneeling on his right knee with his hands folded together, while thinking “From now on, as long as I have not achieved enlightenment, for the purpose of protecting all sentient beings I 
go for refuge to the Buddha, th e one who shows refuge or protection; I go for refuge to the 
actual refuge, the Dharma, true paths and true cessations; and I go for refuge to the Sangha, 
those who help me actualize the final refuge, th e Dharma.” This is the general attitude or 
motivation for going for refuge. The special or pa rticular attitude is the strong aspiration: “I 
will not turn away from this attitude at any time.”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
548 2 The words of the ritual  
“Master, please grant me your attent ion. I, whose name is (…), from 
now until I reach the essence of enli ghtenment, go for refuge to the 
best of men, the Buddha Bhagavans.  
Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now 
until I reach the essence of enlightenm ent, go for refuge to the best of 
Dharma, the Dharma that is peace, free from attachment.  Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now 
until I reach the essence of enlightenm ent, go for refuge to the best of 
assemblies, the Sangha of irreve rsible arya bodhisattvas.” {183} 
 
Repeat this three times. This request for a ttention when going for refuge to each of 
the Jewels and the unusual words of going for refuge to the Dharma accord with the ritual composed by Jowo [Atisha]. 
 
Here we begin by asking the “Master” or “Achar ya” to pay attention to us. “I, who am called… 
from now on, as long as I have not reached the essence of enlightenment, go for refuge to the 
best among bipeds, that is, among human be ings who walk on two legs, the Buddha 
Bhagavans.” The Sanskrit word Buddha is sang-gye  (sangs rgyas ) in Tibetan. The syllable, sang, 
meaning purified , indicates that he has completely purified all obscurations. The syllable gye, 
meaning extended , indicates that he has complete increase d his wisdom to the point that he is 
able to see all phenomena directly. The Sanskrit word Bhagavan is translated into Tibetan as 
chom-den-de  (bcom ldan ‘das ) The syllable chom, meaning destroyed , indicates that he has 
destroyed the four maras or demons: the mara of the aggregates, the mara of the mental 
afflictions, the mara of de ath, and the mara of the so ns-of-the-gods. The syllable den, meaning 
possess , indicates that he possesses the six qualities of perfect wisdom and so forth. The syllable 
de, meaning transcended  or passed beyond , is added to the original Sa nskrit word “Bhagavan” in 
order to indicate that a buddha has gone beyond  or transcended the great gods because this 
epithet was used in India to refer to Brahma , Shiva, Mahadeva, and so forth. Because a 
buddha bhagavan possesses these characteristics, we pay homage to him by putting the crown 
of our head to his feet.  
 Again we say “Master, please listen to me. I, who am called…, from now on, as long as I 
have not attained reached the essence of enligh tenment, go for refuge to the Dharma Jewel.” 
The Dharma Jewel is peace or cessation, since it  pacifies or ceases all sufferings and mental 
afflictions, and is free from attachment and so forth.   Then once again we say: “Master, please list en to me. I, who am called…, from now on, as 
long as I have not reached the essence of en lightenment, go for refuge to the best of 
assemblies, the sangha of irreversible arya bodhisattvas.” The Sublime Continuum  sets out the 
eight qualities of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sang ha Jewels. Irreversible arya bodhisattvas who 
are dull-facultied are the bodhisattvas abidin g on the eighth, ninth, and tenth grounds. 
Irreversible arya bodhisattvas who are sharp-fa cultied are those who have achieved the heat 
level of the path of preparation and will never gi ve up bodhichitta and fall to the hearer path. 
In this case “irreversible” means that their re alization of the mind of enlightenment will no 
longer degenerate and that they will never fall to the Hinayana path.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
549  We should repeat these words three times. Th is ritual for taking the vow of the aspiring 
mind generation was composed by Atisha. While the words of going for refuge to the Dharma 
differ from those found in other contexts, they are based upon Atisha’s teachings on taking 
the bodhisattva vows by means of ritual.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A3 Stating the trainings of having gone for refuge 
Third: Here too the master should express the trainings that were explained before 
in the context of small beings. 
 
Having gone for refuge, there are precepts or trainings to be followed that were explained 
previously in the context of the path of small beings. These include general precepts and 
specific precepts. The specific precepts regarding what is to be abandoned are: 
1. having gone for refuge to the Buddha, to  not go for refuge to mundane gods;  
2. having gone for refuge to the Dharma, to no t go for refuge to the scriptures of the 
Tirthikas; and  
3. having gone for refuge to the Sangha, to no t associate with misleading friends such as 
Tirthikas. 
The specific precepts regarding what is to be adopted are:  
1. having gone for refuge to the Buddha, to resp ect any representation of the Buddha as if it 
were the actual Buddha;  
2. having gone for refuge to the Dharma, to re spect any Dharma texts as if they were the 
actual Dharma, true paths and true cessations;  
3. having gone for refuge to the Sangha, to resp ect the ordinary sangha of monks and nuns as 
if they were the actual sangha.  
The general precepts are before eating or drinki ng to offer one’s food and drink to the Three 
Jewels, and to recite the refuge formula three times during the day and three times at night. 
These precepts were taught in the context of small beings. We should read and study them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1B Accumulation of the collection [of merit] 
S e c o n d :  A s  b e f o r e  t h e  s e v e n - l i m b  p r a y e r  s h o u l d  b e  d o n e  i n  t h e  p r e s e n c e  o f  t h e  
direct and lineage gurus and the merit field explained previously. 
 
We also need to accumulate merit. To do so, in front of ourselves we should visualize the 
direct gurus from whom we presently receive teachings and the lineage gurus from Buddha 
Shakyamuni down to our present guru. We shou ld also visualize the merit field that was 
explained previously. Then we should perform th e seven-limb prayer, offer a mandala, and so 
forth as before.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1C Training in the attitude 
Third: As explained previously, the obse rved objects and aspects of love and 
compassion should be visualized. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
550  
The observed object of love is sentient beings , its aspect is the thought: “How wonderful it 
would be if all sentient beings were to have  happiness and the causes of happiness. May they 
have happiness and the causes of happiness.” Th e observed object of compassion is all 
sentient beings, its aspect is the thought: “How  wonderful it would be if all sentient beings 
were free from suffering and the causes of suffering. May they be free from suffering and the 
causes of suffering.” All sentient beings are tormented by the three types of suffering: the 
suffering of suffering, suffering of change, and pervasive suffering. Unable to bear this, we 
should wish all sentient beings to be free from their suffering and the causes of their suffering. 
We should visualize this clearly.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-2 The actual ritual 
A The behavior 
Second: In front of the master, [the student ] should kneel down on his right knee; 
alternatively, sitting in a crouching position  is also appropriate. With palms joined, 
he should generate the mind [of enlightenment]. 
 
The behavior is, in front of the master, for th e student to kneel with his right knee on the 
ground, or to sit in a crouching position. He should join his palms and generate the mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The distinction of the mind generation 
[The mind generation here ] is not the mere mind generation that thinks “I will 
attain buddhahood for others’ welfare.” Ra ther, it is the promise that, observing 
the mind that has been generated, thinks, “I  shall not give it up as long as I have 
not attained enlightenment.” This is why that attitude should be generated in 
dependence on a ritual. 
 
The distinction or particularity of the mind genera tion here is that it is not just the mind of 
enlightenment wishing to attain buddhahood for th e welfare of all sentient beings. What is it? 
It is the promise or determination to not give up this mind of enlightenment as long as we 
have not attained enlightenment. To make this ki nd of promise, we need to rely on a ritual.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C An exception to that 
If you are unable to train in the traini ngs of the aspiring mind, you should not 
[make this promise ]. On the other hand, if the me re thought “I will become a 
buddha for the welfare of all sentient bein gs” is generated by means of a ritual, 
everyone can do it, regardless of whether they are able or not to train in the 
trainings of the mind generation. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
551 The exception to this is that if we want to take the mind generati on that is the wish to attain 
enlightenment for the welfare of all sentient bein gs by means of ritual but are unable to train 
in the trainings, we should  not make the promise “I will not give up the mind of 
enlightenment as long as I have not attained  enlightenment.” So, wh at should we do? We 
should merely think “I will become a buddha for the welfare of all sentient beings,” and with 
this thought take the mind generation by means of ritual. In this case, whether we can train 
in the trainings or not, we can take the mi nd of enlightenment by means of ritual.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D It is inappropriate to posit two systems of guarding and not guarding the trainings with respect to the 
engaging mind [of enlightenment] 
With respect to the aspiring mind, these two [systems] may be appropriate, 
however, with respect to taking the enga ging mind by means of ritual, it is 
inappropriate to take it without training  in the trainings. Therefore, it is 
unsuitable to assert that there is a diffe rence with respect to it being appropriate 
and inappropriate in the many rituals fo r the vow transmitted from Nagarjuna and 
Asanga {184}. 
 
If we take the aspiring mind of enlightenmen t there are two ways to do so: (1) with the 
promise not to give up the mind generation as  long as one has not attained enlightenment 
and to guard the trainings and (2) with the mere  promise not to give up the mind generation 
as long as one has not attained enlightenment. However, in the case of taking the engaging 
mind of enlightenment by means of a ritual, one must necessarily promise to train in the 
trainings, as otherwise one cannot take the enga ging mind, that is, the bodhisattva vows, by 
means of ritual. While there are two systems rega rding the ritual for taking the vows, that of 
Nagarjuna and that of Asanga, it is inappropriat e to assert that there is a difference between 
them with respect to  this assertion. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E Although it is appropriate for someone not training in the trainings to generate the aspiring mind, the 
engaging vow is inappropriate 
The Advice to King Prasenajit  says that if one cannot train in the trainings of 
generosity, etc., a great amount of merit is accomplished from merely generating 
the mind [of enlightenment ]. Taking this as its source, the First Stages of Meditation  
says: 
 
Whoever cannot train in the perfection s fully in all their aspects should 
generate the mind of enlightenm ent thoroughly conjoined with 
method because the results will be great. 
 Thus, it is clear that it is appropriate for someone incapable of training in the 
trainings of generosity and so forth to generate the mind of enlightenment, but inappropriate to hold the vow. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
552 Someone who does not guard the trainings can ge nerate the aspiring mind of enlightenment 
by means of ritual but cannot take the engaging mind of enlightenment by means of ritual, 
that is, cannot take the bodhisattva vows. In the Advice to King Prasenajit  it says that someone 
who cannot train in the trainings can still take the vows of aspiring mind of enlightenment. 
In other words, even if such a person cannot keep the trainings he can still generate the mind 
of enlightenment and thereby create  a lot of merit. Likewise, the First Stages of Meditation  says 
that even if someone cannot practice the six perf ections fully and in all ways, if he generates 
the mind of enlightenment it will still bring a great result. In other words, we need to 
generate the mind of enlightenment thoroughly  conjoined with method . Hence, even if we 
are unable to train in the trainings of the six pe rfections, it is still s uitable to generate the 
aspiring mind of enlightenment by means of ritu al. However, if we are unable to train in the 
trainings, we should not take the bodhisattva vows, that is, th e vows of the engaging mind of 
enlightenment.  
 
In short, we should try to generate bodh ichitta. Every morning we should generate 
bodhichitta thinking “May I attain buddhahood in  order to be able to benefit all sentient 
beings.” We should develop the mo tivation to take care of all sentient beings based on great 
love and great compassion, and, with these as a cause, generate the mind of enlightenment 
thinking to attain enlightenment in order to be able to take care of all sentient beings. We 
should try to generate bodhichitta in this way in our every day life. This will make our human 
rebirth useful and meaningful. If we do not do anything special with it, our good human 
rebirth will just go to waste. It will be meaningl ess. If we think only ab out this life, this will 
become the cause for us to be reborn again an d again in cyclic existence and to experience 
suffering. Therefore, we should wish to get out of cyclic existence and to take other sentient 
beings with us.  
 Thursday morning, 5 May 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
F The ritual for assuming the mind generation  
The ritual for assuming the mind generation is: 
 
All buddhas and bodhisattvas residing in the ten directions, please 
grant me your attention. Master, please grant me your attention. I, 
whose name is (…), by means of the roots of virtue of the nature of 
generosity, the nature of morality, an d the nature of meditation that I 
have created, caused to be created, and rejoiced in the creation of in 
this life and in previous lives, just as the previous tathagata, foe-destroyer, perfectly complete buddhas and great bodhisattvas thoroughly abiding on the great grounds, generated the mind of unsurpassed perfectly complete enligh tenment, in the same way also I, 
whose name is (…), from now until I reach the essence of enlightenment, will generate the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly 
complete, great enlightenment, I will  liberate the sentient beings who 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
553 are not liberated, free those who ar e not free, give breath to those 
unable to breathe, and cause thos e who have not completely passed 
beyond sorrow to completely pass beyond sorrow. 
 
Say this three times. Even though it is not clearly mentioned in the refuge 
[ c e r e m o n y ]  a n d  i n  t h i s  r i t u a l ,  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  r e p e a t  [ t h e s e  w o r d s ]  a f t e r  t h e  
master. 
 This is the ritual for taking the aspiring mi nd generation. Here we request all the buddhas 
and bodhisattvas abiding in the ten directio ns – the four cardinal directions, four 
intermediate directions, above and below – to p ay attention to us. We also ask the master or 
acharya to pay attention to us. When we say “I, whose name is…, ” we should insert our actual 
name or our bodhisattva name.   There are roots of virtue of th e nature of generosity, the natu re of morality, the nature of 
meditation, that we have created; roots of vi rtue of making others practice generosity, 
morality, and meditation; and roots of virtue of having rejoiced in others’ generosity, morality, and meditation.” By means of these r oots of virtue, we promise that just as the 
previous buddhas and bodhisattvas generated th e mind of unsurpassed, perfectly complete 
great enlightenment, so do we, from now un til we reach the essence of enlightenment, 
generate the mind of enlightenment. Having generated the mind of enlightenment, what 
should we do? We then promise to liberate all the sentient beings who are not liberated, free 
those who are not free, give brea th to those unable to breathe,  and cause those who have not 
completely passed beyond sorrow to completely pass beyond sorrow. By making this promise 
we take the aspiring mind generation by means of ritual.   Although in the ritual of going for refuge an d in this ritual for taking the aspiring mind 
generation it is not clearly said that we need to  repeat these words after the master or acharya, 
this in fact is necessary.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
G The method for taking [the mind generation] by oneself in a ritual  
This is the manner [of taking the mind ge neration] in the presence of a master. 
From Jowo [Atisha]’s Mind Generation  Ritual what to do if we cannot find a master 
is taught: 
 
The ritual for generating the mind  of enlightenment oneself in the 
absence of a master is as follows.  Having brought to mind Tathagata 
Shakyamuni and all the tathagatas of the ten directions, prostrate to 
them and do the rite of offerings an d so forth. Then, according to the 
previous order, make the request, go for refuge while leaving out the 
word “Master,” and so forth.  
 
What was set out above is the system for taking the vow [of the aspiring mind generation ] by 
the ritual from a master. However, if we do no t have a master, we shou ld do as explained in 
the Ritual for the Mind Generation  composed by Jowo Atisha. In th is case we can take the mind 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
554 generation by ritual by visualizing Tathagat a Shakyamuni and all the tathagatas of the ten 
directions in front of us. Then, we prostrate to  them three times, do the rite of offerings, 
make request, and go for refuge while leaving out the words “Master, please grant me your 
attention.” 
 Tathagata  literally means thus gone  or gone thus . In addition, the buddhas are also called 
sugata , literally gone to bliss . There are two types of tathagata or sugata: the tathagata or sugata 
of the complete abandonment of all the afflicti ons, obscurations, and their imprints, and the 
tathagata or sugata of the omniscient mind that directly sees both varieties and modes, that is, 
conventional truths and ultimate truths, with out any exception. One who has achieved this 
realization is called “thus gone.”  
 Shakya  is the name of Buddha’s clan, muni means capable one, that is, able to destroy all 
the afflictions and obscurations. Thinking of the qualities of the tathagatas, we should 
prostrate with our body, speech, and mind, to them , that is, physically we should prostrate to 
them, verbally we should recite praise to th em, and mentally we should generate faith in 
them. Then we can do a short o ffering ritual such as the seve n-limb prayer which consists of 
prostrating, offering, confessing, rejoicing, requ esting to turn the wheel of Dharma, exhorting 
to not pass away, and dedicating all the virtue s created by the previous six limbs that they 
become a cause for all sentient beings to ac hieve enlightenment. Then we should offer a 
mandala, for example, the seven-heap mandala with  the recitation of the usual four-line verse. 
The seven heaps consist of Mount Meru the middl e, surrounded by the four continents in the 
east, south, west, and north, as well as th e sun and the moon. In  the context of the 
Guhyasamaja Tantra and the Tara Chittamani Ta ntra There is also mandala offering of 23 
heaps, however, in this contex t we could over the long mandala of 37 heaps that comes from 
the Sakya tradition.  
 We go for refuge as before, except that we omit the words “Master, please grant me your attention”:   
I, whose name is (…), from now until I re ach the essence of enlightenment, go for 
refuge to the best of men, the Buddha Bhagavans.  I, whose name is (…), from now until I re ach the essence of enlightenment, go for 
refuge to the best of Dharma, the Dharma  that is peace, free from attachment.  
I, whose name is (…), from now until I re ach the essence of enlightenment, go for 
refuge to the best of assemblies, the Sangha of irreversible arya bodhisattvas. 
 The rest of the ritual for taking the mind genera tion is also the same, although once again we 
leave out the words “Master, please grant me your attention”:   
All buddhas and bodhisattvas residing in the ten directions, please grant me your 
attention. I, whose name is (…), by means of the roots of  virtue of the nature of 
generosity, the nature of morality, and the nature of meditation that I have 
created, caused to be created, and rejoiced  in  t h e  c r e a t i o n  o f i n  t h i s  l i f e  a n d  i n  
previous lives, just as the previous tath agata, foe-destroyer, perfectly complete 
buddhas and great bodhisattvas thorou ghly abiding on the great grounds, 
generated the mind of unsurpassed perfectl y complete enlightenment, in the same 
way also I, whose name is (…), from now until I reach the essence of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
555 enlightenment, will generate the mind of  unsurpassed, perfectly complete, great 
enlightenment, I will liberate the sentient  beings who are not liberated, free those 
who are not free, give breath to those unab le to breathe, and cause those who have 
not completely passed beyond sorrow to completely pass beyond sorrow. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-3 The concluding ritual 
Third: The master should mention the tr ainings of the aspiring mind to the 
student. 
 
The master should explain to the student the tr ainings of the aspiring mind that he should 
now train in.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2 Guarding that which has been obtained without degeneration 
A Training in the cause that assures the mind generation will not degenerate in this life  
B Training in the cause that assures one will not be separated from [the mind generation ] 
again in future lives 
The second has two [points]: Training in the cause that assures the mind 
generation will not degenerate during this  life and training in the cause that 
assures one will not be separated from [the mind generation ] again in future lives. 
 
We need to train in the causes for not degenera ting the mind of enligh tenment in this life 
and in other lives and for not being separated from it in future lives.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A Training in the cause that assures the mind generation will not degenerate 
during this life 
1 Training in remembering the advantages, so that the strength of one’s delight in the mind generation increases 
2 Training in generating it six times, so that the actual mind generation increases  
3 Training in not mentally abandoning any sentient being for whose welfare the mind has 
been generated 
4 Training in accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom 
The first has four [points]: Training in remembering the advantages, so that the 
strength of one’s delight in the mind genera tion increases, training in generating it 
six times, so that the actual mind genera tion increases, training in not mentally 
abandoning any being, for whose welfare the mind has been generated, and 
training in accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom. 
 We should try at all times to remember the adva ntages or benefits of generating the mind of 
enlightenment, whereby our delight in it will in crease. To increase the strength of the actual 
mind of enlightenment, we need to generate it  six times: three times a day and three times at 
night. In order to take care of all sentient beings, we must never abandon any sentient being and should continually train in the thought to ta ke care of them. If we abandon even a single 
being thinking “I cannot generate the mind of enlightenment toward this man or that 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
556 woman,” our mind of enlightenment degenerates.  Therefore, we should abandon thinking in 
this way.  
 We should also train in accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom. Merit is 
accumulated by making prayers, doing prostratio ns, making offerings, circumambulating holy 
objects, practicing generosity, keeping morality, avoiding anger and practicing patience, 
putting joyous effort into virtue, and developing a single-pointed mind. By means of these practices we accumulate the collection of merit.  The collection of wisdom, on the other hand, 
is accumulated by thinking about the emptiness of inherent or true existence, trying to 
understand it, and doing analytical meditation and single-pointed meditation on it. We need 
to accumulate these two collections.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1 Training in remembering the advantages, so that the strength of one’s delight 
in the mind generation increases 
A The way [the advantages] are explained in the scriptures 
B The way [the mind of enlightenment] is praised in the writings of the holy beings  
C The instruction to exert oneself as it is this very [mind] that the buddhas and their children have seen 
to be the exalted method  
 
The way the benefits are explained in the script ures is set out, followed by how they were 
praised by the holy beings such as Shantideva. We need to put effort into the holy method 
seen by the conquerors and their sons.  
 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A The way [the advantages] are explained in the scriptures 
1 The uncommon cause 
2 Showing the advantages 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A1 The uncommon cause 
{186} First: You consider the advantages of  the mind of enlightenment by studying 
the sutras or hearing them from the guru. Since they have been taught extensively 
in the Gandhavyuha [Sutra] , they should be studied there. As the quotation above 
from that says “It is the seed of all th e Dharma of the Buddha”  and all the conduct 
and aspiring prayers of the bodhisattvas are summarized in it, it is said to be like a 
brief presentation. Although the extensive explanation of the branches is 
boundless, since the brief presentation co ntains everything, the brief presentation, 
like a synthesis of them, teaches a synthesi s that summarizes the essential points of 
all the paths of bodhisattvas.  
 We need to read the scriptures and listen to teachings from the teacher on the benefits or 
advantages of the mind of enlightenment, an d then think about them . The benefits of the 
mind of enlightenment are ex tensively explained in the Array of Trunks Sutra  (Gandhavyuha ), 
therefore we should read it. Previously a citati on was quoted from this sutra that says “The 
mind of enlightenment is like the seed of all Dh arma of the Buddha.” In other words, it is the 
seed that is the cause of all the qualities of a bu ddha, just as a rice seed is the cause of a rice 
plant. This sutra also sets out the bodhisattva conduct, the six perfections and so forth, which 
have as their root the mind of  enlightenment, that is, which are motivated by the mind of 
enlightenment. It also includes prayers such as “May the mind of enlightenment that has not 
yet been generated, be generated and increase. May that which has been generated, increase 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
557 more and more.” This sutra contains an extens ive explanation of all the branches or parts, 
while this verse is a brief presentation of it. Howe ver, although it is condensed, it contains all 
the essential points of the bodhisattva path.  
 In short, bodhichitta is the root or seed of  all the buddhas’ qualities. Buddhas are said to 
be born from bodhisattvas, and bodhisattvas ar e said to be born from three minds: great 
compassion, the mind of non-duality (the re alization of emptiness), and the mind of 
enlightenment. These are the causes of a bodh isattva. Therefore, if  we wish to attain 
buddhahood, we must generate the mind of enli ghtenment in our continuum and train in it 
so that it becomes stronger and stronger, without ever allowing it to degenerate.  
 
(Oral transmission 12:04-12:26, pp. 186-194)  Thursday afternoon, 5 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2 Showing the advantages 
A The transition 
B The actual [advantages] 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2A The transition 
As the advantages taught in [Asanga’s] Bodhisattva Levels  concern the aspiring mind 
[of enlightenment], from among them the two advantages of generating a stable 
mind generation are mentioned first. 
 
The Bodhisattva Levels  by Asanga says that with respect to  the aspiring mind generation, there 
are two advantages of having generated a stable mind generation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 186) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B The actual [advantages] 
1 You become a holy field 
2 You thoroughly hold the merit of non-harm 
You become a holy field and thorou ghly hold the merit of non-harm. 
 
Having generated the aspiring mind of enlighte nment, we become a holy field and thoroughly 
hold the merit to not be harmed, that is, due to  the merit of the mind of enlightenment, we 
can no longer be harmed by other beings and things.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B-1 You become a holy field 
A [One becomes an object of veneration] 
First: Like it says in the scriptures: “The world with its gods and human beings will 
prostrate [to you],” as soon as you generate this mind you become an object of veneration for all sentient beings. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
558 We become a holy field because when we generate the mind of enlightenment, we 
immediately become an object of veneration of  gods and human beings. This is mentioned by 
Shantideva in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds . As soon as we generate the mind of 
enlightenment in our continuum, not only gods and human beings, but all sentient beings 
respect us as an object of veneration, offeri ngs, and prostration. Thus, due to our having 
generated the mind of enlightenment, when othe r sentient beings venerate us, make offerings 
to us, or prostrate to us, they create much meri t. Likewise, having generated the aspiring mind 
of enlightenment, other sentient beings are bene fited even by their making a small offering to 
us.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B [One becomes an exalted being] 
As it says [in the scriptures], “As soon as  this mind is generated, you outshine the 
foe-destroyer great beings by way of your lineage,” you become a guru or an exalted 
being.  
 
As soon as we generate the mind of enlightenment, we outshine the hearer and solitary realizer foe-destroyers by way of our lineage. This is because, having become a child of the 
buddhas, from the point of view of lineage we become superior to the hearer and solitary 
realizer foe-destroyers. We become Mahayanists, whereas they are Hinayanists. It is like when 
a son is born to a king, he is respected by all th e ministers due to his lineage even though he is 
just a small baby. In a similar way, having gene rated bodhichitta, we come to outshine all the 
foe-destroyers by way of our lineage.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C [One becomes a field of merit] 
You become a field of merit due to yieldi ng limitless results even through doing 
minor meritorious actions.  
 
When we generate the mind of enlightenment, we become a field of merit such that even 
making small offerings will bring a great result, fo r example, if we give even one mouthful of 
food to an animal it will bring a great result. Th erefore, we should try at all times to generate 
the aspiring mind of enlightenment that wishes to attain enlightenment for the welfare of all 
sentient beings. We should do this now, wh ile we have all the necessary conditions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D [One becomes a support for the whole world] 
As is said “Due to supporting the whole wo rld, you are like the earth”; you become 
like a father of the nine beings. 
 
The ground is the support of all that is anim ate and inanimate, for example, human beings 
and their houses. Without the support of the grou nd or earth, nothing could be built and we 
would abide in empty space. Bodhichitta is like the ground or earth. Just as all vegetation 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
559 grows from the earth, similarly all the good qu alities of the bodhisa ttvas and buddhas grow 
from bodhichitta. Therefore, bodhichitta is like ned to the earth. Bodhichitta is also like a 
father who gives rise to a child,  a mother being unable to do th is alone. “The nine beings” are 
the beings who take the nine types of rebirth:  dying from the desire realm and being reborn 
(1-3) in the desire realm, in the form realm, or in the formless realm; dying from the form 
realm and being reborn (4-6) in the form realm, in the formless realm, or in the desire realm; 
and dying from the formless realm and being rebo rn in (7-9) the formless realm, in the form 
realm, or in the desire realm.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B-2 You thoroughly hold the merit of non-harm 
A The way in which one is guarded by the protectors 
Second: {187} Since you are always guarded by twice as many protectors as protect 
a wheel-turning king, yakshas and non-human primordial [local guardians ] cannot 
harm you even when you are asleep, intoxicated, or non-conscientious.  
 
Having generated the mind of enlightenment we  will always be guarded by twice as many 
protectors as a wheel-turning king, whereby ev en when we are asleep, intoxicated, or non-
conscientious we cannot be harmed by yakshas or  non-human guardians of the place. In other 
words, due to having generated the mind of enligh tenment, external beings will not be able to 
harm us. On the other hand, if we do not have bodhichitta, we can be harmed by yakshas, spirits, demons, and so forth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Mantras and the like will succeed more easily 
You pacify calamities, harm, and infectio us diseases with the words of secret 
mantra and knowledge mantra. If even thin gs that cannot be accomplished in the 
hands of sentient beings, will be accompli shed when they come into your hands, 
what need is there to mention that [other things ] will be accomplished? Due to 
this, the collection of activities, pacificati on and so forth, are shown to be easily 
accomplished in dependence on the mind generation, whereby, if that exists, the 
common attainments will also quickly be accomplished.  
 
Having generated the mind of enli ghtenment, if we recite the word s of either secret mantra or 
knowledge mantra, they are effective and can ea sily pacify epidemic illnesses, harm, and 
contagious diseases. The mantras of different de ities perform different functions; for example, 
the mantra of Manjushri slowly diminishes an d eliminates our ignorance whereby our mind 
becomes clearer and our wisdom increases; the mantra of Avalokiteshvara pacifies the mind 
whereby it becomes more compassionate; and th e mantra of Tara eliminates many types of 
harm. Some mantras also pacify particular illnesses.   Even though someone cannot accomplish so mething with their hands, due to having 
generated the mind of enlightenment it can be accomplished, therefore what need is there to 
mention that other things will be accomplished ? Due to the mind gene ration, the collection 
of activities, such as pacification and so forth,  will also be easily ac hieved. Also, due to the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
560 mind generation, we will easily accomplish wh atever common attainments or siddhis we want. 
In other words, when the mind of enlightenment is present, we  will quickly accomplish the 
eight types of common attainments.  The collection of activities ( las tshogs ) refers to the 
activities of pacification; the activities of incr easing for increasing our wealth, lifespan, and so 
forth; the activities of control or power fo r successfully controlling other beings; and the 
activities of wrath, which are to be used when  the previous three fail. Having generated the 
mind of enlightenment, we can achieve all th e common attainments as we wish. We can also 
perform different rituals in order to achieve every success while banging drums, clashing 
cymbals, and so on. REALLY!!! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Famines and the like will not occur  
Fear, famine, and harm from non-human bein gs will not occur in those places in 
which it has not occurred, and after you di e and transfer you will have little harm, 
will be without illness, and so forth. 
 
There are many benefits of ge nerating the mind of enlighte nment including the fact that 
famines and so forth will not occur. In other word s, in the place in which we live there will be 
a lack of fear. There will also not be famine due to a lack of food, like often happens in some 
of the Third World countries wher e everyday children die of star vation. There will also not be 
harm by non-humans. Also having died, in our ne xt life we will encounter little harm, be free 
from sickness, and so forth. Since there will even be a good result after death, when the 
consciousness has left this body and gone to th e next life, we should strive to develop the 
mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D One is without anger and is patient  
Due to being endowed with patience and a gentle disposition, you will bear harm 
that is done to you and will not return the harm and so forth. 
 
Due to having generated the mind of enlighte nment, we will have less anger and be more 
patient. Due to being endowed with patience, wh en someone harms us we will be able to bear 
it and we will not harm the other person in return , that is, we will not retaliate. Thus, due to 
the mind of enlightenment, we will be more patient, and when someone harms us, due to 
being patient and able to bear it, we  will not think to return the harm.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E It will be difficult for one to be reborn in the bad migrations and one will quickly be freed  
A l s o  i t  w i l l  b e  d i f f i c u l t  f o r  y o u  t o  b e  r e b o r n  i n  t h e  b a d  m i g r a t i o n s  a n d ,  i f  i t  
happens, you will quickly be freed. While there you will have little suffering and thereby, through taking that as a condition, you will become extremely 
disenchanted with cyclic existence and wi ll also generate compassion for those 
sentient beings. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
561  
Having generated the mind of enlightenment, it wi ll be difficult for us to be reborn in the bad 
migrations, and even if we are born there we will quickly be freed from them. Also if, due to 
our karma, we have to take rebi rth in the lower realms, we will experience very little suffering 
there. In addition, we will develop the mind of definite emergence that wants to quickly 
emerge from cyclic existence, and we will also  generate compassion toward the other sentient 
beings there. Thus, having taken rebirth in the he ll realm, for example, we will not experience 
much suffering and, seeing the many sentient beings tormented by suffering there, we will 
generate strong compassion for them. Ther e is a four-line verse about this in the Sublime 
Continuum  but I can’t remember it now. My head is like an old computer that doesn’t 
function anymore!  
 Having generated bodhichitta, even if due to ka rma that we created in the past we need to 
take rebirth in the lower realms, especially the hell realm, we will stay there only for a short 
time, the suffering we experience will be relatively  little, and during this time we will generate 
compassion for the other suffering hell beings an d will ripen their minds. However, it is also 
possible, without taking rebirth in hell, for this  karma to ripen in intense physical suffering 
like that of hell, for example, Angulimala. It is recounted that Anguli mala was a follower of a 
Hindu teacher whose wife fell in love with Angulimala. When Anguli mala refused to make 
love to her, she scratched her face with her sharp nails and pulled out her hair in anger. 
When her husband asked her what had happened, she told him that Angulimala had tried to 
rape her. The teacher told Angulimala that in order to purify this negative action he would 
have to kill 1000 human beings and, to prove this, cut a finger from each one of them and string it in a garland around his neck. When he  had done this, the teacher promised that he 
would once again give him teachings. Angulima la followed these instructions until he had 
successfully killed 999 people. However, he had difficulty finding the last one as everyone would flee when they saw him appr oaching. He began to think th at he would have to kill his 
mother who would bring food to him each day.  As he thought this, a man appeared, walking 
along the road before him. He ran behind th e man, calling out to him to wait. The man 
turned and said, “I am always waiting. It is  you who are always running.” When Angulimala 
arrived in front of the man, he showed hims elf to be Buddha Shakyamuni. The Buddha gave 
teachings to Angulimala, whereby the thought wi shing to kill his mother was eliminated. The 
Buddha took him to his monastery and gave him a room. Buddha Shakyamuni told a monk 
to go check up on him and to put an iron rod through a hole in the wall of the room. When this was done, the iron rod melted! The monk told Buddha Shakyamuni what had happened. 
Although in that very same life Angulimala  became a monk, subdued his mind, and gained 
higher realizations, whenever he went begging for alms everyone would run away out of fear 
o f  h i m .  I n  t h i s  w a y ,  i n  t h e  s a m e  l i f e  i n  which the heavy karma wa s created, Angulimala 
experienced the suffering of the hot hell, whereb y he purified his negativities and later on 
attained the state of a foe-destroyer.   Thus, there are many benefits of  the mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
562 F  How the advantages are immeasurable 
If the merit of the mind of enlightenmen t were to become form, it could not be 
contained in space itself. Making offerings of material things to the buddhas does 
not compare to it even partially. In [the Sutra] Requested by Viradatta  it says:  
 
If bodhichitta’s merit  
Had physical form, All the realm of space would be filled, 
And still more would remain. 
 Even if one completely filled buddha fields,  Numerous as the sand grains  Of the Ganges River {188} with jewels, And offered them to the world’s Protector, 
 
If someone, palms joined, 
Were to bow to bodhichitta. It would exceed that offering. As for that, it is without limit. 
 If the merit of generating the mi nd of enlightenment were to take form, it could not fit in all 
of space. Even if we were to fill buddha fields, as many as the grains of sand of the Ganges River, with jewels and offer them to the Prot ector of the World, although there would be 
much merit it would be exceeded by the meri t of someone who puts his hands together and 
generates the mind of enlightenm ent. This cannot be measured an d the merit is limitless. In 
short, if we were to offer jewels filling all of  space to all the buddhas of the ten directions, 
much merit would be created but still the meri t of generating the mind of enlightenment, 
even for a short time, would be much greater. Ther efore, we must really try to wish to achieve 
enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient bein gs. We must try to do this all the time, in 
every moment. We must try to move our mind in  the direction of the good heart that wishes 
to take care of all sentient beings, and to  generate love, compassion, and the mind of 
enlightenment toward them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1B  The way [the mind of enlightenment] is praised in the teachings of the holy beings 
When the great Jowo [Atisha] circumambu lated the Vajra Seat and thought about 
what was to be done to attain complete enlightenment quickly, the smaller statues 
stood up and asked the bigger ones: “Wha t should someone who wants to quickly 
become a buddha train in?” whereupon the latter replied: “They should train in 
the mind of enlightenment.” When, in the sky above the Gandhola statue, a 
young woman questioned an older woman,  she received a reply similar to the 
previous. It is said that his mind became very certain with respect to the mind of 
enlightenment due to hearing this. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
563 When Atisha was circumambulating the temple or stupa in Bodhgaya, thinking about how to 
attain complete enlightenment quickly, the small statues stood up and asked the bigger 
statues “What should someone who wants to quic kly become a buddha train in?” The bigger 
statues replied, “They should train in the mind  of enlightenment.” Also, in the space above 
the Gandhola, perhaps the stupa itself, Atisha heard a young woman ask an older woman the 
same question, “What should someone who wants to quickly become a buddha train in?” The 
older woman also replied that it was best fo r such a person to train in the mind of 
enlightenment. When Atisha heard this, he beca me very certain with re spect to the mind of 
enlightenment and afterward he only thou ght about how to generate the mind of 
enlightenment, that is, how to achieve buddhahood  for the welfare of all sentient beings. In 
other words, this became the main practice of his life.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1C  The instruction to exert oneself as it is this very [mind] that the buddhas and their 
children have seen to be the supreme method 
In that way, you should understand that the mind of enlightenment is: 
1. the condensed essential point of all the Mahayana instructions,  
2. the great treasure of all spiritual attainments,  
3. the special feature distinguishing the Great Vehicle from the Lesser Vehicle,  
4. the exalted basis that exhorts one to the vast conduct of the conquerors’ 
children.  
Through increasing the strength of your de light in meditating on it, you should do 
it like someone thirsty hearing talk of water because, having made it more and 
more subtle by means of their marvelous exalted knowledge over many eons, when 
they analyzed the paths, the buddhas and their children saw it to be the supreme 
method for attaining buddhahood. Thus, it also says in Engaging in Bodhisattva 
Behavior :  
 
The able and powerful [buddhas],  having reflected thoroughly 
For many eons, saw that this above all is beneficial. 
 
The best method for attaining enlightenment is the generation of the mi nd of enlightenment. 
The mind of enlightenment is:  1. the condensed essential point of all the Mahayana instructions,  
2. the treasure of all spiritual attainments,  
3. the special feature that distinguishes the Mahayana from the Hinayana,  
4. the exalted basis that exhorts one to the vast conduct of the conquerors’ sons.  
Understanding this, we should develop more and more delight in meditating on the mind of 
enlightenment, like a very thirsty person who merely upon hearing that there is water in a 
particular place delights in the po ssibility of quenching his thirst.  
 Having thought about the mind generation for many eons and after investigating many 
paths, the conquerors and their sons came to  the conclusion that the supreme method for 
achieving enlightenment is the generation of the mind of enlightenment. Likewise, 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  also says that all the powerful buddhas or 
Munis, having reflected for many eons on what is  of most benefit to se ntient beings, saw that 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
564 bodhichitta was of the greatest be nefit. Therefore, we too need to strive at all times, day and 
night, not to forget bodhichitta. Even though it may be difficult, again and again we should 
generate the thought to achieve enlightenment in or der to be able to take care of all sentient 
beings. To do this, we need to strive to develo p its causes, love and compassion for all sentient 
beings, by wishing them happiness and its caus es and wishing them freedom from suffering 
and its causes, and taking upon ourselves the re sponsibility to give them happiness and its 
causes and to free them from suffering and its ca uses. We need to try to develop this attitude 
in our mind. Although it will not arise immediately, by familiarizing with it our mind will 
gradually change.   Friday morning, 6 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 188) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-2 Training in generating it six times so that the actual mind generation increases 
A Training in not giving up the aspiring mind generation 
B Training in increasing the aspiring mind generation 
The second has two [points]: training in not {189} giving up and increasing the 
aspiring mind generation. 
 
Having generated the aspiring mi nd of enlightenment, we should train in not give it up and 
in increasing it by generating it six times – th ree times a day and three times a night. In order 
to increase it, we need to engage strongly in  the bodhisattva conduct – the six perfections and 
the four means of gathering disciples.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-2A Training in not giving up the aspiring mind generation 
1 Giving it up is heavier than a defeat of the [vow s] of individual liberation and [as a consequence ] one 
must wander in the bad migrations for a long time 
First: In the  Abbreviated [Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ] it was taught:  
 
If you, having taken the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and your spiritual 
friend as your witnesses, in their presence you make the promise to liberate the sentient beings that are not liberated and so forth, and then 
due to the condition of having become discouraged upon seeing  1. the enormous number of sentient beings and their bad actions,  
2. the long time for which it is nece ssary to exert yourself over many 
eons,  
3. that it is necessary to train in  the limitless two collections and 
difficult practices,  
you lay down the burden of the mind  generation, it will be a greater 
negativity than a defeat of individual liberation. 
 
In the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds it says that if you give up the promised 
mind, you will have to wander in th e bad migrations for a long time,. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
565 A fully-ordained monk commits a defeat of his v o w s  o f  i n d i v i d u a l  l i b e r a t i o n  b y  k i l l i n g  a  
human being, stealing, engaging in sexual intercours e, or telling a great lie, such as saying that 
he has achieved clairvoyance although he has not. However, if a bodhisattva who has made 
the promise of the aspiring mind of enlightenment gives it up, he will be reborn in the bad 
migrations and remain there for a long time. In  other words, having ma de the promise in the 
presence of the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and our sp iritual friend to liberate all the sentient 
beings who have not been liberated, to free those who are not free, and so forth, if later on we 
were to come to think “Oh, there are an enormo us number of sentient beings and by nature 
they are bad,” or “I would have to put effort for many eons into accumulating the collection 
of merit and the collection of wisdom. This is  t o o  d i f f i c u l t ,  I  a m  n o t  a b l e  t o  d o  i t , ”  a n d  
become depressed and give up our promise, the negativity is much greater than breaking a 
root vow of individual liberation. This is mentioned in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras . Thus, if 
we give up our mind generation in this way, we will have to wander in the lower realms for a 
long time, suffering and experiencing many prob lems. This is also mentioned by Shantideva 
in his Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds .  
 In short, having made the promise of the as piring mind of enlightenment in front of the 
buddhas, bodhisattvas, and other holy beings, if l a t e r  o n  w e  g i v e  i t  u p ,  w e  c r e a t e  a  h e a v y  
negativity and therefore we must try not to do  this. We should try to keep our promise and 
never give it up.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Not giving it up due to delight like that of finding a jewel in a rubbish heap  
Also that same [text] says: 
 
Like a blind person finding  
A jewel in a heap of rubbish, Similar to that, bodhichitta Has been generated in me. 
 Think “What I have found is just as amazin g” and “I will not give it up under any 
circumstances.” Observing this, reinforce the decision to not give it up even for an 
instant. 
 If a blind person were to find a jewel, such as a diamond, in a huge heap  of rubbish, he would 
be very happy, shine it, and take care of it. Si nce we too have presently found this one-time 
opportunity to generate the mind of enlightenmen t, we must generate it, take care of it, and 
increase it. Thinking “It is amazing to have foun d this,” we should dete rmine never to give it 
up but to always guard the vow of the aspiring  mind generation. If, on the other hand, we 
w e r e  t o  g i v e  i t  u p ,  t h i s  w o u l d  b e  v e r y  b a d .  T h e r e f o r e ,  n o w  t h a t  w e  h a v e  t h i s  s p e c i a l  opportunity to generate the mind of enlightenmen t, we should resolve not to give up even for 
an instant. Think “I will not give up the mind of enlightenment even for a single instant. I 
will keep my promise from the bottom of my heart.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
566 2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-2B Training in increasing the aspiring mind generation 
1 It is not enough to merely not give it up, it must be reinforced 
Second: Since it is not enough to merely not give it up, you should reinforce it 
three times a day and three times at night with great effort. 
 
It is not enough merely to not give up the mind  of enlightenment, we should also increase it. 
To do this, we should generate it with effort  three times a day and three times a night. In 
addition, we should practice the six perfections, that is, we should try to increase our practice 
of the bodhisattva conduct day and night by constantly remembering the mind of 
enlightenment – the mind wishing to achieve en lightenment for the welf are of all sentient 
beings. To do this, we should think about the fa ct that all sentient beings need to attain 
enlightenment and that we must help them by leading them to enlightenment. Since this is 
the only solution, we need to think about it  day and night. In ot her words, we should 
remember bodhichitta when we wake up, we should remember it at midday, we should 
remember it in the afternoon, we should rememb er it at night, we should remember it at 
midnight, and we should remember it at dawn. If we cannot do this, we should at the very 
least generate this mind three times in the mo rning and three times in the evening like, for 
example, the Six Session Guru Yoga . This is sufficient, if we cannot do it continually day and 
night due to being busy. However, we shou ld generate it as much as possible.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How the ritual is performed at the six times 
If the extensive ritual explained above ca n be accomplished, do it according to 
that. If it cannot be accomplished, havi ng visualized the merit field and made 
offerings, you should train in love and compassion. Do this six times [a day]. The 
ritual for that is to say the following three times [in the day ] and three times [at 
night]: 
 
I go for refuge until I am enlightened 
To the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Supreme Assembly. {190} By my practice of generosity and the other [perfections], May I attain buddhahood in order to benefit migrating beings. 
 How should we do the ritual six times? If possib le, we should do the extensive ritual explained 
above. However, if we cannot do this, we should  visualize the merit field, make offerings of 
flowers, light, perfume, water and so forth, as  well as a mandala offering, generate love and 
compassion, and recite the above verse six times. This verse is the short ritual for generating 
the mind of enlightenment. First we go for re fuge to the Three Jewels, the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha, thinking that we will go for refuge to them from now until we attain 
enlightenment. Then we can think about what ever bodhisattva conduct we may have done, 
such as practicing the three types of generosi ty of giving material things, giving Dharma 
teachings, and giving protection to those whose life is in danger or those who are sick. These 
three types of generosity are mentioned in relati on to sutra, whereas in tantra there is the 
additional generosity of giving love. With respec t to the practice of morality, we should guard 
our vows and pledges and strive to benefit othe r sentient beings by setting them in the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
567 practice of morality or ethical discipline, as well  as strive to abandon that which is discordant 
with the other perfections such as hatred, lazi ness, distraction, and distorted wisdom and to 
strive to safeguard them. Morality is the mind  wishing to abandon or the mind wishing to 
safeguard.  
 W e  s h o u l d  a l s o  s t r i v e  t o  d e v e l o p  p a t i e n c e  b y  k e e p i n g  o u r  m i n d  u n d i s t u r b e d ,  b y  n o t  
retaliating when others say something bad to us, and by remaining still like a statue. When we 
experience difficulties, we should try to bear th em with great courage. In addition, we need to 
abandon laziness, which often arises, and instead take delight in the practice of the Dharma 
or virtue. This is the practice of joyous e ffort. When something is difficult and we feel 
discouraged, we should not give up but instea d put effort into continuing it, whereby we will 
eventually achieve success in it.  Because we have many distractions and our mind wanders continually, going here, there, 
and everywhere, we need to eliminate these ob stacles and to develop the mind that abides 
single-pointedly on its object. In other words, we need to develop more and more 
concentration. This will make our mind more stable and we will be able to gain many 
realizations. We also need to develop the wi sdom understanding the real nature of all 
phenomena, that is, how they exist and how they  function. We should do this by means of 
mainly doing analytical meditation but also sometimes doing stabilizing meditation. By means 
of analytical meditation we should examin e the nature of all phenomena and how they 
function.   In this way, we should practice these si x perfections as well as the additional four 
perfections of method, prayer, strength, and ex alted wisdom, for a total of ten perfections. 
When there are six perfections, the last four are included in the perfection of wisdom.  
 We should strive to practice these perfecti ons ourselves and also encourage others to do 
them. In short, we should recite the above formula three times in the morning and three 
times at night.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-3 Training in not mentally abandoning any sentient being for whose welfare the 
mind has been generated 
Third: The measure of mentally abandoning  a sentient being is to generate the 
thought: “I will never enact his welfare”  i n  d e p e n d e n c e  o n  t h e  c o n d i t i o n  o f  
unreasonable behavior and so forth. 
 
Having generated the aspiring mind generation  for the welfare of all sentient beings, we 
should not mentally give up even one single sentient being. The measure of mentally abandoning a sentient being is that, based on th e condition of the sentient being having done 
a negative action, to think “Since he or she is bad, I will not take care of him. I will not enact 
his welfare.” Therefore, to do this , it is not necessary to abandon all sentient beings. It is 
enough that when someone near us acts badly and we become discouraged, to think “I will 
not help him.” Thus, just by mentally abando ning a sentient being from our heart, we 
abandon the aspiring mind of enlightenment.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-4 Training in accumulating the two collections 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
568 Fourth: Having assumed the aspiring mind by a ritual, you should strive to 
accumulate the collections through making da ily offerings to the Jewels, etc., as the 
cause for increasing the mind of enlightenment. 
 
Having taken the aspiring mind of enlightenment by means of ritual, we need to train in the 
collection of merit and the collection of wisdom . To do this, as a cause of increasing our 
mind of enlightenment, we should make offering s, such as the usual seven or five types of 
offerings, every day to the Three Jewels. We shou ld try to offer them whatever we can. We can 
also mentally offer them a mandala. In addition , we should purify our negativities and mental 
afflictions and accumulate merit by means of reciting mantras, doing prostrations, 
circumambulating stupas, medita ting, praying, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B Training in the cause of not separating from [the aspiring mind ] in other lives. 
1 Training in abandoning the four black dharmas that cause it to degenerate 
2 Training in adopting the four white dharmas that do not allow it to degenerate 
The second has two [points]: training in abandoning the four black dharmas that 
cause it to degenerate and training in ad opting the four white dharmas that do not 
allow it to degenerate. 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1 Training in abandoning the four black dharmas that cause it to degenerate 
A [Deceiving one’s abbot, master, guru, or those worthy of offerings ] 
B [Causing others to regret the virtuous deeds they do not regret] 
C [Saying something infamous [lit. indescribable] about a person who has entered the Great Vehicle] 
D [Actions committed with the intention to deceive or dissimulate, but without the extraordinary attitude] 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1A [Deceiving one’s abbot, master, guru, or those worthy of offerings ] 
1 Object and action 
First: Among four black dharmas, with re spect to that of deceiving one’s abbot, 
master, guru, or those worthy of offering s, the objects that are one’s abbot and 
master are easy to understand. The guru is someone who wishes to benefit you, 
and those worthy of offerings are those en dowed with good qualities, even though 
they do not belong to the previous two.  If you wonder about what deed becomes a black dharma with respect to them, to 
knowingly cheat them by any means is a black dharma. 
 In order to not be separated from the mind of enlightenment in our future lives, we need to 
train in abandoning the four black dharmas an d adopting the four white dharmas. The first 
of the four black dharmas is to deceive or ch eat our abbot, master, guru, or those who are 
worthy of offerings. Having generated the mind of enlightenment, such behavior is very bad 
and will become the cause of taking rebirth in the lower realms.   Our abbot is someone who has given us vows, and our master is someone who has given us 
teachings. A guru or lama is someone who wish es to benefit us. Someone who is worthy of 
offerings is someone who is not our abbot or master, but is an object of offering possessing good qualities. If we knowingly try to cheat our abbot, master, guru, or someone possessing 
good qualities by any method, we commit this black dharma.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
569 2 Clearing up doubts 
Nonetheless, as the deceit and dissimulation  that are not lies are indicated below, 
here it has to be cheating thro ugh lying. This is because in [Asanga’s] Compendium 
of Manifest Dharma  it is taught that abandoning a black dharma constitutes a white 
dharma, and that the antidote of this [bla ck dharma] is the first of the four white 
dharmas. 
 
To tell our abbot or master that we need to go somewhere to do something important, such 
as study, whereas in reality we have nothing important to do and instead go to the cinema, or 
play footfall or tennis, it to cheat him by means of  a lie. Likewise, to tell our father or mother 
that we need to go somewhere to do someth ing important, whereupon they are happy and 
praise us, but then we actually go to hang arou nd a street corner and smoke with our friends, 
or go out drinking or playing cards with friends, is to deceive our parents by means of a lie. If we have generated the aspiring mind of enligh tenment, this becomes a black dharma that can 
cause it to degenerate.  
 Deceit and dissimulation will be explained la ter on. For example, it is said that when 
Brahma was asked a question but did not know the answer, rather than saying he did not 
know it, he said “I am Brahma. I am Great Br ahma,” in order to deceive his questioner. The 
mental factors of deceit and dissimulation act to cheat others.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1B [Causing others to regret virtues that they do not regret] 
1 Object and action 
With respect to causing others to regret [t he virtues] they do not regret, the object 
is another person who does not regret a virtue that he has done. What one does 
toward him is {191} that, with the inte ntion to make him regret, one makes him 
generate regret for that which is not a source of regret. 
 
This black dharma is to make another person regret virtuous actions that he has done. The object is therefore a person who does not regret  a virtuous action that  he has done. We can 
make him regret it by telling hi m that it was not right to do the virtuous action, for example, 
to give something to someone, by saying that  t h e  p e r s o n  i s  b a d  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  T h u s ,  w e  
intentionally wish to make a person, who is with out regret, to regret his virtuous action. This 
is another black dharma. Another example is to  say to someone who has just taken the lay 
vows, novice vows, or vows of fu ll ordination that he has made a very bad mistake in taking 
ordination because he needs to take care of his family. Thus, althou gh the person who has 
taken the vows does not regret his action, we ma ke him generate regret for it by telling him 
that it is a bad action. While it is good to regr et non-virtuous actions such as stealing others’ 
possessions and to try to abandon them in the fu ture, it is not good to make others regret 
their virtuous actions such as entering into retr eat by saying that they may become sick and so 
forth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
570 2 Clearing up doubts 
As regards these two, it is the same whether [the person ] is deceived or not 
deceived and whether [the person ] generated or did not generate regret.  
 
With respect to these two black dharmas, it is the same whether or not we were actually able 
to deceive the other person and whether or not we were actually able to make the person 
regret his actions. In both cases, they are st ill a black dharma. In other words, it is not 
necessary that the other person be deceived or that the other person generate regret, in order 
to commit a black dharma it is enough  that we said tried to do this.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1C [Saying that which is not praise and so forth to a sentient being who has entered the 
Great Vehicle] 
1 Object and action 
With respect to saying that which is not praise and so forth to a sentient being 
who has entered the Great Vehicle, the ob ject is someone who has generated the 
mind of enlightenment and now possesses it . What one does toward him is to say 
something unpleasant motivated by hatred. 
 
This black dharma is to say something unpl easant about a person who has entered the 
Mahayana. Thus, the object is a bodhisattv a – someone who has generated the mind of 
enlightenment and possesses it. The action is to say something unpleasant motivated by 
hatred.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The measure 
The object to whom it was sa id understands the meaning. 
 
The measure of committing this black dharma is that the obje ct to whom the unpleasant 
words are spoken understands the meaning. On  the other hand, if someone says something 
bad but it is not understood, for example, if  I were to say something bad in Tibetan to 
someone who does not understand Tibetan, it  would not be this black dharma. In this 
particular case, it is necessary that th e other person understand the meaning.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 How it is necessary to abandon this since it easily occurs and is a great fault 
That it is easy for this to occur and it is  also a very great disadvantage has already 
been mentioned previously in brief. Furthermore, it is taught in the Sutra of the 
Miracle of Complete Certainty of Perfect Peace  that if a bodhisattva generates a mind 
of contempt toward a bodhisattva he must remain in hell for that many eons and 
that apart from deprecating a bodhisattva nothing can make a bodhisattva fall into 
the bad migrations. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
571 It is easy for us to say something unpleasa nt motivated by hatred and it is a great 
disadvantage, therefore we need to abandon it. In other words, it is easy to get angry even at a 
bodhisattva, but it is a great fault. This was already explained briefly. In short, for however 
long a bodhisattva generates a mind of deprec ation toward another bodhisattva, one hour, 
half an hour, one minute, and so forth, he wi ll have to remain in hell for a corresponding 
number of eons. Thus, if a bodhisattva disparag es another bodhisattva, it will cause him to 
fall into hell in his next life. There is no other negative action done by a bodhisattva toward a 
bodhisattva will throw him into the he ll realm. This is taught in the Sutra of the Miracle of 
Complete Certainty of Perfect Peace .  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 How this takes you further away from enlightenment 
In the Abbreviated [Perfection of Wisdom Sutra]  it also says that a bodhisattva, who 
has not yet obtained a prediction, who argu es out of anger with a bodhisattva who 
has obtained a prediction, for however long  he generated a mind of anger he will 
have to spend that many eons longer on the path. 
 
If a bodhisattva who has not obtained a pred iction argues with a bodhisattva who has 
obtained a prediction out of anger, he will ha ve to remain on the path for a much longer 
time, continuing to train in the collection s, whereby he will become distant from 
enlightenment. In other words, for however many  instants he generates anger, for that many 
more eons will he have to rema in on the path. Although he do es not fall to a lower path, for 
example, from the path of meditation to the path  of accumulation, he will have to remain on 
that path for a much longer time and will not increase in realizations. Therefore, we should 
also be careful not to generate anger   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 The need to exert oneself in confession and restraint  
Because of that, in the same [t ext] it is also taught that it is necessary to put an end 
to anger i all its aspects and to put effort  into confessing it restraining from it 
immediately whenever it arises. 
 
Therefore, we too should not generate anger.  However, if we do, we should immediately 
confess it by regretting it, determining not to do it anymore, going for refuge to the Buddha, 
Dharma, and Sangha and generating the mind of enlightenment, and reciting the hundred-
syllable mantra of Vajrasattva or other mantras, the names of the thirty-five buddhas, or sutras 
such as the Diamond Cutter Sutra . In short, whenever we create  negative actions we should 
immediately strive to purify them with the four opponent powers.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-1D [An activity done out of deceit and dissimulation but without the extraordinary attitude] 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 2-6 May 2005 (12) 
572 1  Object and action 
With respect to an activity done out of  deceit and dissimulation but without the 
extraordinary attitude, the object is any other sentient being. What one does 
toward him is to engage in deceit and dissimulation. 
 
This is the point where deceit and dissimulati on are now explained. This black dharma is, 
without the extraordinary attitude (a good heart) , to engage in an activity out of deceit or 
dissimulation. The object is another sentient be ing. The action is to engage in deceit or 
dissimulation.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Explanation of the meaning of the word 
{192} Regarding that, deceit and dissimulation are explained in terms of deceiving 
with respect to measures and weights and th e like of what Gyelwa Yechung did: in 
order to send someone off to Ragma, he ca used him to be sent to Tolung first so 
afterwards he would accept Ragma. According to the Compendium of All Trainings  
deceit is to display good qualities that actually do not exist, and dissimulation is to 
take measures for faults not to become evident.  
 
In the past the measure of six handfuls, which filled a pan of a particular size, was used to 
measure quantities of rice, barley, and so forth.  Also a weighing scale with two pans was used. 
However, nowadays we use kilograms and meas ure the weight of things with a digital 
weighing scale! Measures and weights can be used  to deceive or cheat others. For example, in 
India there is a drinking glass used to serve tea that looks large but inside the bottom is raised 
so that it actually does not hold much tea. This would be an example of cheating others with 
wrong measures.  
 Deceit ( sgyu) is to show good qualities that we do not have. Dissimulation ( gyo) is to hide 
our faults by some method in order that they cannot be seen. Deceit, for example, can be to 
say that we know many things and can do many  things whereas in reality we do not know 
them or cannot do them. Dissimulation, on the other hand, is to hide our faults People 
engage in deceit and dissimulation in order to accomplish their own welf are. Although it may 
not directly entail a lie, it is very similar to a lie. 
 
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
573 Monday afternoon, 9 May 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 192) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2 Adopting the four white dharmas that do not allow it to degenerate 
A [Abandoning lying knowingly] 
B [Abiding with the extraordinary attitude without deceit or dissimulation] 
C [Generating the discrimination that bodhisat tvas are like the Teacher and praising them] 
D [Ripening sentient beings] 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2A [Abandoning lying knowingly] 
Second: The object of the first white dharma is all sentient beings. The action is to 
abandon lying to them knowingly even for th e sake of one’s life or for as little a 
joke. If you act in this way, you will be sure not to cheat special objects such as 
your abbot, master, etc. through lies. 
 
The object of the first of the four white dhar ma is all sentient beings. The action is to 
abandon telling a lie knowingly even at the cost of  our life and even to make others laugh. If 
we do this, we will not cheat our abbot,  teacher, and other special objects.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2B [Abiding with the extraordinary attitude without deceit or dissimulation] 
The object of the second white dharma is al l sentient beings. The action is to abide 
with the extraordinary attitude towards th em without deceit or dissimulation, that 
is, to abide with an honest attitude. It is  the antidote to the fourth black dharma. 
 
The object is all sentient beings. The action is to not deceive or dissimulate while abiding with 
the extraordinary attitude. It is the an tidote to the fourth black dharma.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2C [Generating the discrimination that bodhisattvas are like the Teacher and praising them] 
1 Object and action 
The object of the third white dharma is al l bodhisattvas. The action is to generate 
the discrimination of them as if they we re the Teacher and to proclaim truthful 
praise about them in the four directions.  
 
The object of the third white dharma is all bodhisattvas. The action is to generate the 
discrimination of all bodhisattvas as being like our Teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, and to 
praise them in the four directions, east, south, west, and north. In short, we should proclaim 
their good qualities and their abandonments.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How there is a need to guard against this 
Sharawa says:  
 
Although we are constantly busy scraping together something like 
virtue, there is no sign of its increa se and many signs of its exhaustion. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
574 Virtue is exhausted by hatred toward bodhisattvas and our companions, 
disdain towards them, and through insu lting them. Therefore, if we are 
able to abandon insulting them and bodhisattvas, we will no longer 
experience what is referred to in the Compendium of All Trainings  as 
“harm dependent on persons.” Si nce we do not know who is a 
bodhisattva, through generating th e discrimination of all sentient 
beings as the Teacher, as in the Sutra Requested by Kashyapa , we act from 
the point of view of training in pure appearance. 
 
Sharawa said that although we try to create virtue, there are no signs that our virtue has 
increased and many signs that it is exhausted.  Through generating anger or hatred toward 
bodhisattvas and our companions and by disp araging and insulting them, we exhaust our 
virtue. Therefore, we need to abandon these ac tions. If we are able to do this, as the 
Compendium of Trainings  says, we will not longer experience  harm from other persons. Since 
we do not know who is a bodhisattva, when we encounter sentient beings we should practice 
pure appearance and see them as if they were th e Teacher himself. This is the best way to act 
given that we do not know who is a bodhisattva and who is not.  Some people, although they 
are bodhisattvas, appear outwardly to be very humble and poor, whereas other people who are 
not bodhisattvas appear to be wealthy and pr oud. Because a bodhisattva has the mind of 
enlightenment, his mind is tamed and he does no t show off saying “I am a bodhisattva! I have 
realizations.” In short, we should see sentient beings as if they were the Teacher and train our 
mind in pure appearance.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The way to express the qualities 
{193} If there is an opportunity to expre ss their good qualities and an audience, do 
so. However, if you do not proclaim them ha ving gone to all four directions, this is 
not a fault. 
This [white dharma] is the anti dote to the third black dharma. 
 
When we are teaching we should praise the good  qualities of bodhisattvas. However, if we do 
not express these qualities in all four directions, it is not a fault. When someone asks us to do 
so, we should strive to express all the good qual ities of bodhisattvas such as love, the mind of 
enlightenment, their knowledge of emptiness, and so forth. This is the antidote to the third 
black dharma.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2D [Ripening sentient beings] 
1 The actual [fourth white dharma]: object and action  
2 The statement in other scriptures as well 
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2D1 The actual [fourth white dharma]: object and action 
The object of the fourth white dharma is  the sentient beings who are ripened by 
oneself. The action is to make them hold to complete enlightenment without 
wishing for a temporary vehicle. Moreover, while from your side you should cause 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
575 the disciple to make a connection with it , if that thought does not arise in the 
disciple, it does not become a mistake because you were unable to accomplish that. 
 By means of this [white dharma] you ab andon the second black dharma, for, if 
you wish to place others in the final of all happinesses, you do not practice it for 
the purpose of connecting them to the aris al of mental unhappiness for the sake of 
generating the mere regret that is mental unhappiness. 
 
The object of the fourth white dharma is sent ient beings who are ripened by oneself. The 
action is to make them engage in the great enlightenment and to not engage in a temporary 
vehicle. In other words, the action is to ma ke sentient beings wish to attain complete 
buddhahood without generating  the wish to achieve the nirvana of the Hinayana 
enlightenment that is only a personal freedom  from suffering and mental afflictions.  
 Although from our side we need to put effo rt into connecting the disciple to complete 
enlightenment, if the disciple does not generate  this mind, it does not become a fault for us 
because we were unable to acco mplish that. This is because se ntient beings from their own 
side need to put effort into this. Thus, if we pu t effort into helping them generate the mind of 
enlightenment but they do not want to do this, we do not create a fault.  
 This white dharma is the anti dote to the second black dharma  because if we wish to set 
others in the final happiness we do not this fo r the purpose of making others generate the 
regret that is mental unhappiness.  
 In brief, from our side there is a good hear t wishing others to attain enlightenment. Then, 
for others’ sake we try to make them generate  the mind of enlightenm ent and to attain the 
final enlightenment of buddhahood. However, if the other person does not listen to us and 
does not do what we say, there is nothing more  we can do. It is not that we tried to make 
others regret their virtuous actions, that is, we  did not do this for the purpose of making them 
generate the regret that is mental unhappiness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2D2 The explanation in three scriptures, the  Compendium of All Trainings  and so forth  
A  The advantage of setting others in the mind generation  
In the [Sutra] Requested by Simha : 
 
“By means of what is the mind of enlightenment 
Not to be given up in all lives, Even while dreaming, much less while not sleeping?” He spoke: “In villages or in cities, in whatever places you abide, Guide [others] correctly to enlightenment. By that, the mind of enlighte nment will not be abandoned.” 
 In the sutra there is the question “How is it po ssible to avoid generating the mind thinking to 
abandon the mind of enlightenment even in  a dream?” The Buddha said “Wherever we 
abide, in a town, city, and so forth, we should strive to set others in enlightenment. By means 
of this, the mind of enlightenment will not be abandoned.”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
576 B The statement that by abandon ing pride and the like the mind ge neration will not be abandoned 
Furthermore, in Arraying the Buddha Field of Manjushri  it is taught that the aspiring 
mind172 is not abandoned if four [qualities] are possessed: having abandoned pride, 
having abandoned jealousy, having abandoned miserliness, and being mentally 
joyful when seeing others’ wealth.  
 If we have the four – having abandoned pride,  having abandoned jealousy, having abandoned 
miserliness and being mentally joyful when seei ng the wealth of others, we will not give up 
the aspiring mind of enlightenment. The Treasury of Manifest Dharma  sets out nine, seven, and 
three types of pride. Jealousy, on the other ha nd, has many different types of objects, for 
example, if one man has two girlfriends, th e two women may be jealous of each other. 
Miserliness is an inability to give material th ings as well as an inability to share one’s 
knowledge of special painting techniques and s o  f o r t h  w i t h  o t h e r s .  W e  n e e d  t o  a b a n d o n  
pride, jealousy, and miserliness. In addition, when we see that others have wealth, good 
bodies, and other good things, we  should joyfully think “How ni ce! Isn’t that wonderful!” If 
we have these four kinds of minds, we will never give up the aspiring mind of enlightenment.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C  If all actions and conduct are done conjoined with the mind generation, one will not be separated 
from the mind of enlightenment in all lives 
This is clearly taught by the Jewel Cloud Sutra (Ratnamegha Sutra)  {194}: 
 
If you train in the mind of enlightenment in all behaviors and generate 
the mind of enlightenment before starting any virtuous activity, you will 
not be separated from this precious  mind. If you do not investigate 
time and again how... 
 
We must try in all behaviors to generate bo dhichitta, that is, all our actions should be 
conjoined with bodhichitta. By doing this, we  will never be separated from the mind of 
enlightenment in all our future lives. “All behavi ors” refers to the four behaviors of standing, 
sitting, walking, and lying. In all these behavi ors our mind should never be separated from 
bodhichitta and we should constantly be trying to  generate it. In addition, before engaging in 
any virtuous action, we should try to generate bodhichitta. In this way, we will achieve success 
in all our activities and will never be separated from the mind of enlightenment in our future 
lives. For this reason, when we finish a prayer and so forth, we should make a dedication to 
never be separated from the precious mind of enlightenment in all our future lives. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-2C3 The means of restoring [the vow] if it has degenerated 
Third: If you transgress the trainings, ex cluding the two of giving up the aspiring 
mind and mentally giving up sentient be ings, as long as you do not have the 
                                              
172 JN: Although the Tibetan  text actually says smon lam , prayers, it would seem to be more correct for it to read 
smon sems , aspiring mind. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
577 bodhisattva vows there is no downfall fr om the point of view of a bodhisattva. 
However, since it does transgress the tr ainings of the promise of intermediate 
virtue, it becomes faulty conduct and ther efore should be confessed by means of 
the four powers. 
 
If we give up the aspiring mind of enlightenment or mentally give up a sentient being, it is a 
downfall. When the other trainings are transgressed, [as long as you do not have the 
bodhisattva vows ] there is no downfall. However, since th ere is a transgression of the trainings 
of the promise of intermediate virtue, it does  become faulty conduct and therefore must be 
confessed by means of the four opponent powers in order to restore the vows.  
 Among the eighteen root downfalls in relation  to the bodhisattva vows, if we transgress 
sixteen of them, as long as the four factor s – non-shame and non-em barrassment, thinking 
that it does not matter, and so forth – are not complete, we have not broken the vows and 
they still remain. On the other hand, if we gi ve up the aspiring mind of enlightenment or 
mentally give up a sentient being, we dege nerate the trainings of the aspiring mind 
generation. When we transgress any other of th e trainings, although we do not have the 
bodhisattva vows, because we have transgressed the trainings of the promise of intermediate 
virtue, we must confess it with the four opponent powers:  1. the opponent power of regret, 
2. the opponent power of determining not to do the negative action again, 
3. the opponent power of the basis – going for re fuge to the Three Jewels and generating the 
mind of enlightenment, and 
4. the opponent power of applying an actual antidote. 
In this way, we should try to purify our negativi ties. The antidote can be to make tsa-tsas or to 
do any other virtuous action, such as reciting sutras such as the Sutra of Golden Light , with the 
motivation to purify our negativities.   (Oral transmission 7:15-7:30, pp. 194-202)  Tuesday morning, 10 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 194) says:  
Explanation of how to train in the conduct 
 having generated the mi nd [of enlightenment] 
2B4B-2B3B-3 Having generated the mind of enlightenment, how to train in the conduct 
A The reason it is necessary to train in the trainings, having generated the mind [of 
enlightenment] 
B Demonstration that buddhahood is not achieved  by training in method or wisdom alone 
C Explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings  
The third has three [points]: The reason why it is necessary to train in the 
trainings, having generated the mind [of enlightenment]; demonstration that 
b u d d h a h o o d  i s  n o t  a c h i e v e d  b y  t r a i n i n g  i n  m e t h o d  o r  w i s d o m  a l o n e ;  a n d  
explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
578 Having generated the mind of enlightenmen t, we need to train in the conduct of 
bodhisattvas. The reason for this, in brief, is that if, having generated the mind of 
enlightenment, we do not train in the bodhisa ttva conduct it will not be possible to attain 
buddhahood. Likewise, by training in method alone or wisdom alone, buddhahood cannot be 
achieved. In other words, we need to train in  both method (the collection of method) and 
wisdom (the collection of wisdom). Only when the two collections are complete can we attain 
buddhahood. On the other hand, as long as they are not complete buddhahood cannot be 
attained because a buddha’s form body is the re sult of the collection of merit and a buddha’s 
truth body is the result of the collection of wi sdom. Thus, in order to a ttain these two results, 
we must accumulate their two causes – the two collections.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3A The reason it is necessary to train in the trainings, having generated the mind [of 
enlightenment] 
1  Buddhahood is not achieved by not accomplishing [the trainings] 
First: Although, having generated the mind  [of enlightenment], you do not train in 
the trainings of generosity and so forth, it will still be of great benefit as [expressed] 
in the above quotation from the Biography of Maitreya . However, if you do not 
make the bodhisattva trainings your esse ntial practice, it will be impossible to 
become a buddha. Therefore, you shou ld train in the conduct. In the King of 
Concentration  it says:  
 
“One should make it the essential practice. Why? Because, O youthful 
one, for one who makes it his essential practice it will not be difficult to 
obtain unsurpassed, perfectly complete enlightenment.” 
 If we do not train in the trainings – the bo dhisattva conduct of the six perfections of 
generosity and so forth – we will not be able to achieve buddhahood. Although it is still of 
great benefit to generate the mind of enlightenm ent, without training from the bottom of our 
heart in the bodhisattva conduct, we will ne ver achieve buddhahood. Never! Therefore, we 
need to train in the me thod or conduct. The King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra  also says 
that if we make the bodhisattva conduct our e ssential practice, it will not be difficult to 
achieve unsurpassed, perfectly complete buddhah ood. In other words, if we train, from the 
very depths of our heart, in the bodhisattva co nduct of the six perfecti ons, generosity and so 
forth, and the four means of gathering disciples, it will not be difficult to attain buddhahood. 
O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d ,  i f  w e  d o  n o t  d o  t h i s ,  buddhahood cannot be achi eved. Therefore, we 
must try to train and put effort into the bodhisa ttva conduct in our daily life. If we try to do 
this, some result will come. If we  do not try, nothing will come.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 First of all tame oneself since others will not be tamed with out taming oneself 
Also [Kamalashila says] in the First Stages of Meditation : 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
579 {195} A bodhisattva who has genera ted the mind, understanding that 
he cannot tame others without tami ng himself, thoroughly applies 
himself to the practice of generosi ty and so forth. Without them, he 
cannot achieve enlightenment.  
 
Without subduing or taming our own mind, we cannot subdue others’ minds. Thus, if we 
wish to subdue others’ minds, we  must first subdue our own. The First Stages of Meditation  says 
that a bodhisattva, understanding that he cannot subdue others without subduing his own 
mind puts effort into practicing the six perf ections – generosity, morality, patience, joyous 
effort, concentration, and wisdom – or the ten pe rfections. We too must develop this kind of 
attitude in our mental continuum. Since with out this we will not be able to achieve 
buddhahood, we must put effort into practi cing the six perfections and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 What is to be accomplished 
What is to be accomplished once the vow has been taken is to train in those very 
trainings associated with it. 
 
Having taken the vow, we must train in the trai nings, that is, we must guard the bodhisattva 
vows by training in the six perfections so that  they do not degenerate. We must constantly 
train through thinking that we need to do so in order to be able to take  care of other sentient 
beings. We should not become discouraged, bu t instead should make a strong determination 
that, having taken the vows, to  train in them and achieve bu ddhahood. The trainings to be 
trained in are the six perfections of generosity and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B Demonstration that buddhahood is not  achieved by training in method or wisdom 
alone 
1 How to train in the unmistaken and complete method 
2 Refutation of wrong conceptions about this 3 Refutation of the answers to objections about this 
2B4B-2B3B-3B1 How to train in the unmistaken and complete method 
A The need to not be mistaken concerning the complete path  
Second: In the Middle  Stages of Meditation  [Kamalashila ] says:  
 
One who engages in the method fo r accomplishing buddhahood needs 
an unmistaken method, for a mistaken path, however hard you try, will 
not bring about the [desired] result, just as if, wanting milk, one were to pull [a cow] by its horn. If, although faultless, it is incomplete, the result 
will not come about despite your effort, just as a sprout will not grow if either the seed, water, earth, and the like are incomplete. 
 In order to achieve buddhahood, we need to en gage in a method that is unmistaken and 
complete. On the other hand, no matter how much  effort we put into a mistaken path, we 
will not achieve the result of  buddhahood. This would be like  someone who, wanting milk, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
580 pulls the horns of the cow! We must not do li ke this, but must use a correct method. Having 
understood what is the right method, we should  put as much effort as we can into it.  
 Likewise, if the method is not complete, we wi ll also not achieve the result. For example, if 
we have a seed and water but the soil is not good , a sprout will not grow. Also if we sow a seed 
in the soil but there is no water, a sprout will not grow. Likewise, if there is water and soil but 
no seed, as sprout will not grow. In short, Kamalashila, in his Middle Stages of Meditation , says 
that the method must be both complete and unmistaken in order for buddhahood to be 
achieved.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Identifying the complete path 
Well then, what are the complete and unmistaken causes and conditions? In 
Vairochana’s Manifest Enlightenm ent (Vairochana’s Abhisambodhi)  it says: 
 
O Lord of the Secret, the exalted wisdom of omniscience arises from 
the root that is compassion. It arises  from the cause that is the mind of 
enlightenment. It is culminated by method. 
 
I n  t h i s  r e g a r d  “ c o m p a s s i o n ”  h a s  a l r e a d y  b e e n  e x p l a i n e d .  “ T h e  m i n d  o f  
enlightenment” is the two: the convention al mind of enlightenment and ultimate 
mind of enlightenment. “Method” is thorou ghly complete generosity and so forth. 
This was explained by the gr eat trailblazer Kamalashila. 
 
Vairochana’s Manifest Enlightenment  says that the exalted wisdom  of omniscience arises from 
the root that is compassion. It arises from th e cause that is the mind of enlightenment. In 
other words, in order to achieve enlightenment the main cause or root is compassion, from 
which comes the mind of enlightenment, on the basis of which one trains in method, the six 
perfections, whereby one achieves the final result.  
 Compassion has already been explained. The conventional mind of enlightenment is the 
wish to achieve enlightenment for the welfare of all sentient beings. The ultimate mind of enlightenment is the wisdom realizing the emptin ess of inherent existence of all phenomena, 
including buddhahood. We should strive to de velop this wisdom in meditative equipoise. 
Method is thoroughly complete ge nerosity and so forth, that is, generosity, morality, patience, 
joyous effort, concentration, wisdom, method , prayer, strength, and exalted wisdom. These 
six perfections are what we need to practi ce. This was explained by Kamalashila.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B2 Refutation of wrong conceptions about this 
A Wrong modes of conception 
B Their refutation 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2A Wrong modes of conception 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
581 1 Wrong modes of apprehension 
One such mistaken conception regarding the path is held up by the Chinese 
Hashang and others who say: “Since projections173 on upward – there being no 
need to mention bad conceptions as even good conceptions – bind us in cyclic 
existence, their results do not transcend cy clic existence, just as one can be bound 
with fetters of gold or rope {196}, just as both white and black clouds obscure the 
sky, and just as one pain is produced rega rdless of whether one is bitten by a white 
or a black dog. Therefore, just equipoise  without conceptions about anything is 
the path to buddhahood. Generosity, ethica l discipline, and the like were taught 
for the welfare of dull beings incapable of  meditating on the definitive meaning. 
That is why, having found the definitive meaning, to engage in those conducts is 
like a king becoming a commoner or like , having found the elephant, looking for 
its footprints.” 
 “Hashang” is the Chinese name for a fully-ordaine d monk, a bhikshu. It is used by Tibetans 
to refer to those meditators whose strive not to think about anything  at all. They assert that all 
conceptions, even good conceptions such as bo dhichitta and compassion, bind us in cyclic 
existence, and that their results are only cyclic existence. They liken this to being bound with 
g o l d  f e t t e r s  o r  n o r m a l  r o p e ,  t h e  f a c t  b e i n g  t h a t  i n  e i t h e r  c a s e  o n e  i s  b o u n d ;  t h a t  w h e t h e r  clouds are white or black, they  obscure the sky; and that whether we are bitten by a black dog 
or a white dog, suffering is produced. Like this, good thoughts, such as bodhichitta or 
compassion, bind us to cyclic existence in the same way that bad though ts bind us in cyclic 
existence. Therefore, they ho ld that by abiding without conceptions, like a statue, one 
achieves buddhahood. For this reason, the Hashan g say that generosity, morality, and so forth 
were taught by the Buddha for those who are du ll and incapable of meditating on emptiness. 
Thus, having found the definitive meaning, if on e were to train in the bodhisattva conduct of 
generosity and so forth it would be like a king who becomes a commoner or someone who, having found the elephant, continues to looks for its tracks.   King Trisong Detsen and Shilarakshita invite d Kamalashila to debate with a Hashang in 
the presence of many ministers in Samye in the south in Tibet. Before the debate, they made 
a written agreement that whoever lost would beco me the other’s follower. Kamalashila said to 
Hashang “Do you not have any thoughts? When  you walk, do you not think about how to 
walk?” Hashang could not reply to this. Kamalashila asked him other questions but as he was 
unable to reply to them he ran way, leaving be hind a shoe. This has since been taken to be a 
sign that the Hashang’s view – that one should meditate by completely emptying the mind of 
all conceptions – would continue to remain in Tibet.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Wrong explanation of their sources  
The Hashang establish [their position] by quoting eighty passages from sutra that 
praise non-conceptuality. 
 
                                              
173 JN: rnam rtog  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
582 The Hashang base their view on sutra cita tions that praise non-conceptuality.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B Their refutation 
1 How scholars refute the worst of wrong views 
2 How some unfortunate beings adhere to it despite those refutations 
3 How non-abiding nirvana has to be accomplished by a path of both wisdom and method 
4 How the emptiness possessing the highest of all aspects is necessary for the attainment of buddhahood 
5 How the position that only accepts wisdom is refuted in the treatises 
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-1 How scholars refute the worst of wrong views 
The statement by them that “All the fact ors of method are not a genuine path to 
buddhahood” is a grave deprecation, and, by  refuting application in the essence of 
the Conqueror’s teachings – selflessne ss – with the wisdom of individual 
investigation, they abandon the mode of the highest meaning to a great distance. 
Although Kamalashila has refu ted them well with stainless scriptural passages and 
reasonings, and although he has presented in  detail the good path that pleases the 
conquerors… 
 
The Hashangs’ assertion that “All the fact ors of method are not a genuine path to 
buddhahood” is a great deprecatio n. They also negate that the essence of the Buddha’s 
doctrine – emptiness – is realized by the wisdom of individual investigation. Due to this, they 
are unable to achieve anything. Kamalashila re futed them by means of stainless scriptural 
passages and reasonings and extensively presente d the good path that pleases the buddhas.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-2 How some unfortunate beings adhere to it despite those refutations 
…there are still some who scorn the side  o f  c o n d u c t ,  s u c h  a s  g u a r d i n g  a n d  
restraining, and who, acting as has been described above, discard it while 
meditating the path. It appears that so me, excluding deprecating the factor of 
method, discard the way of understandin g the view, while others discard the 
search for the view of suchness by means of  the wisdom of individual investigation, 
and then excellently assert th e meditation of the Chinese [sect] of not thinking 
about anything. 
 
In spite of this, there are still those who, like  the Hashangs, think that  when meditating the 
path it is not necessary to guard vows or practi ce generosity, morality, and so forth. There are 
also people who hold the position that it is not necessary to search for emptiness or 
selflessness by means of analytical wisdom. In fa ct, even nowadays there are Tibetans who still 
think that it is not necessary to study Buddhist  philosophy or learn debate, but that it is 
enough just to sit down and meditate wi thout thinking about anything at all.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-3 How non-abiding nirvana has to be accomplished by a path of both wisdom and method 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
583 A That there is no need for method and wisdom to be complete contradicts all the scriptures and 
reasonings 
This does not seem to even be on the side of meditati on on emptiness. However, 
even if it were permitted to be medita tion on emptiness, the statement “Those 
who meditate well on the meaning of em ptiness should meditate on emptiness 
alone, it not being necessary to cultivate object-possessors of conventionalities, the 
side of conduct” contradicts all the script ures [of the Buddha], and simply seems to 
have gone beyond the path of reasoning. The object to be achi eved by Mahayanists 
is non-abiding nirvana. With respect to that, non-abiding in cyclic existence  is 
achieved by that called “the wisdom re alizing suchness,” “the stage of the path 
relying on the ultimate,” “the path of  the profound,” and that called “the 
collection of exalted wisdom” and “the factor of wisdom,” whereas non-abiding in 
nirvana or peace  i s  n e c e s s a r i l y  a c h i e v e d  b y  t h a t  c a l l e d  “ t h e  w i s d o m  c o g n i z i n g  
varieties,” “the stage of the path relying on conventional truth,” “the path of the 
vast,” “the collection of method,” and “the factor of merit.” 
 
There are people who think that it is enough to meditate on emptine ss without method, that 
is, without conventionalities. However, this contradicts all the teachings of the Buddha and 
has also gone beyond the path of reasoning. Th at to be achieved by Mahayana practitioners is 
non-abiding nirvana – the nirvana that has gone beyond both the extreme of abiding in cyclic 
existence and the extreme of abiding in peace. One does not abide in cyclic existence due to 
the wisdom realizing emptiness, the stage of the path relying on the ulti mate, or the path of 
the profound, the collection of wisdom, and the fa ctor of wisdom. The root of cyclic existence 
is ignorance – the conception of phenomena as in herently or truly existent. This is destroyed 
by the wisdom realizing emptiness, which abandons the wrong consciousness holding 
phenomena to be truly existent. Due to this , one does not abide in cyclic existence. 
 Also one does not abide in nirvana, the pe ace that is the pacification of one’s own 
afflictions and sufferings alone. Due to remainin g in that state, unmovi ng for eons, one will 
not be able to achieve buddhahood. One does not abide in self-peace due to the wisdom 
cognizing varieties, the state of the path relyin g on conventional truth , the path of the vast, 
the collection of method, and the factor of method. In short, the main objective of a 
Mahayanist is non-abiding nirvana, which is to no t abide either in cyclic existence or solitary 
peace.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Establishing by scriptural passages how method and wisdom refute the two extremes 
The following words are taken from the Sutra of the Inconceivable Perfect Secret : 
 
The collection of exalted wisdom is what abandons all mental 
afflictions. The collection of merit is what fully nurtures all sentient 
beings. As this is so, Bhagavan, th e bodhisattva mahasattvas strive in 
the collections of merit and exalted wisdom. 
 
By means of the collection of exalted wisdom, all the mental afflictions are abandoned. By 
means of the collection of merit, all sentient beings are nurtured or taken care of. Merit or 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
584 method includes love, compassion, and the mind of enlightenment, as well as the practices of 
generosity, morality, patience, effort and concen tration, by means of which sentient beings 
are cared for. Therefore, the bodhisattva mahasa ttvas put effort into the collections of merit 
and wisdom. The collection of merit includes th e first five perfections, whereas the collection 
of wisdom includes the sixth perfection.  
 In addition, all six perfections can be included  in the practice of ea ch single perfection. 
Therefore, in the case of the perfection of gene rosity, there is the generosity of generosity, the 
generosity of morality, the generosity of pa tience, the generosity of joyous effort, the 
generosity of concentration, and the genero sity of wisdom. This is explained in the Ornament 
for Clear Realizations . Generosity is, in brief, the mind of  giving. Morality is, in general, the 
mind of abandonment, but in the case of the ge nerosity of morality it is specifically the 
abandonment of miserliness while giving. The gene rosity of patience is an undisturbed mind 
when others’ ask us for something. The generosity of joyous effort is to delight in giving it to 
them. The generosity of concentr ation is to give it to them with a single-pointed mind. The 
generosity of wisdom is to give thinking that  oneself – the giver, the object given, and the 
recipient are empty of inherent existence. At the end when we should  dedicate the virtue 
accumulated for the benefit of all sentient bein gs, this is the generosity of generosity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Establishing by way of scriptural passages how we are bound to the extremes of existence and peace 
as long as method and wisdom are not complete 
Also, in the  Sutra Taught at the Request of Vimalakirti it says: 
 
In response to the questions “What is the bondage of bodhisattvas?” 
and “What is their liberation?”: 
 Wisdom not conjoined with method is bondage. Wisdom conjoined with method is liberation. Method not conjoined with wisdom is bondage. {198} Method conjoined with wisdom is liberation. 
 As long as both the side of method and the side of wisdom are not complete, we will remain 
bound in cyclic existence. The Sutra Taught at the Request of Vimalakirti  poses the question as 
to what binds bodhisattvas and what liberates them. The reply is that wisdom not conjoined 
with method is bondage (that is, bondage to se lf-peace); wisdom conjoined with method is 
liberation (that is, liberation from self-peace);  method not conjoined with wisdom is bondage 
(that is, bondage to cyclic existence as with out wisdom one cannot become free from cyclic 
existence); and method conjoined with wisdom is  liberation (that is, liberation from cyclic 
existence).   It is necessary to understand that without wisdom, that is, without the wisdom realizing 
selflessness or emptiness, it is not possible to  achieve nirvana or liberation. On the other 
hand, without method, although we can achi eve self-peace, we cannot achieve buddhahood. 
Therefore, we need both method and wisdom.   Tuesday afternoon, 10 May 2005 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
585  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 198) says:  
D The achievement of buddhahood depends on both wisdom and method 
In the Gayagori Sutra : 
 
The bodhisattva path, in brief, is ma de up of two. What are the two? 
They are the following: method and wisdom. 
 
When the path of bodhisattvas is condensed, it  consists of the two: method and wisdom. By 
practicing these two together we can easily achieve buddhahood, whereas if one of them is 
missing we cannot. Therefore, both method and wisdom are necessary. Method includes 
compassion, the mind of enlightenment, and th e practice of the first five perfections. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Their significance is also taught clearly in the Lamp on the Path : 
 
Due being separated from applicatio n in the perfection of wisdom, 
The obscurations will not exhausted. 
In order to abandon all the afflictive obscurations and The obscurations to objects of knowledge without exception, The yoga of the perfection of wisdom should  Always be meditated in combination with method. This is why wisdom separated from method  As well as method separated from wisdom Are called “bondage.”  Therefore, do not abandon either.  
 Without application in the perfection of wisd om, the obscurations cannot be exhausted. To 
abandon the afflictive obscurations and the obscur ations to knowledge, it is necessary to apply 
their antidote – the yoga of the perfection of wisdom, the prajnaparamita, or the wisdom 
gone beyond. However, we need to meditate on emptiness conjoined with the side of method, that is, conjoined with the motivation of love and compassion, and mainly the mind 
of enlightenment. Therefore, we should abando n neither merit or wisdom. If we practice one 
separated from the other, it is called “bondage .” Thus, if we have me thod but not the wisdom 
realizing emptiness, we will remain bound in cycl ic existence. On the other hand, if we have 
the wisdom realizing emptiness but not method, we  will remain bound in self-peace, this also 
being called “bondage” since it prevents us from achieving buddhahood.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And: 
All the collection of virtue, 
The perfection of generosity and the rest, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
586 That have abandoned the perfection of wisdom  
Are explained by the Conquerors to be method.  
A great being who meditates on the wisdom aspect 
With the power of familiarity with method 
Will quickly achieve enlightenment; This cannot be done by meditating on selflessness alone. 
 
The understanding of the emptiness in nature That realizes the aggregates , constituents, and sources  
As without production, Is thoroughly explained to be “wisdom.” 
 All the perfections excluding wisdom, that is, ge nerosity, morality, patience, joyous effort, and 
concentration, are the collection of virtue that  is the side of method. Through familiarizing 
with merit and meditating on the wisdom aspect, the wisdom realizing emptiness, a great being will quickly achieve enlightenment. On th e other hand, by meditating on selflessness 
alone one will not achieve enlightenment.   The realization that the five aggregates, ei ghteen constituents, and twelve sources – all 
phenomena – are not inherently produced is the realization of emptiness; this is thoroughly 
explained to be “wisdom.” The five aggregates  include all compounded phenomena, whereas 
the eighteen constituents and twelve sources include all compounded phenomena as well as all uncompounded phenomena – space, cessations,  emptinesses, and selflessnesses. In this 
way, all phenomena are included in the th ree groups: the five aggregates, eighteen 
constituents, and twelve sources. The form aggr egate includes all forms, that is, colors and 
shapes, as well as revelatory and non-revelato ry form. The feeling a ggregate includes the 
feelings of suffering, happiness, mental happiness, mental unhappiness, and equanimity. The discrimination aggregate includes both correct discriminations and mistaken discriminations. 
All the remaining forty-nine mental factors as well as the non-associated compositional factors 
are included in the compositional factors aggreg ate. The consciousness aggregate includes all 
primary consciousnesses, that is, the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mental consciousnesses. 
All these phenomena are compounded phenomena.  The eighteen constituents include the six 
objects (forms, sounds, odors, tastes, tangible  objects, and phenomena), the six supporting 
powers (the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mental powers), and the six supported 
consciousnesses (the eye, ear, nose, tongue, bo dy, and mental consciousnesses). They include 
all phenomena, that is, both functioning th ings and permanent phenomena. The twelve 
sources are the six object-possessors (the eye so urce, ear source, nose source, tongue source, 
body source, and mental source) and the six ob jects (form source, sound source, odor source, 
taste source, tangible object source, and phen omena source). None of these phenomena exist 
inherently, that is, they are all empty of inherent  existence. We should me ditate on this fact.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
587 2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-4 How the emptiness that possesses the best of all aspects is necessary for attaining 
buddhahood174
 
In the Jewel Pinnacle Sutra  it is taught that there it is  necessary to meditate on the 
emptiness that possesses the best of all aspe cts which is complete in all the factors 
of method, such as generosity and so forth.  
 
This sutra says that it is necessary to medita te on emptiness when all the factors of method, 
generosity and so forth, are complete. In other words, together with me ditation on emptiness 
we need to practice generosity and so fort h. In this way, we will attain buddhahood.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-5 How the position that only accepts wisdom is refuted in the treatises 
In the Gathering All the Threads  [Sutra] it says: 
 
Foolish people think to repudiate th e bodhisattvas’ practice of the six 
perfections for the sake of enli ghtenment saying: “Train in the 
perfection of wisdom alone. {199} Wh at is the point in training in the 
remaining?” 
 
And: 
Foolish people also say: “One becomes enlightened by a single means, 
that is, by way of emptiness.” Howe ver, they do not have completely 
pure conduct. 
 Foolish people say that it is enough to train in  the perfection of wisdom  and that bodhisattvas 
do not need to practice the six perfections in order to achieve enlightenment. They say that 
one single means is sufficient to become enli ghtened – meditation on emptiness. However, 
the conduct of such people does not become co mpletely pure because bodhisattvas, in fact, 
need to practice all six perfections, it is no t sufficient for them to meditate on the wisdom 
realizing emptiness alone.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3 Refutation of the answers to objections about this 
A Refutation of the objection that asserts that method is unnecessary if emptiness has been realized 
B Refutation of the objection that asserts that method is unnecessary since in the view of emptiness the 
six perfections are complete 
C Demonstration of contradictions in others’ assertions 
 
First the assertion that if emptiness has been realized, method is not necessary is refuted. 
Then the assertion that since all six perfections are complete in the view of emptiness, 
method is not necessary is refuted. Then the co ntradictions in others’ assertions are shown.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
                                              
174 JN: There is a mistake in the numbering of this ou tline and the next one in the Tibetan text (p. 198). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
588 2B4B-2B3B-3B3A Refutation of the objection that asserts that method is unnecessary if emptiness has 
been realized 
1 Stating the assertion 
2 Its refutation 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3A-1 Stating the assertion 
Someone thinks: “Training in the conduct of  generosity and so forth is [necessary] 
if one does not have a stable realization of emptiness, but if one has that, it is 
sufficient.” 
 
Someone thinks that those who do not have a st able realization of emptiness should train in 
the bodhisattva conduct, whereas those who have  a stable realization of emptiness do not 
need to practice generosity, morality, pa tience, joyous effort, and concentration. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3A-2 Its refutation 
A Refutation because it is in contradiction to the definitive meaning sutras  
[The refutation is:] “If this were so, the conquerors’ children who have attained the 
first ground and so forth, and especial ly conquerors’ children on the eighth 
ground who have achieved power over non-conceptual wisdom, would not need 
the conduct.” However, this is inappropriate, for in the Sutra of the Ten Grounds  it 
is taught “On each of the ten grounds, one, such as generosity and so forth, also 
becomes paramount. However, it is not th at the remaining ones are not practiced.” 
Therefore, on each of the grounds all six or all ten are said to be practiced.  
 It is incorrect to say that the bodhisattvas who have attained the first seven grounds – the first 
ground, Joyous, the second ground, Stainless, the third ground, Luminous, the fourth ground, Radiant, the fifth ground, Difficult to Overcome, the sixth ground, Approaching, 
and the seventh ground, Gone Af ar – and especially those wh o have attained the eighth 
ground, Immovable, who have attained power ov er non-conceptual wisdom do not need to 
practice the other perfections. This is because on each of the respective grounds, one of the 
perfections is mainly practiced: on the first ground, generosity; on the second, morality; on 
the third, patience; on the fourth, joyous effort ; on the fifth, concentration; on the sixth, 
wisdom; on the seventh, method; on the eighth , prayer; on the ninth, strength; and on the 
tenth, exalted wisdom. Therefore, it is necessary to practice all six or all ten perfections. While 
the Sutra of the Ten Grounds  says that on each ground or bhumi one perfection is mainly 
practiced, it is not that the others are not pr acticed. In this way, the assertion that the 
realization of emptiness alone is enough is refute d on the basis of valid scriptural authority.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B How, even with the highest realization of emptiness, method and wisdom are necessary 
In particular on the occasion of the eigh th ground, when abiding on the ultimate 
that pacifies all elaborations owing to the exhaustion of all the mental afflictions, 
the buddhas [exhort the bodhisattva saying: ] “Buddhahood cannot be achieved by 
the mere realization of emptiness; this [rea lization] is achieved even by hearers and 
solitary realizers.” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
589  
Even with the highest realization of emptine ss, method and wisdom are necessary. On the 
eighth ground, when the bodhisattva, having extinguished all the afflictions, abides in 
meditative equipoise on the ultimate, he is ex horted by the buddhas who say that it is not 
enough to realize emptiness alone in order to achieve buddhahood because even though 
hearer and solitary realizer foe-destroyers have achieved this realization they are not able to 
achieve buddhahood. in other words, when the bo dhisattva abides in meditative equipoise on 
the ultimate in which all elaborations have b een pacified, the buddhas radiate rays of light 
that strike him and make him rise from his me ditation and then tell him that by means of 
this meditation alone he cannot attain buddhah ood, as otherwise even hearer and solitary 
realizer foe-destroyers would have achieved it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How it is therefore inappropriate [to think] that there is no need for wisdom and method right from the 
beginning 
My bodies, my exalted wisdom, my [buddha] fields are immeasurable. 
L o o k  a t  t h e m !  N o r  d o  y o u  h a v e  m y  p o w e r s  a n d  t h e  l i k e .  T h e r e f o r e ,  
start to exert yourselves. Think of the unpacified sentient beings who 
are confused by various mental afflictions. {200} Do not give up 
patience either! 
 If [the buddhas] are so emphatic in explai ning [to eighth ground bodhisattvas] the 
need to train in the bodhisattva conduc t, this obviously applies to others.  
 The buddhas exhort the eighth  ground bodhisattvas saying: “Look at the immeasurable 
qualities of my bodies, exalted wisdom, and pure lands. Also my powers and so forth are without match. Therefore, you too need to put effort into achieving immeasurable bodies, 
immeasurable exalted wisdom, and immeasurable pure lands, as well as the ten powers, the 
four fearlessnesses, and so forth. Think abou t the fact that sentient beings’ minds are 
unpacified, disturbed by the mental afflictions.  You must help them. It is not fitting to 
remain in the meditative absorption of self-peace . Also do not give up patience, but put strong 
effort into taking care of sentient beings. You must do this.” Therefore,  since it is necessary 
for these bodhisattvas to train in the bodhisattva conduct of the six or ten perfections, there is 
no need to mention that ot hers must also do so.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D How even on the high paths of mantra, the way to generate the mind and train in the six perfections is 
the same by and large 
Although on the occasion of the high path of unsu rpassed mantra there are 
differences in this regard, it has already been explained above that, in general, the 
two – the mantra and perfection [vehicles] – share the same overall structure of the 
path of training in generating the two minds of enlightenment and the six 
perfections. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
590 Also the high path of unsurpassed mantra or ta ntra, it is necessary to train in the mind of 
enlightenment and the six perfections. Althou gh there are differences between the tantra 
vehicle and perfection vehicle, in both cases it is necessary to generate the two minds of 
enlightenment, the conventional and ultimate, an d to practice the six perfections. This has 
already been explained before. While there ar e practices that are uncommon to tantra and 
not found in the perfection vehicle, for exampl e, deity yoga, meditation on the channels and 
winds, training the five root winds and five secondary winds, and so forth, everything taught 
in sutra must be practiced by tantric practitioners.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 200) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3B Refutation of the objection stating that method is unnecessary because in the view of 
emptiness all six perfections are complete 
1 The objection thinking “Since the six perfections ar e complete when not thinking about anything, this 
is sufficient” 
2 Its refutation  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-1 The objection thinking “Since the six perfections are complete when thinking about nothing at all, this is sufficient”: how they are complete due to appearing according to that way of calculating  
[The objection is:] “We do not assert that  generosity and so forth are unnecessary, 
but they are complete when not thinking about anything because by not adhering 
to the recipient, the act of giving, nor the substance given, non-observing 
generosity is complete, and likewise the remaining [perfections] are complete and 
because it says in sutra that the six perfec tions are contained in each one of them.” 
 Some people think that not thinking about anythi ng includes the six perfections, therefore it 
is enough. They think that meditation on empt iness means to sit motionless while trying to 
stop thoughts, whereby it becomes unnecessary to  practice the six perfec tions. However, this 
would be too easy! Then, even a rabbit, due to  merely sitting still, would quickly achieve 
enlightenment! Hence, this assertion is not ri ght. These people think that by not thinking 
about anything at all, the six perfections are completed because there is no thought adhering 
to the giver, the action of giving, and the subs tance given, whereby non-observing generosity is 
complete. In other words, since one does not th ink about anything, one also does not adhere 
to the three spheres, whereby one complete s non-observing generosity, non-observing 
morality, non-observing patience, non-observing joyous effort, non-observing concentration, 
and non-observing wisdom.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-2 Refutation of this together with a digression  
A The absurd consequences [that would ensue] if this were so 
If all the perfections were complete simp ly through this, they would be complete 
for the calm abiding that is a single-point ed mind of a Tirthika at the time of 
meditative equipoise since he does not adhere  to them. In particular, as it says in 
the Sutra of the Ten Grounds , hearers and solitary realizers who have a non-
conceptual exalted wisdom with respect to  reality, when meditatively equipoised 
on it, would become Mahayanists since the entire bodhisattva conduct is complete. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
591 The Sutra on the Ten Grounds  says that since hearers and solita ry realizers have a non-observing 
non-conceptual exalted wisdom with respect to emptiness, they too would have completed the 
bodhisattva conduct of the six perfections. In other words, it would follow that hearers and 
solitary realizers who meditate on emptiness wo uld become Mahayanists, that is, bodhisattvas, 
because all six perfections are complete.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B If it were sufficient that in each one all six are complete, it would follow that a mandala would be 
offered with one single [substance] 
If you assert that this alone is sufficien t, because it is taught that in each 
[perfection] all six are included, then, wh ile offering a mandala with [the verse] 
“Giving cow dung together with water...” it  would also be appropriate to do just 
that since it is said that {201} all six are present. 
 
Is it sufficient to offer a mandala with the verse “Giving cow dung together with water”? 
When we do a mandala offering, we first clean the base with the five  cow substances: dung, 
urine, butter, milk, and yogurt mixed together and made into pills. Since we imagine cleaning 
away the impurities in our mind while simult aneously practicing generosity, morality, 
patience, joyous effort, concentration, and wi sdom, it would be enough just to offer a 
mandala.  Wednesday morning, 11 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 201) says:  
C How inseparable wisdom and method influence each other 
The [following] analogy [is given] in order to illustrate conduct conjoined with the 
view and wisdom conjoined with method. When a mother tormented by sorrow at 
the death of her beloved child engages in talking with other people etc., although 
whatever minds are produced it is not gi ven up due to the power of her sorrow, 
still all her minds are not minds of sorrow. Similarly, if the wisdom realizing 
emptiness is very powerful, when giving gifts, prostrating, circumambulating, and 
so forth, the minds that observe them are not realizing emptiness, but there is no 
contradiction that are performed possessing its strength. If you start off with the 
intense power of the mind of enlighte nment, as you do at beginning of a 
meditation session, although the mind of  enlightenment is not manifest when 
placed in the meditative stabilization of em ptiness, there is no contradiction in it 
being influenced by it. The way in whic h wisdom and method are inseparable is 
also like this. 
 
We need to practice wisdom and method simult aneously, such that one assists the other. Our 
conduct should be conjoined with the view, th e realization of emptiness, and our wisdom 
should be conjoined with method, compassion, the mind of enlightenment, the practice of 
generosity, and so forth. In other words, they  should be inseparable. For example, if a 
mother’s beloved child has died, she is tormen ted by sorrow such that even when she talks 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
592 with other people, although her sorrow or un happiness is not manifest in her mind, its 
strength remains and does not diminish. In othe r words, remembering the death of her child, 
her mind remains conjoined with sorrow or sa dness. Similarly, if our wisdom realizing 
emptiness is strong, even when we practice genero sity, make offerings of water, flowers, light, 
incense, and so forth, do prostrations, circumam bulate holy objects, or do other activities, 
t h e y  w i l l  b e  i n f l u e n c e d  b y  t h e  p o w e r  o f  t h e  w i sdom realizing emptiness, although it is not 
manifest. There is no contradiction that the re alization of emptiness does not decrease in 
strength even when a bodhisattva practices the other perfections. In fact, when a bodhisattva 
practices one of the six perfections, it should be conjoined with all six perfections. He does 
not practice wisdom separate from method and method separate from wisdom, as by doing so 
buddhahood could not be attained.  
 When doing a retreat, at the beginning of ea ch meditation session we generate the strong 
motivation of love, compassion, and the mind of enlightenment. Then, afterward, when we 
meditate on emptiness single-pointedly, even th ough the mind of enlightenment is no longer 
manifest our meditation is still conjoined with  or held by the mind of enlightenment. The 
meaning of inseparable method and wisdom is that while one is manifest, the power of the 
other still remains, that is, they assist each  other. Therefore, every morning we should 
generate the motivation of the mind of enlighte nment that wishes to attain enlightenment for 
the welfare of all sentient beings and then re cite our sadhanas or meditate on emptiness, 
death-impermanence, the breath, and so forth. In this way, the mind of enlightenment 
remains the motivation for all our activities.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C Demonstration of contradictions in others’ assertions 
1 The inappropriateness of the causes for high status and certain goodness being contradictory 
2 [One’s words will be contradictory like the speech of madmen ] 
3 [The reason for its lack of observed objects and its contradictions ] 
4 [Contradiction to bringing about any certainty] 
5 Contradictions with the sutras teaching the absence of an object – has four units 
6 [Clarification of the position that applies equally to sutra and tantra] 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-1 The inappropriateness of the causes for high status and certain goodness being 
contradictory 
You should not be misled with regard to  the statement that the results of the 
collection of merit are your [present] body , resources, long life, and so forth of 
cyclic existence. If method is divorced  from wisdom, this is indeed the case. 
However, if it is conjoined with it, it is altogether suitable to be the cause of 
liberation and omniscience. There are infini te scriptural passages for this, like in 
[Nagarjuna’s] Precious  Garland (Ratnavali) : 
 
The form body, in brief, O King, Is born from the collection of merit. 
 It is said that the result of the collection of merit is our body (a high rebirth as a human being 
or god), resources (the result of generosity), long life (the result of the morality of abandoning killing), and so forth of cyclic existence. Howeve r, we should not be mistaken with respect to 
this statement. If merit is separate from wisdom , it is like this, whereas if merit is conjoined 
with the wisdom realizing emptiness it is s uitable to be the cause of liberation and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
593 omniscience. Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland , for instance, says that the form body of a buddha 
is born from the collection of merit. Th ere are many quotations to this effect. 
 The collection of merit from practicing generosity and so forth is necessary since it is the 
cause of the form body of a buddha, and the coll ection of wisdom is necessary since it is the 
cause of the truth body of a buddha, that is, the mind of a buddha. Since these results arise 
simultaneously, we need to accumulate their causes simultaneously. Therefore, it is not 
correct to accumulate merit while leaving as ide wisdom and vice versa. If, when we 
accumulate merit through practicing the first fi ve perfections, we do not have the wisdom 
realizing emptiness, then our practice of morali ty will become the cause of taking a rebirth of 
high status as a human being or god, our prac tice of generosity will become the cause of 
wealth, our practice of patience will become the cause of beauty, and so forth. Thus, when we 
lack wisdom, our merit becomes the cause of high  rebirth in cyclic existence, whereas when 
merit is conjoined with wisdom , it becomes the cause of definite goodness – liberation and 
omniscience.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-2 One’s words will be contradictory like the speech of madmen 
Furthermore, sometimes you seem to say th at the faulty conduct and all the mental 
afflictions that become the causes of the bad migrations can also become causes for 
buddhahood, and sometimes that virtues like generosity, ethical discipline, and so 
on that become the causes of high status are the causes of cyclic existence, rather 
than the causes of enlightenment. {202} Yo u should set your mind at ease before 
talking! 
 
To sometimes say that faulty conduct and the me ntal afflictions, which are the causes of the 
bad migrations, can become the causes of buddh ahood, and to sometimes say that the virtues 
of generosity, morality, and so forth, which are the causes of high status, are the cause of 
cyclic existence and not cause of enlightenment, is the talk of a crazy person. In other words, 
to say that faulty conduct and the mental affl ictions become the causes of buddhahood, while 
virtues such as generosity and so forth are no t the causes of enlightenment indicates that 
one’s mind is not abiding in its natural state bu t is disturbed. Therefore, before talking, one 
should calm one’s mind and not allow it to fly in the sky! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-3 The reason for its lack of observed objects and its contradictions 
A The presentation in the sutras 
It also says in the sutras: 
 
Strong adherence to the six, generosi ty and so forth, is the action of 
Mara. 
 
In the [ Sutra of the] Three Heaps  it also explains: 
 
The giving of gifts due to  falling into observing, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
594 Guarding ethics due to considering it supreme ethics, 
And so forth; these should be confessed individually. 
 
Also from the [Sutra] Requested by Brahma : 
 
However much conduct exists, all of it is conceptual. 
Thorough non-conceptual ity is enlightenment. 
 You should not be mistaken with respect to these statements. 
 In the sutras it says that strong adherence to the six perfections of generosity and so forth as 
inherently existent is the action of  mara. It is also mentioned in the Ornament for Clear 
Realizations  that there are many such ac tions of mara. Thus, engaging in the practice of the six 
perfections while adhering to them as inherent ly existent, truly existent, or self-supporting 
substantially existent is the action of the mara.  
 In the Sutra of the Three Heaps  i t  a l s o  s a y s  t h a t  t h e  g i v i n g  o f  g i f t s  d u e  t o  f a l l i n g  i n t o  
observing, that is, due to holding to true existe nce, and guarding morality due to holding it to 
be supreme morality must be confessed indivi dually, that is, they must be abandoned.  
 The Sutra Requested by Brahma  says that whatever conduct ex ists, it is conceptual, whereas 
thorough non-conceptuality is enlightenment.  
 We should not be mistaken with respect to these citations but think about them and try to 
understand them correctly. For example, when th e sutra says that whatever conduct exists is 
conceptual, the meaning it that enlightenm ent cannot be attained by that which is 
conceptual. In other words, when we ordinary beings practice generosity, guard morality, and 
develop patience, we do so with a conceptual mi nd, not with a direct perceiver. On the other 
hand, when we achieve enlightenment, our mind is  non-conceptual, that is, it is only a direct 
perceiver. However, this does not mean that all conceptions are to be abandoned. While the 
Hashangs assert that all conceptions are to be aban doned, it is not like this in our tradition.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The contradiction to the way in which the first passage is explained 
The meaning of the first one is that genero sity motivated by mistaken adherence to 
the two [types of] self is explained to be an  action of the maras since it is not pure. 
However, generosity and so forth are not pr esented to be the actions of the maras. 
 
The meaning of the first passage is that when generosity and so forth are motivated by the 
adherence to a self of persons and a self of phen omena, that is the adherence to an inherently 
existent or self-supporting substantially existent  self and aggregates, then generosity, morality, 
patience, and so forth are considered to be th e action of the maras since they are not pure. 
However, it is not that the six perfections are taught to be the action of the maras. In other 
words, although generosity and so forth can beco me the action of the ma ras, in general when 
we engage in the practice of the six perfection s with a good motivation, they become perfect 
actions and not actions of the maras. Therefore, we need to  examine our motivation when 
meditating, when practicing generosity and so fo rth. If we find, for ex ample, that one of the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
595 eight worldly concerns, for example, the thought to give so that others can see that we are 
generous whereby we will become famous, has ar isen, it is not pure generosity, but is an 
action of the maras. In other wo rds, if we give motivated by th e wish for fame, for the wish to 
receive something in return, and so forth, it is not pure. When we give, we should do so with 
a pure motivation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C The contradiction to holding the words of the second passage since it actually says “due to falling into 
observing” 
Otherwise, you would have to say “Giving should be confessed in general” without 
the need to fall into observing saying  “Bestowing gifts having fallen into 
observing.” Therefore, it has not been taught like that. In the [Kamalashila’s] Last 
Stages of Meditation  it becomes a very crucial point [for Kamalashila] to give this 
kind of answer, for if this is misunderstood, one will assert the entire side of 
conduct to be together with signs through holding to signs of a self of persons or 
phenomena.  
 
To “fall into observing” means to conceive of inherent existence, true existence, or self-
supporting substantial existence. To give due to falling into ob serving is an action of the 
mara. However, in general generosity does not entail falling into observing, otherwise there 
would have been no need for the Buddha to have  said that it is necessary to confess the 
generosity of falling into observing. The Ha shangs, on the other hand, have the mistaken 
understanding that the entire side of conduct is together with the thought that persons and 
phenomena are truly existent, that is, together with  the signs of a self of persons or a self of 
phenomena. However, this is mistaken, there is  no need for there to be adherence to true 
existence, that is, falling into  observing, when we practice generosity and so forth. The 
adherence to signs of a truly existent self of pe rsons and a truly existent self of phenomena is 
what is called “holding to signs” ( tshen dzin ).  
 
 (Oral transmission, 12:04-12:29, pp. 202-212)  Wednesday afternoon, 11 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 202) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4 [Contradiction to bringing about any certainty] 
A It contradicts the teachings that one should rely on abandoning negativities and so forth  
B The mistake that this [view] contradicts any ki nd of logic and makes it impossible to establish 
anything with certainty 
C [Understanding the statements in the context of the two truths] 
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4A It contradicts the teachings that one should rely on abandoning negativities and so forth 
If the mind of giving that thinks “I will  give this substance away” and the mind of 
restraint that thinks “I will restrain myse lf from this faulty conduct” and all such 
virtuous conceptions were conceptions of  a self of phenomena apprehending the 
three spheres, it would be suitable for those who have found the view of 
selflessness of phenomena {203} to cease them  in all ways just like hatred, pride, 
etc. and it would be unsuitable to rely on them for that purpose.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
596  
If the mind of giving that thinks “I will give  away this substance” and the mind of restraint 
that thinks “I will restrain myself from this faulty conduct” and all such virtuous conceptions 
were conceptions of a self of phenomena appreh ending the three spheres to be inherently or 
truly existent, then those who have found the view of the selflessness of phenomena (the 
emptiness of all phenomena of true or inherent  existence) would have to cease all virtuous 
conceptions, such as the mind of giving that thinks “I will give away this substance” and the 
mind of restraint that thinks “I will restrain my self from this faulty conduct.” In other words, 
it would be necessary to abandon all virtuous co nceptions in the same way that it is necessary 
to abandon hatred, pride, ignorance, afflicte d doubt, and so forth. However, virtuous 
conceptions such as the mind of giving, that is, generosity, that thinks “I will give this…,” “I 
will make a donation to that…” are not to be abandoned. Therefore, they are not like 
attachment, hatred, pride, and so forth. Vi rtuous minds need to be developed, not 
abandoned.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4B The fault that this [assertion] contr adicts all reasonings and also makes it unsuitable to 
gain certainty with respect to anything 
If any conception that thinks “This is this ” is considered to be a conception of a 
self of phenomena that conceives the thr ee spheres, then thinking about the good 
qualities of a spiritual teacher and the great significance of the leisures and 
endowments, etc., remembering death, thinking about the sufferings of the bad 
migrations, going for refuge, and contemplat ing that from this action arises that 
result, training in love, compassion, and the mind of enlightenment, and training 
in the trainings of the engaging mind  of enlightenment would be thoughts 
thinking “This is this,” “From this, that arises,” “This has these qualities and those 
disadvantages.” Since that would necessarily  just induce certainty, the conception 
of a self of phenomena would increase more  and more as certainty with respect to 
those [above-mentioned topics] increases. Moreover, the certainty with respect to 
those paths would decrease as certainty with respect to the selflessness of phenomena increases. Thereby, the side of  conduct and the side of view having 
come to contradict each other like hot and cold, a strong ascertaining 
consciousness with respect to both of them could not be generated continuously. 
 This assertion contradicts logical reasonings and makes it impossible to gain certainty. This is 
because it would follow that all conceptions “Thi s is a cup,” “This is a table,” “This is a man,” 
“This is woman,” would become conceptions of a self of phenomena that conceive the three 
spheres to be inherently existent. Then, thinking  about the qualities of the virtuous spiritual 
friend and the great meaning of the leisures and endowments, remembering death, thinking 
about the sufferings of the bad migrations, going for refuge, thinking about the fact that from 
this action comes that result (i.e., from a virtuous action comes happiness and from a non-
virtuous action comes suffering), and training in  the love that wishes all sentient beings to 
have happiness and its causes, the compassion that  wishes all sentient beings to be free from 
suffering and its causes, and the mind of enlightenment, as well as training in the trainings of the engaging mind of enlightenment would all be thoughts of “This is that,” “This arises from 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
597 that,” “This has this good quality,” and “That has this disadvantage.” Since we must gain 
certainty regarding these thoughts, it would fo llow that the more we think about them and 
the more our certainty increases, the more the conception of a self of phenomena would also 
correspondingly increase. In addition, the more we  gain certainty with respect to these topics, 
the more the certainty with respect to the path would decrease as the certainty with respect to 
the conception of a self of phenomena increases.  As a result the side of conduct and the side 
of view would become contradictory, like hot and cold. Also a strong ascertaining 
consciousness with respect to both of th em would not be generated continuously.  
 This entire discussion is base d on the assertion that all conc eptions, whether good or bad, 
are to be abandoned. Supporting analogies were given saying that whether one is bitten by a 
white dog or a black dog there is pain, whether th ere is a black cloud or white cloud the sky is 
obscured, whether one is bound by a gold rope o r a n o rm al ro pe o n e is  s till bo un d. Suc h  
people thereby conclude that all conceptions ar e  t o  b e  a b a n d o n e d ,  h e n c e  i t  i s  b e s t  n o t  t o  
think about anything. They assert this to be  meditation on emptiness and the definitive 
meaning of ultimate truth, whereas all conception s only become the cause of rebirth in cyclic 
existence. This assertion is what is being refuted here.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4C [Understanding the statements in the context of the two truths] 
1 Method and wisdom are not contradictory like hot and cold 
In accordance with the two – on the o ccasion of the result, truth body being 
posited as the object to be obtained an d form body being considered to be the 
object to be obtained – not being contradi ctory, the following two at the time of 
the path must also not be contradictory:  
1. an ascertaining consciousness that is in duced with respect to the freedom from 
elaborations of an observed object, even  the merest particle  without exception, 
that is apprehended as having signs of the two [types of] self, and 
2. an ascertaining consciousness that is in duced with respect to “From this, that 
arises” and “This has that fault or quality.” 
 Method and wisdom are not contradictory as ar e hot and cold. Why? Because just as on the 
occasion of the result, the truth body, the object  to be obtained on the side of wisdom, and 
the form body, the object to be attained on the side of method, are not contradictory, likewise 
the causes, method and wisdom, cannot be contradi ctory. Thus also at the time of the path 
the two ascertaining consciousnesses are not contradictory: 1. an ascertaining consciousness that is in duced with respect to the freedom from 
elaborations of an observed object, even the merest particle without exception, that is 
apprehended as having signs of the two types of self, and 
2. an ascertaining consciousness that is induced with respect to “From this, that arises” and 
“This has that fault or quality.” 
In other words, because the two conceptions of a self, that of persons and that of phenomena, 
that is, the holding to signs of truly exis tent persons and phenomena, are mistaken 
consciousnesses, their objects of the mode of apprehension are destroyed such that not even 
an atom remains. Thus, we need to gain certainty with respect to the fact that all phenomena 
are free from true existence and inherent existenc e. Having gained this certainty, we can say 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
598 “This arises from that,” for example, “Smoke arises from fire.” We can also say “This has 
qualities” and “This has faults”; for example, “V irtuous minds, such as love, have qualities” 
and “The mental afflictions have faults.” We n eed to gain certainty with respect to this, as 
w h e n  t h i s  i s  u n d e r s t o o d  m e t h o d  a n d  w i s d o m  w i l l  n o t  a p p e a r  t o  b e  c o n t r a d i c t o r y .  O n  t h e  
other hand, if one does not understand this, method and wisdom will appear to be 
contradictory. However, they cannot be contra dictory because their final results – the form 
body and truth body – are simultaneously achi eved by a single being. A buddha has many 
qualities such as the qualities of his exal ted body, exalted speech, exalted mind, and 
enlightened activities. Cyclic existence, on th e other hand, has many faults, such as many 
types of suffering. Therefore, cyclic existenc e has many faults while buddhahood has only 
qualities.   If we study the lam-rim, for example, our kn owledge and understanding of the stages of the 
path will grow. In fact, whatever subject we stud y, science, mathematics, and so forth, we will 
come to gain more and more knowledge. On the other hand, if we do not study, we will not 
gain knowledge and may even become more an d more stupid as our ignorance increases! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How the two valid cognitions that posit the two truths assist one another 
Moreover, that depends on how {204} the view of the basis, the two truths, is 
settled. Therefore, when, by way of script ures and reasonings, you gain certainty 
that the two: 
1. the valid cognition thoroughly positing the ultimate that has settled the mode 
of subsistence or the manner of being of  all the phenomena of cyclic existence 
and nirvana as without the merest pa rticle of inherent existence; and 
2. the valid cognition of varieties that thor oughly posits causes and results which 
individually ascertains the slightest phenomenon that is a cause or result 
without confusion 
do not harm each other in the least but ra ther assist each other, then you will 
realize the meaning of the two truths and will come to count yourself among 
“those who have found the intention of the Conqueror.” 
 The view of the basis is the two truths. By un derstanding the two truths, we will understand 
that the two valid cognizers realizing them are not mutually contradictory, but instead 
mutually assist each other. By means of vali d scriptural authority and reasonings cyclic 
existence and nirvana are shown to not be esta blished from their own side and to not be 
inherently existent. In fact, they do not have ev en the tiniest particle of inherent existence. 
This emptiness of inhalation and exhalation is their ultimate truth.   On the other hand, causes and results are infa llible: from virtuous actions come happiness 
and not suffering, and from non-virtuous action s come suffering and not happiness. Similarly, 
smoke arises from fire, that is, smoke is the result  of its respective cause, fire. External causes 
function in the same way, for example, a rice s eed does not bring the result of a wheat sprout 
or barley sprout, it only brings the result of rice sprout. Likewise, a mother dog gives birth to 
puppies and not kittens, whereas a mother cat gives birth to kittens and not puppies. Such 
causes and results are established by a valid cognizer of varieties or conventionalities.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
599  The valid cognizer realizing conventional trut hs and the valid cognizer realizing ultimate 
truths do not harm each other, instead they assist each other. Having gained certainty with 
respect to this, we will realize the meaning of  the two truths and find the intention of the 
Buddha. In short, we need to understand that  these two valid cognizers do not contradict 
each other, but assi st each other.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 [Clarification of the misconception expressed in the third quotation] 
The meaning of the third quotation is explained in the Last Stages of Meditation . 
Since the context of this sutra is the cont ext of an analysis of production and so 
forth, with respect to teaching that genero sity and so forth are not really produced, 
they are taught to be merely imputed by  conception saying “They are conceived,” 
however they are not taught to be objects to be discarded and not relied upon.  
 
The third quotation from sutra teaches that gene rosity and so forth are not established from 
their own side or inherently or truly. Rather, ge nerosity and so forth, all six perfections, are 
taught to be merely imputed by conception. Theref ore, it is not that they are not to be relied 
upon or discarded, in fact generosity and so forth are to be practice d. Thus, the sutra only 
teaches that they exist by way of imputation, it does not teach that they are not to be relied 
upon and to be discarded. This is explained by Kamalashila in his Last Stages of Meditation .  
 In short, all phenomena exist by way of impu tation; they do not exis t from their own side. 
We need to understand this. The conception of  phenomena as existing from their own side, 
or inherently, or truly is what is to be aban doned. Phenomena exist by way of being imputed 
by a name on a valid base. Regarding this, it is  recounted that a monk from Sera Monastery, 
J i g m e  W a n g y e l ,  o n c e  s a i d  t o  a n o t h e r  m o n k ,  D o rje Rinchen, “Dorje Rinchen, you are very 
bad.” When Dorje Rinchen aske d why he was bad, Jigme Wang yel explained that it was 
because he called one monk Sengge  (lion) and another Dom (bear), and yet called a dog Tara 
(female liberator)! Dorje Rinchen got a bit angry bu t could not reply since it is true that if we 
give something a name it should be given to a valid basis!   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-5 It contradicts the many sutras and so forth that teach the lack of observed objects  
A [It contradicts the Compendium of All Sutras ] 
As regards [the statement] that a one-sided pa th is not enough, it is also clearly said 
in the Compendium of All Sutras :  
 
Bodhisattvas who are separated from  skillful means should not make 
strong effort in the profound dharma. 
 
A one-sided path – either the vast alone or th e profound alone – is not enough. Likewise, the 
Compendium of All Sutras  says that bodhisattvas who are wi thout skillful means should not put 
strong effort into understanding the profound dharma, that is, emptiness. In other words, 
bodhisattvas lacking method should not put e ffort into emptiness as there will be little 
benefit. In other words, a unio n of the method side and wisdom side is necessary. It is not 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
600 enough to have one side only, for example, an understanding of emptiness while lacking 
method.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B It contradicts the sutras since omniscience does arise when there is no observed object 
In the [Sutra of] Inconceivable Secrets  it says: 
 
Son of the lineage, it is like this . For instance, a fire burns due to a 
cause; if the cause is absent it will subside. Likewise, a mind blazes due 
to an observed object; if an observed object is absent it will subside. 
 
It contradicts sutra since omniscience does no t arise if there is no observed object. The Sutra 
of Inconceivable Secrets  sets out the example of fire which n eeds a cause, fuel, in order to blaze. 
When there is fuel, the fire will ignite. If there is  no fuel, the fire will extinguish. Similarly, if 
the mind has an observed object, it will blaze up. On the other hand, if the mind does not 
have an observed object, it will disappear.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How it is necessary to individually [investigate ] the meaning of the presence or absence of observed 
objects  
Therefore, the bodhisattva of skillf ul means knows how to completely 
extinguish observed objects by means of the thoroughly pure perfection 
of wisdom, {205} but he does not completely extinguish observed 
objects with respect to the roots of virtue. He does not allow the 
observed objects with respect to th e mental afflictions to arise, but 
settles on the observed objects of the perfections. He also individually 
investigates the observed object that is emptiness, but looks upon the 
observed object – all sentient beings – with great compassion. 
 
The individual statements regarding the w ay in which there is an observed object 
and the way in which there is no observ ed object need to be differentiated. 
 Some minds have observed objects and some do not, this difference must be understood. A bodhisattva who is skilled in method knows how to completely pacify the observed object by 
means of the thoroughly pure pe rfection of wisdom. However, he does not thoroughly pacify 
the observed objects with respect to  roots of virtue, that is, in th is case an observed object is 
necessary. On the other hand, he strives to no t allow the observed objects of the mental 
afflictions to arise, but instead seeks to preven t their arisal. For example, when an object of 
attachment is nearby us, attachme nt arises. When an observed object that we do not like is 
nearby us, hatred arises. Therefore, it is better to try not to observe such objects and to avoid 
them. On the other hand, we should try to bring virtuous objects closer to us, such as images 
of holy beings, Tara, Manjushri, or Avalokites hvara, and to observe them with our mind. For 
example, we should try to focus the mind sing le-pointedly on the observed object of calm 
abiding, whereby we bring this object closer an d closer. In this way, we can develop more and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
601 more concentration. On the other hand, if so meone who is our object of attachment comes 
close when we are doing single-pointed medita tion, immediately our mind will be distracted 
and our concentration interrupted. Therefore, some observed objects need to be brought 
closer while others need to be made distant.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D Although the bonds of the mental afflictions and apprehending signs have been loosened, it is 
inappropriate to grow lax in guarding and restraining 
Likewise, the bonds of the mental afflictions and apprehending signs need to be 
loosened, whereas the ropes of the trai nings need to be tightened. The two 
misdeeds need to destroyed, whereas virtuous  actions do not need to be destroyed. 
Therefore, being restrained by the traini ngs and being bound by the apprehension 
of signs are not the same, nor are loosening guarding and restraining and 
loosening the bonds of the conception of a self the same. Therefore, the meaning 
of destruction and self-liberation etc. need to be examined well. 
 The bondage of the mental afflictions, such as  attachment, and the bondage of apprehending 
signs, that is, apprehending true existence or in herent existence, need to be loosened, whereas 
the bondage of the trainings needs to be tigh tened. Thus, on the one hand, we need to 
abandon the mental afflictions and the apprehensi on of signs, while, on the other hand, we 
need to tighten our morality, that is, we need to guard our vows well, like tightening a rope, with mindfulness and introspection.  
 The two types of misdeeds – the natural and form ulated – need to be destroyed, that is, we 
need to cease them. On the other hand, we shou ld not put an end to virtuous actions, but 
instead strive to increase them by constantly putting more and mo re effort into them in order 
to strengthen them. Having taken vows, we need to constantly ex amine whether we are 
transgressing them; this is the morality of aban donment. For example, in the case of the five 
vows of lay people, the ten vows of novices, and the two hundred fifty-four vows of fully-
ordained monk, we should try to keep them stri ctly by always guarding the doors of our body 
and speech.   Our mind is bound by the apprehension of si gns, that is, the conception of all phenomena 
as existing truly or inherently. However, this bondage is not the same as being bound by our 
vows. Nor is loosening the bondage of apprehen ding signs and loosening the bondage of our 
vows the same. Therefore, we need to analyz e the meaning of the terms “destruction” and 
“self-liberation,” which were used by past scho lars. “Destruction” refers to the destruction of 
mental afflictions, non-virtuous actions, and so forth.   Thursday morning, 12 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 205) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-6 [Clarification of the position that applies equally to sutra and tantra] 
A [The object of rejection by Kamalashila] 
The way in which Master Kamalashila refu ted mental inattention does not refute 
meditating through initially setting [the mind on ] the view that has settled the 
meaning of the manner of being and then  setting it single-pointedly on that 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
602 without mentally attending to anything else . However, it does refute that the mere 
placement that sets the mind in not concei ving anything without placing it on the 
meaning settled by the view, the manner of being, constitutes meditation on 
emptiness. 
 
Kamalashila refuted the assertion that to no t think about anything is meditation on 
emptiness. While he did not refute meditating single-pointedly on emptiness, he did refute 
meditating single-pointedly on the emptiness th at is a mere lack of conceptuality. When 
meditating on emptiness, the mind must be focu sed single-pointedly on the final reality of all 
phenomena – suchness, thusness, or emptiness. Such meditation on emptiness is not refuted 
by Kamalashila, rather he refutes the assert ion that meditation on ultimate truth is 
meditation on a complete lack of observed obje cts. This is because we need to meditate on 
the observed object that is the emptiness of  all phenomena of true existence, inherent 
existence, or existence from th eir own side. We must focus the mind single-pointedly on this 
observed object. Therefore, this way of meditati ng on emptiness is not refuted. On the other 
hand, meditation without thinking about anyt hing and completely lacking an observed 
object, which is just a cause of cyclic existence, is refuted.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Demonstration that it will be explained that although the trainings in thoroughly complete method and 
wisdom are the same in both sutra and tantra, when individually investigated and so forth there are 
differences 
This is the same for the mantra and the perfection [vehicles]. However, I will 
explain the way in which there are similari ties and differences in the two systems 
regarding sustaining [meditation] throug h analyzing by means of the wisdom of 
individual investigation. 
 
The need to train in thoroughly complete me thod and wisdom is the same in sutra and 
tantra, or in the perfection vehicle and mantra  vehicle. In both cases the two need to be 
unified. However, there are some differences be tween sutra and tantra in terms of analytical 
meditation, which are yet to be explained. For ex ample, from the point of view of sutra, the 
mind that does analytical medita tion on emptiness is a coarse mi nd, whereas in tantra it is the 
subtle mind. In the sutra system there is not even a presentation of a very subtle mind. However, even in tantra, ordinary beings are said to be unable to use the very subtle mind to do analytical meditation on emptiness, that is, to identify and refute the object of negation. 
They too do this with a coarse mi nd, as in the case of sutra.  
 On the other hand, there is no difference in  the emptiness posited by sutra and tantra, and 
likewise there is no difference in the object of  negation. However, there are different objects 
of negation. For example, it is said that in the perspective of the meditative equipoise on 
emptiness of a learner, conventi onal phenomena such as forms an d so forth do not appear. In 
this sense forms and so forth are negated in th is context. However, conventional truths in 
general are not an object of negation. Thus, th ere are these different explanations depending 
on the context.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
603 2B4B-2B3B-3C Explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings  
1 How to train in the Mahayana in general 
2 In particular how to train in the vajra vehicle 
The third {206} has two [points]: How to train in the Mahayana in general and in 
particular how to train in the vajra vehicle. 
Explanation of how to train in the conduc t of the conquerors’ children in general 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1 How to train in the Mahayana in general 
A Developing the wish to train in the trainings of bodhisattvas  
B Having developed the wish, taking the vows of the conquerors’ children 
C Having taken them, the way in which to train in them  
The first has three [points]: Developing the wish to train in the trainings of 
bodhisattvas; having developed the wish , taking the vows of the conquerors’ 
children; and having taken them, th e way in which to train in them. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1A Developing the wish to train in the trainings of bodhisattvas 
First: With respect to vinaya and tantra it is inappropriate to listen to the trainings 
without taking the vows oneself, but this  is different from them. Through first 
understanding the trainings, the continuum is  purified. Then, if there is delight in 
holding them, the vows are imparted. If yo u take the vows after having understood 
the trainings, taking them to mind as an  object, and having developed a heartfelt 
wish to train in them, they will be very st able. That is why this is a good method. 
 
First we need to develop the wish to train in th e trainings of bodhisattvas. Prior to taking the 
vows of vinaya and the tantra vows it is not perm itted to listen to or read the vows. However, 
in the case of bodhisattva vows, we can listen to and read the trainings prior to taking the 
vow. In other words, we can study the eighteen  root vows and forty-six secondary vows before 
actually taking them. Then, when we generate the wish to take these vows, they should be 
given to us. If we first study the vows, whereb y the mind becomes clear with respect to them 
and we generate the wish to train in them from  our heart, when we take the vows they will be 
very stable. Therefore, this is the best method . On the other hand, if we take them without 
understanding them, there will be difficulties late r on. For this reason it is permitted to study 
the bodhisattva vows prior to taking them. Howe ver, this is not the case of the vows of 
individual liberation and the tantra vows, as we  can only study them after having taken them. 
We need to understand this and to try to train in this way.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1B Having developed the wish, taking the vows of the conquerors’ children 
Second: In the commentary on the Ethics Chapter [of Asanga’s treatise on the 
Bodhisattva Levels ] I already extensively settled how to first take [the vows] and, 
following that, how to guard against the root downfalls and downfalls that are 
infractions, and how to restore [the vows] if they have been degenerated. 
Therefore, before the vows are taken, they  s h o u l d  d e f i n i t e l y  b e  l o o k e d  i n t o  a n d  
understood. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
604 In the commentary on the Ethics Chapter in the Bodhisattva Levels  by Asanga, Lama 
Tsongkhapa has already extensively explained ho w to take the bodhisattva vows, how to guard 
against the root downfalls and infractions, an d how to restore the vo ws if they have been 
degenerated. Therefore, before taking the vows,  one should definitely read about them and 
study them since it is permitted to do so  prior to taking the bodhisattva vows. By 
understanding the vows, we will delight in th e thought to take them and will generate the 
intention to safeguard them. After that, we  should take and then safeguard them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C Having taken them, the way in which to train in them 
1 What the foundation of the trainings is 
2 How the trainings are contained in it 
3 The stages by which to train in them 
The third has three [points]: what the fo undation of the trainings is, how the 
trainings are contained in it, and the stages by which to train in them. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-1 What the foundation of the trainings is  
First: Although there are infinite clear di visions, when grouped together by type, 
all the trainings of bodhisattvas are contai ned in the six perfections. Therefore, the 
six perfections constitute the great synopsis  that condenses all the essential points 
of the bodhisattva path.  
 
The foundation or basis of the trainings is th e six perfections. Although there are infinite 
divisions, when condensed they are all included  in the six perfections – generosity, morality, 
patience, joyous effort, concentr ation, and wisdom. Thus, all the trainings we need to train in 
are included in these six. Therefore, the six pe rfections are the great synopsis that condenses 
the essential points of the bodhisattva path.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2 How the trainings are contained in it 
A The actual meaning: the definite number [of the perfections] 
B In addition to tha t, their definite order 
The second has two [points]: The actual meaning: the definite number [of the 
perfections] and, in addition to that, their definite order. 
 
The perfections are definitely six in number, th ere being generosity, morality, patience, joyous 
effort, concentration, and wisdom. Their order is also definite: first generosity, second 
morality, third patience, and so forth. The re asons for this will be explained later. For 
example, since generosity is easier to practice th an morality, we first engage in the practice of 
generosity. Then, having practiced morality, we need to eliminate anger, short-temperedness, 
by practicing patience. Having developed patience , we may still be lazy and therefore need to 
develop our effort. Then having developed effo rt, we need to set our mind on an object 
whereby we develop concentration. Then, while one part of the mind is set on the object, 
another part of the mind does analytical medita tion on the reality of phenomena, whereby we 
develop wisdom. Perhaps this is the reason for the order, anyway it is what I remember now.   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
605 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A The actual meaning: the definite number [of the perfections] 
1 The transition 
2 The actual [topic] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A1 The transition 
First: {207} The Bhagavan has merely made  a total of six perf ections, whereas the 
holy regent of the conquerors, [Maitreya,] having elucidated the essential points of 
the reasons for them according to his intention, generated an ascertaining 
consciousness. The way in which their numb er is definite is those very points. 
Therefore, when you find certainty which ca ptivates the mind wi th respect to this, 
hold the instructions regarding the practi ce of the six perfections as supreme. 
 
Buddha Shakyamuni explained the six perfecti ons in brief. Then, Maitreya Buddha, the 
regent of Tushita who substituted the king, Buddha Shakyamuni, when he left Tushita to 
come to this world, taught how to practi ce the six perfections in detail in the Ornament for the 
Mahayana Sutras  and the Ornament for Clear Realizations , his commentary on the Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutras. We should study the six perfections as they are presented in the Ornament for 
the Mahayana Sutras  in conjunction with the Bodhisattva Levels , as was taught by His Holiness 
the Dalai Lama last year in Sera Monastery. Then, we should hold the instructions on the 
training in the six perfections to be supreme.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2 The actual [topic] 
A The number is definite from the point of view of high status  
B The number is definite from the point of view of the accomplishment of the two welfares  
C The number is definite from the point of view of the complete accomplishment of the welfare 
of others in all aspects 
D The number is definite from the point of view of comprising the entire Mahayana 
E The number is definite from the point of view of [how the perfections] influence all aspects 
of the path or method 
F The number is definite from the point of view of the three trainings 
With regard to the perfections, the number is definite as six from the point of view 
of high status, the accomplishment of the two welfares, the complete 
accomplishment of the welfare of others in all aspects, comprising the entire 
Mahayana, how they influence all aspects of the path or me thod, and the three 
trainings. 
 
If we want to achieve a rebirth of high status, we need to rely on the six perfections; if we 
want to accomplish our own and others’ welfare, we  need to rely on the six perfections; if we 
want to accomplish the welfare of others, we need  to rely on the six perfections; since all the 
Mahayana practices are included in the six perfec tions, we need to rely on them; since they 
influence all aspects of the path or method, we need to rely on the six perfections; also to 
train in the three higher trainings of morality, concentration, and wisdom, we need to rely on 
the six perfections. Therefore, the perf ections are definitely six in number.  
 For example, we need the support that is a precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen 
qualities – the eight freedoms and ten endowmen ts. To obtain this support, we need to 
practice the six perfections. To obtain a human re birth it is necessary to practice morality. In 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
606 addition, we need wealth, that is , we need to be free from povert y and to achieve this we need 
to practice generosity. We also need an attr active body, therefore we need to practice 
patience. We also need to have a powerful an d magnificent body, due to which we need to 
practice joyous effort. We also need a mind that can remain single-pointed on its object, 
therefore we need to practice concentration. We  also need the intelligence that is able to 
investigate what to do and what not to do, th erefore we need to practice wisdom. If we 
practice all six perfections, then in our ne xt life we will obtain these qualities.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2A The number is definite from the point of view of high status  
1 How the support has to be excellent in all its parts 
First: In order to bring the vast conduct of a bodhisattva to completion, you need 
many consecutive lives and, in order to progress along the path in them, you need 
a support that is complete in all its feat ures. Without it, even though you practice 
with a mere part like your current suppo rt, there will be no progress whatsoever. 
Thus, a support that is excellent in all its parts is necessary. 
 
To achieve buddhahood we need to be able to co ntinue to practice throughout many lives. To 
progress along the path, we need a body that ha s all characteristics complete. If even one is 
missing, it will be difficult to make progress.  Since we presently have a body with all 
characteristics complete, we need to put more  and more effort into practice whereby our 
inner qualities will develop. This is important.  We need a perfect body and a perfect mind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Having identified the excellent support, how the causes that are corresponding causes for that are 
achieved 
Furthermore, you need [a support ] that is endowed with the four excellences: (1) 
resources at your disposal, (2) a body with  which to practice, (3) companions with 
whom to practice, (4) the ends of ac tions that are to be undertaken.  
 
Having identified what kind of support we need, that is, what kind of body, we need to create causes that are similar to the result we want to  obtain. We need a support possessing the four 
excellences: excellent resources, an excell ent body, excellent surrounding people, and 
excellent completion of whatever actions we unde rtake. The resources that we use need to be 
excellent as otherwise we will experience proble ms, such as harm to the body or even death. 
For example, if our food is not good it may make us sick and may even cause our death.  
 We also need an excellent body, that is, one th at is healthy. If our body is weak and lacking 
in energy, we will not be able to practice th e Dharma. We also need excellent people with 
whom to live, work, and study because when we do something together with good people the 
result will be good. If, on the other hand, we are surrounded by misleading people they will 
influence us negatively and our behavior will worsen. For example, if we have friends who drink and smoke, we will tend to do the same. Due to them, we might even end up living on 
the streets or in the woods, whereby we may ev entually become ill and die. Therefore, we 
need to ensure that we have good companions.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
607  In addition, our actions should be excellent. For example, if we set up a shop, we should 
avoid cheating others, selling things that are stol en, for example, by the Mafia, and so forth as 
otherwise one day the police will arrive and pu t us in prison. In other words, our actions 
should accord with the laws of the country in which we live.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
However, due merely to these excellences,  many become conditions for the mental 
afflictions. Thus, it is also necessary no t to come under the power of the mental 
afflictions. But that too is  not enough, you need to distinguish well the observed 
objects that are to be unmistakenly enga ged in and turned away from with respect 
to the essential point of what is to be ad opted and what is to be discarded because, 
otherwise, the excellences will destroy themselves, just like bamboo and plantain 
trees are destroyed by bearing fruit and li ke a mule is destroyed by pregnancy.  
 If you have wisdom, you will understand that [the excellences] are the results of previous good actions, and, striving in th e causes once again, they will increase. If 
you do not have wisdom, by using the resu lts you previously accumulated they will 
be exhausted. Since you do not newly increase them, they will become the 
beginning of suffering in future lives. Henc e, the arisal of the six [perfections] in 
other lives does not come about without a cause nor from a cause that does not 
correspond with them. Also the corresp onding causes are sequential. Thus, 
perfections are definite as six. 
 Although we may have these excellences, the ment al afflictions can still arise, therefore we 
need to avoid coming under their power and pr event their arisal. In addition, we need to 
perfectly and clearly distinguish what is to be di scarded and what is to be adopted. If we do 
not do this, the excellences will destroy themselv es, like a mule, which is usually unable to 
become pregnant, is destroyed by pregnancy.   If we have wisdom, we will put effort into crea ting the causes to have a good result. If we 
do not have wisdom, that is, if we are not in telligent, we will exhaust the results that we 
accumulated in the past and will not create new causes, due to which in the next life we will 
experience suffering. If we continue to practice  the six perfections the result will come about 
in other lives. On the other hand, if we do not create the cause of similar type to the result, 
the result will not come about. Therefore, it is important to practice all six perfections in 
order that we obtain a good rebirth in our next life.   Thursday afternoon, 12 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 208) says:  
3 Relating what has been said above with the scriptures and distinguishing the high status of the time 
of the path and the result in detail 
The resources and so forth on the occasion  of the path are temporary high status. 
Culminated high status – an excellent bo dy and so forth – exists on the buddha 
ground. That too is mentioned in  the Ornament for the Sutras (Sutralamkara) : 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
608 Excellent resources and body,  
Excellent retinue and undertakings are high status,  As well as not falling under the sway of the afflictions and 
Being unmistaken with respect to activities.
175 
 
There is a high status of the time of the path and a high status of the time of the result. The 
high status at the time of the path which is a good rebirth with resources and so forth is 
temporary high status. The culminated high status  of an excellent body and so forth exists on 
the buddha ground. For example, although Buddha Shakyamuni had a human body, he had 
completely purified and achieved all qualitie s of the exalted body. Our body, which possesses 
some good qualities, is temporary high status th at can be used to obtain higher realizations 
and eventually buddhahood. Therefore, it too is important.  
 The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras  says that excellent resource s, excellent body, excellent 
surrounding people, and excellent undertakings are high status. Also by not coming under 
the power of the mental afflictions and not doin g mistaken actions, we make our high rebirth 
useful and in our next life we will improve more and more.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2B The number is definite from the point of view of the accomplishment of 
the two welfares 
1 The transition 
2 The actual [topic] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2B-1 The transition 
Second: When training in the bodhisa ttva conduct with such a support, the 
activities of bodhisattvas are exhausted in the two: those that accomplish one’s 
own welfare and those that accomplish others’ welfare. 
 
Since we have a rebirth possessing excellent resour ces, an excellent body, an excellent retinue, 
and excellent actions, and we do  not come under the control of the mental afflictions and do 
unmistaken actions, we should train in the bo dhisattva conduct. There are only two types of 
bodhisattva conduct: activities for one’s own welfare and activities for others’ welfare. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2B-2 The actual [topic] 
A How the first three of the six perfections enact others’ welfare  
Moreover, in order to accomplish the welfare of  others it is necessary, first of all, to 
benefit them by means of material gifts. Since generosity accompanied by harm to 
sentient beings does not lead to anything , to excellently turn away from actions 
that harm others together with their bases is itself of great benefit to others; 
                                              
175 Those six characteristics of the higher realms consti tute results related to the six perfections as their 
respective causes: excellent commodities as the result of gi ving, excellent bodies as the result of ethics, excellent 
companions as the result of patience, conditions for th e accomplishment of one’s enterprises as the result of 
joyous effort and the absence of wrong views concerning  actions as the result of wisdom. (cf. Wayman, Alex: 
Ethics of Tibet, Delhi 1992, S. 106) 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
609 therefore, ethics is necessary. [However,] given that pure ethics cannot come about 
if you retaliate once or twice due to bein g unable to bear being harmed, {209} the 
patience that in the face of harm thinks “It does not matter” is necessary in order 
to culminate [ethics]. By not retaliating out of [patience], others are prevented 
from accumulating a lot of negativities and apply themselves to virtue through 
being inspired by that, whereby it is of great benefit to others. 
 
The first three of the six perfec tions – generosity, morality, and patience – enact the welfare of 
others. Initially we need to enact others’ welfare by giving them material things, this being the 
practice of generosity. Then, we need to practice  morality in order to enact others’ welfare by 
turning away from actions that harm others to gether with their bases. Among the ten non-
virtuous actions, the three non-virtuous action s of mind are the bases upon which we engage 
in physical and verbal actions that harm othe rs. We harm others with  our body by killing 
them, stealing from them, and engaging in sexu al misconduct, and we harm others with our 
speech by lying and thereby cheating them, by  engaging in divisive speech that creates 
disharmony between people who were previously  in harmony, by speaking harsh words that 
harm others’ minds, and by means of idle talk which, while it may seem to not be a problem, 
harms others by wasting their time and preven ting them from workin g, practicing Dharma, 
and so forth. Therefore, in order to be of benefit to others we need to engage in the practice 
of morality.   If we cannot bear being harmed by others, wh en someone says or does something bad to us 
we will immediately retaliate with the same kind  of harm, due to which our morality will not 
be pure. Thus, when someone harms us, we n eed to practice the patience that remains 
undisturbed thinking “It doesn’t matter.” If, when others treat us badly, we do not retaliate, 
this will bring about a change in the other pe rson’s mind whereby we will prevent him from 
accumulating negativities and cause him to emulate our good actions and thereby apply himself to virtue. In other words, if we real ly practice patience no matter what the other 
p e r s o n  s a y s ,  h e  t o o  w i l l  c a l m  d o w n  a n d  b e  i n s p i r e d  t o  p r a c t i c e  p a t i e n c e ,  w h e r e b y  h e  w i l l  create virtuous actions that benefit himself. In this way, the other person creates less negative 
actions and cultivates patience, whereby we benefit him, as well as ourselves.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B What enacts one’s own welfare 
If your own welfare is to attain the happine ss of complete liberation by the force of 
wisdom, you should moreover set your mind in equipoise by means of 
concentration through not allowing your mi nd to become distracted. Thus, it is 
necessary to achieve a serviceability of body  that abides on the observed object as 
long as you wish.  
 
Wisdom is what enacts our own welfare. To achi eve it, we need calm abiding. To achieve this, 
we need to set our mind in equipoise by means of concentration. By means of this, we will be 
able to meditate for however long we want on an observed object. The mind will become stable and serviceable, that is, it will be tire less, happy, and pliant. Likewise, our body, no 
matter how long we remain in the meditation posi tion, will also remain tireless and pliant. In 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
610 short, calm abiding leads to pliancy of body an d mind. We need to achieve this as a basis for 
developing wisdom.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C How joyous effort becomes the foundation of both welfares 
Since this does not arise in the lazy, you n eed to undertake it with the joyous effort 
that does not relent day and night. Therefore, this is their foundation. 
 
Joyous effort is necessary for enacting both our own and others’ welfare since the lazy cannot 
achieve calm abiding and special insight. For this reason, we need to put strong effort, 
without laziness, into achieving them day and nigh t. In other words, because joyous effort is 
the foundation or basis of single-pointed medita tion and analytical meditation, it is important 
to develop it in our daily life.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D A scriptural passage to that effect 
Therefore, in order to enact the two welfar es, the perfections are definite in being 
six. [In the Ornament of the Sutras ] it says: 
 
Your commitment for the welfare of sentient beings 
Should be fulfilled through giving, not harming, and patience. By means of abiding and liberation, together with their foundation,  Bring about your own welfare in all aspects. 
 To accomplish the two welfares, one’s own and others, all six perfections are necessary. Those who put effort into enacting the welfare of ot her sentient beings need to put effort into 
giving, that is, generosity; into not harming othe rs, that is, morality; an d into the practice of 
patience. “Abiding” refers to the mind that  abides single-pointedly on its object 
(concentration), and “liberation” to the free dom from the mental afflictions and suffering 
that is obtained by means of wisdom. “Together with their foundation” refers to joyous effort. 
In this way, the six perfections are necessa ry to achieve our own and others’ welfare. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 209) says:  
E One does not set others in complete liberation in dependence on wisdom  
This does not comprise others’ welfare in all aspects.  
 
In order to enact the welfare of others, we need  to rely on wisdom. Without this, we cannot 
set others in liberation from the suffering of cy clic existence. In other words, without wisdom, 
we will not know how to liberate others from cyclic existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
611 F Identifying the respective sequence of the last two [perfections] 
In the statement “abiding and liberation,” the mind abiding  on the observed object 
is said to be the work of meditative concentration and liberation  from cyclic 
existence to be the work of wisdom. Wh en these two are distinguished, calm 
abiding will not be mistaken to be special insight.  
 
“Abiding” refers to the mind abiding on its observed object, which follows concentration. 
This is calm abiding. “Liberation” refers to libe ration from cyclic existence, it follows wisdom. 
This is special insight. If we distinguish thes e two, we will not mistake calm abiding to be 
special insight.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2C The number is definite from the point of view of the complete 
accomplishment of the welfare of others in all aspects 
Third: At the outset eliminate the poverty of sentient beings with material things. 
Following that, also do not harm to any se ntient being. Not only that, be patient 
when harmed. Due to being your companio n, act with undaunted joyous effort. 
Through relying on concentration, with magical emanations an d so forth provide 
whatever he wishes. When he has beco me a suitable vessel, give him good 
explanations in dependence on wisdom. By severing his doubt, {210} liberate him. 
Because of this, the perfecti ons are definite as six. 
 
Without poverty and without harming Patient with harm and not discouraged by activities, Being joyful and speaking well; Because of this, others’ welfare is one’s own welfare.  
 Initially we should give other sentient beings material things, thereby eliminating the suffering 
of poverty. Then, we should not harm any sentie nt being; this being the practice of morality. 
When someone harms us, we should not retaliat e; this being the practice of patience. We 
should help our companions with undaunted jo yous effort. Relying on concentration, we 
should develop qualities such as the clairvo yance of magical emanat ion and so forth. In 
accordance with others’ minds, dispositions, and so forth, we should give them excellent 
teachings based on wisdom. By severing their do ubts, we should liberate them. In this way, 
the perfections are definite as six.   By being without poverty, not harming, bein g patient with harm, not being discouraged by 
activities, being joyful, and speaking well, we ac hieve others’ welfare and at the same time our 
own. In other words, when we enact others ’ welfare, we simultaneously enact our own 
welfare. On the other hand, if we try to enact our own welfare alone, we will experience many 
problems and interferences, whereas if we strive  to enact others’ welfare they will help us in 
return, whereby there will be mutual benefit. Th erefore, whatever action we do, we should do 
it to help others. In this way we wi ll fulfill our own and others’ welfare.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
612 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2D The number is definite from the point of view of comprising the entire 
Mahayana 
Fourth: Thus, you will not be attached to  resources that have been acquired and 
will not view resources that you have no t acquired with interest. When that is 
present, you will be able to guard the trainings, whereby you will take up ethical 
discipline and respect it. Due to patience towards sufferings that arise in 
dependence on sentient beings and non-sentient beings, you will not be 
d i s c o u r a g e d .  D u e  t o  a p p l y i n g  y o u r s e l f  t o  and delighting in any kind of virtuous 
activities, you will not be discouraged by them. You will meditate the non-
conceptual yoga of calm abiding and special insight. These six encompass the 
entire Great Vehicle of migrating beings. They are sequentially accomplished by the six perfections and nothing more than them are necessary.   
Not strongly liking resources and highest respect, Not being discouraged with respect to the two, and The non-conceptual yoga; 
The entire Mahayana is exhausted in this.   [ Sutralamkara  XVI, 5] 
 
If we acquire resources we will not become atta ched to them, and if we do not acquire them 
we will not seek them. Due to this, we will be able to train in morality, that is, to guard and respect morality. When we experience sufferings caused by sentient beings who harm us and 
by inanimate things, such as water, fire, wind , earthquake, snowstorms , flood, and so forth, 
we will be able to bear this patiently. Then, without becoming sad or discouraged, we will put 
effort into and delight in virtue. Then, we will engage in the non-conceptual yoga or union of 
calm abiding and special insight. These six in clude all the qualities of the Mahayana. We 
should train in accomplishing them sequentially  as nothing more than that is necessary.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2E The number is definite from the point of view of how [the perfections] 
influence all aspects of the path or method: how the six perfections become the method for 
accomplishing any of the individual aspects 
1 The way in which generosity is contained in the path 
Fifth: The path or the meth od of non-attachment to re sources that are objects you 
have already acquired is generosity becaus e, by familiarizing yourself with giving 
them away, you become free from attachment to them. 
 
What method gives rise to what result? The path or method of no n-attachment to the 
resources that are objects we have already acquir ed is generosity because by familiarizing with 
giving them away we will become free from atta chment to them. Therefore, generosity is a 
method or path.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The way in which ethical discipline acts as a method  
The method for restraining the distraction of exerting yourself for the sake of 
acquiring objects that have not yet been ac quired is ethical discipline because in 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
613 one with the vows of a fully ordained monk all the distractions of ends of actions 
do not arise. 
 
The method for stopping the distraction of seek ing to obtain something that has not yet been 
obtained is morality because in one with th e vows of a fully-ordained monk there does not 
arise the distractions of wanting wealth and so  forth. In other words, a fully-ordained monk, 
who is trying to abide in accordance with the instructions of the vinaya, strives not to think 
about obtaining that which he does not have, fo r example, a watch, a cell phone with which 
to send messages and take photos, and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The way in which patience acts as a method 
The method for not giving sentient beings  up is patience because of not being 
depressed by all the sufferings of being harmed.  
 
The method for not giving sentient beings up is  patience because we do not become disturbed 
by all the sufferings of harm done to us. Ther e are three types of patience: the patience of 
non-retaliation, the patience of bearing difficu lties, and the patience of bearing suffering. 
With patience, the mind remains undisturbed an d does not give up sentient beings in the 
sense of neglecting them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 The way in which joyous effort acts as a method  
{211} The method for increasing virtue  is joyous effort because through 
undertaking [virtue] with joyous effort it increases. 
 
The method for increasing virtue is joyous e ffort because through undertaking virtue with 
joyous effort our delight in virtue increase s and our qualities increase more and more.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
5 The way in which the last two [perfections] act as a method  
The method for completely purifying the ob scurations is the last two perfections 
because the afflictions are completely  purified by concentration and the 
obscurations to objects of knowledge are completely purified by wisdom.  
 Because of this, the perfec tions are definite as six. 
 
The method for completely purifying the ob scurations is the last two perfections, 
concentration and wisdom, because the affliction s are completely purified by concentration 
and the obscurations to knowledge are complete ly purified by wisdom. In other words, the 
two types of obscurations, the afflictive obscurations and obscurations to knowledge, are 
completely purified by concentration and wisdom . Therefore, the perfecti ons are definitely six 
in number.   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 9-12 May 2005 (13) 
614 END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
615 Monday afternoon, 16 May 2005 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 211) says:  
 
Once you have reached the path of non-attachment to objects, 
Another one is to curb distractions. 
Not to give up sentient beings, to increase, and 
To purify obscurations completely are further paths. [Sutralamkara  XVI, 6] 
 
The last two perfections purify the obscurations , that is, the perfection of concentration and 
the perfection of wisdom respec tively purify the afflictive ob scurations and the obscurations 
to knowledge, that is, to knowing all aspect s of phenomena directly and simultaneously. 
Therefore, the perfections are definitely six in number.  
 Having attained the path of no n-attachment to objects, such as our belongings, we will be 
able to practice the morality that restrains from distraction. To not give up sentient beings is 
the perfection of patience as due to it one stri ves to take care of all sentient beings without 
exception. To increase one’s virtuous actions is  the perfection of joyous effort, the fourth 
perfection. The paths that completely purify th e two obscurations, the afflictive obscurations 
and the obscurations to knowledge, are the perf ection of concentration and the perfection of 
wisdom. In this way, we can achieve all ou r aims by means of the six perfections.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2F The number is definite from the point of view of the three trainings 
1 How [the perfections] are contained in the three trainings 
Sixth: The entity of the training in ethical discipline is ethical discipline. 
Moreover, since it is adopted when there is  the generosity that is indifferent to 
resources, [generosity ] is the collection of ethical discipline. Also [when ethical 
discipline ] is adopted, since it is protected by  the patience that does not return 
abuse for abuse, [patience] is in its retinue. Concentration is the training in the 
mind, whereas wisdom is the training in wisdom. Joyous effort is included in all 
three trainings. Therefore, the pe rfections are definite as six. 
 
From the point of view of the three trainings, The Conqueror perfectly explained six perfections: The first is the three, Two are aspects of the last two, 
And one is included in all three.   [ Sutralamkara  XVI, 7] 
 
The three trainings are the higher training in mo rality, the higher training in concentration, 
and the higher training in wisdom. All six perf ections are included in these three trainings. 
The entity of the training in morality is mo rality. Since it is adopted when there is the 
generosity that does not view resources, that is , when we use what we are offered for the sake 
of the donor receiving merit, generosity is includ ed in the collection of morality. The patience 
that does not retaliate when someone says someth ing bad to us is included in the retinue of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
616 morality. In this way, the first three perfec tions, generosity, morality, and patience, are 
included in the higher training of morality. Conc entration is the training in the mind, that is, 
it is the higher training in concentration. Wi sdom is the higher trai ning in wisdom. Joyous 
effort is included in all three higher trainings.  In other words, joyous effort is needed when 
training in morality, when training in the mi nd or concentration, and when training in 
wisdom. Hence, the perfections are definite as six.  
 The Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras  similarly says that from th e point of view of the three 
trainings in morality, concentration, and wisdom, the Conqueror, Buddha Shakyamuni, 
perfectly explained six perfections. The first, th e training in morality, consists of the three, 
generosity, morality, and patience. The last two, concentration and wisdom, are included 
respectively in the training in concentration an d training in wisdom. One, joyous effort, is 
included in all three.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Hence the importance of understanding that the number is definite 
Thus, that which, by means of whatever  excellent support thoroughly completes 
whatever welfare, one’s own or others’, through abiding in either vehicle and 
possessing however many types of methods,  thoroughly completes and synthesizes 
the support that accomplishes any of the tr ainings, the welfare, the great vehicle, 
the method, and the trainings should be  understood to be those very six 
perfections. You should think about this un til you gain great certainty that they are 
the sum of all the essential points  of the bodhisattva practices. 
 
By practicing morality we can obtain the excelle nt support or body that is a precious human 
rebirth possessing the eighteen qualities. Wi th this, we can practice all six perfections 
completely. The six perfections contain all the e ssential points of the bo dhisattva conduct. As 
long as we have not achieved this certainty, we should think about and meditate on this. By 
understanding this, we should practice them. Thus, we should practice the six perfections 
every day. In addition, because all six perfection s are included in each of the perfection, there 
is also the generosity of generosity, the morality  of generosity, and so forth; the generosity of 
morality, the morality of morality, and so forth;  the generosity of patience, the morality of 
patience, and so forth; the generosity of joyous  effort, the morality of joyous effort, and so 
forth; the generosity of concen tration, the morality of concen tration, and so forth; and the 
generosity of wisdom, the morality of wisdom, an d so forth. In this way there are thirty-six 
practices in which to engage. This is explained in the Ornament for Clear Realizations  in the 
context of the armor-like achieving.   (Oral transmission, 18:45-19:00, pp. 212-221)  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2B In addition to  that, the order is definite 
The second has three [points]: the order in  which they are generated, the order in 
terms of the inferior and superior, and the order in terms of the coarser and 
subtler. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
617 1 The order in which they are generated 
First: If there is generosity that is indi fferent to and unattached to resources, you 
will adopt ethical discipline. If you possess the ethical discipline that refrains from 
faulty conduct, you will be patient with regard to harm. If you have the patience 
that does not despair with respect to hardsh ips, you will be able to act with joyous 
effort since adverse circumstances will be few. Through acting with joyous effort 
day and night, the concentration that is able to set the mind in virtue will be 
generated. When the mind is  in meditative equipoise, th e realization of the perfect 
just as it is will arise.  
 
If there is the generosity that is not attached to resources, th at is, belongings and wealth, we 
will adopt morality. If we possess the morality that refrains from faulty conduct, we will be 
patient with regard to harm from others. If we  have the patience that is not discouraged by 
hardships, we will have joyous effort due to  experiencing few unfavorable conditions. With 
joyous effort day and night, the mind will be come more stable and concentration will arise. 
When the mind is in meditative  equipoise, the wisdom realizing emptiness, the perfect, will 
arise. In short, we first generate generosity, th en morality, then patience, then joyous effort, 
then concentration, and then wisdom in our continuum. In this way, they are gradually 
generated one after the other.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The order in terms of the inferior and superior 
Second: The previous ones are inferi or, and the latter ones superior.  
 
Among generosity and morality, generosity is inferior and morality is superior. In the same way, each of the successive perfections is superior  to the previous ones. Morality is superior to 
generosity because it is more difficult to prac tice that generosity. Then between patience and 
morality, patience is more difficult to practice th an morality. In this way, each of the previous 
perfections is inferior to the successive one.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The order in terms of the coarser and subtler 
Third: Since the previous ones are easier to engage in and do than the latter ones, 
they are coarser. Since the latter ones are more difficult to engage in and do than 
the previous, they are more subtle. In the Ornament of the Sutras  is says: 
 
Because the later are generated in dependence on the previous, 
Because they abide as inferior and superior, Because they are coarser and subtler, 
They were taught in this order. [XVI, 14] 
 
Since, between engaging in generosity and engagi n g  i n  m o r a l i t y ,  i t  i s  e a s i e r  t o  e n g a g e  i n  
generosity than to engage in morality, generosi ty is considered to be coarser then morality. 
Morality, in turn, is more subtle than generosity since it is more difficult to engage in. Since, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
618 between engaging in morality and engaging in pa tience, it is easier to engage in morality, 
morality is coarser and patience is subtler. Th us, in the end engaging in wisdom is subtler 
than engaging in the other perfections, including engaging in concentration. The Ornament of 
the Sutras  says that the later ones are generated in dependence on the previous; thus, first 
there is generosity, then morality, and so forth.  Likewise, generosity is inferior to morality, 
morality is inferior to patience, and so forth, that is, each one is successively superior to the 
previous. In addition, generosity is coarser than morality in that it is  easier than morality, 
morality is coarser than patience in that it is  easier than patience, and so forth. For these 
reasons, the six perfections were taught in a particular order.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3 The stages by which one trains in them 
A How to train in the conduct in general 
B How to train in the two last perfections in particular 
The third has two [points]: How to train in the conduct in general and how to 
train in the two last perfecti ons in particular. The first has two [points]. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A How to train in the conduct in general 
1 Extensive explanation of how to train in the conduct in general 
2 Summarized meaning 
 
The training in the bodhisattva conduct in genera l is the training in the six perfections. This 
is explained in detail and then summarized. In addition, the training in the last two 
perfections, concentration and wisdom, is then explained in particular.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1 Extensive explanation of how to train in the conduct in general 
A Training in the perfections that ripen one’s own buddha qualities 
B Training in the four ways of gathering that ripen others’ mental continua  
The first has two [points]: Training in th e perfections that ripen one’s own buddha 
qualities and training in the four ways of gathering that ripen others’ mental 
continua.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A Training in the perfections that ripen one’s own buddha qualities 
1 How to train in generosity 
2 How to train in ethical discipline 
3 How to train in patience 
4 How to train in joyous effort 
5 How to train in concentration 
6 How to train in wisdom 
The first has six [points]: how to train in generosity, ethical discipline, patience, 
joyous effort, concentration, and wisdom. 
 
We train in the six perfections of generosity, morality, patience , joyous effort, concentration, 
and wisdom in order to ripen the buddha qualities in our own continuum, whereas we train 
in the four means of gathering disciples in orde r to ripen others’ continua. Generosity is the 
mind of giving. We can give away our body, posse ssions, and roots of vi rtue. Morality is the 
mind of abandonment. Patience is an undisturbe d mind. Joyous effort is the mind delighting 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
619 in virtue. Concentration is a mind single-point edly focused on a virtuous observed object. 
Wisdom is a mind that analyzes its object.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1 How to train in generosity 
A The entity of generosity 
B Subdivisions 
C How to generate [generosity ] in one's mental continuum 
The first has three points: the entity of  generosity, subdivisions, and how to 
generate [generosity ] in one’s mental continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1A The entity of generosity 
1 Entity 
First: [The entity of generosity] is a virt uous intention to give and the actions of 
body and speech motivated by it. {213} It is  the intention at the time the body and 
speech engage in generosity. 
 
The entity of generosity is a virtuous intent ion to give and the actions of body and speech 
motivated by it, thus, it is the intention at the time the body and speech engage in generosity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The measure of its perfection  
The completion of the perfection of ge nerosity does not depend on having 
eliminated the poverty of sentient beings by giving away substances which are 
objects to be given to others. Rather it  becomes the perfection of generosity 
through destroying the grasping of mi serliness and thoroughly completing 
familiarization with the mind of giving to others, along with the results of giving.  
 
How does generosity become a perfection? The pe rfection of generosity is not completed by 
giving substances to others whereby their povert y is eliminated. Rather it is a mind that has 
eliminated all miserliness and has thoroughly completed familiarity with giving to others, 
along with the result of giving. This  is the perfection of generosity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1B Subdivisions 
1 Subdivisions from the point of view of individual supports 
2 Subdivisions of the entity of generosity itself 
The second has two [points]: Subdivisions from the point of view of individual 
supports, and subdivisions of the entity of generosity itself. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1B1 Subdivisions from the point of view of individual supports 
A Explanation of the individual generosities for the individual supports  
In the Bodhisattva Pratimoksha  it is taught that generosi ty of material things is 
generally practiced by lay bodhisattvas, whereas ordained bodhisattvas should do 
the generosity of the Dharma rather than generosity of material things. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
620 The Bodhisattva Pratimoksha  says that lay bodhisattvas should practice giving away material 
things, whereas ordained bodhisattvas should practice giving the Dharma. This is because 
ordained bodhisattvas are less busy than lay bo dhisattvas and therefore have more time to 
study and hear the Dharma. If a bodhisattva is wealthy and has many th ings, he should give 
them away. If a bodhisattva is poor, he should not put effort into finding a wealthy benefactor 
as this will become a distra ction to keeping his vows.  
 
Tuesday morning, 17 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 213) says:  
B The achieving and giving of material things that interrupts the hearing and so forth of the ordained is 
prohibited, whereas if they are acquired without harm to [their hearing and so forth ] they should give 
Moreover, in the Compendium of Trainings , intending that which interrupts hearing 
and so forth, it says that the giving of gifts by the ordained through working for the 
sake of material things is prohibited. Ho wever, if they obtain them in plenty 
through the power of previous merit without harm to their virtuous activities, they 
should give material things. Sharawa also  said: “To you I will not talk about the 
advantages of giving, however I will talk ab out the disadvantages of grasping.” This 
is the talk of one who was not pleased wh en he was given gifts that the ordained 
had toiled to obtain and through accumu lating them often damaged their ethical 
discipline.  
 
If the obtaining of material things interrupts the hearing, thinking, and meditating of the 
ordained, they should not practice the generosi ty of giving material things. On the other 
hand, if there is no such interruption, the ordain ed should also give material things to others. 
This is mentioned in the Compendium of Trainings  because if the main purpose of the ordained 
becomes the obtaining of material things, this  becomes a distraction to hearing the Dharma 
and so forth. On the other hand, if the ordained  easily find material things due to having 
created virtuous actions in the past and their givi ng of material things does not interfere with 
their hearing, thinking, and meditating, then the ordained should also practice the generosity 
of giving material things. Sharawa said “I will no t talk about the advantages of generosity but I 
will express the disadvantages of grasping.”  He was not pleased with monks who strove 
tirelessly to gain material things due to which their morality was damaged.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1B2 Subdivisions of  the entity of generosity itself 
A  The generosity of the Dharma 
 Second: The generosity of the Dharma is  to unmistakenly teach the holy Dharma, 
to teach as suitable, without misdeeds, the worldly aims of actions such as crafts 
and so forth, and to make [others] engage  in upholding the basis of the trainings. 
 
The generosity of giving the Dharma is to unmi stakenly teach others the holy Dharma of the 
Buddha. It also consists in teaching worldly actions as long as they are not misdeeds, and 
making others uphold the basis of the trainings.  For example, it includes teaching others the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
621 inner sciences since we should give our knowledg e to others so that they too can gain more 
wisdom. This will help them and also enable them in turn to help others.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The generosity of fearlessness 
The generosity of fearlessness is  {214} to thoroughly protect [others] from the fear 
of humans such as kings, bandits, and so forth, from the fear of non-humans such 
as lions, tigers, and so forth, and fear of  the elements such as water, fire, and so 
forth. 
 
The generosity of fearlessness is to protect othe rs from fear of human beings who harm them, 
such as kings, bandits, and so forth; from the fear of ferocious animals such as lions, tigers, 
bears, and snakes; and the fear of the elements, water, fire, an d so forth. When we protect 
others from such fear, this is the generosity of fearlessness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C The generosity of material things 
The generosity of material things is to give material things to others. 
 
The generosity of material things is to give othe rs whatever is of benefit to them such as food, 
clothing, houses, cars, telephones, and so forth,.  
 We should try to practice these three types of ge nerosity as much as we can. This is what is 
meant by the practice of generosity. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C How to generate [generosity ] in one's continuum 
1 How in order to complete the perfection of generosity the mind giving away all one’s possessions is 
necessary in that it is not merely the destruction of miserliness 2 Thinking about the advantages of giving and the disadvantages of not giving  
3 The actual method for engaging in [generosity ] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C1 How in order to complete the perfection of generosity the mind giving away all 
one’s possessions is necessary in that it is not just the destruction of miserliness 
Third: By merely destroying all miserline ss without exception wi th respect to one’s 
body and possessions, it does not become the perfection of generosity because, 
since miserliness is included in the fact or of attachment, the two [types of] foe-
destroyers of the Lesser Vehicle have al so abandoned it without exception along 
with all its seeds. Hence, it is not just th e elimination of the interference to giving, 
the holding on to all [things] that is miserliness, but one must generate the 
thought, from the bottom of one’s heart,  to give all one’s possessions away to 
others. 
 
We should give away our body as well as our possessions and wealth to others. By merely destroying miserliness, it does not become the perfection of generosity. Since miserliness is 
included in the factor of attachment, the two Hinayana foe-destroyers, the hearer and solitary 
realizer foe-destroyers, have also abandoned it al ong with its seeds. Ther efore, in addition to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
622 eliminating the interference to giving, that is, holding on to things, we must also develop the 
wish from the bottom of our heart to give away all our possessions in order to benefit others. 
In short, to complete the perfection of ge nerosity is not enough to merely eliminate 
miserliness, we also need to generate the wish , out of love, from the depths of our heart to 
give away all our possessions to ot hers in order to benefit them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C2 Thinking about the advantages of giving and the disadvantages of not giving  
For that, it is necessary to meditate bo th on the disadvantages of thoroughly 
holding on [to things] and on the advantages  of giving. The former are as taught in 
the Moon Lamp [Sutra] :  
 
Since the body is not clean, the life  force fluctuates like water gushing 
down a steep mountain, and both body  and life force are controlled by 
karma due to which they lack an independent self, you should cease 
attachment to them by seeing them  t o  b e  f a l s e ,  l i k e  a  d r e a m  o r  a  
mirage. If you do not reverse [attachment ], having come under the 
control of attachment, you will a ccumulate great faulty conduct and 
migrate to the bad migrations. 
 
The second, [the advantages of giving,] are as taught in the Compendium of 
Trainings : 
 
Thus, my body and mind  
Pass away in every instant. If through this body, impermanent  And tainted, permanent and  Untainted enlightenment is attained, Is this not invaluable? 
 Holding on to things has many disadvantages, whereas giving has many advantages. We need 
to meditate on these. The Lamp of the Moon Sutra  says that out of miserliness we hold on to 
our body and life force and are unable to give th em away. However, our bo dy is a collection of 
impure substances and our lifespan decreases li ke water cascading down a steep mountain. In 
addition, they are both under the control of ot her, that is, the control of actions, due to 
which they lack an independent self. Due to th is, we should eliminate the attachment to our 
body and life that think “my body” and “my life” by seeing them to be false, like a dream or a mirage. If we do not turn this attachment back, under the power of attachment we will create 
great faulty conduct, that is, negative actions, that will become the caus e for us to migrate to 
the bad migrations, that is, to be reborn in the lower realms in our next life. In short, out of 
attachment to our body and life, we create many non-virtuous acti ons that become the 
projecting karma that will throw us into th e lower realms – the hell realm, hungry ghost 
realm, or animal realm. Therefore, we must stri ve to give up attachment to our body and life, 
as well as our belongings.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
623  The Compendium of Trainings  says that our body and mind change in each instant, whereby 
they quickly pass away. However, by means of  this impermanent and stained body, we can 
achieve the permanent and stainless enlightenment.  A l t h o u g h  i t  i s  d i f f i c u l t  t o  s e e  t h a t  o u r 
body changes in every instant, we can easily see that our mind is constantly changing, for 
example, first wanting something and then no lo nger wanting it, and so forth. Our body ages 
in each day, even though we cannot see the subtle changes. Our body is contaminated and 
impure, as is our mind contaminated and impu re due to the contaminations of attachment, 
anger, jealousy, and so forth. We need to achi eve the permanent body that is the nature body 
of a buddha (svabhavikakaya), the cessation that is the complete abandonment of all 
obscurations and stains. To do this, we need to purify all our mental afflictions, whereby 
eventually we will achieve a pure body and pure mind. When we achieve complete 
enlightenment, we simultaneously achieve the two, three, or four bodies or kayas of a buddha.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3 The actual method for engaging in [generosity ] 
A [How to actually generate generosity] 
B [Importance of the inner attitude] 
C Generosity through mere thought 
D How to make [generosity] into [a practice] with [the] six perfections 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3A [How to actually generate generosity] 
1 The actual [topic] 
{215} Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  [describes] how [generosity] should actually be 
generated: 
 
My body and likewise resources, 
All my virtues of the three times, I give away without any sense of loss To accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings.   [III, 11] 
 Like this, through taking the three – body, resources, and roots of virtue – as the 
observed object, you should familiarize yourself again and again with the thought of giving them away to all sentient beings. 
 We should familiarize our mind with the though t that wishes to give away everything – our 
body, resources, and roots of virtue collected in  the past, present, and future – for the welfare 
of all sentient beings. In other words, by taking  our body, resources, and roots of virtue as our 
observed object, we should train in this attitu de again and again, continually wishing to give 
them away.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How beginners should act 
Since presently this wish has not yet ma tured and it has little strength, even 
though you have already given away your bo dy in thought to sentient beings, you 
should not actually give away your flesh, etc. Nonetheless, since the Compendium of 
Trainings  says that if we do not train in the thought to give away our body and life, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
624 du e t o  lack o f fam i li ar i t y w i t h i t  w e w i ll also  n o t be able t o  do  so  i n  t he fut u r e 
either, it is necessary to trai n in that thought from now on. 
 
Right now we are unable to give away our body since by doing so we would endanger our life 
and thereby would not be able to do anything more. However, we should train in doing this 
in our imagination, striving to develop the strong wish to give away our body and life, without 
actually giving away parts of our body for the ti me being. Since if we cut off an arm in order 
to give it to someone else, we wi ll die and will no longer be able to practice, at the moment we 
should train our mind in giving without actual ly giving away our body and life. We should 
train over and over again in the wish to give away our body, resources, and roots of virtue to 
others. By doing so, when we gain higher realizations in the future we will be able to actually do this. Since it would not be appropriate to  give away parts of our body at the present 
moment, we should not jump off a bridge thinking  to offer our body to the fish living in the 
river!  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3B [Importance of the inner attitude] 
1 The disadvantages of forgetting the welfare of others 
Thus, if you use food, clothing, etc. that  you have given away to sentient beings 
with a sincere thought, if, having forgo tten the thought “I will use these for the 
welfare of others,” you instead use them ou t of craving for your own welfare, it is 
an afflicted downfall. If, without this crav ing, you forget the discrimination that 
o b s e r v e s  a l l  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  o r  h a v e  a t t a chment for the sake of another sentient 
being, it is a non-afflicted downfall.  If you use for your own sake those [things] 
dedicated to others while discriminating them to be others’ substances, it becomes 
taking what has not been given (stealing)  and, if it is something valuable, it 
becomes a defeat of the pratimoksha [vow].  [On the other hand,] if you use them 
thinking: “I will use the resources of this  sentient being for his own welfare,” there 
is no fault. This is mentioned in the Compendium of Trainings . 
 If we forget the welfare of other sentient be ings, there are many disa dvantages. If having 
mentally given away our food, clothing, and so forth to others, we then use them out of 
craving for our own welfare while forgetting to th ink “I will use them in the service of others,” 
it is an afflicted downfall. If, having mentally  given them away all. If, without craving for our 
own welfare and forgetting that we have alread y given them away to other sentient beings and 
that they therefore belong to them, we use them, it is a non-afflicted downfall. Also if, 
understanding that they belong to others if , we use them out of attachment to another 
sentient being, it is a non-afflicted downfall, that  is, it is not non-virtuous but it is a fault due 
to the attachment. However, if we use somethin g of value for our own welfare that we have 
already dedicated to others while discriminating  it as belonging to others, it becomes the 
defeat of stealing of the individual liberation vows. On the other hand, the Compendium of 
Trainings  says that if we think to use the belongin gs of others to enact their welfare, for 
example, we eat in order to keep our body healthy so as to use it in the service of others, there 
is no fault.   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
625 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Clearing up doubt concerning a defeat 
The intention is that the way in which it becomes a defeat is that, having dedicated 
something to a migrating being who is a human being with a sincere thought and 
when he too, having cognized it, holds it to  be his, you take it for your own welfare 
with the discrimination that it belongs to someone else, if it is of some value then 
the factors for it to become defeat are present.  
 
If, having dedicated something such as food, clot hing, wealth, and so forth, from our heart to 
a migrating being who is a human being and he has come to think of it as “mine,” we take it 
for our own welfare with the discrimination that  it belongs to someone else, if it has some 
value then it becomes a defeat. On the other hand, if it is not of a certain value, while it does not become a defeat there is a fault. Since we often recite a verse in which we give away our 
body, possessions, and so forth to others, when we use them we need to think that, having 
given them to others, we will use them for their welfare. If we eat and drink and so forth with 
this motivation, there will be no fault. On the other hand, if we give them away and then use 
them for our own welfare, there will be a fault.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 216) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3C  Generosity that is a mere thought 
{216} Moreover, the Bodhisattva Levels  teaches that the traini ng in the aspiration 
that aspires to give to sentient beings through emanating immeasurable varieties of 
phenomena that are objects to be offered wi th clear faith from the depths of one’s 
heart increases immeasurable merit with litt le effort and is the generosity of the 
wise bodhisattva. 
 
If with a clear faith from our heart we mentally  create or visualize various things and give 
them to other sentient beings, we can accu mulate a huge amount of merit with little 
difficulty. It is also the practice of  generosity of wise bodhisattvas. The Samantabhadra Prayer  
also includes verses of prostrating while visu alizing thousands of bodies with thousands of 
heads and thousands of tongues reciting praises,  whereby we create immeasurable merit. In a 
similar way, we should mentally visualize emanating thousands of emanations who make 
offerings, recite praises, do prostrations, practice  generosity, and so forth. If we train in this 
way, we will accumulate great merit very easily  and in a short time. If, on the other hand, our 
motivation is not very good when we do so mething, the merit will be very little.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-1C3D  How to make [generosity] possess the six perfections 
If at the time of training in the perfection  of generosity, it is made to possess the 
six perfections the training that occurs will be very powerful. The six are made 
complete in that, in addition, at that time there is: 
1. the ethical discipline that restrains the mental attention of hearers and solitary 
realizers; 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
626 2. the aspiration for and patience with resp ect to the qualities of a knower of all 
aspects and patience when abused by others; 
3. the joyous effort that generates the aspi ration for the sake of increasing them 
more and more;  
4. the concentration that is a single-poi nted mind not mixed with the Lesser 
Vehicle that dedicates that virtue  to complete enlightenment; and 
5. the wisdom that understands the object given, the giving, and the recipient to 
be like illusions. 
 
When we train in the perfection of generosity , we should also simultaneously possess all six 
perfections as this will make the training very  powerful. If when we train in generosity, we 
have the mental attention of hearers and solitary realizers, thinking of ourselves as being like 
them, we will simultaneously be practicing mo rality. In other words, if, when we practice 
generosity, we also have a mind of abandonment, we will simultaneously practice morality. If 
we aspire for and are patient with respect to  the qualities of omniscience and are patient 
when others abuse us, we will also practice pa tience while training in generosity. If we 
generate the aspiration to increase them more an d more, we will also practice joyous effort. At 
the time of generosity, if we have the concen tration that is a single-pointed mind that 
dedicates our virtue to the attainment of enli ghtenment without mixing it with the Hinayana 
motivation to achieve nirvana for ourselves, we will practice the perfection of concentration. 
If when training in generosity, we understand th e object given, the giving, and the recipient to 
not exist inherently and to be like illusions, we will practice the perfection of wisdom. In this 
way, when we practice generosity, we will at the same time also practice the other five 
perfections, whereby all six perfections will be  complete. Since this makes our practice of 
generosity very powerful, it is important to do so. 
 
STUDENT : Is the practice of wisdom while practicing  generosity – seeing the three spheres as 
empty of inherent existence – only the collectio n of wisdom or also the collection of merit? 
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : It is the collection of both merit and wisdom. This is discussed in the 
commentary on the Ornament for Clear Realizations  in the context of explaining how all the 
perfections are included in the perfection of g e n e r o s i t y  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  B y  p r a c t i c i n g  e a c h  
perfection in combination with all six perfections,  we engage in thirty-six perfections. This is 
also mentioned in the Bodhisattva Grounds  and the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras , which 
were recently taught by His Holiness the Dalai Lama at Sera Monastery. Since you are still 
young, you should study these texts. An old man like myself can no longer study! Now 
sometimes when I read something,  some memory of it returns but an hour later I forget it 
once again. The mental energy as well as the ph ysical energy of the inner winds and channels 
degenerate with age, due to which the mind is no longer clear.  
 Tuesday afternoon, 17 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 216) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2 Training in ethical discipline 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
627 A The entity of ethical discipline 
B Its subdivisions 
C How to generate [ethical discipline ] in one's mental continuum 
The second has three [points]: The entity of  ethical discipline, its subdivisions, and 
how to generate [ethical discipline ] in one’s mental continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2A The entity of ethical discipline 
1 The entity of ethical discipline 
First: Ethical discipline is the mind of  abandonment that is a mind turned away 
from harming others together with its base . This is mainly from the point of view 
of the ethical discipline of restraint. 
 
The entity of morality is the definition of morality. The entity of morality is a mind of 
abandonment that is a mind turned away from ha rming others together with its base. In other 
words, it is a mind turned away from harming ot hers by means of body and speech, that is, by 
killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisive speech, harsh words, and idle talk. 
“Together with its base” refers to covetous ness, malice, and wrong view, which are called 
“base” because based on them we engage in non-virtuous actions of body and speech. In 
short, the entity of morality or ethical discip line is the mind of abandonment of killing, 
stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisi ve speech, harsh words, and idle talk.  
 Among the three types of morality, “morality” in  this context mainly refers to the morality 
of restraint. In addition, there is the morality of  benefiting sentient beings and the morality of 
accumulating virtuous actions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The entity of the perfection [of morality ] 
Through thoroughly completing the familiar ity with this mind more and more, it 
becomes the perfection of ethical discipline . It is not that you externally set all 
sentient beings in freedom from all harm without exception. In Engaging in 
Bodhisattva Behavior  it says: 
 
The achievement of the mind of abandonment  
Is explained to be the perfection of ethical discipline. 
 By training in morality, we become more an d more familiar with this mind whereby it 
becomes the perfection of morality. It is no t that one sets all sentient beings without 
exception in freedom from all harm. Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds  says that the 
achievement of the mind of abandonmen t is the perfection of morality ( shilaparamita ). 
Morality is the mind that abandons harming ot her sentient beings, that is, the mind that 
abandons all harmful actions of body and speec h. It is not that in order to achieve the 
perfection of morality we must free all sentient beings from harm since even a buddha is unable to achieve this.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2B Its subdivisions 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
628 1 The ethical discipline of restraint 
2 [The ethical discipline of accumulating virtuous qualities] 
3 [The ethical discipline of working for the welfare of beings] 
The second has three points.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2B1 The ethical discipline of restraint 
A General presentation 
The ethical discipline of rest raint, {217} from the point of view of being together 
with the motivations, is the ten abandonm ents that abandon th e ten non-virtues. 
From the point of view of its entity, it is the seven abandonments of body and 
speech that abandon the seven non-virtues.  
 
The morality of restraint from th e point of view of being togeth er with its motivation is the 
ten abandonments that abandon the ten non-virt ues. On the other hand, from the point of 
view of its entity, it is the seven abandonments – the three of body and four of speech – of the 
seven non-virtues. Motivated by covetousness, malice, or wrong view, we engage by means of our body in killing, stealing, and sexual misc onduct, and by means of our speech in lying, 
divisive speech, harsh words, and idle talk. Th us, when these seven non-virtues are together 
with their motivations, there are ten abandonmen ts. However, from the point of view of its 
entity, the morality of restraint is the abandonm ents of the three non-vi rtuous actions of body 
and four non-virtuous actions of speech. This is because it is not possible to take a vow that 
counteracts non-virtuous paths of  actions of mind since the mi nd cannot be stopped. On the 
other hand, if we want to, we can avoid killing , stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisive 
speech, harsh words, and idle talk. For this reason, it is possible to take vows that are 
promises not to engage in them. Therefore, by  way of entity there are seven abandonments, 
whereas when they are together with thei r motivations there are ten abandonments.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B Precise features 
The intention of the Bodhisattva Levels  in stating that the ethical discipline of 
restraint in the continuum of a bodhis attva is the seven types of [vows of] 
individual liberation is [as follows]. In those possessing the vows of individual 
liberation who possess the bodhisattva vows,  the ethical discipline of restraint is 
the actual vows of individual liberation of the class of the laity or the ordained and 
the abandonments and vows that are common to them in their continua. In those 
possessing bodhisattva vows who are uns uitable as a support for the vows of 
individual liberation, the ethical discipli ne of restraint is the abandonments and 
restraints of abandoning either the natu ral misdeeds or formulated misdeeds that 
are common to individual liberation. Although the vows of individual liberation in the continuum of a bodhisattva are vows of ethical discipline in the continuum of 
a bodhisattva, they are not actual bodh isattva vows, whereas the rest have a 
common basis with the bodhisattva vows. 
 
The Bodhisattva Grounds  says that the morality of restrain t in the continuum of a bodhisattva 
is the seven types of vows of individual libe ration. The seven types of vows of individual 
liberation are the male and female lay vows, the male and female no vice vows, the vows of 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
629 probationary nuns, and the male and female vows of full ordination. If a bodhisattva has such 
vows, he possesses the morality of restraint. In  other words, there are lay bodhisattvas who 
possess the lay vows of individual liberation and are upasakas or upasikas, and there are also 
ordained bodhisattvas who are novice monks or  nuns, probationary nuns, or fully-ordained 
monks or nuns. They possess th e morality of restraint.  
 In addition, there are those who possess bodh isattva vows who are unsuitable to take the 
vows of individual liberation, such as gods, anti -gods, and nagas, because they do not have a 
human body of the eastern, southern, or west ern continents. In addition, the human beings 
of the northern continent cannot achieve the vo ws of individual liberation because they are 
unable to generate a mind of renunciation or definite emergence due to their lifespan being 
fixed at 1000 years, due to lacking financial prob lems, and so forth. The morality of restraint 
of these beings is the abandonments of either  the natural misdeeds or formulated misdeeds. 
Although the vows of individual liberation in the continuum of a bodhisattva are the vows of 
morality in the continuum of a bodhisattva, they are not actu al bodhisattva vows. The rest 
have a common basis with the bodhisattva vows. Perhaps “the rest” refers to the 
concentration vows and uncontaminated vows. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2B2 The ethical discipline of gathering virtuous qualities 
The ethical discipline of gathering virtuo us qualities is, through observing virtues 
such as the six perfections, etc., to generate that whic h has not yet been generated 
in one’s own continuum, to not allow that which has b een generated to 
degenerate, and to increase it more and more. 
 
The morality of gathering virtuous qualities is, through observing virtues such as the six 
perfections (these being the observed object), to generate the virtue that has not yet been 
generated in one’s continuum; if it has already b een generated, to not allow it to degenerate; 
and to increase it more and more. For example,  if we have not yet generated bodhichitta we 
should try to generate it; if we have already ge nerated it, we should not allow it to degenerate; 
and we should increase it more and more. In fact, we often make the following dedication: 
 
May the precious mind of enlightenment  Be born in those in whom it has not been generated.  
May that which has been generated  
Not decline, but develop more and more. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2B3 [The ethical discipline of enacting the welfare of sentient beings] 
The ethical discipline of enacting the welf are of sentient beings is to accomplish 
the welfare of sentient beings in this an d future lives through ethical discipline 
without any misdeeds as appropriate.  
 
The morality of enacting the welfare of sentie nt beings is through morality to accomplish 
whatever is suitable for the welfare of sentient beings in this life and future lives without any 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
630 misdeeds. Thus, it is to do whatever we can to  bring temporary benefit to sentient beings in 
this life and to benefit their future lives by causing them to not commit non-virtue. We 
should try to do whatever we can to help sentie nt beings, but if we find that we cannot help 
them we should at least avoid harming them. For example, whenever we encounter sentient 
beings who are suffering, we should do what ever we can to eliminate or reduce their 
sufferings and problems. In addition, we should try to help them refrain from committing 
non-virtuous actions and to set them in engagi ng in virtuous actions. Also when sentient 
beings lack material things such as food, clot hing, a bed to sleep in, a place to stay, and so 
forth, we should do whatever we can to help them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2C How to generate [ethical discipline ] in one's mental continuum 
1 [Preconditions and advantages of ethical discipline] 
2 [The entity of ethical discipline] 3 [Making [ethical discipline] into [a prac tice] [combined] with the six perfections] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2C1 [Preconditions and advantages of ethical discipline] 
A What is the cause of pure ethical discipline and what does it depend on 
Third: Pure ethical discipline depends on  putting into practice what should be 
engaged in and what should be avoided according to the formulated [rules of the 
Buddha]. Furthermore, it follows the strong  and firm wish to guard [ethical 
discipline]. For it to arise, you must medi tate for a long time on the disadvantages 
of not guarding it and the advantages of  guarding it. {218} This was explained 
above in the context of middling beings. 
 
What are the causes of pure morality and what does it depend on? It depends on thinking 
about the advantages of guarding morality and the disadvantages of not guarding it. Pure morality depends on practicing what is to be  engaged in and what is to be avoided in 
accordance with the formulated rules. In othe r words, one should strive to abide by these 
formulated rules. In addition, it follows from a strong and firm wish to guard our morality. 
For this to arise, we need to meditate for a lo ng time on the advantages of guarding morality 
and the disadvantages of not guarding it. This  was already explained in the context of the 
path of middling beings.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 218) says:  
B Considering the advantages and disadvantages of guarding and not guarding [ethical discipline] 
Moreover, in the Summary of Perfections  [II, 48] it also says: 
 
If by degenerated ethical discipline you cannot achieve your own 
welfare, 
Where would you get the power for the welfare of others? 
Therefore, it is inappropriate for someone striving well  For the welfare of others to loosen his veneration for it. 
 Since, if we degenerate our morality, we cannot achieve our own welfare, how could we 
possibly achieve others’ welfare? In other words, if we do not take care of ourselves, we will 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
631 n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  t a k e  c a r e  o f  o t h e r  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s .  I f  w e  a r e  s t r i v i n g  f o r  o t h e r s ’  w e l f a r e ,  w e  
should not loosen our ve neration of morality.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And [II, 60/61]: 
 
This ethical discipline, the special path of attainment, 
Should be accomplished equal to those who are naturally compassionate. The nature of the excellence of pure exalted wisdom, Free from errors, it is called “the best of ornaments.”  It is the pleasant fragrance guarded in all three realms, 
The unguent that does not contradict ordination. 
One possessing ethical discipline becomes a noble being among humans, Even though he accords with outer appearances. 
 Morality is the special path of  attainment. It should be acco mplished equal to those who are 
naturally compassionate. The nature of superb, pure exalted wisdom, free from errors, it is 
called “the best of ornaments. ” The pleasant fragrance of morality is guarded in all three 
realms. Morality is likened to an ointment or unguent that does not contradict ordination, 
whereas other ointments cannot be worn by the or dained. In fact, it is said that those who 
keep pure morality come to have a naturally fr agrant odor, like sandalwood or lotus flowers, 
without anointing themselves with ointments or  perfumes. Although externally those with 
morality appear to be the same as others in  terms of their outer appearance and behavior, 
they become noble beings among human beings.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
This says that in dependence on [ethical discipline ], one’s mental continuum 
improves more and more; one becomes similar in training to the great beings who 
are naturally compassionate; one attain s the pure exalted wisdom that has 
abandoned all seeds of faulty conduct; al though other ornaments do not beautify 
the very young or very old, the ornament  of ethical discipline is the supreme 
ornament for whoever possesses it, whether young, old, or in between, since it 
pleases everyone; although other fine fragra nces only spread in the direction of the 
wind and do not spread in other directions  whereby they are in but one direction, 
the scent of ethical discipline’s fame spre ads in all directions; although ointments 
such as sandalwood and the like, which cool the torment of heat, contradict 
ordination, the ointment that protects from the torment of the heat of the 
afflictions does not contradict ordination  but rather accords with it; and even 
though you seem to have the signs of ordi nation, to be endowed with the jewel of 
ethical discipline is more excellent than anything else.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
632  
In dependence on morality, our continuum, that is, our realizations, increase more and more. 
We become similar to bodhisattvas who are naturally compassionate and attain the pure 
exalted wisdom that has abandoned all the seeds of faulty conduct. When a very young child 
puts on ornaments, necklaces, earrings, and so forth, she does not look very nice, nor does a 
very old and wrinkled woman who walks bent ov er and with difficulty. On the other hand, 
those who are in between in age are beautified by such ornaments. However, the inner 
ornament of morality suits everyone, old, young, or middle aged, and pleases everyone. 
Therefore, it is the best of ornaments.  
 Whereas other fragrances, such as that of incense, only go where they are carried by the 
wind and do not go to other places, the fragra nce of the fame of morality spreads in all 
directions. Although anointing oneself with ointments of sandalwood that eliminate the 
torment of heat is contradictory for the ordained , the ointment of morali ty that protects from 
the fever of the afflictions does not contradict ordination but accords with it. This is because 
the fragrant odor of morality arises naturally fr om within and is not something that is applied 
externally to the body. While those who merely  wear the robes of monks and nuns can have 
either pure or impure morality in that extern ally they appear the sa me, those who have the 
jewel of morality are superior to the other.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Again from the same text [II, 62-64]: 
 
Without expressing a word and without much effort, The resources and services needed for practice gather. {219} All the world bows low without intimidation;  Power and wealth are gained wi thout effort and without work. 
 Without expressing words and without effort, the resources and service necessary for our 
practice, will arrive. All the world bows down to  those with morality without needing to be 
intimidated. Power and wealth will be obtained without effort and without need to do anything.   Wednesday morning, 18 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 219) says:  
 
All beings from lineages unworthy to be mentioned, 
Even those he did not benefit or help, And those he did not know from former times, Bow to a being who possesses ethical discipline,  Even the dust made auspicious by his feet,  is raised to the head due to being holy, and Gods and men prostrate to them, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
633 Touching them with their heads, and carry them all around. 
 
Thus, one should think about [the advantages] as expressed [here].  
 
Although he has neither helped or benefited ot hers and does not even know them, all beings 
bow to a being who possesses pure and perfect morality. In other words, those who guard 
their vows become objects of respect of others su ch that other people even place the specks of 
dust from their feet on the crown of their head s. Others also bow low to those with perfect, 
pure morality and good behavior. Such signs of  respect are still common in places like Sri 
Lanka and Vietnam when lay people encounter monks. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2C2 [The entity of ethical discipline] 
A Instruction on the importance of the way in which to train in ethical discipline 
Although there are three [kinds of] ethica l discipline, the ethical discipline of 
restraint – the actual formulated rules of individual liberation or the engagements 
and avoidances common to them – are them selves important for bodhisattvas in 
the beginning. If they are guarded, the othe rs will also be guarded, whereas if they 
are not guarded, the others will also  not be guarded. Therefore, the Compendium  
says that if the ethical discipline of th e bodhisattva vows degenerates, all the vows 
are degenerated. Whoever thinks that th e vows of individual liberation are for 
hearers and rejects their formulated rules of engagement and avoidance saying: “I 
must train in the other bodhisattva traini ngs” has thus not grasped the essential 
point of the training in ethical discipline  of bodhisattvas, for it is taught many 
times that the ethical discip line of restraint is the basis and source of the two 
subsequent ethical disciplines. 
 
The training in morality or ethical discipline is  important, therefore we should strive in it. 
There are three types of morality : the morality of restraining from non-virtue, the morality of 
gathering virtuous qualities, and the morality of enacting the welfare of sentient beings. 
Among them, the main one is the morality of rest raint, which is related to vows. It is also 
important for bodhisattvas to trai n in it and to give up whatever  is discordant with it. If one 
guards the vows of individual liberation, one will  also guard the bodhisattva vows. If one does 
not guard the vows of individual liberation, one will also not guard the other vows. Therefore, 
if the morality of vows degenerates in a bodh isattva, also his other vows will degenerate. For 
this reason, bodhisattvas must also train in th e morality of restraint. Thinking “The vows of 
individual liberation are for hearers. I do not need them because I have the bodhisattva vows,” whereby we discard the formulated rules of what to engage in and what to avoid, indicates that we have not understood the bo dhisattva vows. Since the Buddha taught many 
times that he morality of restraint is the foun dation of the other two moralities, we need to 
understand this. In short, the morality of rest raint is the foundation of the other types of 
morality. If we do not guard the morality of vows, also we will not guard the other types of 
morality. Just as a strong and stable founda tion is necessary when building a house as 
otherwise the entire house will collapse, likewise , having taken any of the different kinds of 
vows of individual liberation of lay men or wo men, novice monks or nuns, or fully-ordained 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
634 monks and nuns, we must strive to keep them pu re. When faults arise, we should confess and 
purify them. For this purpose monks and nuns perform the Restoring and Purifying 
Ceremony (so-jong) every fifteen days. Those who have the necessary requisites can also 
perform a self-initiation everyday, such as th at related to Vajrayogini, Tara Chittamani, 
Yamantaka, the Chakrasamvara Body Mandala, and s o  f o r t h .  I n  t h i s  w ay, negativities that 
have committed are purified and vows that have been degenerated are restored.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The main ethical discipline of restraint: how the mind of restraining from natural misdeeds should be 
[generated ] again and again 
The main ethical discipline of restraint is to abandon the natural misdeeds. The 
synthesized essential point of the great disadvantages of the natural [misdeeds] is 
to abandon the ten non-virtues. Therefore,  the mind of restraint that does not 
even move toward their motivations should be [generated ] again and again.  
 
The main point of the morality of restraint is to abandon the natural misdeeds, which are 
synthesized in the ten non-virtuous actions. “Natu ral” indicates that, when it is engaged in, it 
brings a bad result by means of the natural law of cause and result. Although the degeneration of some vows of monks or nuns is  naturally non-virtuous, the degeneration of 
others only becomes non-virtuous because of tr ansgressing a formulated rule such as eating 
after noon, singing, dancing, playing music, and so forth. Thus, when lay people without such 
vows engage in these actions, there is no fault.   We should also strive to avoid even thinki ng about killing someone, stealing something, 
and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
{220} From the Summary of Perfections : 
 
That which becomes the path to th e happiness of high status and 
liberation 
Is to not degenerate from the ten paths of action. Due to abiding in them, there is the special result Of the thought that thinks to benefit migrating beings. 
 
Perfectly restrain speech, body, and mind.  The Conqueror taught “This, in brief, is ethical discipline.” 
Since they are the basis of all ethical discipline  Without exception, thoroughly train in them. 
 The path to the happiness of high rebirth, as a god or human being, and to the happiness of 
the liberation of foe-destroyers and buddhas is to not degenerate from the ten virtuous paths 
of actions. While the th ree abandonments of body (the aban donments of killing, stealing, and 
sexual misconduct) are both actions and paths of  actions, as are the four abandonments of 
speech (the abandonments of lying, divisive sp eech, harsh words, and idle talk), the three 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
635 abandonments of mind are only paths of acti ons, not actions. We should not degenerate 
from these ten virtuous paths of actions. Abiding in them brings the special result of thinking 
to benefit migrating beings. In brief, to perf ectly restrain one’s body, speech, and mind is 
morality; this was taught by the Conqueror. Since they are the ba sis of all morality, we should 
thoroughly train in them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Summarized presentation 
In brief, through taking this as the basis,  to train again and again in the mind of 
restraint that trains in the trainings of whatever ethical discipline one has 
promised is the practice of ethical discipline.  
 
We should take this morality as  a basis and then guard whatever  vows of individual liberation, 
bodhisattva vows, or tantra vows we have promis ed to maintain. We should train in the mind 
of restraint again and again through thinking th at having taken these vows we need to keep 
them pure. We must understand the vows we ha ve taken and abandon transgressing them. To 
do so, we need to train in the wish to keep them and to not transgre ss either the natural or 
formulated rules.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-2C Making [ethical discipline] possess the six perfections 
Ethical discipline is made to possess the si x perfections in that, abiding in ethical 
discipline oneself, one sets others in it; this being generosity. The remaining 
[perfections] are as before. 
 
Abiding in morality or ethical discipline oneself, to set others in morality is the practice of the 
generosity of morality. The remaining perfection s are as was explained before in the context 
of generosity. In short, to abide in morality an d set others in morality is the generosity of 
morality. If at this time our mind is patient, this  is the patience of morality. If at that time our 
mind delights in abiding in morality and setting  others in it, this is  the joyous effort of 
morality. If at that time our mind is focused on  what we are doing, this is the concentration 
of morality. If at this time we think that ours elves (the one practicing morality), others, and 
morality all lack inherent existence, this is the wisdom of morality. In this way, when we 
practice morality, it includes the practice of all six perfections.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3 Training in patience 
A The entity of patience 
B Its subdivisions 
C How to generate [patience] in one’s continuum  
The third has three [points]: the entity of  patience, its subdivisions, and how to 
generate [patience] in one’s continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3A The entity of patience 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
636 1 [Explanation of] the entity of patience 
First: The entity of patience is th e mind abiding at ease without being 
overwhelmed by harm and the occurrence of suffering and thoroughly abiding 
aspiring for the Dharma. Its discordant cl ass are hatred, disheartenment, lack of 
appreciation, and lack of desire. 
 
The entity of patience is a mind that abides in its natural state, that is , undisturbed, when we 
are harmed or when suffering occurs. In additi on, it is the mind th at thoroughly abides 
aspiring for the Dharma taught by the Buddha, in particular, for emptiness. The discordant 
c l a s s  o f  p a t i e n c e  i s  h a t r e d  o r  a n g e r ,  t h e  d i s h eartenment that thinks one is unable to be 
patient, a lack of aspiration, and a lack of de sire. When anger arises, we should immediately 
apply its antidote, patience. For example, when someone says something bad to us or even beats us, we should strive to practice patience. Likewise, when we are sick or in pain, instead 
of becoming sad and discouraged thinking that  we are unable to do anything, we should 
p r a c t i c e  p a t i e n c e  b y  w i l l i n g l y  a c c e p t i n g  t h i s  s u f f e r i n g .  T h i s  i s  o n e  k i n d  o f  p a t i e n c e  t h a t  w e  
need to develop. Likewise, when due to conditions it is a bit difficult to stay in a certain place 
and we become discouraged, we should try to a ccept this difficulty and bear it patiently.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The completion of the perfection of patience 
The completion of the perfec tion of patience is the mere complete familiarity of 
the mind with ceasing one’s own belligerence  and so forth; it does not depend on 
freeing [other] sentient beings from their unruliness.  
 
The measure of having completed the perfection of patience is the mere complete familiarity 
of mind with ceasing one’s own belligerence, that  is, anger or hatred. It does not depend on 
freeing sentient beings from unruliness, violen ce, or impatience. Since this can only occur 
when all sentient beings have achieved buddhah ood, this is not what is meant by completing 
the perfection of patience. Rather it is that our mind ceases to have anger, belligerence, 
resentment, spite, and other such  minds. These have all been pacified, whereby our mind is 
quiet and calm. This is the completion  of the perfection of patience.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3B Its subdivisions 
Second: There is the patience of not paying  heed to harm by others, the patience 
of accepting the suffering that arises in  one’s own continuum, and the patience of 
a mind certain with respect to the Dharma.  
 
When others harm us, thinking that it does no t matter we should not ge nerate the thought to 
retaliate but instead keep our mind calm and undisturbed. When suffering arises in our 
continuum, we should voluntarily accept it without sadness and without being disturbed. 
When difficulty arises in understanding th e Dharma, especially the emptiness of all 
phenomena of inherent existenc e, we should be patient.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
637 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C How to generate [patience] in one’s continuum 
1 Meditating on the advantages of patience and the disadvantages of impatience 
2 The actual way of cultivating patience 
It is necessary to meditate on the advant ages of patience and the disadvantages of 
impatience. 
 
In order to generate patience in our continuum,  we should meditate on the many advantages 
of patience and the many disadvantages of anger.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1 Meditating on the advantages of patience and the disadvantages of impatience 
A The advantages of patience 
B The disadvantages of impatience 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1A The advantages of patience 
First: You should think about the fact that later on you will have {221} few 
enemies, you will not be separated from dear ones, you will experience much 
happiness and mental happiness, you will die without regret, and your will be 
reborn among the gods after this body has perished.  
 
The advantages of patience are that later on we  will have few enemies, we will have good 
relationships with those who are dear to us an d will not be separated from them, we will 
experience much physical and mental happiness,  we will die without regret due to being 
certain that we have acted well during our life, and, having given up the body of this life, we will be reborn among the gods. Thus, there are many advantages to being patient.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The Summary of Perfections  [III, 3-5] says:  
 
For those possessing the mind that  neglects others’ welfare,  
It was taught “The sublime way is patience.” 
The world’s goodness and excellence  Are protected from the faults of anger by patience. 
 For those who possess the mind that neglects ot hers’ welfare, the Buddha taught the sublime 
way of patience. As this statement is a bit un usual, perhaps there is  some mistake in the 
Tibetan text. Or perhaps it means that the mind thinking that one is unable to take care of 
sentient beings is eliminated by patience. All the world’s goodness and excellence comes 
about due to patience and are protected from the faults of anger by patience.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Sublime ornament of the powerful ones, 
Peak of the strength for those upholding the ascetic way, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
638 Torrent engulfing the conflagrat ion of minds wishing to harm, 
 
Patience is the sublime ornament of the powerful one. For ascetics it is the best of strengths 
for bearing difficulties. It is a torrent of wate r extinguishing the fire of the harmful mind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Patience eliminates manifold harms in this and other lives. 
The arrows of the words of unruly beings Are blunted by the armor of patience of great beings.  They transform into beautiful flowers of praise And become attractive garlands of renown. 
 
Cultivating patience eliminates all the varieties of harm in this and ot her lives. The armor of 
patience dispels the arrows of the words of un ruly beings, whereby they become beautiful 
flowers of praise and attractive garlands of renown. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And [III, 83]: 
 
The source accomplishing the form possessing beautiful qualities and Adorned with the best of signs is also patience. 
 You should meditate on the advantages as taught until a strong and stable 
certainty is reached with regard to them. 
 Due to patience the body becomes very beauti ful, as though adorned with the signs and 
exemplifications. Thus, we should meditate on  the advantages of patience again and again 
until our mind achieves certainty rega rding the need to develop patience.  
 (Oral transmission 12:23-12:33, pp. 221-224)  Wednesday afternoon, 18 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 221) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B The disadvantages of impatience 
1 Invisible disadvantages  
2 Visible disadvantages alone with supplementary remarks 
 
The disadvantages of impatience or a lack of pa tience are of two types: those that cannot be 
seen at the moment and those that can be seen. In other words, the disadvantages of anger 
include disadvantages that can presently be s een and disadvantages that cannot presently be 
seen.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
639  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1 Invisible disadvantages  
A How anger destroys roots of virtue 
B How they are destroyed even if the object of anger is an ordained person who is not a bodhisattva 
C Clearing up doubts concerning their destruction 
D Details regarding the way in which they are destroyed 
 
The fault or disadvantage that cannot be seen presently is that anger destroys our roots of 
virtue. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1A How anger destroys roots of virtue 
1 The actual [topic] 
Second: In Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  [Shantideva says]: 
 
The generosity accumulated  
Over a thousand eons and excellently engaging in Making offerings and the like to the sugatas; All this is also destroyed by one [instant of] anger. 
 
This appears to be set forth in a ccordance with Aryasura’s work [ Summary of 
Perfections ]. The Sutra of the Displays of Manjushri  says that it destroys the virtue 
accumulated over a hundred eons. 
 
The virtue accumulated by the ge nerosity of giving material th ings over a thousand eons and 
that of making offerings to the sugatas, prostr ating to them, and so forth is destroyed by one 
instant of anger. Anger mainly destroys the virt ue that is included in the side of merit, 
whereas it does not destroy the virtue accumulated by me ans of the wisdom realizing 
emptiness. For this reason, we need to be ca reful to avoid anger, especially anger toward 
bodhisattvas. It appears that Shantideva s ays “accumulated over a thousand eons” in 
accordance with the text composed by Aryasura. The Sutra of the Displays of Manjushri , on the 
other hand, says that one instant of ange r destroys the virtue accumulated over a hundred eons . 
That anger destroys our roots of virtue is its invisible disadvantage.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Differences in the object [of anger ] 
With respect to the object, some explain that it must be a bodhisattva, whereas 
some assert it to be a general object. The former accords with the 
[Madhyamak]avatara  [III, 6a-c]: 
 
Through anger toward a child of the conquerors, 
The virtue amassed over one hundred eons, Through generosity and ethical discipline 
{222} Is destroyed in but an instant. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
640  
Some texts say that the anger that destroys our roots of virtue is that directed at a bodhisattva, 
whereas other texts say that it is anger direct ed at any person. However, in general it is 
understood to refer to anger at a bodhisattva.  This accords with wh at is set out in the 
Supplement to the Middle Way , which says that one instant of anger at a conqueror’s child, a 
bodhisattva, destroys the virtue accumulated by generosity and morality over one hundred 
eons.  
 In brief, it is a heavy non-virtue to get angry at a bodhisattva. It is said that even when we 
once again take rebirth as a human being, we will have an ugly body. In fact, we see that when we get angry, our face becomes ugly, our eyes bulge and dart about, our body shakes, and so 
forth. We do not look nice! Likewise, when we  see other people who are angry, we do not 
even want to look at them!  In addition, due to anger we will be led into the unholy, that is, we will not engage in the 
holy (virtuous actions) and will engage in the unholy (non-virtuous actions). In other words, 
we will engage in non-virtuous actions and wi ll not engage in virtuous actions. For this 
reason, we need patience.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The support 
As regards the support of the one who gene rates anger, since even if a bodhisattva 
gets angry it destroys his roots of virtue, th ere is no need to mention that this is the 
case for one who is not a bodhisattva who gets angry at a bodhisattva. The 
Commentary on the Guide [to the Middle Way]  says that whether it is certain that the 
object is a bodhisattva or not and whether the fault seen to be the reason for the 
anger is true or not, the destruction of the virtue like that explained above is 
similar.  
 With respect to the support of the anger, since when a bodhisattva gets angry at a bodhisattva, 
his roots of virtue are destroyed, there is no need to mention that this happens when a non-
bodhisattva gets angry at a bodhisattva. Whethe r or not it is certain that the object is a 
bodhisattva and whether or not the fault that is the reason for getting angry actually exist, the 
roots of virtue from having accumulated genero sity or morality for a thousand eons or a 
hundred eons are destroyed by anger. This  is mentioned by Chandrakirti in his Commentary 
on the  Supplement to the Middle Way . Therefore, we should avoid getting angry at any sentient 
being, even a dog, a cat, or a mosquito! In or der to not get angry we must train in patience. 
We should stop ourselves from showing anger as  much as possible and also apply its antidote. 
If we try to do this, there will be some resu lt. If we do not even try, nothing will happen! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1B How they are destroyed even if the object of anger is an ordained person 
who is not a bodhisattva 
In general, anger does not need to be dire cted at a bodhisattva in order for it to 
destroy roots of virtue. A passage quoted from the Sarvastavadin scriptures in the 
Compendium of Trainings  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
641  
If a monk prostrates to a stupa of ha ir and nail [relics] with extended 
limbs and a pure mind, he will come to enjoy as many kingdoms of 
wheel-turning kings as there are partic les of dust in the ground covered 
down to the golden foundation. 
 
And:  
 
Also those roots of virtue will be exhausted if he injures or disparages 
one of pure conduct. Therefore, if one should not even be angry at a 
charred log, how much less so at a body endowed with consciousness! 
 In general, in order for anger to destroy our root s of virtue it is not necessary for it to be 
directed at a bodhisattva. The Compendium of Trainings  says that when a fully-ordained monk 
makes full-length prostrations to  a stupa containing the hair or nails of the Tathagata with a 
mind of lucid faith, he will become a wheel-turning king for as many times as the number of particles of dust he covers with his body down  to the golden foundation. On the other hand, 
if out of anger he insults or hurts a friend of pure conduct with whom he studies and practices, his roots of virtue will be exhausted. The object of anger therefore does not need to 
be a bodhisattva, it can also be another monk  with whom one studies and practices. If we 
should not get angry even with a charred log or stick of wood, what need is there to mention 
that we should not get angry at a body that is endowed with consciousness?  
 
STUDENT : What is the difference between anger and wr ath? Anger seems to me to be the wish 
to harm, whereas I think that there can be wrat h when one is disgusted with the behavior of 
someone while there is no wish to harm him. 
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : When there is wrath, there is compassion inside, although outside 
there is the aspect of wrath. For example, when a child does something bad, sometimes 
parents have to put on a wrathful aspect while in side their intention is virtuous in that they 
wish to benefit and educate their child.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C Clearing up doubts concerning their destruction 
1 Doubts raised by scholars 
2 Their refutation 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C1 Doubts raised by scholars 
Some scholars say that the meaning of “the  destruction of roots of virtue” is that 
the emergence of their effect is delayed through the potential of earlier virtue to 
bring about its effects quickly being destroye d, whereupon the effects of hatred etc. 
emerge first. However, if they meet with [suitable] conditions afterward, it is not 
that their respective effects do not emerge , for if there is no mundane path that 
can eliminate the seeds of the objects of abandonment, it is not possible for seeds 
to be abandoned by the mental afflictions.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
642 Some scholars say that the destruction of root s of virtue means that the emergence of the 
results of virtuous actions created in the past  that could have quickly brought results is 
delayed, and that the results of hatred will emer ge first. However, it is not that the virtuous 
actions created in the past will not bring ab out a result when they meet the necessary 
conditions; it is just that the emergence of their result will be delayed. They say that just as 
there is no mundane path that can abandon the seeds of the objects of abandonment, 
likewise the seeds of virtuous actions cannot be de stroyed by mental afflictions such as anger.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C2 Their refutation 
A The seed is not certain 
B How ‘destruction’ does not just mean postponement  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C2A The seed is not certain 
1 How the result does not arise due to conditions even though the seed is present 
That reason that it is not certain is be cause even though ordinary beings purify 
non-virtues by means of the four opponent  powers, their seeds are not abandoned. 
However, although the conditions are met la ter on, {223} it is not possible for their 
fully ripened effects to emerge.  
 
The seed is not certain because even though it exists, the result may not emerge due to conditions. In other words, the reason that it is not certain is that when ordinary beings 
purify their non-virtues by means of applying  the four opponent powers of regret, the 
determination to not do it again, going for refu ge and generating the mind of enlightenment, 
and applying an antidote such as recitation of a sutra such as the Diamond Cutter Sutra  and so 
forth, their seeds are not abandoned, however even though conditions are later met it is 
impossible for these seeds to bring fo rth their fully-ripened results.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Even if the seed has not been abandoned its effect does not emerge once tolerance is attained 
Once the peak and tolerance [levels] of th e path of preparation have been attained, 
although wrong views and the seeds of non- virtues that become the causes of the 
bad migrations have not been abandoned, wrong views and rebirth in the bad 
migrations are not possible even if [the se seeds] meet with their conditions. 
 
Even if the seed has not been abandoned, its re sult will not emerge once one has achieved the 
peak and tolerance levels of the path of preparat ion. In other words, having achieved the peak 
and tolerance levels of the path of preparation,  even though wrong view and the seeds of non-
virtues that become the cause for taking re birth in the bad migrations have not been 
abandoned, wrong view cannot be generated and one cannot take rebirth in the bad migrations even if the co nditions come together.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1C2B How ‘‘destruction’’ does not just mean postponement  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
643 1 The absurd consequence  
According to the statement “Due to ka rma whatever is heaviest in cyclic 
existence...,” either a virtuo us or non-virtuous karma, due to ripening sooner, can 
temporarily block the occasion for another karma to ripen. However, it cannot be 
posited nor has it been taught that a virt uous or non-virtuous karma is destroyed 
by merely that. The temporary postponement of its ripening is not suitable to be 
the meaning of the destruction of roots of virtue, as otherwise it would have been 
necessary to teach that all strong non-virtuo us actions destroys the roots of virtue.  
 
Whatever actions, whether virtuo us or non-virtuous, are the heaviest bring about their result 
first. When two actions are the same in weight , that which was done most recently ripens 
first. When two actions occurred at the same time , that which is most familiar will ripen first. 
This is mentioned in a sutra. In the case that a virtuous or non-virtuous action ripens first, it 
can temporarily prevent other actions from ripeni ng, however it does not stop their ripening 
forever. Therefore, it cannot be said that it destroys  virtuous or non-virtuous karma. Thus, the 
fact that its ripening is merely postponed is  not the meaning of “destroy,” otherwise the 
Buddha should have taught that any strong non- virtuous action destroys the roots of virtue, 
but he did not.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Analogy for how the effect does not emerge although the seed has not been abandoned 
Therefore, with respect to this , the master Bhavaviveka said:  
 
As explained above, neither non-virtues that have been purified by the 
four powers nor roots of virtue that  have been destroyed by wrong views 
or harmful mind can bring about their effects even if later on they meet 
with the conditions; just like a seed that has been damaged does not 
give rise to a sprout even though the conditions are met. 
 Bhavaviveka said that non-virtues purified by the four opponent powers and roots of virtue 
that have been destroyed by wrong view or anger cannot give rise to their results later on, even 
though their seeds have not been abandoned; ju st like a seed that has been damaged cannot 
give rise to a sprout even when the conditions  are present. Likewise, even though the seeds 
are not abandoned by the four opponent powers or by wrong view or harmful mind, they will 
not give rise to their results.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-1D Details regarding the way in which they are destroyed 
1 How the fully ripened effect and the effect corresponding to the cause may or may not be destroyed 
Moreover, even though negativities that have been accumulated are purified by 
purifying them with the four powers as ex plained above, this does not contradict 
the fact that they delay the arisal  o f  h i g h e r  p a t h s .  T h u s ,  i n  s o m e  [people] the 
results of giving gifts and guarding ethical discipline, such as the arisal of excellent 
resources and a body, are destroyed. However, due to [the result] corresponding to 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
644 the cause (deeds of familiarity with givi ng and the mind of abandonment), the 
roots of virtue of generosity and mora lity are easily generated and cannot be 
destroyed. In others the arisal of [the result ] corresponding to the cause as a 
continuum of similar type (deeds of inner mo rality and so forth) is destroyed, but 
the arisal of an excellent body, resources, and so forth {224} is not destroyed. Again 
others, as described previously, as long  as they do not generate anger at a 
bodhisattva who has attained prophecy, will ha ve some realizations of the path that 
enable them to completely traverse it in one eon. If they generate one thought of 
anger, although the path that exists in their continua is not relinquished, their 
traversal of the path in one eon will be delayed. In brief, just as with respect to 
purifying non-virtues, not everything that was done is necessarily purified, likewise, with respect to the destruction of virtue, no t everything that was done is necessarily 
destroyed.  
 
Even though negativities that have been a ccumulated are purified by means of the four 
opponent powers, this does not contradict the fact that the generation  o f  h i g h e r  p a t h s  i s  
delayed. For some people, while the results of giving gifts and guarding morality, such as the 
arisal of excellent resources and an excellent body, are destroyed, whereas due to the result 
corresponding to the cause that is familiarit y with the mind of giving and the mind of 
abandonment they once again generate the roots of  virtue of generosity and morality and this 
cannot be destroyed. For other people the result  similar to the cause of inner morality is 
destroyed, but the arisal of excellent resour ces, and excellent body, and so forth is not 
destroyed. For still others, as long as they do not become angry at a bodhisattva who has 
received prophesy, their realizations will enab le them to traverse the path in one eon. 
However, if they generate one thought of anger, even though the path is not relinquished, 
their realizations are delayed and they will not ac hieve the result in one eon. In short, if we 
purify non-virtuous actions, not all their resu lts are purified, and likewise, when roots of 
virtue are destroyed, not all their results are destroyed.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 How that depends exclusively on the scriptures 
Nonetheless, this being an important poin t, since it seems to be necessary to 
analyze it in dependence on the Buddha’s scriptures and the reasonings based on 
them, analyze it through depending on the Buddha's excellent teachings.  
 
Nonetheless, we should analyze this impo rtant point in depend ence on the Buddha’s 
scriptures and reasonings by reading and analyz ing well the Buddha’s scriptures, whereby we 
will come to a deeper understanding. Karma is no t visible to a direct perceiver, such as the eye 
or ear consciousness, nor can it be establis hed by reasonings. Therefore, in order to 
understand it, we need to analyze the perfect sc riptures of the Buddha, checking whether they 
are harmed or not by a direct perceiver or by an inferential cognizer based on reasons. 
Examples of valid reasons are: during the day th ere is fire behind the mountain because there 
is smoke; during the night there is no fire on  the water because there is mist; water exists 
there because there are waterfowl overhead; th e body is impermanent because it changes 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
645 momentarily, the body is impermanent because it  is created by causes and conditions. We can 
understand such reasonings by way of an infe rential cognizer. However, the law of cause and 
result cannot be understood by means of such re asons; it can only be understood by relying 
on the Buddha’s scriptures.  
 
Thursday morning, 19 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 224) says:  
3 How the two activities of the great are done  
Thus, the invisible disadvantages [of anger] ar e that it projects very unpleasant fully 
ripened results and prevents the emergence of other very pleasant fully ripened 
results. 
 
The invisible disadvantages of anger and so fort h is that it projects very unpleasant fully-
ripened or fruitional results and stops the emergence of very pleasant fully-ripened results. These are disadvantages of anger that we are unable to see.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C1B-2 Visible disadvantages alone with supplementary remarks 
A How peace of mind and so forth are not experienced 
The visible disadvantages [of anger] are taught in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  
[VI, 3-5]: 
1. one does not experience mental peace and certainty,  
2. previously existing joy and happiness are ruined and later on are not achieved,  
3. sleep does not come and the mind does not abide at ease, 
4. if the hatred is strong, even those who previously nurtured one out of 
kindness, having forgotten their kindness, may kill one, 
5. friends and relatives abandon one out of irritation, 
6. even those you gather with gift s do not stay, and so forth.  
 
There are also visible disadvantages of anger that are results that are visible in this life: we do 
not experience mental happiness and certainty, our happiness and joy decrease both now and 
later, sleep does not come, and our mind does not abide at ease and relaxed. Due to strong 
anger, those people who once cared for us fo rget this and may even kill us. Friends and 
relatives become irritated and unhappy with us and turn away from us. Even if we gather others with gifts, they will not remain with us.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B How to gain certainty regarding the faults 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  [VI, 2] says: 
 
There is no negativity like hatred, 
And no austerity like patience. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
646 Therefore, in various way 
Earnestly cultivate patience. 
 
Thus, you should consider the advantages and disadvantages and make an effort to 
develop patience in many ways. 
 
Shantideva says that because there is no negativi ty like hatred, and no austerity like patience, 
we should cultivate on patience in a variety of ways. Considering the many advantages of 
patience and the many disadvantages of anger, we  should put effort into cultivating patience.  
 (Oral transmission 11:26-11:42, pp. 224-231)  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
C Supplementary remarks 
I t  i s  t o  b e  u n d e r s t o o d  f r o m  t h e  Compendium of Trainings  t h a t  h a t r e d  i s  n o t  
ascertained to be the only faulty conduc t that collects both grave fully-ripened 
results and destroys roots of virtue. {225} There is the wrong view that deprecates 
[the law of cause and effect]; the ab andonment of the holy Dharma; and 
contempt, generation of pride, and so forth towards bodhisattvas, gurus, and so 
forth. 
 
Anger or hatred gives rise to unpleasant fully-ripened results and destroys our roots of virtue. 
However, this also occurs due to the wrong view  that deprecates the existence of the law of 
cause and result and so forth, the abandonm ent of the holy Dharma, and not respecting, 
generating strong pride, and so forth toward bo dhisattvas, the holy gurus, one’s parents, and 
so forth. It is said in the Guhyasamaja Tantra  that if we do confessi on well with the four 
opponent powers, we can even purify the five actions of immediate retributions – killing our 
mother, killing our father, killing a foe-destro yer, drawing the blood of a tathagata, and 
creating a schism in the sangha. However, this is not the case for the action of abandoning 
Dharma as this will necessarily bring rebirth in the hell realm. The Treasury of Manifest 
Dharma  says that we must respect and never neglect our parents who gave us this body as well 
as sick people.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C2 The actual way of cultivating patience 
A How to cultivate the patience that is unconcerned with respect to harm 
B How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering  
C How to cultivate the patience that aspires for a certain mind regarding the Dharma 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C2A How to cultivate the patience that is unconcerned with respect to harm 
How to cultivate the patience that is  unconcerned with respect to harm. 
 
When others harm us, we should cultivate patien ce toward that person through thinking that 
the harm does not matter.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
647 1 [The offender’s lack of freedom]  
If you investigate whether or not someon e who harmed you was free to not harm 
you, [you will find that ] he did not harm you while being autonomous, for he 
generated the wish to harm you out of caus es and conditions such as the seeds of 
mental afflictions from previous familiarity and improper mental attention. Also 
due to them, he engaged in activities th at inflicted harm and due to them he 
produced suffering in others, for under the power of other, the mental afflictions, 
he had become as if their slave.  
 Is the person who harms us free or not? If we examine this, we will find that he is not free, rather he is under the control of the mental afflictions and du e to them inflicts harm upon 
us. Due to the seeds of mental afflictions being very strong due to previous familiarity with 
them and due to improper mental attention, the wish to harm us arose in his mind. This in 
turn induced him to engage in actions that ha rm other people and make them suffer. Having 
come under the power of the mental afflictions, he is as if their slave. In other words, he 
became like a soldier who without choice mu st obey the orders of his superiors.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The inappropriateness of anger given that [one harming] has no freedom 
Even if someone, driven by something else without freedom, has harmed you, 
anger is not appropriate. For instance, if  someone, having been possessed by an 
evil spirit, were to come under its power and wish to harm you who would benefit 
him by freeing him from it and strike you,  you would not get even the slightest bit 
angry at him but instead think: “He is acti ng like this now because the evil spirit 
has deprived him of his freedom.” You woul d also put effort into doing whatever 
you could to free him from the demon. A bodhisattva should also act like that. 
 
Since the person harming us has no freedom, that is, he is driven by so mething else, it is not 
right for us to become angry with him. For exam ple, if someone who is possessed by a spirit, 
his mind controlled by it, were to wish to ha rm and beat someone who wants to help him by 
freeing him from the spirit, because he is unde r the power of the spirit his benefactor would 
not become angry at him but instead would strive to help him by performing certain rituals and so forth in order to gradually release him from  the control of the spir it. This is the way in 
which a bodhisattva should act.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The scriptural source for this 
The Four Hundred Verses  says: 
 
Just as a doctor is not disturbed 
By one who, although angry, is gripped by an elemental spirit, 
Likewise, the Muni, who sees the afflictions, Is not contaminated by those with afflictions. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
648 Buddha Shakyamuni sees that the harmful person is  bound by the mental afflictions, that is, 
that he is under control of the mental affliction s and due to this beats others and so forth. All 
faults arise due to the fact that our mind is overpowered by the mental afflictions such as 
anger, jealousy, belligerence, resentment, spite, ignorance, and so forth. They in turn bring 
only suffering, they never bring happiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Also Master Chandrakirti says: 
 
“This is not a fault of sentient beings, It is a fault of the mental afflictions”; After thorough investigation, the wise ones Are not disturbed by sentient beings. 
 Chandrakirti also says that sentient beings are no t at fault, it is the me ntal afflictions that are 
at fault. Through examining this well, the wi se are not disturbed by sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 How anger is inappropriate if one thinks of one’s own karma 
Moreover, the experience of suffering produced by the harmer {226} is the 
experience of the result of a negative ac tion accumulated by oneself in the past 
and, in dependence on that, the action wi ll be exhausted. If you cultivate patience 
with respect to it, you will not newly accumulate causes for the experience 
suffering later on, whereas, if you get angr y, you will have to experience suffering 
that is even greater than that.  
 
Because the experience of suffering produced by  a harmer is not created by him, we should 
not get angry at him. Instead we should remember that it is the result of non-virtuous actions 
that we created in the past, and that, having now ripened, they will be exhausted. If we 
cultivate patience, we will not accumulate new causes for suffering. If, on the other hand, we 
become angry, we will create causes to ex perience even more suffering in the future. 
Therefore, when we experience suffering, we sh ould remember that it is the result of non-
virtuous actions that we ourselves created in the past and that are now being exhausted, and 
therefore be patient with this suffering. In this  way, we will experience less suffering and will 
also not create new causes for future suffering .  O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d ,  i f  w e  d o  n o t  c u l t i v a t e  
patience when someone harms us through thinking  that it is due to our karma, and instead 
retaliate, we will only create more non-virtue  due to which we will once again experience 
suffering in the future.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
649 5 Consequently, the appropriateness of being patient as if it were a medical examination 
Thus, it is very appropriate to be patien t with minor suffering in order to avert 
greater suffering, such as being patient wi th bloodletting, burning, and so forth as 
a method for curing a grave illness. 
 
When someone is sick, he is willing to be ar minor painful treatments as blood-letting, 
burning, and so forth in order to avoid death. Nowadays doctors tend to advise surgery as a 
cure for many problems and people similarly accept such treatment as an alternative to death. 
Thus, people even accept to have a kidney removed, a part of a limb amputated, and so forth 
in order to avoid death, even though they may also risk dying during the surgery itself. Some 
people even accept to have both legs amputate d in order to avoid death. They patiently bear 
such suffering in order to avoid even greater su ffering in the future. Similarly, when others 
harm us, we should patiently bear the suffering in order to avoid creating the cause of even 
greater suffering in the future. We need to us e our intelligence well and try not to get angry 
w i t h  a n y o n e  b y  t h i n k i n g  t h a t  i t  d o e s  n o t matter that someone harms us, and instead 
voluntarily accepting the harm with a calm mind.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C2B How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering 
How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering.  
1 Countering the categorical aversion for suffering that arises  
If the suffering that arises is easy to alleviate, aversion is unnecessary. If it is not 
suitable to be alleviated, also dislike fo r it, since without benefit, is useless and 
even disadvantageous, for even tiny suffe ring becomes extremely hard to bear if 
one is very intolerant, whereas even grea t suffering can be endured if one is less 
intolerant.  
 
When suffering arises, we should counteract the mind that does not like it. If the suffering 
that arises is easy to alleviate, there is no need to mentally dislike it. Even if we cannot 
alleviate it, there is no benefit whatsoever in di sliking it and this will only disadvantageous to 
us. If we are very short-tempered or have little to lerance, it will be very difficult to bear even 
the slightest suffering even, for example, someone saying to us “You have a very big nose!” If 
we are less short-tempered and more tolerant, we will be able to bear even great suffering and 
it will not be a the slightest problem if someone tells us that we have a big nose, small eyes, 
and so forth. Thus, those people who are more pa tient and relaxed are able to bear even very 
great suffering.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Considering the good qualities of suffering itself 
The way to mentally take the side of suffe ring is to train the mind again and again 
through thinking “If there was no such su ffering, I would not generate the wish to 
definitely emerge from cyclic existence,  therefore it has the good quality of 
exhorting my mind to liberation; it ha s the good quality of eliminating my 
arrogance since, when I am beset with suffering, my conceited superiority is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
650 destroyed; it has the good quality of maki ng me shun negativities because when I 
experience intense suffering feeling, since it  arises from non-virtue, if I do not want 
this result, I must turn away from its cause; it has the good quality of making me 
delight in accomplishing virtue since, du e to being tormented by suffering, I want 
happiness and for that purpose I must acco mplish virtue; and, having understood 
that compassion is generated for the bein gs of cyclic existence through thinking 
“In proportion to my own experience, others  also suffer,” this suffering fulfills my 
wishes.”  
 
We should think about the good qualities of su ffering. For example, due to suffering we will 
generate the mind of renunciation that wishes to become free from suffering and to definitely 
emerge from cyclic existence. On the other hand , if we do not experience suffering, the wish 
to emerge from cyclic existence will not arise. Suffering, on the other hand, acts to urge our 
mind to achieve liberation, as if someone were  to tell us “You must attain freedom from 
suffering!”   Also due to experiencing suffering, the pride thinking that we are superior is eliminated. 
Due to experiencing suffering, we will strive to avoid creating its causes – non-virtuous 
actions. If we are tormented by suffering, we wi ll wish to experience happiness and will strive 
to create the causes of happiness – virtuous acti ons. Due to experiencing suffering, we will 
generate the wish from our heart to help ot hers eliminate their sufferings. Therefore, 
suffering has good qualities in that it can he lp us develop our inner realizations. For this 
reason, we should not be sad when we suffer but instead use it as an incentive to practice the 
Dharma.   Thursday afternoon, 19 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 226) says:  
3 It is not difficult if one familiarizes in small steps 
Here again [it says]:  
 
There is nothing that does not get easier, 
If you familiarize with it, therefore, 
{227} By familiarizing yo urself with minor harm, 
You will also be able to bear great harm. 
 
Thus, by putting on the armor of the though t to accept suffering and integrating it 
with suffering in small steps, the stre ngth to accept suffering will increase. 
 
Due to familiarity with something, it becomes ea sy. Thus, by first familiarizing ourselves with 
small harm thinking “It does not matter,” later on when someone does us great harm, we will 
b e  a b l e  t o  b e a r  i t  w i t h  p a t i e n c e .  T h i s  i s  t h e  p a t i e n c e  o f  b e i n g  a b l e  t o  v o l u n t a r i l y  a c c e p t  
suffering. In short, initially we should strive to  accept small sufferings so that our strength to 
accept suffering in the future will increase. On  the other hand, if we continue to think “Poor 
me! I cannot bear this,” our strength will only de crease and we will not be able to bear even 
small sufferings.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
651  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-3C2C The way to cultivate the patience that aspires for a certain mind regarding the 
Dharma 
The way to cultivate the patience that aspires to a certain mind regarding the 
Dharma is to train in the aspiration for the following without bias:  
1. the objects of clear faith, the Three Jewels;  
2. the objects to be actualized, the two selflessness; 
3. the object of desire, the great streng th of the buddhas and bodhisattvas; 
4. the objects to be adopted and discarded,  the causes that are excellent conduct 
and fault conduct and their results; 
5. the object of meditation, enlightenm ent, the meaning to be achieved; 
6. the method for attaining that, the pa th of the bodhisattva trainings; 
7. the objects of hearing and thinking, the holy Dharma of the twelve scriptural 
branches and so forth. 
 
We need to develop our aspiration without bias for:  1. the objects of clear faith, the Three Jewels;  
2. the objects to be actualized, the two selflessnesses,  that is, the lack of an inherently existent 
or self-supporting substantially existent person and the lack of inherently existent or self-
supporting substantially existent phenomena;  
3. the object of desire, the great streng th of the buddhas and bodhisattva, 
4. the objects to be adopted and discarded, resp ectively the cause that is excellent conduct 
and its result, happiness, and the cause that is faulty conduct and its result, suffering, 
5. the object of meditation, the enlightenment that is the meaning to be obtained, 
6. the method for attaining that, the path of the tr ainings of bodhisattvas, 
7. the objects of hearing and thinking, the twelve scriptural branches and so forth. 
Our aspiration should not be biased in the se nse of thinking that some of these objects 
belong to the Hinayana and some to the Mahayana and therefore rejecting some and 
adopting others. The objects of hearing and thin king also include the 84,000 aggregates of 
Dharma and the three baskets – the sutra, abhi dharma, and vinaya baskets. We should read 
these texts, think about them, and meditate  on them, whereby we will achieve higher 
realizations. If we think that we can meditate without studying, by merely sitting still like a 
statue with an empty mind, there will be no resu lt. Likewise, sitting in meditation posture but 
thinking about running a business, how to impr ove our painting skills, and so forth will not 
be of any benefit.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4 Training in joyous effort 
A The entity of joyous effort 
B Its subdivisions 
C How to generate [joyous effort] in one’s continuum 
The fourth has three [points]: the entity of  joyous effort, its subdivisions, and how 
to generate it in one’s continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4A The entity of joyous effort 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
652 First: In the Bodhisattva Levels  [joyous effort] is explained to be a mind that delights 
strongly for the sake of gathering virtue  and enacting the welfare of sentient 
beings, as well as the actions of  the three doors motivated by it. 
 
Joyous effort is a mind that delights in virtue. On the other hand, effort in activities that are 
not virtuous is called “laziness” since interferes  with achieving our aims. Here the text says 
that “joyous effort is a mind that delights stro ngly in gathering virtue and enacting the welfare 
of sentient beings and the acti ons of the three doors motivate d by it.” “Gathering virtue” 
refers to engaging in the prac tice of the six perfections.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4B Its subdivisions 
1 Armor-like joyous effort 
Second: From the three, the first is armo r-like joyous effort. When bodhisattvas 
undertake joyous effort, prior to applying themselves, they put on the armor of the 
thought that first delights the mind. Th at is, they delight even in attaining 
buddhahood through abiding only in hell fo r the sake of eliminating the suffering 
of a single sentient being for 100, 000 times 10 million rounds of three 
immeasurable eons. Also with respect to making effort to attain complete 
enlightenment, they wear the armor of th e thought “If I will not give up engaging 
in effort for that length of time , what need is there to mention [that I will not give 
it up] if the time is less than that  and if the suffering is less?” 
 If a bodhisattva wishes to undertake joyous e ffort, prior to applying himself he generates 
delight through thinking that even if it is ne cessary to remain for 100,000 times 10 million 
rounds of three countless eons in hell for the sake of eliminating the suffering of a single 
sentient being, he will do so. A bodhisattva trai ns his mind in such thoughts and puts effort 
into achieving complete enlightenment without ever giving up engaging in joyous effort. 
Therefore, there is no need mention that they do  not give up their effort if they must stay for 
l e s s  t i m e  i n  h e l l  a n d  i f  t h e  s u f f e r i n g  i s  l e s s  t h a n  t h a t  o f  U n r e l e n t i n g  T o r m e n t .  T h i s  i s  t h e  armor-like joyous effort.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharmas 
The joyous effort of gathering virtuous dh armas is to apply ones elf to them for the 
sake of accomplishing the six perfections. 
 
Thus, the joyous effort of gathering virtuous dh armas is to accomplish the six perfections.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The joyous effort of enacting the welfare of sentient beings 
The joyous effort of enacting the welfare of  sentient beings {228} is similar to the 
above. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
653  
The joyous effort of enacting th e welfare of sentient beings is to delight in remaining in the 
hell of Unrelenting Torment even for three countl ess eons for the sake of a single sentient 
being. Thus, it is a strong determination to enac t the welfare of sentient  beings in the eleven 
ways.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C How to generate [joyous effort] in one’s continuum 
1 Advantages to undertaking joyous effort 
2 The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort 
3 How to actually generate joyous effort 
4 How joyous effort is made to possess the six perfections 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C1 Advantages to undertaking joyous effort 
Third: how to generate [joyous effort] in one’s continuum: the advantages to 
undertaking joyous effort. 
 
To generate joyous effort in our continuum, we need to contemplate the advantages of joyous 
effort – that one will not be overcome by distractions and that one will achieve the two 
spiritual attainments (siddhis).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
A One will not be overcome by distraction and so  forth and will achieve the two attainments 
From the Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras  [XVI, 65, 66 ,70]: 
 
Among the collection of virtue, joyous effort is the best. 
Thus, in dependence on it, that is subsequently attained. 
Due to joyous effort, immediately ther e is the best source of happiness, 
Including the supramundane and mundane attainments.  
Due to joyous effort, one attains desired worldly resources. 
Due to joyous effort, one possesses thorough purity. Due to joyous effort, one passes beyond the transitory collection and is freed. Due to joyous effort, you become a buddha, the supreme enlightenment. 
 
Among the collection of virtue, joyous effort is the best. Why is this? Be cause by relying on it, 
we achieve all other qualities. Due to joyous e ffort, we will obtain all happinesses, including 
the mundane and supramundane spiritual attainme nts. Due to joyous effort, we will obtain 
the desirable resources of existence. Due to joyous effort, we will come to possess pure 
qualities. Due to joyous effort, we will go beyond and be liberated from the transitory 
collection, that is, from this body. Due to  joyous effort, we will attain the supreme 
enlightenment of buddhahood. In short, ever ything good comes from joyous effort.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
654 B How those endowed with joyous effort not only develop these qualities but also non-humans like them 
In the Summary of Perfections  [IV, 2c-d] it also says: 
 
For him who has great joyous effort and does not dismay, 
There is nothing that cannot be attained or accomplished. 
 
And [IV, 41c-d, 42]:  
Also all non-humans like to benefit one. All types of meditative stabilization will be achieved. Days and nights pass by with results obtained. Due to the collection of good qualities, one will not decline. Due to aims more noble than human activities, One will blossom like an utpala flower. 
 
I f  w e  h a v e  j o y o u s  e f f o r t ,  m a n y  g o o d  qualities will arise. For example, the Supplement to the 
Middle Way  says that if we have joyous effort, we will accumulate the two collections of merit 
and wisdom and thereby attain supreme enlightenm ent. In fact, due to tireless effort, we can 
achieve whatever we want, that is, there is noth ing that we will not attain or accomplish. In 
short, we will achieve success in whatever we do . Due to joyous effort, non-humans will like to 
benefit us. All types of meditative stabilization will be attained. Day and night will pass by in 
good results. Due to our collection of good qualities, we will not decline, but will only 
improve more and more. Due to aims that are su perior to human activities, we will blossom 
like an utpala flower.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C2 The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort 
The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort are described in the [Sutra] 
Requested by Sagaramati : 
 
For the lazy, enlightenment is very far and far in all ways. 
In the lazy, generosity through wisdom do not exist. 
In the lazy, the welfare of others does not exist. 
 
And the  Close Placements of Mindfulness  also says: 
 
The one foundation of the mental afflictions 
Is laziness, in whomever it exists. He who has the one, laziness, Does not have any qualities whatsoever. 
 
You should think like this. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
655 The Sutra Requested by Sagaramati  says that for those lacking in joyous effort, that is, for the 
lazy, enlightenment is very far away, that is, th ey will not achieve it soon. It is not that 
enlightenment arrives by itself in  our mind, without doing anything  to obtain it. In fact, Lama 
Yeshe used to say, “For the lazy, even wate r cannot reach their mouth,” meaning that water 
does not just fall into the mouth of those who ar e too lazy to pick up a glass of water and put 
it to their mouth!  
 The sutra also says that for the lazy generosity  through wisdom do not exist, that is, they do 
not practice the generosity of giving material things, the generosity of giving the Dharma, or 
the generosity of giving protection, nor do th ey practice morality, pa tience, joyous effort, 
concentration, and wisdom. If someone does  not put any effort into attaining them, 
realizations will not just arise by themselves. It is like the fact that food on the table in front of 
a lazy person does not spontaneously come to hi s mouth. In addition, th e lazy do not think to 
enact the welfare of other sentient beings, and they, in fact, do not do anything for them.  
 The Close Placements of Mindfulness Sutra  says that the foundation of all the afflictions is 
laziness. Those who are lazy do not possess any qual ities on the side of enlightenment, that is, 
the class of the completely pure, which rang e from mindfulness through omniscient mind. 
Instead the lazy possess many a fflictions, which are the class of the thoroughly afflicted  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3 How to actually generate joyous effort 
A Adverse conditions to joyous effort 
B Relying on favorable conditions for joyous effort 
C How body and mind become serviceable that way  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A Adverse conditions to joyous effort 
1 Seeing that one is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas but not engaging in them 
2 The discouragement that thinks “How could I ever accomplish anything like that?” 
There are two adverse circumstances to joyous effort: seeing that one is able to 
accomplish virtuous dharmas but not engaging in them and the discouragement that thinks “How could I ever accomplish anything like that?” 
 
There are two conditions adverse to the generation of joyous effort. The fi rst it to see that one 
can accomplish virtuous dharmas but not to engage in them. The second is the 
discouragement that thinks “P oor me, I cannot do that.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A-1 Seeing that one is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas but not 
engaging in them 
{229} The first has two [points]. 
A The actual [topic ] 
One postpones things till later thinking, “The re is still time,” and, if not that, one 
is overcome by attachment to bad activities. 
 
We postpone things through thinking that we ar e still young and therefore there is still time 
and that we will do it later on. This is one type  of laziness. In addition, there is the laziness of 
attachment to bad activities. Due to clinging to the bad or trivial activities of this life, the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
656 attaining of wealth, possessions, and so forth, we busy ourselves with them. As a result of this 
laziness, we focus our whole life on doing acti ons only for the sake of this life, such as 
accumulating wealth so as to buy a house, furnit ure to fill it, a car, then a second and better 
car…, then to find a beautiful wife or a handso me husband, then to have a beautiful child, 
and so forth. Due to this so-ca lled “attachment to bad activities ,” we continue to wander in 
cyclic existence. Such activities are bad in the sense of being trivia l pursuits that make us waste 
our precious human rebirth. Such activities in terfere with our development of joyous effort 
and the thought to obtain enlightenment. Anothe r example of this type of laziness would be 
passing time in chasing votes and so forth in order to become a successful politician. Such 
activities are meaningless from the point of view of the Dharma, although they may be 
considered worthwhile from a worldly point of view.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The antidotes 
The antidote to the first, [the laziness of procrastination, ] is to meditate on the 
three: 
1. this body that has been obtained quickly disintegrates,  
2. after death one will fall into the bad migrations, and  
3. it will be difficult to find such a good support once again. 
This was already taught before. 
[The following considerations are ] the antidote to attachment [to bad activities]:  
1. the holy Dharma is the cause for the aris al of boundless joy in this and future 
lives;  
2. meaningless idle chatter and the distractions of excitement and so forth 
degenerate the great aim in this life, and  
3. through seeing it to be the source that  generates manifold suffering in future 
lives, it should be stopped. 
 
The antidote to the laziness of procrastination, the thought that one still has time to practice 
the Dharma, is to think that this body quickly disintegrates, that after death one will fall into 
the bad migrations, and that it will be diffi cult to find another precious human rebirth 
possessing the eighteen qualities. If instead we  continue to think that we do not need to 
practice the Dharma now but will do it a bit la ter on, perhaps next year, perhaps when we are 
a bit older, and so forth, we will die before we  even begin. This subject was discussed before 
in the context of small beings in which it was explained that while we presently have a 
precious human rebirth possessing the eighteen qual ities, we will soon die, that after death we 
will fall into the bad migrations, and that it is difficult to obtain another precious human 
rebirth again due to it being difficult to create its causes and so forth. 
 The antidote to the attachment  to bad activities, on the other hand, is to think about the 
fact that the holy Dharma is the cause of great ha ppiness in this life and in future lives; that 
due to idle chatter and the distractions of exci tement and so forth, our great aim degenerates 
and we will not achieve anything in this life; and that through seeing this attachment to be 
the source of many sufferings in our future live s, it must be stopped. These considerations 
counteract the attachment to bad activities, that  is, to the mundane activities of this life.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
657  
Friday morning, 20 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 228) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A-2 The second adverse condition: the discouragement thinking: “How 
could I ever accomplish anything like that?” 
A The actual [topic] 
B The antidotes 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A-2A The actual [topic] 
Discouragement is also of three [types]: 
1. The discouragement that with respect to  the objects to be attained thinks: 
“Since the good qualities of a buddha are limitless, I cannot attain them.” 
2. The discouragement that with respect to  the method thinks: “Since giving away 
my arms, legs, and the like is immensely difficult, I cannot accomplish it.” 
3. The discouragement that with respect to the abode thinks: “Since it is necessary 
to take infinite rebirths in cyclic existenc e, at that time I will be harmed by the 
sufferings of cyclic existence.” 
 
The first type of discouragement is to think “Since the object to be achieved, the good 
qualities of a buddha, are infini te, I cannot attain them.” This type of discouragement is an 
adverse condition to the development of joyous effort.   The second type of discouragement is to th ink “Since the method of giving away my legs, 
arms, and so forth is extremely difficult, I cannot do this. I am not able to give others my eyes 
and so forth. The achievement of buddhahood is  very difficult. I better not think about it. 
Instead I will give it up.” This type of disc ouragement is another adverse condition to the 
development of joyous effort.   The third type of discouragement  is to think “I will have to ta ke rebirth in cyclic existence 
many times, and at that time I will be tormen ted by suffering. I cannot bear this.” On the 
other hand, if we have joyous effort, we will think, “I will remain in the hell realm for eons even to help one sentient being achieve liberation  from cyclic existence. ” Therefore, this type 
of discouragement is another adverse condit ion to the development of joyous effort.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3A-2B The antidotes 
[Accordingly,] there are also three antidotes. 
1 The antidote to the discouragement with respect to the object to be attained 
The antidote to the first one is the th ought: “Even the buddhas did not already 
attain elevated paths right from the start.  Rather they were like me and became 
buddhas by treading increasingly higher pa ths. Since the Bhagavan also said that 
even those who are greatly inferior to me will attain buddh ahood, why should I 
not attain it too unless I do not make the effort?” 
 
The antidote to thinking that we are unable to achieve the infinite qualities of a buddha is to 
think “The buddhas, for example, the previous  t h r e e  b u d d h a s  w h o  h a v e  c o m e  a s  s u p r e m e  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
658 emanation bodies in the fortun ate eon, as well as the four th, Buddha Shakyamuni, did not 
attain the paths right from the beginning but on ly by training gradually did they achieve the 
various paths and become buddhas. Since Buddha Shakyamuni said that even beings who are 
inferior to me in intelligence can attain buddhahood by constantly making effort in 
meditation without becoming discouraged, why would I too not be able to become a buddha 
i f  I  m a k e  e f f o r t  i n  i t ?  I f  I  t r a i n  i n  t h i s  w a y ,  I  t o o  w i l l  b e  a b l e  t o  a t t a i n  b u d d h a h o o d ! ”  W e  
should encourage ourselves by thinking in this way.  
 Likewise, when we are studying and the though t arises “I cannot understand this. My mind 
i s  c o n f u s e d , ”  w e  s h o u l d  a l s o  t r y  t o  g e n e r a t e  s t r o n g  c o u r a g e  a n d  p u t  m o r e  e f f o r t  i n t o  o u r  
studies, whereby we definitely will be able to  gain a good understanding. Since even animals 
can learn to do something, various tricks an d so forth when taught by human beings, why 
would we not be able to learn new things? Dogs , for example, can be taught to search for 
things that have been lost. Even cats and bird s can learn to do certain things, for example, 
parrots can learn to say some words. There is  a story about a group of people who were 
traveling together to Lhasa with various an imals including a monkey. The owner of the 
monkey gave it some food in a bowl. One youn g boy thought that when  the monkey finished 
eating he would leave the bowl whereupon he  could take it, however when the monkey 
finished eating it put the bowl on its head an d went off. The boy was surprised that even an 
animal could learn to protect its belongings ! Since animals can learn such things, human 
beings are capable of learning much, much more!  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The antidote to discouragement with respect to the method 
The antidote to the second is to think: “As long as I generate the discrimination 
that it is difficult to give my body and so forth away, I will not give them away. 
However, when it is time to give them, it will not at all be difficult but will be like 
giving away cooked vegetables.” 
 
If when we think about the bodh isattva conduct, which includes the generosity of giving away 
our bodily parts, we become discouraged and th ink that we cannot do this, we should think 
that it is not necessary to give  them away at the moment, and th at later on, having trained our 
mind in generosity, we will be able to cut off our leg and give it to others like giving away a plate of cooked vegetables. We need to gradually familiarize with this thought and dispel such discouragement.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The antidote to discouragement with respect to the abode that is to be accomplished 
The antidote to the third {230} is to st op discouragement through thinking: “Due 
to a bodhisattva having abandoned negativities, their results, suffering feelings, do 
not arise. Due to his stable realization that  cyclic existence lacks inherent existence, 
like an illusion, there is no suffering in his mind. If he thrives due to physical and 
mental happiness even though he remains in  cyclic existence, despair is senseless.” 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
659 As an antidote to thinking that we are unable to enact others’ welfare, we should think that 
due to bodhisattva having abandoned negativities , he no longer experiences suffering feelings; 
that due to his stable realization that suffering does not exist inherently but is like an illusion, 
he does not suffer; and that he experiences mental and physical happiness even though he 
remains in cyclic existence so despair is sensele ss. Thinking like this, we will be able to make 
the determination to remain in cy clic existence even in order to help a single sentient being.  
 A bodhisattvas sees that cyclic existence is like an illusion and th at it does not exist 
inherently. Seeing this, he experiences mental  and physical happiness, whereby it is not 
difficult for him to remain in cyclic existenc e for the benefit of other sentient beings. In 
general, there are places or abodes in which it is difficult to stay where there are many 
interferences and distractions. However, we should  think that they are like illusions and that 
they do not exist inherently, whereby they can ch ange. In this way, we should try to keep our 
mind relaxed, whereby noise and so forth will not disturb our mind. Instead we will become 
happy and relaxed, thinking “Now I can do in crease my inner happiness by practicing the 
Dharma, whereby my mind will change and impr ove. This is wonderful.” Thinking in this 
way, it will not be difficult to bear the things that happen to us in our daily life. On the other 
hand, if we continually think, “This is difficult . I cannot do this. I cannot bear this,” we will 
only experience more and more di fficulties. We may think that it would be better to go to stay 
in a cave on a mountain, but then when we  get there we will think “Maybe someone will 
come to kill me.” Due to such thoughts, we wi ll never find a place anywhere in which to stay. 
We will never find any real peace or happiness. Our mind, and no one else, will only create 
more and more problems for us. Thinking in this  way, we should try to be more relaxed.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3 Relying on favorable conditions for joyous effort 
Relying on favorable conditions for joyous effort has four [types]: 
1 The power of aspiration 
The power of aspiration is that, through me ditating on causes and results, one will 
strive in discarding and adopting. 
 
The power of aspiration is that, through meditati ng on actions and result s, that is, on the law 
of cause and effect, we will strive to discar d non-virtuous actions and to adopt virtuous 
actions. In other words, we need to develop stab le faith in the infallible functioning of the law 
of actions and results, whereby we will develo p a strong aspiration to abandon non-virtuous 
actions in order to avoid suffering and to pr actice virtuous actions in order to achieve 
happiness. This will act as an  antidote to laziness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The power of stability 
The power of stability is to not engage in  anything without investigating it, and, 
having investigated it, to enga ge in it and culminate it.  
 
The power of stability is to not engage in an ything without first investigating it, but then, 
having investigated it, to engage in it and to culminate it, that is, to bring it to a conclusion. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
660 For example, when we undertake to do a certain job, we should make sure that we complete 
it. It is not good to do a bit an d then stop, as in this way we wa ste material things as well as 
our time, whereby there is no benefit. Thus, what ever we want to engage in, such as study and 
meditation, we should first investigate whether we  can do it, then engage in it, and then bring 
it to a conclusion.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The power of joy  
The power of joy makes one’s undertakin g of joyous effort uninterrupted and 
insatiable, like a child engaged in play. 
 
The power of joy makes one want to do more an d more, like a small ch ild who never wants to 
stop playing or the Institute’s dog, Gianni, wh o never wants to stop pulling on a stick. We 
s h o u l d  p u t  s u c h  j o y o u s  e f f o r t  i n t o  o u r  p r actice of the Dharma, thinking to achieve 
buddhahood, and practice happily and continuously, without interruption. Due to such joy, 
our laziness will be eliminated and we will achieve some result.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 The power of suspension 
The power of suspension is to rest when your body and mind are worn out due to 
your joyous effort. As soon as you ha ve recovered, you should start again. 
 
The power of suspension is, for example, having  become physically and mentally tired due to 
meditating, to stop for a bit, relax, and be ca lm. Then, when our body and mind regain their 
power, we should once again make effort in our practice. Likewise, when our body or mind 
become tired from studying, we should stop for a bit, relax our body, relax our mind, lie 
down, sleep a bit, and then later on once again ta ke up our studies. If we do this, we will be 
able to go on and on.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C3C How the body and mind become serviceable through [joyous effort ] 
In this way, in dependence on stopping adverse conditions and relying on 
favorable conditions, you should undertake joyous effort until your body and 
mind become light, like a piece of cotton carried by the wind. 
 
Our body and mind become serviceable throug h joyous effort. Through stopping adverse 
conditions and relying on conducive conditions, we should engage in joyous effort until our 
body and mind become light, like a piece of cotton blown by the wind.  
 We need to develop joyous effort, the armor-li ke joyous effort and so  forth, continuously 
by eliminating conditions adverse to it and relying on conditions, both inner and outer, 
conducive to its development. For example, if we  have companions who put joyous effort into 
doing good things, we will also enjoy doin g the same. Therefore, this is a conducive 
condition. Likewise, eating a moderate amount  good food is a conducive condition for the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
661 development of joyous effort. On the other hand, if we stay together with  lazy people who do 
bad things, for example, who spend their time in smoking and drinking, we too will become 
attached to bad activities and our mind will be come unhappy and we will experience physical 
problems. Therefore, this is an adverse condition to joyous effort. For this reason, we need to 
examine what is happening around us and to give up things that are unfavorable to our 
Dharma practice. We should take care of our body and mind, thinking that we need to be 
healthy in order to be able to practice more strongly. A monk, named Gyeltsen, in Tibet, who 
was from the same class as Khensur Jampa Tegc hog and Geshe Tashi Bum, once sent a short 
letter to a disciple in India saying “If my mind is  quiet, there exists the state of liberation even 
in prison.” Although he had been put in prison  together with other people, because his mind 
was relaxed he did not experience any difficultie s and was able to practi ce and keep his mind 
happy. In this way, the state of liberation exists wherever we are, in prison or in our home, 
and it is not necessary to go to practice in an isolated place.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-4C4 How joyous effort is made to possess the six perfections 
While training in joyous effort, you sh ould possess the six perfections. While 
abiding in joyous effort oneself, to set others  in it is the generosity of joyous effort. 
The remaining are as before. 
 
When we are training in joyous effort, if we al so encourage others to de velop joyous effort, it 
becomes the generosity of joyous effort. The re maining perfections are the same as before. In 
other words, by abandoning the discordant class of joyous effort, that is, laziness, it becomes 
the morality of joyous effort. By practicing joyous effort with an undisturbed mind, it 
becomes the patience of joyous effort. By practi cing joyous effort with a single-pointed mind, 
not allowing it to wander, it becomes the concen tration of joyous effort. By practicing joyous 
effort while thinking that the th ree spheres – the practitioner, we  ourselves, the object of our 
joyous effort, and the joyous e ffort – are empty of inherent ex istence, it becomes the wisdom 
of joyous effort.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-5 Training in concentration 
A The entity of concentration 
B Its subdivisions  
C How to generate [concentration ] in one's continuum 
The fifth has three [points]: the entity of  concentration, its subdivisions, and how 
to generate [concentration ] in one’s continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-5A The entity of concentration 
First: The entity of concentration is a mi nd that abides single-pointedly on any 
suitable virtuous observed object. 
 
The entity of concentration is a mind that abid es single-pointedly on any suitable virtuous 
observed object. Although here  the text says “virtuous observed object,” concentration 
actually can be developed with respect to any observed object whatsoever. This is mentioned 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
662 by Atisha in his Lamp for the Path . Thus, we can choose any object on which the mind is 
inclined to remain. When we meditate on love , compassion, or the mind of enlightenment, 
our mind should become the very entity of lo ve, compassion, or the mind of enlightenment. 
In other words, we should make love and so forth become manifest in our mind and then 
keep our mind focused on it steadfastly, without allowing it to move to any other object. This 
is one way to develop concentration with respec t to a virtuous observed object. Another way 
to meditate on a virtuous observed object is to visualize an image of the Buddha, Manjushri, 
Tara, the merit field, and so forth, making it s aspect appear clearly to our mind and then 
concentrate on it, that is, keep the mind fixed on it. We can also meditate on the four noble truths and their sixteen attributes by, for exampl e taking any of the four attributes of true 
sufferings – impermanence, suffering, empty, or  selfless – as the object of the mode of 
apprehension of our mind. We should generate  its aspect and then concentrate on it.  
 Alternatively, in order to reduce our attachme nt to someone’s body, we can meditate on it 
as having the aspect of ugliness. For example, we can imagine the body of the person to whom 
we are attached as being covered with holes through which worms are going in and out, or 
imagine it to be a rotten corpse or a skelet on. If, on the other hand, we are angry with 
someone, we should meditate on love for him or her, thinking that just as we need happiness and the causes of happiness so too does the othe r person. In this case  we meditate on the 
virtuous observed object that is love and deve lop familiarity with it, whereby we can eliminate 
its discordant class, anger. When our mind is  filled with ignorance,  we can meditate on 
dependent-relationship, thinking that all ph enomena are dependent-relations and therefore 
do not exist inherently. We should try to unders tand this and to meditate single-pointedly on 
this aspect, whereby we will gain a deeper un derstanding of emptiness and thereby eliminate 
our ignorance. When we develop strong pride, we should medita te on the fact that our body 
is composed of the four elements and four deri vatives and examine whether it is in fact so 
pure and beautiful. We can look for the I that is so proud, examining whether it can be found among the four elements, the eighteen constituents , the twelve sources, or the five aggregates. 
In this way, we will come to see that there ar e many things that we do not know, whereby our 
pride will be deflated. We should meditate in  order to gain concentr ation and eliminate our 
laziness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-5B Its subdivisions 
By way of entity, there are the two: mund ane and supramundane. By way of class, 
there are the three: the class of calm abid ing, the class of special insight, and the 
class that is a union of the two. When it is divided by way of function, there is the 
concentration that causes one to abide in  physical and mental happiness in this 
life, the concentration that manifestly accomplishes good qualities, and the 
concentration that enacts the welfare of sentient beings. 
 
When concentration is divided by way of enti ty, there are the two: mundane concentration 
and supramundane concentration.  When concentration is divide d by way of class, there are 
the three: the concentrat ion that is the class of calm abid ing, the concentration that is the 
class of special insight, and co ncentration that is the class of  the union of calm abiding and 
special insight. When concentration is divided by way of function, th ere are the three: the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
663 concentration that causes one to abide in ha ppiness in this life; the concentration that 
manifestly accomplishes good qualities, for exam ple, the qualities of a buddha of the four legs 
of magical emanation, the clairvoyances, and so  forth; and the concentr ation that enacts the 
welfare of sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
1 The concentration that causes one to abide in physical and mental happiness in this life 
The first is {232} the concentration that generates physical and mental pliancy in 
one who is in meditative equipoise. 
 
The concentration that causes one to abide in mental and physical happiness in this life is the 
concentration that generates physical and me ntal pliancy in one who is in meditative 
equipoise.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The concentration that manifestly accomplishes good qualities 
The second is a concentration that accompli shes the good qualities shared with the 
hearers, such as the clairvoyances, complete  liberations, totalities, masteries, and so 
forth.  
 
The concentration that manifestly accomplishes  good qualities is th e concentration that 
accomplishes the good qualities common to hearer s – the clairvoyances, complete liberations, 
totalities, masteries, and so fo rth. The six clairvoyances, eight complete liberations, ten 
totalities, and eight masteries are discussed in the Ornament for Clear Realizations  and 
Supplement to the Middle Way . They are shared by or common to hearers, bodhisattvas, and 
buddhas.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The concentration that enacts the welfare of sentient beings 
The third is the concentration that accomp lishes the welfares in eleven ways by 
means of concentration. 
 
The third type of concentration is the concentrat ion that accomplishes the welfare of sentient 
beings in eleven ways. The eleven ways in wh ich bodhisattvas enact the welfare of sentient 
beings are: 
1. they enact the welfare by performing action s and alleviating the suffering of sentient 
beings; 
2. they enact the welfare by eliminating the co nfusion of sentient beings with method; 
3. they enact the welfare by benefiting sentient beings; 
4. they enact the welfare of those afflicted by fear; 
5. they enact the welfare of thos e who are tormented by sorrow; 
6. they enact the welfare of those who lack necessities such as food, drink, possessions, and so 
forth; 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
664 7. they enact the welfare of those who ar e unable to find a place to stay; 
8. they enact the welfare through fulfilling thei r wishes in accordance with their minds; 
9. they enact the welfare of thos e who are engaging correctly; 
10. they enact the welfare of those who are en gaging wrongly by making them engage 
correctly; 
11. they enact the welfare of those who ar e to be subdued by emanating magical 
manifestations that fly in the sky, go underg round, and so forth, whereby they generate 
interest in the Dharma. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-5C How to generate [concentration ] in one's continuum 
The thoughts regarding the advantages of cultivating concentration and the 
disadvantages of not cultivating it will be explained in the chapter on calm abiding. 
 
The advantages of cultivating concentrat ion and disadvantages of not cultivating 
concentration will be explained in the context of ca lm abiding. In short, in order to gain calm 
abiding, there are eight antidotes that need to be  applied to the five faults. The first fault, the 
main obstacle to generating concentration, is laziness. The second fault is forgetfulness, for 
example, when we meditate on a deity to forget how to visualize the deta ils of the deity or to 
forget the instructions on how to do this. The third fault is laxity and excitement. Laxity is 
literally a sinking mind, whereupon the mind be comes unclear, dull, and sleepy. Excitement 
is a mind that wanders outside due to remember ing previous enjoyments , for example, events 
with friends and so forth. Thes e two are the main obstacle to developing calm abiding. The 
fourth fault, non-application, is to not apply the appropriate antidote when either laxity or 
excitement arise. The fifth fault, over-applicat ion, is to apply the antidote to laxity or 
excitement even though neither of them have arisen. These five  faults are the obstacles to 
generating calm abiding. They are overcome by ei ght antidotes. The first antidote is faith. Due 
to seeing the qualities of concentration, we develop clear faith in them. Due to this, there 
arises aspiration, the second antidote, which is  the wish to attain them. Due to this, we 
develop effort, the third antidote. Then we gene rate pliancy or suppleness of body and mind, 
the fourth antidote. These are the four antidote s to laziness. The fifth antidote, mindfulness, 
is the antidote to forgetfulness. Mindfulness or  memory is the opposite of forgetfulness; it 
keeps the object clearly in mind. The sixth antido te, introspection, is the antidote to laxity 
and excitement. The seventh antidote, intention,  is the antidote to non-application since 
intention moves the mind toward an antidote . The eighth antidote, equanimity, is the 
antidote to over-application, when neither laxi ty or excitement have arisen. Over-application 
of antidotes distracts the mind, therefore when neither laxity or excitement have arisen we 
should leave the mind in equilibrium. These ar e the eight antidotes that oppose the five 
faults. They will be explained in more detail later on.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
 The generosity of training in concentrat ion while possessing the six perfections is, 
while abiding in concentration oneself, to  set other in it. The remaining are as 
before. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 16-20 May 2005 (14) 
665  
When we practice the perfection of concentration, we should do so in combination with all six perfections. For example, when we abide in concentration and strive to set others in it, 
this is the generosity of concentration. The remaining are as before. 
 
(Oral transmission 12:11-12:23, pp. 231-235)  
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
666 Wednesday morning, 25 May 2005 
 (Note: There were no teachings 23-24 May 2005  due to the annual Nyung Ne on the full 
moon of Sakadawa.) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6 Training in wisdom 
A The entity of wisdom 
B Its subdivisions  
C How to generate [wisdom] in one’s continuum 
The sixth has three [points]: the entity of wisdom, its subdivisions, and how to 
generate [wisdom] in one’s continuum. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6A The entity of wisdom 
First: In general wisdom is that which very  thoroughly distinguishes the qualities in 
the thing that is being investigated. Here it is the wisdom that is skilled in the five 
sciences and so forth.  
 
In general wisdom is that which very thoroughly distinguishes the qualities in the thing that is 
being investigated in terms of their entity and so forth. However, here it is the wisdom that is 
skilled and so forth in the five sc iences. Among them, inner science ( nang gi rig pa ) is the most 
important. The others are the sciences of dialectics or logic ( gtan tshigs kyi rig pa ), grammar 
(sgra'i rig pa ), medicine ( gso ba'i rig pa ), and arts and crafts ( bzo gnas kyi rig pa ). 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6B Its subdivisions  
Second: There are three: the wisdom realizing the ultimate, the wisdom realizing 
conventionalities, and the wisdom realiz ing the welfare of sentient beings.  
 
The wisdom realizing the ultimate is the wisd om realizing emptiness. The wisdom realizing 
conventionalities is the wisdom realizing all the varieties of ph enomena. In addition, there is 
the wisdom realizing the welfare of sentient beings.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
1 Wisdom realizing the ultimate 
The first is [the wisdom ] comprehending the suchness that is selflessness by means 
of a meaning generality and [the wisdom ] comprehending the suchness that is 
selflessness by means of a direct perceiver. 
 
The wisdom realizing the ultimate is of two ty pes: the wisdom realizing selflessness by means 
of a meaning generality and the wisdom real izing selflessness directly or nakedly.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
667 2 Wisdom realizing conventionalities  
The second is the wisdom that is  skilled in the five sciences. 
 
The wisdom realizing conventionalities is the wi sdom that is skilled in the five sciences. 
Among the five, the main one is inner sc ience. For example, texts such as the Ornament for 
Clear Realizations , the Ornament for the Middle Way , and the Vinaya Sutra teach how to subdue 
the mind, how phenomena exist and how they func tion, and so forth, whereby they enable us 
to develop wisdom. The Compendium of Valid Cognition  teaches how to develop inner 
realizations by way of a valid cognizer, that is, an inferential cognizer and a direct perceiver. 
There are five sense direct perceivers, a mental di rect perceiver, a yogic direct perceiver, and, 
according to some tenets, a self-knowing direct perceiver. This text also sets out the four 
reasonings and eight reasonings that establis h Buddha Shakyamuni to be a valid being. For 
example, he looks six times during the day and ni ght at sentient beings to see whether or not 
they are ready to be ripened and, if they are re ady, he ripens them directly or indirectly by 
manifesting in different ways to teach them. Because all sentient beings are wandering in 
cyclic existence due to the ignorance conceiving a self, he taught selflessness. At the time of he 
was an ordinary being, he developed compassion  and then gradually developed the realization 
of the selflessness of persons until he attained a direct realization of it on the path of seeing. 
He then continued to meditate on it, whereby he  achieved the state of thus gone (tathagata) 
or gone to bliss (sugata), in which he had gone  beyond cyclic existenc e to enlightenment due 
to having abandoned all objects of abandonm ent and having come to know all phenomena 
directly and simultaneously without exception. He  then acted to benefit all sentient beings by 
turning the first wheel of Dharma of the four noble truths, the second wheel of Dharma of 
emptiness, and the third wheel of Dharma of di fferentiating characteristics. He taught the 
first mainly to disciples who were Vaibhashikas  or Sautrantikas, the se cond to Madhyamikas, 
and the third to Chittamatrins. In  this way he gave teachings to holders of the four tenets of 
Buddhism. This is what is meant by inner science.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 Wisdom realizing the welfare of sentient beings 
The third is to know how to accomplish, without misdeeds, the welfare of sentient 
beings in this and future lives.  
 
The wisdom enacting the welfare of sentient  beings is the wisdom that knows how to 
accomplish the welfare of sentient beings in th is life and future lives without committing any 
misdeeds. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C How to generate [wisdom] in one’s continuum 
1 The advantages of generating wisdom 
2 The disadvantages of not generating wisdom 
The third is to think about the advant ages of generating wisdom and the 
disadvantages of not generating it. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
668 In order to generate wisdom we need to unders tand and investigate the benefits of generating 
it in our continuum and the disadvantages of not generating it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C1 The advantages of generating wisdom 
A It is the root of all good qualities 
First: In the Hundred Verses on Wisdom  it says: 
 
The root of all good qualities, 
The seen and unseen, is wisdom. Thus, in order to accomplish both,  Thoroughly uphold wisdom. 
 
Whatever good qualities arise, th eir root is wisdom. In fact, the Hundred Verses on Wisdom  says 
that since the root of all good qualities, both  the seen and unseen, is wisdom, in order to 
achieve them it is necessary to uphold or trai n in wisdom. While other sentient beings have 
good qualities that we can see directly, such as the knowledge obtained from studying, there 
are other qualities, such as inner realizations, that remain hidden.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
B The fact that a bodhisattva is not perturbed by good or bad conditions and that he is skilled in 
methods such as generosity etc. depends on wisdom 
Although a bodhisattva gives his own fles h to someone who asks him for it, {232} 
like taking [a leaf] from a medicinal plant it is not done with the 
conceptualizations of pride, discourageme nt, etc., but is done through directly 
perceiving suchness by means of wisdom . By means of the wisdom seeing the 
problems of existence and pe ace, he practices ethical discipline for the welfare of 
others, thereby purifying ethical discipline . By means of the wisdom realizing the 
faults of impatience and the good qualitie s of patience, his mind is subdued, due 
to which he is not captivated by he retical practices and suffering. Through 
understanding, by means of wisdom, the ex cellent basis that is undertaking joyous 
effort, he exerts himself in that, whereb y there is great progress on the path. By 
means of the wisdom relying on a process of reasoning, he achieves the supreme 
joy and happiness of the concentration ab iding on the meaning of suchness. In 
this way, the complete purity of the first five perfections, generosity, etc., depends 
on wisdom. 
 
That a bodhisattva is not moved or perturbed by conducive or adverse conditions and is 
skilled in the methods of generosity, morality , patience, joyous effort, and concentration 
depends on wisdom. For example, when a bodhisa ttva is asked to give away his own flesh, he 
willingly cuts a piece from his body and gives it away. Like taking a leaf from a medicinal 
plant, he does this without any problem whatsoever. He also does so without the 
conceptualizations of pride, discouragement, an d so forth. This is possible only because the 
bodhisattva directly realizes suchness by means of wisdom. Also, by means of the wisdom that 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
669 sees the troubles of existence and peace, his engages in pure morality for the welfare of 
sentient beings. In addition, because he has co mpletely abandoned self-cherishing in order to 
take care of sentient beings, his morality is pure. By means of the wisdom realizing the many 
qualities of patience and the many faults of impatience, his mind is subdued and he is not 
captivated by heretical practices and suffering. An  example of a heretical or wrong practice is, 
for example, due to seeing that in one’s past  life one was a pig and was then reborn as a 
human being, to behave like a pig in order to  take another human rebirth in the future. A 
bodhisattva is free from such mistaken behavior . He also cannot be captivated by suffering 
due to having developed patience through un derstanding the disadvantages of impatience 
and the advantages of patience.  
 Through understanding, by means of wisdom, th at joyous effort is the basis, he exerts 
himself in that and thereby progresses along th e path very quickly. In other words, his 
accomplishment of the path quickly improves. Through relying on wisdom, there arises the 
supreme joy and happiness, physical and mental , of the concentration abiding on suchness. 
In this way, the complete purity of all the fi rst five perfections, generosity and so forth, 
depends on wisdom. For this reason, we too n eed to investigate the nature of phenomena, 
trying to understand their qualities and faults. We need to strive in the practice of the six 
perfections as this has many advantages, wher eas their opposites – miserliness, immorality, 
impatience or anger, laziness, and distraction – have many disadvantages. Although we do not 
recognize their disadvantages, they in fact brin g many problems to us. Therefore, we need to 
understand their disadvantages and then try to eliminate them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 232) says:  
C One possessing wisdom can accomplish without contradiction even those actions that appear 
contradictory to common beings 
Those endowed with wisdom can accomplish two qualities that appear to be 
opposed without any contradiction. If a bodhisattva were to become a wheel-turning king with power over the four co ntinents, that he does not come under 
the power of desirable objects is due to  the force of the minister of wisdom. 
Likewise, although his love that sees sentient beings as attractive is very strong, it is 
not even slightly mixed with attachment . Although his intense compassion that 
cannot bear the suffering of sentient beings lasts for a long time, he is without the 
laziness that does not delight in virtue through being oppressed by sorrow. 
Although he possesses immeasurable joy,  he is without the restlessness that 
distracts the mind from the observed object. Although he possesses great equanimity in his continuum, he does not neglect the welfare of migrating beings even for an instant. All this is done out of wisdom because the obstacles to 
accomplishing them with corresponding strength are ceased by wisdom. 
 
Actions that appear to be contradictory to  ordinary beings can be performed without 
contradiction by those who possess wisdom. In  other words, two apparently contradictory 
qualities, one that appears to ordinary beings  as something to be developed and one that 
appears as something to be avoided, can be accomplished by a bodhisattva. Even if a 
bodhisattva were to become a wheel-turning king  with power over the fo ur continents in the 
four cardinal directions, he would not come un der the control of desirable objects because he 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
670 has the force of the minister of wisdom. On th e other hand, when we see attractive forms we 
come under the power of attachment, when we hear pleasant music we come under the power 
of attachment, when we smell pleasant fragra nces we come under the power of attachment, 
when we taste delicious food we come under the power of attachment, and when we feel 
pleasant tangible objects that are soft and smooth we come unde r the power of attachment. In 
this way our mind is always under the control of  the five desirable sense objects. Contrarily, 
even if a bodhisattva has become a wheel-turning king, he does not come under their control.  
 When a bodhisattva sees sentient beings, he sees them as attractive, whereby he develops 
love for them. However, his love is not mixed even with the slightest attachment. He only 
develops pure love for them. Likewise, when he sees sentient beings who are suffering greatly, 
he develops strong compassion that lasts for a long time. In spite of this, he never develops 
the laziness that dislikes engaging in virtue, bu t due to his wisdom acts with joyous effort. 
Although he possesses immeasurable joy, he is  never distracted when observing sentient 
beings. Although he possesses great equanimity  in his continuum, he never neglects the 
welfare of sentient beings even for an instan t. Instead he constantly seeks to enact their 
welfare due to the power of wisdom. In this way, all the interferences or obstacles to 
accomplishing the good qualities of the si x perfections are eliminated by wisdom. 
 Thus, from all points of view we need wi sdom. Even when doing mundane activities, we 
need wisdom. Without wisdom, we cannot succeed even in mundane activities. Hence, 
wisdom or knowledge is necessary for accomplish ing both the inner, the side of the path, and 
the outer, mundane activities. The more wisdom  we have, the more we will understand the 
final nature of all phenomena, that they do no t exist inherently or truly but exist by way of 
being imputed by thought and name. Some peop le think that if phenomena do not exist 
inherently they do not exist at all, however su ch conclusions are danger ous. Although things 
do not exist inherently, they do exist in depe ndence, that is, in dependence on causes and 
conditions, in dependence on parts, and in dependence on being imputed by a valid conception and a valid name. That phenomen a are empty of inherent existence and yet 
perform their respective functions is not at all contradictory. We need to develop the wisdom 
that understands this.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
D That the two truths are considered to be non-contradictory is also due to wisdom 
The Praise of the Praiseworthy  [v. 23a-b] says: 
 
Without discarding reality, 
{233} It also accords with conventionalities. 
 Thus, that it is not necessary to discard the reality that is the gaining of great 
certainty with respect to the fact that not even a mere atom of the reference object 
that holds the sign is established, and that conventionalities are found through 
deep certainty regarding the fact that indi vidual results arise from their inner and 
outer causes and conditions is not contra dictory and is compatible. Although they 
are extremely contradictory for those with out the power of awareness, for those 
possessing wisdom they are not co ntradictory and are compatible.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
671  
If the two truths are not contradictory, does th is mean that they have a common locus? Since 
the two truths do not have a common locus, in  this sense conventional truth and ultimate 
truth are contradictory. However, there is no need  to discard reality, since it also accords with 
conventionalities. If we investigate the object of comprehension that holds the sign of true 
existence or inherent existence, we will find th at it does not have the slightest atom of true 
existence, or existence from its own side. A tr uly existent object of comprehension does not 
exist, not even the slightest atom. It does not ex ist at all. By gaining ce rtainty with respect to 
this, our mind will not discard thusness or em ptiness because we will understand that this 
does not contradict the fact that all external  and internal phenomena arise from causes and 
conditions, and that actions give rise to results. If we examine this deeply, we will come to see 
that conventionally phenomena perform function s. By understanding the ultimate truth, we 
will also understand that conventionally ph enomena perform their functions and that these 
two are therefore not contradictory.  
 On the other hand, those who do not have st rong wisdom see them to be contradictory. 
They think that, if things do not have an atom of inherent existence, th ey do not exist. They 
hold the view of nihilism. Alternatively, they th ink that if things function, that is, if causes 
and conditions bring results, it is because they  exist truly or inherently. However, for those 
with wisdom the two – the lack of inherent ex istence and the ability to perform a function – 
are not contradictory. Thus, external causes and co nditions give rise to results. For example, if 
we sow a flower seed in a garden, the seed is the cause and the water, heat, fertilizer, and so 
forth are the conditions that give rise to the re sult, a flower. According to  what kind of flower 
seed was sown, a particular type of flower arises. Similarly, when a rice seed is planted it gives 
rise to a rice sprout, and not a barley sprout. The result corresponds to  the cause. Likewise, 
that fire gives rise to smoke also depends on ca uses and conditions. Therefore, external things 
depend upon causes and conditions. In the same way, internally, due to causes and 
conditions our mind becomes happy or unhappy. Due to bad conditions our mind becomes unhappy, and due to good conditions it become s happy. This is how things function. We 
should understand with wisdom that these two – not existing inherently and existing 
conventionality – are not contradictory.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
E That permissions and prohibitions are not contradictory also depends on wisdom 
In the same text [V. 7] it also says: 
 
Regarding permissions and prohibitions  
Some of your words are definite as one. 
While others are not as definite,  
They are also not mutually contradictory. 
 
Thus, there are many different permission s and prohibitions in the higher and 
lower vehicles and in sutra and tantra an d for those seeking the intention of the 
infinite scriptures regarding the two bein g practiced by a single person, to those 
who do not have the strength of intellig ence they are contradictory, whereas for 
the skilled they are not contradictory. This too is due to wisdom. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
672  
That permissions and prohibitions  are not contradictory. For ex ample, while the ordained in 
general are not permitted to eat after midday, perm ission is granted to do so if one’s body is 
not healthy. One can say “Please, Buddha, gran t me permission to ea t after noon,” whereby 
one is permitted to do so. While the permission s and prohibitions may seem to some to be 
contradictory, they are not because they are rela ted to specific occasions. For example, if his 
or her body is not healthy, a mo nk or nun can eat after noon.  
 In short, although there appear to be cont radictions in what is permitted and what is 
prohibited in the higher and lower vehicles an d in sutra and tantra, they are in fact not 
contradictory. Rather, they are to  be practiced by a single pers on. Thus, one first practices the 
common path of sutra, after which one begins to  practice tantra whereby one is permitted to 
do more and more what is prohibited by sutra.  For example, someone with the realization of 
the actual or meaning clear light of the comple tion stage of tantra is permitted to kill a 
sentient being. This is because even though exte rnally it appears that he has killed a sentient 
being, in reality he has stopped that sentient being from creating strong negative karma and 
enabled it to take a high rebirth. On the othe r hand, from the point of view of sutra we are 
prohibited to kill any sentient being.  
 Wednesday afternoon, 25 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 233) says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2 The disadvantages of not generating wisdom 
A The faults of being separated from wisdom 
B Causes of wisdom and so forth 
C How [wisdom] comes to po ssess the six perfections 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2A The faults of being separated from wisdom: that fault that, if wisdom is lacking, 
generosity and so forth will no t become completely pure  
If they are separated from wisdom, the fi ve – generosity and so forth – and the 
view will not be pure. In the Summary of the Perfections  it says: 
 
In those who strive for result s in the absence of wisdom, 
The nature of giving will not be completely pure. 
Giving for others’ welfare is said to be “the best of generosities.” The remaining are applications for the pu rpose of increasing wealth. [VI, 5] 
 If wisdom is lacking, the first five perfections,  generosity, morality, patience, joyous effort, and 
concentration, will not become completely pu re. For example, if we are separated from 
wisdom, our practice of generosity will not be pu re. The best of generosities is to give for the 
welfare of others.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And [VI, 11]: 
 
If the darkness is not dispe lled by the light of wisdom, 
One will not come to possess pure ethical discipline. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
673 Mostly, ethical discipline, due to the absence of wisdom, 
Will be together with the pollution of  the afflictions due to a fault in 
one’s understanding. 
 
Without the light of wisdom, our morality will no t become completely pure, that is, it will be 
impure. This is because without wisdom, our mo rality will be stained by the faults of the 
afflictions, like water is made turbid due to  being mixed with dust. We need to keep our 
morality pure through the wisdom that unders tands that if we commit certain actions our 
morality will become impure. In other words, we  need to apply wisdom in order to keep pure 
morality. If we do not have wisdom, we will no t understand what is the discordant class of 
morality and what is pure morality, that is, wh at actions are to be discarded and what actions 
are to be adopted. Only if we have wisdom, can we keep our morality pure.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And [VI, 13]: 
 
If the mind is polluted by the faults of distorted wisdom, One will not abide in the good qualities of patience; One will sustain dislike for investigating the excellent and the faulty; and  
One will be renowned like a king who is without good qualities. 
 
Distorted wisdom includes the view of the transi tory collection, the view of an extreme, the 
view holding a bad view as supreme, the view holding bad morality and conduct as supreme, 
and wrong view. These views are considered to be wisdoms but they are wrong or distorted wisdoms. Due to them, the mind becomes poll uted and we will not abide in the good 
qualities of patience, we will have dislike for investigating the excellent and faulty, and will be 
renowned like a king without good qualities.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
And [I, 16]: 
 
It is extolled as sublime for the wise. {234} There is nothing more subtle and deep than it. The mind completely unobscured  by the fault of attachment 
Will not take the straight path without wisdom. 
 Wisdom is extolled or praised as sublime for th e wise. There is nothing more subtle and more 
profound than wisdom. Even the mind that is unobscured by attachment will not travel the 
straight path, that is, be honest, without wisdom.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
674 And [VI, 18a]: 
 
If the mind upholds the manner of wisdom without effort, 
The view of that will not become completely pure. 
 
To be renowned as a king implies that for a king who lacks good qualities fame 
may occur one time but, through degenerating, it will pass.  
 The view of whoever does not have effort with  respect to wisdom will not become completely 
pure. “Renowned as a king” means that one wh o is renowned as a king who is without 
qualities will degenerate the name “king” and no one will respect him. In other words, if one 
has the mere name “king” but does not have the good qualities of a king, one will merely 
degenerate this role.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2B Causes of wisdom 
1 The importance of hearing as a cause of wisdom 
Therefore, it being necessary to genera te wisdom, one should listen to the 
completely pure scriptures, its cause, in accordance with one’s mental capacity. In 
the Summary of Perfections  [VI, 48] it says: 
 
Little hearing, blind from birth, not knowing how to meditate; 
With failings like that, how can anyone think? Therefore, make effort in he aring. From that cause,  
There is thinking. By meditating, spacious wisdom arises.  
 In order to generate wisdom, we need to create  its cause – much hearing and studying of the 
Buddha’s scriptures. We should listen to th em, think about them, and meditate on them, 
whereby we will respectively develop the wisdom arisen from hearing, the wisdom arisen from 
thinking, and the wisdom arisen from meditation. If we have little hearing, are blind, and do 
not know how to meditate, how can we think ab out the meaning? Therefore, we need to put 
effort into hearing, then think about the meanin g of what we have hear d, and then meditate 
on the meaning that we have understood. If we  try to meditate without hearing and thinking, 
it would be like someone trying to climb up a cliff without hands. Only having heard a lot of 
teachings and thought about them, should we medi tate on them either by way of stabilizing 
meditation or analytical meditation. All this depends on hearing or study. If, on the other 
hand, we do not study, we will not gain any kn owledge and we will not be able to understand 
anything. Then, even if we try to meditate in a cave or in our room, nothing will happen. It 
will not be any different from sleeping!  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 The wisdom that abandons the two obscurations also depends on hearing 
Venerable Maitreya also wrote [in his Uttaratantra , V, 14-15]: 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
675 Any conceptualization of the three spheres is asserted 
To be an obscuration to objects of knowledge. Any conceptualization of miserliness and the like 
Is asserted to be an afflictive obscuration. 
 
There is nothing apart from wisdom That abandons them; therefore, 
Wisdom is supreme. Likewise, 
Hearing for the sake of that is said to be “supreme hearing.” 
 
And in the Compendium of Trainings  [k.20a-c] it says: 
 
Be patient. Seek hearing.  
Then dwell in a forest. 
Put effort into meditative equipoise. 
 
The two obscurations are the afflictive obscur ations and obscurations to knowledge. The 
wisdom that abandons these two ob scurations depends on hearing.  
 The three spheres, for example, the meditator,  the object of meditation, and the action of 
meditation, do not exist inherently. The concep tualization of them as truly or inherently 
existent is asserted to be an obscuration to objects of knowledge. The conceptualizations of 
miserliness, immorality, impatience or ange r, laziness, and distraction are afflictive 
obscurations. These two obscurations are aban doned by wisdom, nothing else can abandon 
them. Because of this, wisdom is  supreme. Because this wisdom arises from hearing, hearing 
is also said to be supreme. In other words, through the wisdom arisen from hearing and the 
wisdom arisen from thinking, the wisdom arisen  from meditation arises. Therefore, first we 
need to generate the wisdom arisen from hear ing, then the wisdom arisen from thinking 
about the meaning, and then the wisdom arisen from meditation that is equipoised on its 
object. By means of this wisdom, we will come  to realize emptiness by means of a direct 
perceiver rather than by means of a meaning ge nerality or sound generality. In other words, 
we will be able to see emptiness nakedly.  
 The Compendium of Trainings  says that we should be patient,  that we should seek hearing, 
and that we should then dwell in a forest and put effort into meditative equipoise. In other 
words, first we need to be patient with respec t to understanding emptiness. For this purpose, 
we need to hear a lot of teachings and read a lot of books, whereby the wisdom arisen from 
h e a r i n g  w i l l  a r i s e .  T h e n  w e  s h o u l d  t h i n k  a b o u t  t h e  m e a n i n g .  T h e n  w e  s h o u l d  g o  t o  a n  
isolated place, such as a forest, and meditate there, putting effort into meditative equipoise. 
By means of meditative equipoise on emptine ss, we will quickly abandon the afflictive 
obscurations and obscurations to knowledge.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The imprints of training in the instructions 
The holy beings of the past also said: Fi rst you should gather together the Dharma 
of hearing that exists in your mind. Then again and again you should think about 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
676 it, appraise it, and investigate it. Having  forgotten the Dharma, to sometimes train 
in holding and sustaining the mind will not be of help. The great meditators who 
teach the best become the best; the gr eat meditators who teach the middling 
become middling. However much one medi tates, to that same extent one’s 
knowledge of the Dharma should grow. {235 } Once this certainty has become firm 
through such considerations, you will not listen to the words of negative 
companions who say “All virtuous and non- virtuous thoughts are to be abandoned 
because they are conception.” Rather, you will think: “The Dharma does not teach 
anything like that and my virtuous spiritua l friend also does not assert that.” If 
lacking that, someone who has a little bit of faith but no wisdom will burst into 
tears when he sees a face with tears and into burst into laughter when he sees 
someone who is laughing. Considering true wh atever people say, like a river he will 
go wherever he is lead. 
 
The holy beings of the past said that at first we should hear the Dharma, and then we should 
keep it clear in our mind, think about it again and again, and do analytical meditation on it. 
In other words, we should put effort into not forgetting the scriptures and instructions we 
have studied, and instead to keep them in ou r mind without forgetfulness by thinking about 
them again and again. If we forget the Dharma  we have heard and studied and only train in 
holding and sustaining the mind, this will not be of any help, that is, it will not become a 
condition that develops our meditation. In othe r words, forgetting what  we have studied as 
well as the object of meditati on and the instructions, to train in holding the mind in its 
natural state will not be of help or assistance  to us. The great meditators who teach the best 
become like the Teacher. The great meditato rs who teach the middling become middling. 
The more we meditate the more we will unde rstand the Dharma. On the other hand, if we 
meditate alone in an empty cave with an empt y head, an empty mind, and an empty stomach, 
there will not be much benefit!   Once we have gained certainty, we will not listen to negative friends who say that both 
virtuous and non-virtuous thoughts are to be abandoned. If we understand the Dharma very 
well through studying the instructions, we will  understand that this is not taught in the 
scriptures of the Buddha and is not taught by ou r teachers. As a result, we will not listen to 
what others say and will not follow them. On th e other hand, if we lack wisdom but only have 
a bit of faith, when negative companions say th at virtuous thoughts such as bodhichitta are 
objects of abandonment because they are conceptions, we will believe them. We will be like someone who when seeing others cry also begins to cry and when  he sees others laughing he 
also laughs. In other words, like water flowing in  an irrigation ditch, if we are unintelligent 
and have not studied much we will follow whatev er others say. On the other hand, if we 
understand the Dharma deeply, wh en others say something opposite to it we will not follow 
them but will rely on the Buddha’ s teachings and our teachers. We  need to develop this kind 
of wisdom.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2C How [wisdom] comes to possess the six perfections 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
677 At the time of training in wisdom, it should possess the six perfections. Through 
abiding in wisdom oneself, to set others in it is the generosity of wisdom. The 
remaining are as above. 
 
At the time of training in wisdom, we need to  simultaneously possess all six perfections. If 
while we ourselves abide in wisdom, we set others  in wisdom, this is the generosity of wisdom. 
While abiding in wisdom, if we strive to aban don distorted wisdom, this is the morality of 
wisdom. If we are patient with respect to meditati ng wisdom, this is the patience of wisdom. If 
we have a mind that delights in  meditating on emptiness, this is the joyous effort of wisdom. 
If we concentrate on wisdom, this is the conc entration of wisdom. The wisdom realizing the 
emptiness of the three spheres is the wisdom of wisdom.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1B Training in the four means of gathering [disciples ] that ripen others’ 
continua 
1  The entity of the four means of gathering [disciples]  
Second: Generosity is the same as expl ained in the context of the perfection [of 
generosity ]. Pleasant speech is to teach the perfections to disciples. Meaningful 
conduct is to make the disciples engage in  the meanings that were taught or to 
make them engage in assuming them co rrectly. To act in accordance with the 
meaning is, through abiding in accordance with whatev er meaning one has taught 
to others, to train in accordance with it. In Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras 
[XVI, 72] it says: 
 
By according with giving, teaching it, making others assume it, And by oneself subsequently engaging in it, There is asserted to be pleasant speech,  Meaningful conduct, and according with the meaning. 
 The generosity of this contex t is explained in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras and the 
Ornament for Clear Realizations , which say that we should gi ve whatever material things, 
including food, drink, clothing, and a place to stay, are needed to our disciples. This will 
make the mind of the disciple happy. After that we should talk  p l e a s a n t l y  o r  n i c e l y  t o  t h e  
disciple, teaching him the six perfections of generosity, morality, patience, joyous effort, 
concentration, and wisdom. Then we should eith er make the disciple engage in practicing 
them and make one who is already engaging in them, practice them even better. Then, we too 
n e e d  t o  l i v e  i n  a c c o r d a n c e  w i t h  w h a t  w e  t e a c h. If we talk to others but do not act in 
accordance with what we say, it will not be of benefit. It will just be empty words, like an 
echo, that serves no purpose. Therefore, we need  to perfectly practice whatever we teach. The 
Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras  says that we should give to others, talk nicely to them, make 
them practice, and that oneself should engage  in accordance with what one teaches.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
678 2 The reason for the presentation of four means of gathering 
Why are the ways of gathering [disciples] definite as four? In order to gather a 
retinue for the purpose of applying them to virtue, initially they must be joyful. In 
this regard, through giving them gifts of material things, this is done in 
dependence on benefiting their bodies. Ha ving thus become joyful, in order for 
them to engage in the path, initially they  need to know how to do that. For that, 
moreover, by explaining the Dharma to them through speaking pleasantly, they 
will give up unknowing and doubt and wi ll engage in apprehending the meaning 
unmistakenly. When they understand that , make them engage in accomplishing 
virtue through meaningful conduct. {236} Furthermore, if you do not accomplish 
that yourself but explain to others “You should engage like this. You should avoid 
like that,” they will say, “If you do no t accomplish it yourself, why do you tell 
others to accomplish it? You too still need to be corrected by others” and they will 
not listen to what is to be accomplished. However, if you accomplish that yourself, 
they will also newly engage [in the path ] through thinking: “Since he himself also 
abides in the virtue in which he guides me , if I accomplish it, there will definitely 
be benefit and happiness for me.” Also, those who have already engaged [in the 
path] will not turn away from it and will grow firm. Therefore, you should act in 
accordance with the meaning. 
 Why are there definitely four means of gathering di sciples? In order to gath er disciples so as to 
apply them to virtue, we first need to make th em happy. For this purp ose, we should give 
them material things and benefit their bodies by  giving them food if they need food, giving 
them drink if they need drink, giving them clothing if they need clothing, giving them 
medicine if they need medicine, and so forth. Du e to their bodies becoming healthy, they will 
become joyful and will generate interest in th e Dharma. Then, in order for them to engage in 
the path, they need to understand how to do so . For this purpose, we should teach them the 
Dharma by talking to them pleasantly and nice ly. Due to this, their unknowing of ignorance 
and doubts will be eliminated and they will  unmistakenly apprehend the meaning. When 
they understand this, we should encourage them  to engage in accomplishing virtue through 
meditation and so forth. However, if we ourselve s do not engage in abandoning what is to be 
abandoned and adopting what needs to be adopted, others will say “You tell us what to do, but you yourself do not do that! If you do not practice yourself, why do you tell other people 
to practice?” In this way, they will not listen to us. Therefore, it is important that we ourselves 
practice whatever we tell others to do. In this  way, others will think “He practices just as he 
teaches me to practice. Therefore,  if I too practice, I will definitely obtain benefit and become 
happy.” Also those who are already engaged in the path will not turn away from it, but will 
b e c o m e  m o r e  s t a b l e .  O n  t h e  o t h e r  h a n d ,  i f  w e  t e l l  o t h e r s  w h a t  t o  d o  b u t  d o  n o t  d o  i t  
ourselves, it will not be of any benefit. Theref ore, we should act in accordance with what we 
teach.  Thursday morning, 26 May 2005  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 236) says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
679 3 The need to rely on the four means of gathering disciples 
Since the buddhas taught that they accomp lish all the welfare of all disciples and 
that they are a good method, those who gather a retinue should rely on them. 
[Ornament of the Gr eat Vehicle Sutras , XVI, 77] says: 
 
Those who gather a retinue 
Should perfectly rely in this way. They accomplish all the welfare of everyone and 
Are thoroughly praised as being a good method.  
 
Those who wish to gather discip les should rely on the four means of gathering since they 
accomplish their welfare and are a good method. For example, we should talk to them nicely 
and skillfully, using pleasant words and teac hing them the Dharma, whereby they will 
generate interest in it. By relying on such means, we will accomplish the welfare of everyone. 
Thus, these four are praised as a good method. If  we do not fulfill others’ welfare, we will not 
be able to gather disciples around us.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A2 Their summarized meaning 
The great Jowo [Atisha] taught how to  accomplish them during meditative 
equipoise and subsequent attainment:  
 
The vast conduct of bodhisattvas 
Is the six perfections and so forth. 
The yogi arising from meditative absorption, 
Steadfastly achieves the path of accumulation. 
 With respect to how the six perfections are ac complished during meditative equipoise and 
subsequent attainment, Jowo Atisha said that th e vast conduct of the bodhisattvas is the six 
perfections. Thus, having arisen from medita tive equipoise, we should train in the other 
perfections. Although in meditative equipoise on  emptiness, only the perfection of wisdom is 
manifest and the other perfections are not, wh en one arises from meditative equipoise we 
should engage in the other perfections without forgetting our understand ing of emptiness. In 
this way, we will simultaneously collect both meri t and wisdom. If we practice in this way, the 
path of accumulation will be a ccomplished with stability.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In this way, a beginner bodhisattva, who has taken the vows of a conquerors’ child, 
abiding on the path of accumulation ne ver passes beyond the six perfections, 
whether in meditative equipoise or subseq uent attainment. Ther efore, some of the 
six perfections are sustained in meditative equipoise and some in subsequent 
attainment. Some of the entity of concentr ation, calm abiding, and the entity of 
the perfection of wisdom, special insight,  are cultivated in meditative equipoise. 
The first three perfections and some parts of concentration and wisdom are 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
680 sustained in subsequent attainment. Joyous effort comes in both meditative 
equipoise and subsequent attainment. One class of patience – some minds ascertaining the profound Dharma – also occur during meditative equipoise. 
 
A bodhisattva who has taken vows, whether in meditative equipoise or subsequent 
attainment, does not pass beyond the six perfection s, that is, he practice s them all. Some of 
the perfections are sustained during meditati ve equipoise and some during subsequent 
attainment. The entity of the perf ection of concentration is calm abiding and the entity of the 
perfection of wisdom is special insight. Some  of these two are cultivated in meditative 
equipoise. The first three perfections, generosi ty, morality, and patience, and some parts of 
concentration and wisdom are cultivated in subs equent attainment. Joyous effort is the basis 
for both meditative equipoise and subsequent a ttainment, therefore it is cultivated on both 
occasions. Also one class of patience arises du ring meditative equipoise on emptiness. Which 
one? Among the three types of patience, it is th e patience with respect to the Dharma, that is, 
with respect to the emptiness of inherent or true  existence. Patience is needed with respect to 
this because some people are unable to be ar the thought that phenomena are empty of 
inherent existence due to thinking that this implies that phenomena do not exist at all, 
whereby they fall into the extreme of nihilism. Th erefore, the patience that is able to bear the 
lack of inherent existence, the final nature of phenomena,  is necessary in meditative 
equipoise.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
The great Jowo [Atisha] said: 
 
At the time of rising from meditative equipoise, {237} Familiarize yourself with the view that all phenomena  Are like the eight analogies of  an illusion and so forth. 
Subsequently, purify conceptions and Mainly train in method. At the time of meditative equipoise, Do calm abiding and special insight in equal parts and Familiarize yourself with this continuously. 
 Atisha said that when we arise from medi tative equipoise, we should, in subsequent 
attainment, familiarize ourselves with the eight analogies of an illusion, dream, reflection, 
mirage, and so forth. These eight are analog ies for deceptive phenomena. For example, a 
magician creates an illusion by blessing a subs tance, such as sticks or pebbles, with mantra 
and medicine, whereby the spectators’ eyes are tr icked and they see a horse or a beautiful girl. 
The illusion can be so real that in one of his texts Nagarjuna recounts the story of a young man who seeing such a magically created beautifu l woman, developed the strong desire to be 
with her, marry her, and so forth. However, such  magical tricks are not true in that they do 
not exist in the way that they appear. Another su ch example is the reflec tion of our face in a 
mirror, which appears to be a real  face but is not, there being no  face in the mirror. In this 
case appearances are also deceptive.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
681  There are eight such analogies for the lack of  true existence. Using these analogies of an 
illusion, a dream, and so forth, we should see all phenomena as not existing in the way that 
they appear but as being like an illusion, a dr eam, an echo in an empty room, and so forth. 
We should train our mind in this way in subs equent attainment or post-meditation. Thus, 
during subsequent attainment, we try mainly to  practice the side of method. Among the six 
perfections, the first five are mainly method. Thus, during subsequent attainment we should 
practice the generosity of giving material th ings, giving the Dharma, and giving protection; 
the morality of restraining from non-virtue, the morality of gathering virtue, and the morality 
of enacting the welfare of all sentient beings; and so forth. Then, during meditative equipoise, 
we should strive to develop calm abiding and sp ecial insight in equal parts, that is, without 
one being stronger than the other. We should co ntinuously strive to familiarize ourselves in 
this way, whereby we will eventually achieve their realization.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
If you hear about such wonderful conduct, so hard to do due to the mind being 
untrained, it produces torment in the mind. Although even bodhisattvas are 
unable to practice it right from the start, if, through understanding it, you 
acquaint yourself with it beginning from it being an object to be aspired for, later on you will come to naturally engage in it without depending on effort. Therefore, 
familiarization is important, for if you see it  to not be possible to actually engage in 
them and discard even familiarizing yourse lf with training the mind in them, you 
will be extremely far from the completely pure paths.  
 Even hearing about the bodhisattva conduct, wh ich is special, pure, and good, our mind is 
tormented by the thought “How can I ever do th at?” The bodhisattva conduct is not easy to 
practice from the beginning, however we should  still generate the motivation wishing to 
develop meditative equipoise and to practice the other perfections. By familiarizing with them 
i n  t h i s  w a y ,  l a t e r  o n  w e  w i l l  b e  a b l e  t o  engage in them naturally without much effort. 
Therefore, due to familiarizing ourselves with them, there will come a great result. on the 
other hand, if we think that we cannot actually engage in them and give up training our mind 
in familiarity with them, our achievement of th e pure path will be delayed and become very 
distant.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
In Praise of [the Buddha's] Boundless Qualities  it says: 
 
Even hearing about it, produces harm in the worldly.  
By familiarizing yourself for a long time with those practices  That you have not practiced, in time they will become natural for you.  Henceforth, good qualities are difficult to increase without thorough 
familiarization.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
682 This scripture says that worldly people, having  heard about the bodhisattva conduct which is 
difficult to practice, experience mental sufferi ng due to thinking that they are unable to 
engage in it. Although we canno t practice the conduct right from the beginning, we need to 
familiarize ourselves with it for a long time. No matter how difficult it is to train our mind in 
it, we should continue to do so, whereby it wi ll slowly become more and more familiar, until 
eventually we will no longer need to make e ffort in it, it will arise naturally. Whatever 
qualities we wish to obtain, we need to famili arize ourselves with them. If, on the other hand, 
we do not do this, we can be certain that th ey will not arise. However, if we familiarize 
ourselves with them through continuous effort , all qualities will easily be obtained.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
Therefore, those who have taken the bodhisattva vows bu t, lacking a method, are 
not training in the conduct and also thos e who have not taken the engaging mind 
by means of ritual, should put effort into developing the wish to train in it. Then, 
if, having increased their strength of thei r delight in training, they take the vows, 
[the vows] will be very stable. Theref ore, put effort into this. 
 
If we have taken the bodhisattva vows, we need to train in the bodhisattva conduct. If we do 
not do this, we will not be able  to keep the vow purely. Therefor e, we need to engage in the 
practice of generosity, morality, patience, joyo us effort, concentration, and wisdom. We must 
strive in them. This is the sole method, no other method exists. Those who have not taken 
the engaging mind of enlightenment, that is, the bodhisattva vows, should develop the wish 
to train in this conduct. The more we train in  the bodhisattva conduct,  the more our joy will 
arise, whereby we will want to take the bo dhisattva vows. If we then take them, the 
bodhisattva vows will be very stable. In short, if  we practice the bodhisattva conduct of the six 
perfections and then take the bodh isattva vows, they will be very stable. Therefore, we need to 
put effort into practicing them well.  
  
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
 
This concludes the explanation of training in the aspiring mind through the stages 
of the path of great beings and the stages of the path of  training in the conduct of 
the conquerors’ children in general. 
 
This concludes the explanation of the training in the aspiring mind of enlightenment and the 
training in the conduct of the co nquerors’ children in general.  
 We have come to the end of th e translation by Conni Krause and Philip Quarcoo. Over the 
few remaining days I will finish the oral transmissi on of the text while you meditate, as then it 
will seem that we have finished the text!   QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
683 STUDENT : If in a future life we do not remember that we have the bodhisattva vows, do we 
commit the fault of breaking the vow even though we are not aware of having it? 
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : If we take the bodhisattva vows in this life and strive to keep them, 
when we die we will relinquish them. Likewise, if we have the vows of individual liberation of 
a lay man or woman, a novice monk or nun, a probationary nun, or a fully-ordained monk or 
nun, they are relinquished when we die. In this case, death becomes the cause for 
relinquishing our vows. Because we are not bodhisattvas, the bodhisattva vows are also 
relinquished at death. However, in the case  of bodhisattvas abiding on the path of 
accumulation, path of preparation, or path of  seeing, when they die they do not relinquish 
the vows. Instead they continue to have bodhic hitta and the path on their continua, due to 
which they also continue to po ssess the bodhisattva vows. On th e other hand, ordinary beings 
like us who take the bodhisattva vows and try to keep them in this life, relinquish the 
bodhisattva vows when we die. I think it is like this.  
 
STUDENT :  C a n  G e s h e - l a  p l e a s e  g i v e  a n  e x a m p l e  f r o m  h i s  o w n  l i f e  o f  h o w  t o  t r a n s f o r m  
suffering into happiness? 
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO : That is easy. I have had many ex periences of something that happened 
that appeared to be suffering, yet my mind di d not suffer. For example, when I experienced 
the physical suffering of being sick, it di d not produce any mental suffering. My mind 
remained quiet and happy. Most people when their body is sick tend to get agitated and worry 
about dying, whereby they add mental suffering to their physical suffering and their physical 
suffering becomes even more difficult.   I also experienced the great suffering of having  to give up my country and leave behind my 
mother, brother, and sister in order to escape  with my uncle and some teachers. However, 
when I arrived in India I was not sad. We sh ould not be too attached to our family, our 
wealth, and so forth, given that they are unst able, impermanent, and constantly changing. If 
we understand this, our mind will not suffer. We  need to try to think like this. Whenever we 
experience suffering, we need to generate mindfu lness of this fact and keep our mind quiet. 
In other words, we need to have less desire and more satisfaction and contentment. In this 
way, we will be able to transform suffering  into a condition for mental happiness.  
 Now I will give the oral transmission of the rest  of the text (Tibetan text page 237-385). The 
remaining part of the text is devoted to a discu ssion of last two perfections – the perfection of 
concentration and the perfection of wisdom. Thes e are first explained in general and then the 
entity of calm abiding and the entity of special insight are explained individually.   In general, concentration is a mind single-poi ntedly focused on its object. Presently it is 
difficult for us to focus on an object even for five or ten minu tes. However, we should choose 
an object of concentration and then strive to concentrate on it, whereby stable concentration 
will gradually arise. An Indian saddhu once told  me that in order to develop concentration, 
one should visualize a familiar object in front of oneself, gain a clear aspect of it, and focus on 
it. He said that if we try to concentrate on an ob ject that is not familiar, it will not be easy for 
our mind to generate a clear aspect of it and our mind will not abide steadfastly on it, rather 
it will wander away from it. When  I asked him what was easiest for him to take as an object of 
concentration, he said that it was his wife! He imagined his wife in front of him, generated a 
clear aspect of her face, and focused on it, whereby his mind could remain on it without 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
684 wandering. He said that if someone wishes to develop calm abiding alone, without wishing to 
attain liberation, this is enough, and that, in th is case, it is not necessary to meditate on a 
deity such as Ram or Krishna.  
 When practicing calm abiding, some people choose a deity as their object of meditation, 
whereas others take even the flame of a candle as the object of meditation and try to focus 
their mind on it. In fact Atisha’s Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment  says that we can take any 
phenomenon as an object of meditation for th e development of concentration. In order to 
develop calm abiding, we need to choose one object and then focus on it. Maitreya Buddha, 
in his Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras , explained the nine stages of mental abiding: setting, 
resetting, close setting, and so forth. We should try to learn these stages.  
 I already mentioned the five faults and thei r eight antidotes, which also explained in 
Maitreya’s Discrimination of the Middle Way and the Extremes . We need to eliminate the five 
faults by means of applying the eight antidote s, the four mental engagements, and the six 
forces, whereby we can attain th e nine mental abidings. The main  obstacle to achieving calm 
abiding is laziness. In fact whenever we do good things, laziness arises. When, on the other hand, we do bad things, such as gossiping for fo ur, five, and six hours, laziness does not arise! 
It is very easy to gossip. On the contrary, even  when we try to do a little bit of meditation, 
laziness arises and we immediately feel tired an d think “Today I am too tired. I will try to 
meditate tomorrow.” Then again tomorrow we th ink tomorrow and so on, until death arrives. 
Hence, we need to give up laziness. Even when  we do our daily commitments, we should keep 
our mind relaxed, clear, virtuous, and joyous, thinking “It is wonderful that I can do such 
practices. I am very fortunate.” We should not th ink, “Oh, I have this commitment. It is very 
difficult to keep.”   We should also try to meditate every day, mainly trying to develop bodhichitta and its 
causes. We should try to develop love and comp assion for all sentient beings. If this is 
difficult to do with respect to all sentient be ings, at the beginning we should generate love 
and compassion for the people around us th rough wishing them to have happiness and the 
causes of happiness and to be free from suffering  and the causes of suffering. In this way, we 
should try to develop love and compassion at al l times and to familiarize with them and with 
bodhichitta, the wish to attain enlightenment fo r the welfare of all sentient beings. In the 
morning we should think, “Whatever I do tod ay, I will do it to benefit and serve other 
sentient beings.” In this way, we will co llect merit and something good will happen.  
 Now I will try to finish the oral transmission of the text. While the FP MT suggested a certain 
amount of time for the study of the Middle Lam-Rim , it has not been sufficient. However, I 
intend to finish this commentary later on  (January-March 2007). While I give the 
transmission, try to meditate on bodhichitta, love , or whatever you wish, or else recite some 
mantras and so forth.  (Oral transmission 12:10-12:30, pp. 237-247)  Thursday afternoon, 26 May 2005  Try to meditate on bodhichitta, developing it in  your mind. Bodhichitta is the mental attitude 
that wishes to attain  buddhahood for the welfare of all sentient beings. Think about and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
685 develop this kind of attitude. We must achiev e buddhahood and to do so we need to develop 
both conventional bodhichitta and ultimate bodhichitta. First we should try to develop 
conventional bodhichitta by mean of the differ ent ways that were taught before. To develop 
ultimate bodhichitta, we need to think abou t the fact that all phenomena do not exist 
inherently or truly. First we should try to reco gnize the object of negation. Once we recognize 
the object of negation then we should try to refu te it. If we do not recognize it, we will not be 
able to clearly understand emptiness. For exampl e, to understand that there are no horns on 
our head, we first need to understand that, if they did exist on our head, they would exist in 
such and such a way. on the ot her hand, if we do not know what horns are, we will not be 
able to understand whether horns exist on our he ad or not. Similarly, if phenomena were to 
exist inherently or from their own side they would have to be concrete, immutable, stable, 
and not depend on parts or causes or anythi ng else. For example, if this table exists 
inherently, it must exist from its own side wi thout depending on causes and conditions or 
parts. It should exist solidly from its own side , independent and without parts. We should try 
to understand the object of negation through imagining what it would be like, trying to 
develop a mental image or a meaning generality or sound generality of it. If it existed 
inherently, it would exist like this…, but it does not. A table exists in dependence on parts. It 
is not unitary, therefore it is empty of inhe rent existence. All phenomena are like this.  
 Likewise, the table does not exist inherently because it does not exist as an inherently existent one or an inherently existent many. It is not an inherently existent one because it has 
parts. It is not partless. Having parts and be ing partless are contradictory. The partless does 
not exist. Therefore, the table does not exist as an inherently existent one because it has parts. 
Then we should think: the table does not exist as  an inherently existent many because it does 
not exist as an inherently existent one; many exists in dependence on one, and it does not 
exist as one. Therefore, the table is not inhere ntly existent because it is not an inherently 
existent one or an inherently existent many. Th erefore, the table is not inherently existent. 
We need to apply these reasonings to establish th e lack of inherent exis tence of the table. We 
should meditate on this, reflec ting on the non-affirming negative that is the emptiness of 
inherent existence. There are no phenomena that  exist inherently. We should try to meditate 
in this way.   Another reasoning that establishes emptine ss is: the table is not inherently produced 
because it is not inherently produced from se lf, not inherently produced from other, not 
inherently produced from both self and other,  and not inherently produced without causes. A 
table is not produced from itself. In fact, no thing is produced from itself. In order for 
something to be produced it must depend on  others, that is, on causes and conditions. 
Without causes and conditions or parts, ph enomena cannot arise. The table is also not 
inherently produced from other because inherent ly existent other does not exist. It is not 
inherently produced from both self and other because neither self nor other are inherently 
existent. Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom  sets out this fourfold reasoning that proves the lack 
of inherent production from self, from other,  from both, and without causes in order to 
refute the tenet systems that po sit such types of production.  
 We should choose whatever reasoning is easies t for us. Perhaps the easiest is: the table does 
not exist inherently because it is a dependent- arising. We should examine this in our own 
mind, mentally examining what it means. If al l phenomena existed inherently, also my mind 
would have to exist inherently. Does my mind exist inherently? It does not because my mind 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 25-27 May 2005 (15) 
686 is dependent, in each instant it changes. Therefore, it does not exist inherently or 
independently or truly. Therefore, the final na ture of the mind is clear light, that is, 
emptiness. There is the conventional nature of  mind and the ultimate nature of mind. The 
ultimate nature of mind is its emptiness of inhe rent existence. This emptiness is posited from 
the side of the object. From the side of the subject, the mind is a clear knower. It is clear 
because it is not form, it does not have either  color or shape. We need to examine our mind 
i n  t h i s  w a y .  I f  o u r  m i n d  w e r e  i n h e r e n t l y  o r  truly existent, or existent from its own side 
without depending on other, it could not change . Then, for example, ou r mind when we were 
a small child, our mind when we were a teenag er, our mind when we are an adult, and so 
forth could not change. Due to this, we could not learn anything, we could not gain either 
qualities or knowledge. However, the reality is that if we study and tr y to understand, we do 
gain more knowledge. The reason this can happe n is that our mind does not exist inherently. 
It exists in dependence; it depends on causes  and conditions. Due to causes and conditions, 
our mind can improve and our knowledge increase. We should think about this and meditate 
on emptiness. Now I will give the oral transm ission of this text. About 150 pages remain.  
 
(Oral transmission 18:10-19:30, pp. 247-270)  Maybe no teachings tomorrow. You sleep! I sleep! Okay?  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
687 Monday afternoon, 22 January 2007 
  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 237) says: 
Explanation how to train in the la st two perfections in particular 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B Explanation how to train in the last two perfections in particular 
1 Transition 
2 The actual explanation 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B1 Transition 
Training in the last two perfections {238 } consists in the meditation methods of 
calm abiding and special insight, as the perfections of concentration and wisdom 
comprise those two in order. 
 
Now there is an explanation of how to train in  the last two perfection s among the six, these 
being respectively the fifth perfection, concentr ation, and the sixth perfection, wisdom. Thus, 
first there is a discussion of calm abiding. In  other words, whereas previously the first four 
perfections of generosity, morality, patience, and joyous effort were discussed, now there is a 
discussion of the last two perfections in particular . In this context, first there is a short section 
that connects the previous outlines with this su bject, called “Transitio n,” which sets out the 
way to meditate on calm abiding and special insigh t, which is also taught in the Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutras.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2 The actual explanation 
A The benefits of developing calm abiding and special insight 
B Demonstration that these two contain all meditative stabilisations C The essence of calm abiding and special insight 
D The reason why both need to be developed 
E How their order is established 
F How to train in each of them 
This has six points: the benefits of developing calm abiding and special insight, 
demonstration that these two contain all me ditative stabilisations, the essence of 
calm abiding and special insight, the reas on why both need to be developed, how 
their order is established and how to train in each of them. 
 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2A The benefits of developing calm abiding and special insight 
1 Demonstration that all the positive qualities of the Mahayana and Hinayana are results of calm 
abiding and special insight  
The first point from among five regarding the first one: In [the Sutra ] Unravelling 
the Thought  it is set out that all the positive qu alities, worldly and transcendental, of 
the Mahayana and Hinayana are results of  calm abiding and special insight. 
 
First the benefits of cultivating calm abiding and special insight are set out. Calm abiding 
refers to a mind that is stable and single po inted. Having achieved calm abiding, one then 
strives to attain special insight by doing analyt ical meditation on an object. Thus, there is 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
688 single-pointed meditation and analytical meditati on, analytical meditation being what leads to 
special insight or lhag-tong ( lhag mthong ), literally “special seeing.” Analytical meditation is 
cultivated in order to understand the nature  of phenomena. For example, one examines 
whether phenomena abide inherently or not, wh ereupon they are found to lack a self of 
persons and a self of phenomena. For example, with respect to the person, one examines how 
the person exists, independently or dependently. By doing so one discovers that the person is 
merely imputed on the bases of the five aggregat es. Thus, since the basis of imputation of the 
person is the aggregates, the person does not exist independently but exists in dependence, 
that is, in reliance on other phenomena. Afte r that, one examines other phenomena such as 
the form aggregate, feeling aggregate, disc rimination aggregate, compositional factors 
aggregate, and consciousness aggregate. Throug h examining them, from the Prasangika point 
of view one will not find these aggregates. For example, if one examines external forms as well 
as the internal sense powers, they cannot be foun d. The physical aggregate of form is not the 
person, nor is it sound, odor, taste, or tactile ob ject. By checking in this way one will find that 
the person does not exist independently, part lessly, or permanently. It is necessary to 
understand this.  
 Hence, first one does single-pointed meditation and then one does analytical meditation, c h e c k i n g  i n  t h i s  w a y .  M e d i t a t i n g  o n  c a l m  abiding and special insight has the benefit of 
bringing about all the hinayana and mahayana qualities as well as all mundane and supramundane qualities. In short, first one n eeds to develop calm abiding, after which one 
needs to develop special insight. This order is mentioned in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought . 
Buddha Shakyamuni taught three wheels of Dharma , the first wheel is called “the four noble 
truths,” the second wheel is called “without characteristics,” and the third wheel is called 
“fine discrimination,” the Sutra Unraveling the Thought being included in the latter. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2 Presentation of a doubt about that 
“Are calm abiding and special insight not positive qualities of mind [that are] 
gained from meditation? How can all those positive qualities be admitted as results 
of those two [then]?” 
 
Someone has the doubt that wonders: “Are calm  abiding and special insight not themselves 
qualities that are obtained from meditation? If so, how can all qualities be the result of these 
two?  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
3 The response to it 
Calm abiding and special insight themselves  are [indeed] positive qualities of mind 
gained from meditation, as will be ex plained [below]. Therefore, not all the 
positive qualities of the Mahayana and Hinayana are results of the two, however, 
[all] meditative stabilisations starting from the mind [remaining] one-pointedly on 
a wholesome object are included in the sphere of calm abiding and [all] the 
wholesome wisdom minds discriminating  in detail what the nature and 
multiplicity of phenomena means are includ ed in the sphere of special insight. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
689 From that understanding there is thus no  contradiction in saying that all the 
positive qualities of the three vehicles are results of calm abiding and special 
insight.  
 
The calm abiding and special insight are them selves qualities achieved from meditation, 
therefore not all qualities of the mahayana an d hinayana are their results. However, all 
meditative stabilizations beginning from single -pointed meditation onward are included in 
calm abiding, and all virtuous wisdoms distin guishing varieties (conventional truths) and 
modes (ultimate truths) are included in special in sight. Therefore, in th is sense there is no 
contradiction in saying that all the qualities of the three vehicles – the hearer, solitary realizer, 
and bodhisattva vehicles – are the results of calm  abiding and special insight. In other words, 
since this is an interpretive meaning statemen t and not a definitive meaning statement, there 
is no contradiction. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
4 How the benefits of giving up what needs to be given up are related to a quotation from [the Sutra ] 
Unravelling the Thought   
In [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought  it also says:  
 
Having familiarized themselves 
with calm abiding and special insight, 
beings will gain complete liberation from the fetters of signs and taking bad states. 
 
which means this: “taking bad states” [refer s to] dispositions in the mind capable 
of increasingly generating wrong consciou snesses, and “signs” [are that which] 
nourishes the disposition for attachment to wrong objects arising time and again. 
{239} The Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  explain that the former is 
abandoned through special insight and the latter through calm abiding. Those are 
the benefits termed calm abiding and special insight. 
 The benefits of abandoning the object s of abandonment are related to the Sutra Unraveling the 
Thought . The citation quoted here says that by fa miliarizing themselves with calm abiding and 
special insight, beings can attain complete  liberation from the bondage of mistaken 
tendencies and the bondage of signs. The latter refers to seeing all phenomena as existing 
inherently and truly. The adherence to all phen omena as truly or inherently existent and its 
imprints in our continuum are bonds that bind us . Bad states or negative tendencies are, for 
example, speaking harsh words automatically with out the thought to do so or swinging from 
tree to tree like monkeys. The bondage of mist aken tendencies and the bondage of signs are 
abandoned by means of the two types of meditation. This is taught in Instructions on the 
Perfection of Wisdom . These benefits are given the name “c alm abiding” and “special insight.”  
 Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
690 5  Through that you should also come to understand the benefits [when] referred to differently 
However, even if they are not termed ca lm abiding and special insight the meaning 
is the same: statements on the benefits of  concentration should be understood as 
the benefits of these two.  
 
Even if they are not given the names “calm abid ing” and “special insight”, there is still the 
result of concentration and wisdom. Therefor e, the benefits of these two should be 
understood.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2B Demonstration that these two contain all meditative stabilisation 
Second: In [the Sutra ] Unraveling the Thought  it says that all the limitless meditative 
stabilisations proclaimed in the Mahayana and the Hinayana can still be subsumed 
under calm abiding and special insight. Therefore, as someone striving for 
meditative stabilisation cannot get to th e root of all their limitless manifest 
divisions, he should skillfully get to th e root of how to sustain calm abiding and 
special insight, the common principle of all meditative stabilisations.  
 
The Sutra  Unraveling the Thought  says that all the limitless meditative stabilizations taught in 
the mahayana and hinayana are included in calm abiding and special insight. Since the 
meditative stabilizations are divided into many types, to examine them all would be difficult, 
therefore one should try to understand how to train in, meditate on, and develop calm 
abiding and special insight. One should do th is by examining them with analysis, whereby 
one will come to understand the benefits of all the  meditative stabilizations. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2C The essence of calm abiding and special insight 
1 The essence of calm abiding 
2 Explaining the essence special insight 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2C-1 The essence of calm abiding 
A Stating the source 
Third: As regards the essence of calm abiding it says in [the Sutra ] Unravelling the 
Thought :  
 
Dwelling alone in solitude, having pl aced [the mind] within, he attends 
to the very phenomena he has thor oughly reflected on, in the same 
manner he has [previously]. He attends to them by directing his mental 
activity inside continuously and attent ively. The [states] he thus enters 
[into] where extreme phys ical and mental suppleness arise, as he dwells 
in them often, are called calm abiding. 
 One should abide in a solitary place and place th e mind inside. In other words, it should not 
be that the body remains inside but the mind remains outside! One should try to hold the 
mind inside, focused single-pointedly on its obje ct and abiding on it. One should meditate on 
the nature of phenomena continuously. In othe r words, one should meditate in this way 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
691 again and again, whereby one will gradually prog ress through the nine stages of calm abiding, 
such as the first called “setting the mind” an d so forth. By doing this, one day a special 
pliancy of body as well as of special pliancy of mind will arise. When this comes to be held by 
concentration, one will have achieved calm ab iding. Due to the special pliancy of body, the 
body feels very light and one can meditate for twenty hours, forty hours, and so on without 
the body ever becoming tired. Also due to the special pliancy of mind, the mind becomes 
tireless but is able to abide peacefully on  its object without tiredness arising.  
 Our mind can be likened to a crazy elephant, me aning that at times it can be very bad! If 
we check our own mind, we will see that this is true! Yes! A crazy elephant is very strong and 
i f  w e  t r y  t o  h a r m  i t ,  i t  w i l l  r e t a l i a t e .  S o m e  B h u t a n e s e  p e o p l e  s a y  t h a t  i f  u p o n  s e e i n g  a n  
elephant, one does prostrations to it, the elep hant will look around and go away whereas if 
one threatens it, it will feel it has to show itself to be strong and come forward. Our mind is like such a crazy elephant. While a crazy dog or crazy cat is not ve ry strong, a crazy elephant is 
indeed very strong. Because of this, one should try to meditate a little bit every day, whereby 
one day the mind will be able to abide on its object.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B The meaning of this [statement] 
The meaning of this: If the mind stays on th e object of meditation by itself, having 
paid attention to it continuously without distraction, and if the bliss of extreme 
physical and mental suppleness arises, th at meditative stabilisation has become 
calm abiding. This will come about from  merely keeping the mind within without 
distraction and it does not depend on  the internalization of suchness.  
 
By meditating on an object a special pliancy ar ises that produces a special bliss of body and 
mind. When this is conjoined with concentration, it is called calm abid ing. At this time the 
mind is able to meditate on its object, abiding stably without any distraction. However, even if 
the mind abides inside on its object with out distraction, this does not bring the 
understanding of the suchness of all phenomena. Therefore, we also need to develop special 
insight.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2C-2 Explanation of special insight 
1 Stating the source 
In the same sutra it says: 
 
Having achieved extreme physical and mental suppleness, he abides in 
it, gives up [what has so far been] the aspect of his mind and {240} takes 
an interest in the discriminating ex amination of the image that is the 
object of meditative stabilisation and [which is] among the very phenomena he had likewise reflecte d on. Thus with regard to the 
images that are objects of meditative  stabilisation any [of the following:] 
discrimination of the meaning of those objects of knowledge, their 
thorough discrimination, consideration, complete investigation, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
692 forbearance, acceptance, differentiation, conceptualization, and view 
are called special insight. In that way the bodhisattva is skilled in special 
insight. 
 
The explanation of the entity of  special insight has six outlines , the first being the setting out 
of the scriptural source. Having achieved a special pliancy of body and mind, one should 
examine how phenomena abide, that  is, their nature, by seeing them to be like reflections. 
Just as the reflection of one’s face in a mirror a ppears to be an actual face but is not, likewise 
all phenomena are similar in that they appear to  exist inherently and truly but in actuality do 
not exist in that way. In shor t, one should analyze how phenomena do not exist inherently or 
truly but are similar to reflections in a mirror. Objects of meditative stabilization, like 
reflections, should be investigated with an alytical meditation. One should check whether 
phenomena can bear investigation because when they are not investigated they are found to 
exist truly, whereas when they are investigated they are not found to exist inherently but are 
found to exist by way of being imputed by though t on their basis. One should examine this by 
means of analytical meditation. This is done on  the basis of having achieved calm abiding, 
that is, a physical and mental pliancy that indu ces a physical and mental bliss, whereupon one 
part of the mind is used to analyze, this be ing special insight. A bo dhisattva is skilled in 
special insight.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 Elucidating the meaning of the sutra [passage] 
In this regard “discrimination” refers to the discrimination of the multiplicity [of 
phenomena] and “thorough discrimination ” to the discrimination of suchness. 
“Consideration” refers to coarse consideration and “investigation” to fine 
investigation.  
 
After the scriptural source, the meaning of the su tra is set out. “Differentiation” refers to the 
differentiation of the multiplicity, va rieties, or conventional truths ( ji snyed pa ) and “thorough 
differentiation” to the differentiation of modes or suchness ( ji lta ba ). Investigation refers to 
investigating in a coarse way, whereas analys is refers to a fine or detailed analysis. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3 The way statements from other sutras and commentaries conform to [the Sutra ] Unravelling the 
Thought   
What is taught in other sutras and commentar ies corresponds with what is taught in the Sutra  
Unravelling the Thought . 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
The Jewel Cloud [Sutra ] says: 
 
Calm abiding is one-pointed mind, 
special insight detailed analysis. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
693  
The Jewel Cloud Sutra  says that the mind abiding single-poi ntedly on its object is called “calm 
abiding,” whereas special insight is the indivi dual investigation that analyzes its object. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
and venerable Maitreya: 
 
The concepts of dharmas – th is summary, too, should be 
known as the path of calm abiding, thorough analysis of their meanings as the path of special insight.” 
 
Maitreya also says that the names of phenomen a, for example, “white,” that is, the mind 
having taken white as an object abiding single-poi ntedly on it without analyzing, is called “the 
path of calm abiding.” Special insight instead investigates, for example, “Why is it the color 
white and not the color red?”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
And: 
 
Something based on abiding thoroughly in order to place the mind on mind, in order to discriminate dharmas is calm abiding and special insight. 
 The mind abiding perfectly on one basis or object is called “calm abiding.” The mind 
examining individual objects or phenomena with investigation and analysis that looks at their 
detailed aspects is called “special insight.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Based on thorough meditative stabilisation,  placing the mind is said to be calm 
abiding and the wisdom discriminating dhar mas [is said to be] special insight. In 
the Bodhisattva Levels  it is set out just like that and in the Middle  Stages of 
Meditation , too, it says:  
 
Once [mental] wandering to external objects has calmed down 
continuous engagement with the internal  object is called ‘abiding in the 
mind itself
176 associated with joy and ex treme suppleness’. That which 
examines suchness at the time of dwe lling in that very [state of] calm 
abiding is special insight. 
                                              
176 The term “sems nyid” (mind itself) is often us ed synonymously with “nature of the mind”. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
694  
The Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  explain this in the same way. 
 
Setting the mind on its object based on perfec t meditative stabilization is given the name 
“calm abiding.” Examining the entity, characterist ics, divisions, or illustrations of phenomena 
is called “special insigh t.” This is taught in Bodhisattva Levels  as well as in Kamalashila’s Middle 
Stages of Meditation . In the case of calm abiding, the mind that wanders outside to external 
phenomena has been completely pacified and in stead it abides inside on a single object, 
producing pliancy of body and mind. Then, wh en one part of the mind abides single-
pointedly on its object, and one part of the mind  analyzes its object, this is called “special 
insight.” This is taught in the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom .  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
4 Therefore calm abiding and special insight are not distinguished by way of the meditation object  
{241} Therefore, as each of them, ca lm abiding and special insight, have 
meditation objects among both [things] as  they really are and [things] in their 
variety, calm abiding and special insight are not differentiated by way of their 
meditation objects. There is calm abiding realizing emptiness and there is also 
special insight that does not realize empt iness. Rather it is because [mental] 
wandering to external objects has calm ed down and the mind is abiding on 
internal objects that something is called ca lm abiding and it is because of special, 
distinguished seeing that someth ing is called special insight.  
 Calm abiding and special insight are not different iated in terms of their observed object. In 
other words, it is not because of having a partic ular object that one is called “calm abiding” 
and because of having another ob ject the other is called “special  insight.” Asanga wrote about 
this in his Five Treatises on the Grounds. Bo th calm abiding and special insight can take 
either thusnesses (ultimate truths) and the multip licity (conventional truths) as their observed 
objects. In short, since both calm abiding an d special insight take the two truths as their 
objects, they are not distinguished in terms of their observed objects. Because of this, there 
exists a calm abiding that realizes emptiness as well as a special insight that does not realize 
emptiness. Hence, they are dist inguished by the fact that the mind not wandering to external 
objects but abiding inside is called “calm abidin g,” whereas the special seeing of the divisions 
of phenomena and so forth is  called “special insight.” 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
5 How it is inappropriate to distinguish calm abiding and special insight based on whether or not the 
clarity of the consciousness apprehending its object is intense  
The claim by some that the mind abiding non-conceptually without intense clarity 
is calm abiding and with intense clarity is special insight is inappropriate because it 
contradicts everything explained earlier and because this distinction is only a 
distinction between meditative stabilisat ion with or without mental sinking. 
Because, to be sure, every meditative stabil isation of calm abiding also needs to be 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
695 purified of sinking and in every concentrat ion that is free from  sinking the clarity 
aspect of the mind will surely come.  
 
Nor are calm abiding and special insight diffe rentiated in terms of the clarity of the 
consciousness apprehending the object. In other wo rds, it is not correct, as some people say, 
that a mind that abides non-conceptually with out strong clarity is calm abiding whereas one 
with strong clarity is special insight. If it we re like this, it would contradict that taught 
previously. The distinction of clarity and unclar ity refers only to the respective absence and 
presence of mental sinking or laxity. When ca lm abiding is achieved, sinking is completely 
purified. When the mind is free from sinking or laxity, such a meditative stabilization 
definitely has clarity. Therefore, it cannot be sa id that calm abiding is a lack of clarity and 
special insight is the presence of clarity. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
6 The need to distinguish between the realization of emptiness and [states of] bliss, clarity and non-
discursiveness 
F o r  t h a t  r e a s o n  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  i d e n t i f y  w h e t h e r  o r  n o t  [ a n  a w a r e n e s s ]  i s  a  
meditative stabilisation with emptiness as its object and [thus] a wisdom [consciousness] on the basis of whether or not that awareness realizes whichever of 
the two [types of] selflessness as its object. In fact there are countless non-
conceptual meditative stabilisations of bliss and clarity where the mind is not 
directed at that object of suchness
177. As it is proven by direct experience that the 
mind can thus be held in a non-concep tual state without attaining the view 
realizing the mode of being, there is noth ing to contradict the generation of non-
conceptual meditative stabilisations that do not understand emptiness. If the mind 
is held this way for a long time, thro ugh the power of the mind being held a 
workability of inner energies will come ab out. {242} As it is natural for joy and 
bliss to arise in body and mind if that ha s come about, there is no contradiction to 
the development of bliss [without a realization of emptiness]. Once that has 
developed, the clarity of one’s sensation of joy and bliss will brin g on an aspect of 
clarity. Therefore you cannot posit that every blissful, clear, non-conceptual 
meditative stabilisation realizes suchness.  Consequently, since bliss, clarity, and 
non-conceptuality also come on in meditati ve stabilisations realizing emptiness and 
since there are also many meditative stabil isations where the mind is not directed 
at emptiness and where bliss, clarity, and no n-conceptuality occur, it is necessary to 
distinguish between the two.  
 It is necessary to distinguish between the realiz ation of emptiness and the a mind that is non-
conceptual, clear, and blissful. This is beca use there are many non-conceptual meditative 
stabilizations that do not realize emptiness. It  is necessary to examine whether a meditative 
stabilization or wisdom observing emptiness actual ly realizes one of the two selflessnesses: the 
selflessness of persons or the selflessness of ph enomena. In other words, in order to realize 
emptiness one must realize either the selflessne ss of persons or the selflessness of phenomena. 
                                             
 
177 synonym for emptiness 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
696 This is because without realizing one of these clearl y, there exists a mind that is clear, blissful, 
and non-conceptual among non-Buddhists as well  as in the seventeen levels of the four 
concentrations of the form realm. In short, thes e are meditative stabilizations that are clear, 
blissful, and non-conceptual but that do not realize emptiness. However, if it is not a 
meditative stabilization realizing emptiness, it cannot abandon the root of cyclic existence. In 
this case no matter how many years one remained  in meditative stabilization, when one dies 
one can once again fall into the hell realm and so forth.  
 Thus, there is a mind that does not analyze emptiness, the perfect view, and without 
thinking about anything abides very quietly, wh ereby there is no contradiction that there are 
non-conceptual meditative stabilizations that do not realize emptiness. If one concentrates 
without thinking about any object, the winds will gradually become more stable, which produces a bliss of body and mind. This occurs  naturally and there is no contradiction that 
this bliss is generated. Then, by the power of the happiness and joy that arise in the mind, the 
mind will become more clear. In short, not a ll minds that are clear and concentrated are a 
realization of emptiness.   Tuesday morning, 23 January 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 242) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2D The reason for developing both [calm abiding and special insight] 
1 Illustration 
Fourth: You may wonder: Why is it not enough to develop calm abiding and 
special insight alone – why is it necessary to develop both [together]?   To illustrate: if you light a butter lamp at  night in order to look at murals, if the 
butter lamp is both very bright and not ca used to flicker by the wind, you will see 
the painted figures very clearly. However, if  the butter lamp is not very bright or if 
– even though bright – it is blown by the wind, you will not see the forms clearly.  
 
Someone raises the question: “Why is it necessa ry to develop both calm abiding and special 
insight? Why is one of them not enough?” The resp onse to this question is given by way of an 
example. When at night one lights a butter lamp  in order to see the paintings of deities and 
so forth on the wall of a temple, if the butter lamp burns very bright and is not blown by the 
wind, one will be able to see the paintings very clearly. On the other hand, if the butter lamp 
is not very bright or if it is bright but blown by the wind, one will not be able to see the forms 
of the deities clearly. This is an  analogy that signifies that in or der to have a mind that is both 
stable and clear, one needs both calm abiding and special insight.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 Explaining the meaning  
Likewise, if you have both the wisdom  correctly determining the profound 
meaning of suchness and a mind staying on an object immovably at will, you will 
see suchness clearly, but if you do not have the wisdom realizing the mode of 
being, even though you [may] have a mi nd that stays on an object without 
d i f f u s i n g  t o  o t h e r  o b j e c t s ,  y o u  w i l l  n o t  b e  a b l e  t o  r e a l i z e  t h e  m o d e  o f  b e i n g ,  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
697 however much you train in meditative stab ilisation. And if you have the view of 
internalized selflessness but do not have th e firm meditative stabilisation where the 
mind abides one-pointedly, you will not be able to realize clearly the meaning of 
the mode of being. Therefore both calm abiding and special insight are necessary. 
 
It is necessary to examine the view of empt iness with the wisdom that unmistakenly and 
clearly sees emptiness. In addition, it is necessa ry to have the calm abid ing that enables one to 
s e t  o n e ’ s  m i n d  o n  a n  o b j e c t  s u c h  t h a t  i t  a b i d e s  s i n g l e - p o i n t e d l y  o n  i t  w i t h o u t  m o v i n g .  B y  means of these two – calm abiding and special insight – one will be able to clearly see emptiness or suchness without the mind going to  another object. If, on the other hand, one 
does not have the wisdom realizing suchness or thusness, the profound nature, then even 
though one develops firm meditative stabilizat ion one will not realize emptiness. Likewise, 
even if one has realized the view of selflessn ess – either the selflessn ess of persons or the 
selflessness of phenomena – but lacks single-point ed meditative stabilization, one’s realization 
will not be stable. Therefore, both calm abidin g and special insight are necessary in order to 
enable one to see the suchness or final nature of  all phenomena. On the other hand, if one of 
them is missing, one will not see suchness in a stable way.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3 Relating this to scripture 
In the Middle  Stages of Meditation  it says:  
 
Only due to special insight that is  disconnected from calm abiding a 
yogi’s mind wanders away to [other ] objects and rather {243} becomes 
unstable like a butter lamp in the wind. If so the light of wisdom will 
not shine forth very brightly. Therefore you should rely on both alike. 
 
This is the scriptural source that proves th at both calm abiding and special insight are 
necessary. Kamalashila’s Middle Stages of Meditation  says that if one has special insight 
separated from calm abiding, one’s mind will wander and will not be able to abide on its 
object firmly, like a butter lamp blown by the wi nd. Due to this the light of wisdom will not 
shine brightly. Therefore, it is necessary to rely  on both calm abiding and special insight, like 
a butter lamp that is both bright and not blown by the wind.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
And: 
 
Through the power of calm abiding the mind will not be moved by the 
winds of conceptualization – like a butter lamp placed [where] there is 
no wind. Through special insight you leave behind the snares of all inferior views so that others do not shake you [anymore] – it is like it 
has been set out in the words of the Moon Lamp Sutra : “Through the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
698 power of calm abiding you become unshakable; through special insight 
you become like a mountain.” 
 
Due to the strength of calm abiding, the mind will not be moved by the winds of 
conceptualization. Special insight is able to cut through all wrong or bad views, whereby one 
is no longer moved by the disc ordant classes. Similarly, the Moon Lamp Sutra  says that by the 
strength of calm abiding the mind is made unsh akable and by the strength of special insight 
the mind is made like Mount Meru. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
If you investigate [phenomena] with wisd om that is thus conjoined with the 
meditative equipoise of calm abiding free from unevenness through sinking and 
excitement of the mind, you will know the true meaning. With that intention it 
says in the Complete Summary of Teachings : 
 
If the mind is in meditative equipoise you will know reality as it is. 
 
Calm abiding is a mind free from sinking or la xity and distraction and abides on its object 
steadfastly. When it is conjoined with the wisdom that understands the emptiness or the 
profound meaning of phenomena, such a medita tive equipoise will know the perfect view, 
that is, emptiness or ultimate truth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
From the First Stages of Meditation : 
 
Since the mind is mobile like wate r there is no abiding without the 
basis of calm abiding. With a mind that is not in meditative equipoise 
reality cannot be known as it is. The Bhagavat also spoke: “Reality is 
fully known as it is by a mind in meditative equipoise.” 
 
The First Stages of Meditation  says that the mind without calm abiding is like a flowing river in 
that it is constantly moving and never remains on  its object. A mind that is not in meditative 
equipoise cannot completely and perfectly unders tand the perfect view or emptiness. Buddha 
Shakyamuni said that by medita ting perfectly in equipoise, emptiness or selflessness will be 
perfectly realized. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
4 How the power to do anything wholesome is great once calm abiding has been attained 
If you attain calm abiding, not only do you avert the fault of your wisdom 
[consciousness] wandering off while correctly  investigating selflessness. The fault of 
wandering off to [other] objects is even av erted in all analytical meditations you do 
with the wisdom of discriminating aw areness regarding impermanence, actions 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
699 and their effects, the faults of cyclic ex istence, love, compassion, and training in 
bodhichitta and through engaging with each  individual object, whatever it may be, 
without wandering off to something else, anything wholesome you do is very 
powerful. Before, when you have not [yet] gained calm abiding, through wandering 
off to other objects most of the time {244} an y practice of virtue is weak – as it says 
in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior :  
 
A man whose mind is wandering 
is in the fangs of the afflictions. 
 Having attained calm abiding, whatever virtuo us actions one creates will be more powerful 
and, while correctly investigating selflessne ss, all faults of wisdom wandering off are 
completely eliminated. Likewise, the same applies to the wisdom understanding impermanence, the law of cause and effect, the fa ults of cyclic existence, love, compassion, 
and bodhichitta (the mind of enlightenment) in  that due to calm abiding all wandering and 
distraction are completely overcome. One’s mind  abides unmoving on any observed object, 
whereby whatever virtue one creates becomes very  strong and powerful. If, on the other hand, 
one has not achieved calm abiding, even though one tries to concentrate, the mind will move 
to other objects whereby whatever virtue one practices is weak. Engaging in Bodhisattva Behavior  
also says that someone who has a wandering mind  abides between the fangs of the afflictions. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
And: 
 
The seer taught that recitation, ascetic practice, and the like – even if you practice long – are pointless with a mind wandering off. 
 
Similarly, even though one recites mantras for hours and hours with great effort, goes without 
eating for long periods, and so forth, as long as one has not attained calm abiding, one’s mind 
will continue to wander and be distracted, wh ereby one will not achieve much and will not be 
able to realize suchness or the perfect view.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 244) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E How to determine the order 
1 The actual [order] 
2 Explanations on how calm abiding is a precondition for special insight 3 Presentation of an objection and the response to it 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-1 The actual [order] 
Fifth: In Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] Behavior  it says: 
 
Having understood that special insight 
conjoined with calm abiding destroys the afflictions 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
700 first seek calm abiding. 
 
Thus you first attain calm abiding and th en develop special insight based on it.  
 
Having attained the quality of calm abiding if  one then achieves sp ecial insight, all the 
afflictions can be completely destroyed. Having  understood this, one should first seek calm 
abiding, that is, one should develop it first. In  short, first it is necessary to develop calm 
abiding and then, having attained it, one should st rive to develop special insight. This sets out 
the order in which they are to be developed. La ter on in the text it will be explained how to 
develop calm abiding by means of the eight antidote s to the five faults, as well as by way of the 
six powers and the four mental engagements, th ereby progressing through the nine stages of 
mental abiding. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 244) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-2 [Explanations on how calm abiding is a precondition for special insight] 
A Presentation of an objection 
B The response to it 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-2A Presentation of an objection: If you meditate focusing on emptiness from the 
beginning, since you have [ultimate] reality as the meditation object of calm abiding, calm abiding and special 
insight will come about simu ltaneously and therefore th e two do not need to be [p racticed separately as two] 
steps  
In this regard one may wonder: It has been  taught that there is no specification 
with regard to the object of calm abiding – in the First Stages of Meditation , it says: 
“Its object is not specified” – and as ex plained previously there is calm abiding 
with a phenomenon and with [ultimate] re ality as its object. Therefore, having 
understood the meaning of selflessness on e should indeed be able to generate 
simultaneously both calm abiding where through focusing on that [meaning] and 
meditating the mind does not wander o ff to other objects and special insight 
focusing on emptiness. Why first seek calm abiding and then develop special 
insight? 
 
Someone thinks that since the observed object of  calm abiding is not specified, by observing 
emptiness one can simultaneously achieve calm ab iding and special insight. Since it is like 
this, this person asks: “Why is it necessary to first develop calm abiding and then special 
insight?” 
 In fact, Atisha’s Lamp on the Path  says that one can develop calm abiding by taking any 
phenomenon whatsoever as an observed object. In  other words, it is not necessary to take a 
certain object such as emptiness, an image of a buddha, a form, a color,  and so forth as the 
observed object, one can take any observed object whatsoever. In other words, one can take 
either the phenomenon that is the support of emptiness or the supported emptiness itself as 
an object. Thus, if one observes selflessness and meditates on it by means of a mind that is 
not distracted to any other phenomenon, one ca n achieve calm abiding observing emptiness. 
Because of this, this person says that since one can achieve calm abiding and special insight 
on the basis of any object, why is it necessary to first attain calm abiding and then special insight?  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
701 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-2B The response to it 
1 An understanding of emptiness and a mere meditational experience does not need to be preceded by 
calm abiding  
Here the manner in which calm abiding pr ecedes special insight [matters]: calm 
abiding does not need to come first for an understanding of the view realizing 
selflessness to arise, because the view has al so been found to arise in the absence of 
calm abiding. Calm abiding also does not need to come first for a transformational 
mental experience concerning that view to arise, because even without calm abiding, there is nothing to contradict th e generation of a transformational mental 
experience through meditating, examinin g again and again with discriminating 
awareness. {245} For, if it were contradi ctory, it would absurdly follow from the 
same reason that the generation of a tran sformational mental experience regarding 
impermanence, the faults of cyclic exis tence, and training in the mind of 
enlightenment also depends on calm abiding.  
 In order to understand and have a slight experience of emptiness it is not necessary to first attain calm abiding. In other words, in order to  understand the view realizing emptiness it is 
not necessary to first attain calm abiding. This  means that even without develop calm abiding, 
one can understand the perfect view or emptin ess or selflessness. Thus, to have a slight 
mental transformational experience with respec t to emptiness it is not necessary to have 
developed calm abiding. In other words, there exists a wisdom that engages in analytical meditation on emptiness without calm abiding. In fact there is no contradiction in this. If it 
were contradictory, it would follow that some  experience regarding impermanence, the faults 
of cyclic existence, and the mind of enlightenm ent would also depend on calm abiding, but it 
is not so.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 The manner in which calm abiding has to precede special insight 
Well then, what about the manner in whic h calm abiding has to precede special 
insight? Here the context of generating sp ecial insight is that of ordinary beings 
where the realization born from meditation has not [yet] arisen, who are 
generating it anew. In this regard there is a method of meditating on selflessness 
with a special consciousness realizing emptiness, which will be explained below. 
[However,] apart from that, in the contex t of the perfection vehicle and the three 
lower classes of tantra, analytical medita tion is necessary because special insight 
which is realization born from meditation  does not arise unless you have examined 
the meaning of selflessness with discrimi nating awareness and then engaged in 
analytical meditation sustaining [the  result from] that [examination].  
 
So why is it necessary to develop calm abiding fi rst and then special insi ght? Special insight is 
a wisdom arisen from meditation among the th ree types of wisdom: the wisdom arisen from 
hearing, wisdom arisen from thinking, and wisdom arisen from meditation which are 
developed even by ordinary beings. In both th e perfection vehicle and the three lower classes 
of tantra – action tantra, performance tantra , and yoga tantra – there exists analytical 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
702 meditation because special insight, which is a wisdom arisen from meditation, does not arise 
without examining the meaning of selflessness and then engaging in analytical meditation on 
it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
If you seek an understanding of selflessne ss before, when you have not yet attained 
calm abiding, and then examine its mean ing again and again, since calm abiding 
has not come about [yet] it is impossible fo r calm abiding to develop based on it. If 
you engage in non-analytical placement meditation, even though calm abiding 
develops based on it, this will only be a method of sustaining calm abiding and you 
will not have a method of sustaining spec ial insight. Therefore it is necessary to 
seek special insight subseque ntly and thus the sequence of seeking calm abiding 
first and then meditating on special insigh t based on it has not been violated. This 
being so, if in this system the method of generating special insight has no effect on 
the generation of pliancy through the an alytical meditation of discriminative 
awareness, there would not be a proper re ason for seeking calm abiding first and 
then meditating on special insight based on it178.  
 If without having achieved calm abiding one seeks an understanding of emptiness by examining it with analytical meditation again and again, it will not be possible to achieve calm 
abiding based on it. If one engages in non-analytical placement meditation, one can develop calm abiding but still this will only be a method for cultivating calm abiding and not special 
insight. Therefore, having attained calm abidin g it is necessary to st rive to achieve special 
insight. This means that the orde r is that first one attains calm  abiding followed by the special 
insight observing emptiness and so forth. Thus, having attained a physical and mental pliancy 
that induces a physical and mental bliss, on e goes on to develop special insight, which 
increases the mental pliancy and bliss even more.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3 How maintaining a sequence other than this contradicts the writings of the great trailblazers 
It would indeed be very unreasonable not to meditate according to that sequence. 
As [mentioned] earlier it says in [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought  that you 
meditate on special insight ba sed on the attainment of ca lm abiding. {246} This is 
why: the sequence of the concentration and wisdom [forming part] of the six 
perfections, of which it says: “based on the former the latter comes about” and the 
s e q u e n c e  o f  t h e  h i g h e r  t r a i n i n g  i n  c o ncentration based upon which the higher 
training in wisdom comes about are sequences where you first cultivate calm 
abiding before special insight is cultivated.  
 
                                              
178 The implication here is that analytical meditation generates a level of pliancy exceeding that of calm 
abiding, which, however, does not co me about without it. Cf. A. Wallace, The Bridge of Quiescence , Open Court 
1998, p. 125, and R. Thurman, Life and Teachings of Tsongkhapa , Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1993, 
p. 114 and 235. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
703 The assertion that the order is ot her than that of first attaining calm abiding and then special 
insight contradicts the texts of the great trailb lazers. Thus, one should meditate on special 
insight based on first having attained calm abid ing. Likewise, also in the context of the six 
perfections, first there is concentration and then  wisdom. Similarly, the order is also similar 
in the context of the three higher trainings of  morality, concentration, and wisdom, that is, 
first one develops the higher training in morali ty, then the higher trai ning in concentration, 
and then the higher training in wisdom. This indi cates that it is necessary  to first attain calm 
abiding and only after that special insight. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In the Bodhisattva Levels  and the Shravaka Levels  it also says that special insight is 
cultivated based on calm abiding. The Essence of the Middle Way , Engaging in  
[Bodhisattva ] Behavior , and the three [volume] Stages of Meditation  as well as 
Jñanakirti and Shantipa set forth that  one acquires calm abiding and then 
develops special insight. Therefore the po sition of some Indian masters whereby 
you start off developing special insight from an analysis with discriminating 
awareness – without seeking calm abiding se parately – is in contradiction to the 
writings of the great trailblazers which is why it would be inappropriate for the 
intelligent to depend on them. However, the sequence of calm abiding and special 
insight applies in this manner when you first develop them, whereas later on the 
sequence is not specified, calm abiding al so being practiced after special insight has 
been generated. 
 
Also the Bodhisattva Grounds  and Hearer Grounds  say that one first develops calm abiding and 
then based on that, special insight. Bhavaviveka’s Essence of the Middle Way , Shantideva’s 
Engaging in  the Bodhisattva  Behavior , and Kamalashila’s three-volume Stages of Meditation , as 
well as the Indian scholars Jñanakirti and Shanti pa, all say that it is necessary to first seek 
calm abiding and then develop special insight. While some Indian masters say that it is not 
necessary to first seek calm abiding and that  from the beginning one can do analytical 
meditation and develop special insi ght, this is not right in that it contradicts the texts of the 
great trailblazers. Therefore, those who are inte lligent should not assert this. However, even 
though when they are initially developed, on e must first develop calm abiding and then 
special insight, after having de veloped them one can also medita te on calm abiding based on 
special insight. In other words, having attained  both calm abiding and special insight, one can 
first meditate on special insight and then de velop calm abiding base d on it, whereby their 
order is reversed.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 246) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2E-3 Presentation and response to an objection  
A The objection that there is a contradiction to scripture in this 
But how can that be, because in the Compendium of All  [Manifest Knowledge ] it says:  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
704 Some have attained special insight, but not calm abiding. They strive 
for calm abiding based on special insight. 
 
If you wonder how this is [so], 
 
The Compendium of All  Manifest Knowledge  says that some people who have achieved special 
insight but not calm abiding strive to achi eve calm abiding based on special insight. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B The response overcoming that fault [pointing out] the need to distinguish between calm abiding of 
actual level and that which belongs to the preparatory level 
it is not [about] those who have not a ttained calm abiding belonging to the 
preparatory level of the first concentratio n, but rather [about ] those who have not 
attained calm abiding of the actual leve l of the first concentration and above. 
Moreover, upon direct realization of the four truths, calm abiding of the first 
concentration and above are achieved based on that.  
 
Those who first develop special insight and then  seek calm abiding are not those who have 
not attained the calm abiding included in the preparatory level, but those who have not attained the calm abiding included in an actual  concentration. There is calm abiding included 
in a preparation and calm abiding included in an actual concentration. When the four noble 
truths are realized directly, one achieves the calm  abiding of the first concentration and above.  
 
For in the Actual Basis of the Levels  it says:  
 
Apart from that, [it is possible that] someone with perfect understanding of suffering [and so on] up to the path as they really are has not [yet] attained the first concen tration or anything above. As soon 
as {247} that [concentration] is pres ent they place the mind and do not 
analyze. Based on exactly that specia l wisdom they combine it with the 
special state of mind. 
 To simplify the terminology, nine [diffe rent] minds are loosely called calm abiding 
and the four types of investigation
179 are called special insi ght. However, actual 
calm abiding and special insight, as will  be shown [later], must be posited [as 
occurring] after the development of pliancy. 
 There are those who have understood the four no ble truths – true sufferings, true origins, 
true cessations, and true paths – but who have not attained the first concentration. Special 
wisdom needs to be combined with the mind of the first concentrat ion. This means that 
when talking very roughly, ther e are nine mental stages that are loosely called “calm abiding” 
even though they are not actual calm abiding.  These nine stages include setting, continuous 
                                             
 
179 Investigation of phenomena from the point of view  of their nature, the performance of functions, 
dependence and logical establishment. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
705 setting, resetting, close setting, and so forth,  which are at times called “calm abiding.” 
Similarly the four types of thorough differentiation are also loosely called “special insight” 
even though they are not actual  special insight. However, in order to develop actual calm 
abiding and actual special insight, it is necessary to first develop pliancy. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 247) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F The individual manners of training 
1 How to train in calm abiding 
2 How to train in special insight  
3 How to couple the two 
The sixth one has three points: how to tr ain in calm abiding, how to train in 
special insight and how to couple the two. 
 
Tuesday afternoon, 23 January 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 247) says: 
Explanation of how to train in calm abiding, the essence of concentration 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1 How to train in calm abiding 
A Attending to the prerequisites for calm abiding 
B How to develop calm abiding based on that 
C The measure for the accomplishment of calm abiding through meditation 
The first one has three points: attending to  the prerequisites for calm abiding, how 
to develop calm abiding based on that, an d the measure for the accomplishment of 
calm abiding through meditation. 
 
Calm abiding is the entity of concentration ( bsam gtan ). 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1A Attending to the prerequisites for calm abiding 
The first one has six points.  
1 Staying in a favourable environment 
As regards staying in a favourable enviro nment the five desirable qualities of the 
environment are: easy access to food, clothi ng and the like, in the sense that they 
can be obtained without trouble, a good location in the sense that predators and 
other wild creatures as well as enemies and so  on do not live there, good soil in the 
sense that it does not does not breed dise ases, good company in the sense that one 
has companions of equal ethical discipline  and views, and being well endowed in 
the sense that during the day there are fe w people [around] and at night there is 
little noise.  
 
The place in which one trains in calm abiding sh ould be conducive in that it possesses five 
qualities: 1. the necessities for life such as food and clothing are easily found,  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
706 2. it is free from wild animals as well as  enemies such as bandits and so forth, 
3. it has good earth that does not cause sickness in the body,  
4. there are companions with similar morality  and views who are good friends that do not 
cause problems, and 
5. there are not many people duri ng the day and little noise at ni ght such as that of strongly 
flowing rivers, strongly blowing wind, th e howling of animals, and so forth. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In Ornament of the Sutras  it says: 
 
A place for intelligent people’s attainments 
has good access, a good location,  
good soil as well as good companions 
and comfortable conditions for yoga. 
 
I t  s ho u ld  be a place w her e i t  i s  eas y t o  fi n d  food, such as vegetables, and water, as well as 
clo t hin g. It  s ho uld be  a n ice pl a ce, t h at  h a s good earth, where there are good companions 
who take care of and help one, and all the necessities for one’s comfort are present.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 Few desires 
Few desires: no special attachment to good or numerous robes etc.  
 
In addition, one should have few desires, for ex ample, if one is a monk one should not have 
excessive attachment to possessi ng good and numerous robes. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3 Contentment 
Contentment: always to be satisfied with any [old] robes etc. that serve their 
purpose. 
 
One should be satisfied with what one has, fo r example, if one is a monk one should be 
satisfied with having enough robes to keep out the cold.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
4 Complete abstention from many activities 
{248} Complete abstention from many activities: completely to give up 
unwholesome activities like trading, as well as excessive association with householders and the ordained, practicing medicine and astrology. 
 
One should abandon many activities, meaning that one should give up bad activities such as business, that is, non-Dharma or mundane activities, which involve cheating others, 
bargaining with others, and so forth. One should also give up excessive association with 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
707 householders and the ordained due to which on e engages in meaningless talk, and also give 
up practicing medicine and astrology for money.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
5 Pure ethical discipline 
Pure ethical discipline: with regard to one’s pratimoksha and bodhisattva vows, 
not to breach the basis of the trainings through anything unwholesome either by 
nature or by commitment, and if one care lessly does, to restore it quickly through 
regret in accordance with the teachings.  
 
One should keep pure morality which involves safeguarding the vows of individual liberation 
and bodhisattva vows as well as abandoning th e natural and formulated misdeeds. If one 
engages in these activities out of carelessness, one should imme diately generate regret for it 
and purify it. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
6 Complete abstention from  thoughts of desire 
Complete abstention from thoughts of desi re etc.: you should give up all thoughts 
o f  d e s i r e  e i t h e r  b y  m e d i t a t i n g  o n  b e i n g  k i l l e d  o r  b o u n d  i n  t h i s  l i f e  a n d  o n  
disadvantages of future lives such as going to bad realms, or you should meditate 
thinking ‘All the pleasant and unpleasant things of cyclic existence are subject to 
destruction and impermanent. If I will surely  be separated from all of them before 
long why do I get totally attached and so on?’  
 
One should completely abandon the conceptualizations of desire and so forth. One should 
meditate on the faults of this life, such as being killed, bound, and so forth, and on where 
one will be reborn in the future. In this way,  one should contemplate the many disadvantages 
of negative actions. One should think that ever ything, both the attractive and unattractive, in 
cyclic existence is impermanent and will chan ge. One should ask oneself: “Since I will 
definitely be separated from them because of not remaining in this life for long, why be 
attached to attractive things and so forth?” Thinking in this way one should abandon the 
conceptualizations of desire.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In Lamp on the Path  it says:  
 
Even if you exert yourself greatly, 
even for a thousand years, if calm abiding’s limb is impaired meditative stabilisation will not be achieved. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
708 In this context the “limbs” or “branches” of calm  abiding refer to the causes of calm abiding. 
No matter how much effort one exerts, even for a thousand years, if these causes degenerate 
one will not achieve meditative stabilization. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
For those with the heartfelt wish to achi eve the meditative stabilization of calm 
abiding and special insight it is therefor e essential to strive for the thirteen 
prerequisites set out in the Shravaka Levels  etc.  
 
Those who wish from their heart to achieve the meditative stabilization of calm abiding and 
special insight must strive in the collection of their respective causes, thirteen of which are 
mentioned in the Hearer Grounds .  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 248) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B How to develop calm abiding based on that 
1 The preliminaries 
2 The main part 
The second one has two points: the preliminaries and the main part.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B1 The preliminaries 
First: You should long cultivate the six preparatory practices explained earlier as 
well as the mind of enlightenment and, as  part of that, also practice the core 
meditation topics shared with lesser and intermediate beings.  
 
One should do the six preparatory practices that were explained earlier on in the text, cultivate the mind of enlightenment, and tr ain in the common paths of small and middling 
beings. The path of small beings consists in re lying on a spiritual teacher, contemplating the 
precious human rebirth endowed with the eighteen  qualities, the difficulty of finding it, its 
meaningfulness, and so forth. One should do a gl ance meditation very briefly on these topics. 
For example, one should think about the eigh t non-leisures and the ten endowments. The 
eight non-leisures include the four non-human st ates of being born as a hell being, a hungry 
g h o s t ,  a n  a n i m a l ,  o r  a  l o n g - l i f e  g o d .  I n  a d d i t i o n ,  o n e  i s  f r e e  f r o m  h a v i n g  b e e n  b o r n  i n  a  barbaric land lacking in culture and religion, one has not been born in a dark eon when a 
buddha has not given teachings, one has not b een born deaf and mute, and one does not 
hold wrong views such as thinking that the law of cause and effect, past and future lives, and 
the Three Jewels do not exist. One should thin k about this and conclude “I am very lucky,” 
thereby lifting up one’s mind with this thought.   Among the ten endowments, five are from a pe rsonal point of view and five are from a 
circumstantial point of view. At the moment we have all ten of them bu t they are difficult to 
find again and, although extremely us eful, they quickly come to an end. 
 One should then do the nine-round medita tion on death-impermanence. All beings who 
are born will definitely die, the time of death is uncertain, and at the time of death all that 
will help one is one’s Dharma practice. At that  time one’s relatives and friends, one’s wealth, 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
709 and even one’s body will not be of any help and will have to be left behind. Thinking about 
this, one should determine to pr actice the Dharma right now.  
 Then one should think about the fact that if  has created non-virtuous actions, one will be 
reborn in the lower realms, for example, in on e of the eight hot or eight cold hells, in a 
neighboring hell, or in a peripheral hell. Right now we are very lucky to not have been born 
there. One can also be born as a hungry ghost with inner or outer obstructions or with both 
inner and outer obstructions. One can also be bo rn as an animal, for example, as one of the 
numerous animals crowding the ocean or as on e of the animals who li ve scattered on the 
earth together with human beings such as a cow, buffalo, and so forth, or as a dog, a cat, a 
bird, and so forth. Animals engage in killing  each other and are unable to practice the 
Dharma due to their stupidity. We are lucky to  have escaped such a rebirth, but one should 
ask oneself: “If I were reborn in the future in  one of these realms how could I bear it?”  
 Thinking like this, one should determine to give up creating non-virtuous karma such as 
the three non-virtuous actions of body, the four of speech, and the three of mind. Even 
though one cannot block the actions of mind physically, one should apply mindfulness and 
introspection in order to do so. In this way on e will be reborn in the good migrations as a 
human or god. However, even if one is reborn as a human or god,  such a rebirth is still within 
cyclic existence. Therefore, one needs to th ink about the path of middling beings which 
includes meditation on the four noble truths and their sixteen attributes. One should begin 
by recognizing sufferings. Then one should th ink about the causes of sufferings, karma and 
afflictions, which are to be abandoned. Ho w are they abandoned? By actualizing true 
cessations. How is this done? By  meditating true paths. Howeve r, this cannot be done right 
from the beginning so one needs to practice the higher training in morality, the higher 
training in concentration, and the higher trai ning in wisdom. By doing so, one will come to 
realize selflessness, whereby one can abandon the afflictions and achieve the state of liberation 
or the state of foe-destroyer. One should de termine to abandon the sufferings of cyclic 
existence in this way. But then  one should think remember that  one’s mother sentient beings 
are also suffering in cyclic existence and, th erefore, generate love and compassion for all 
sentient beings and develop the mind of en lightenment, the mahayana mind. Then one 
should about the fact that if on e follows the sutra path it will ta ke a very long time to attain 
enlightenment. Because of this, one should  engage in the uncommon path of tantra, 
especially highest yoga tantra, in order to be able to quickly achieve buddhahood in order to 
be of benefit to all sentient beings. One should  think about and meditate on these topics in 
this way.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2 The main part 
A What body posture to meditate in  
B Explanation of the stages of meditation themselves 
The second one has two points: what body posture to meditate in and explanation 
of the stages of meditation themselves.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2A What body posture to meditate in 
F i r s t :  A s  i t  s a y s  i n  Stages of Meditation  you should [settle down] on a very 
comfortable smooth seat [and] {249} ad opt a body posture with the eight 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
710 characteristics: The legs are fully crossed or half-crossed, which is also allowed. 
That is how you should sit. The eyes focu s on the tip of the nose, neither too open 
nor too closed. You sit with the body straig htened up [so it is fully] erect rather 
than too bent and crooked and mindfu lness should be placed inward. The 
shoulders are straight at the same level. The head is not [too] high nor [too] low 
and held without tilting to one side – yo u are erect from the nose [down] to the 
navel. The teeth and lips are held naturall y, as they usually are. The tongue is 
placed near the upper teeth. As regard s the breath, exhalation and inhalation 
should not be allowed to make any sound, be forceful, or uncontrolled. Rather, its 
coming and going always follows effort lessly in a relaxed manner – without any 
sensation. That is the way to do it. In ac cordance with that you should first of all 
achieve the body position with eight [c haracteristics] and especially gentle 
breathing, the way it has been explained.  
 
What should one’s body posture be while training in calm abiding? The Stages of Meditation  
says that one should sit on a soft and co mfortable cushion in the Vairochana posture 
possessing the eight attributes: 
1. one’s legs should be in the fully crossed or half crossed position, like we are sitting here; 
2. one’s eyes should neither be open too wide or  completely closed, but should be half closed 
while looking at the tip of the nose; 3. one’s body should not be either leaning backward or bending forward but should be 
upright with mindfulness placed inward; 
4. one’s shoulders should be at the same leve l, without one being higher than the other; 
5. one’s head should not be held either too high  or too low or tilted to one side, but should 
be very straight, forming a straight line fr om the tip of the nose down to the navel; 
6. one’s teeth and lips should be in the natu ral position (without baring one’s teeth!); 
7. the tip of one’s tongue should rest against th e upper palate so as to prevent saliva forming 
and becoming thirsty; 8. one’s breathing, inhalation and exhalation, sh ould not be strong and noisy (like snoring!), 
rather one should breath in an d out very normally, without fo rce, such that others cannot 
hear it, that is, one should breath slowly and gently, without effort.  
It is important right from the beginning to sit in  this posture with the eight attributes and to 
breath normally.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B Explanation of the stages of meditation themselves 
1 Transition 
2 The actual [explanation] 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-1 Transition 
Second: The majority of Lam-rim [text]s te ach the achievement of calm abiding by 
way of eight [conditional] factors180 [for] giving up five faults, set out in 
[Discrimination of ] the Middle and Extremes . On top of that, instructions from Geshe 
Lagsorwa’s lineage explain the need to achieve the six powers, four attentions, and 
                                              
180 i.e., “antidotes” 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
711 the nine minds explained in the Shravaka Levels . The venerable Maitreya in his 
Ornament of the Sutras  and [ Discrimination of ] the Middle and Extremes  also sets out 
the nine means of stabilizing the mind an d the eight [compositional] factors [for] 
giving up [faults]. Following them Indian  scholars like Haribhadra, Kamalashila, 
and Shantipa have also [written] many co mpositions on the stages of achieving 
meditative stabilisation. In the Mantr ayana too, you need to know them. In 
particular the shortcomings of meditative stabilisation such as the five faults and 
the way to eliminate them is fully illumi nated by scriptures pertaining to the 
collection of sutras.  
 
Most texts on the Stages of the Path teach that  calm abiding is attained through abandoning 
the five faults by means of the eight antido tes. The instructions from Geshe Lagsorwa’s 
lineage say that one needs to achieve the six powers and four attentions or four mental 
engagements as well as the nine mental abidings  in order to attain calm abiding. Maitreya’s 
Ornament of the Sutras  and Discrimination of  the Middle and Extremes  set out nine methods of 
mental abiding and the eight factors for abando ning faults. The Indian scholars who followed 
them also wrote about achieving meditative stabil iz at ion . It  is als o n eces s ary t o  kn o w  t hes e 
subject in the context of tantra. The five fa ults of meditative stabilization and how to 
eliminate them are taught more exte nsively in sutra than in tantra. 
 The five faults are:  1. laziness (we are often lazy!), which has four antidotes; 2. forgetfulness, its antidote is mindfulness; 3. laxity and excitement, their antidote is introspection; 4. non-application of the antidote when these faults arise, its antidote is intention which 
moves the mind to the antidote; and 5. over-application of an antidote when no fa ult has arisen, its antidote is equanimity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2 The actual [explanation 
A How to generate flawless meditative stabilisation 
B The stages of mental abiding arising on its basis  
This one has two points: {250} How to ge nerate flawless meditative stabilization 
and the stages of mental abiding arising on its basis. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A How to genera te flawless meditative stabilization 
1 What to do before focusing the mind on the meditation object  
2 What to do while focusing the mind on the meditation object 
3 What to do after focusing the mind on the meditation object  
The first one has three points: what to d o  b e f o r e  f o c u s i n g  t h e  m i n d  o n  t h e  
meditation object, what to do while focu sing the mind on the meditation object, 
and what to do after focusing the mind on the meditation object.  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A1 What to do before focusing the mind on the meditation object 
A The need to rely on antidotes to laziness at the outset  
First: If you cannot put an end to lazine ss which does not rejoice in concentration 
but rather delights in its opposite, from th e beginning it will not let you engage in 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
712 concentration and even if you achieve [con centration] once it will not possibly be 
persistent and therefore deteriorate quic kly. For that reason it is of major 
importance to put and end to laziness at the outset.  
 
Initially one needs to strive to eliminate laziness by applying its antidotes. This is because if 
one is not able to stop the laziness that does not enjoy meditation but enjoys its discordant 
classes, right from the beginning one will not en gage in meditative stabilization, and even if 
one engages in meditative stabilization one will not do so continually and it will quickly 
degenerate. Therefore, right from the very be ginning the essential point is to eliminate 
laziness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B Individual explanation of the four antidotes 
In this regard, once you achieve pliancy where body and mind expand with bliss, 
there will be no [more] weariness day or ni ght with regard to training in what is 
wholesome and therefore laziness will have be en stopped. To generate it there is a 
need for the ability continuously to create  joyous effort with respect to the cause 
for generating pliancy, meditative stab ilization. To generate that, intense, 
continuous aspiration is needed that strive s for meditative stabilization. As a cause 
of that the steady faith of strong fascin ation due to an insight into the positive 
qualities of meditative stabilization is necessary. Therefore you should cultivate 
again and again the faith aware of the positive  qualities of meditative stabilization.  
 There are four antidotes to laziness. If one achi eves the physical and me ntal pliancy that are 
increased by mental happiness and joy, one will be able to train in virtuous actions day and night without becoming tired whereby laziness will be eliminated. However, in order to develop this pliancy, one needs to develop it s cause, effort, with respect to generating 
meditative stabilization. In order to generate this  effort one must first have the aspiration that 
wishes to develop this meditative stabilization.  In order to develop this aspiration, one first 
needs to develop lucid faith in meditative st abilization through seeing its qualities. One 
should cultivate the faith that understands the qualities of meditative stabilization again and 
again.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C The source of this  
In [Discrimination of ] The Middle and Extremes  it says: 
 
The ground and that which rests on it, 
the cause and the result itself. 
 
Here the ground is aspiration, [i.e.] the ground[ing] for endeavour. That which 
rests on it is endeavour or joyous effort. The cause of aspiration is the conviction 
in positive qualities. The result of endeavour is pliancy.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
713 Faith is likened to a mother, in that just as for a child to be born a mother is necessary, 
similarly in order for qualities to grow faith is necessary. Faith is the cause of practicing virtue. 
Just as a mother gives birth to her child and then  nurtures it, likewise the faith that sees the 
qualities of meditative stabilization causes one to aspire to achieve meditative stabilization, 
which then causes one to put effort into achiev ing meditative stabilization, which causes one 
to achieve the result of pliancy or suppleness. Al though the main antidote to laziness is said to 
be pliancy, when pliancy is a ttained laziness has actually alre ady been overcome by means of 
faith, aspiration, and effort. In short, initia lly one needs to contemplate the qualities of 
meditative stabilization.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D How to reflect on the positive qualities of meditative stabilization 
The positive qualities of meditative stabil ization to be developed here: Once calm 
abiding has been accomplished mental happiness and physical comfort increase 
greatly, so that you stay happy in this li fetime. Due to the acquisition of physical 
and mental pliancy the mind is apt to ma ke use of any wholesome object at will. 
As involuntary wandering {251} to wrong ob jects has subsided negative actions do 
not occur a lot while whatever wholesome things you do have great strength. Based 
on calm abiding positive qualities such as supernormal cognitive powers and miraculous powers can be achieved. [Most] specially, based on it the realization of 
special insight knowing emptiness comes abou t so the root of cy clic existence can 
be cut quickly. If you consider any such positive qualities, the power of joy in 
cultivating meditative stabilization will increase. You should get to know them and meditate. Once this has developed, as ther e will be a continuous urge to cultivate 
meditative stabilization, it will be easy to  accomplish meditative stabilization and, 
upon its accomplishment, as you engage in its cultivation again and again, it will 
be very difficult for it to deteriorate.  
 If one achieves calm abiding, the result is that  one’s mind will be joyful and one’s body will 
experience happiness. In other words, this br ings about pliancy which induces mental and 
physical bliss that causes one to abide in ha ppiness in this very life. Due to mental and 
physical pliancy, one will be able to make as  much effort as one wishes with respect to 
virtuous objects due to a tirelessness of body and mind. Due to the mind no longer wandering to wrong objects, one will not commit negative actions and one’s positive actions will become stronger and more powerful. In dependence on calm abiding one can develop 
clairvoyance, such as the clairvoyance knowing others minds, as well as magical powers. In 
addition, based on calm abiding one can generate the special insight realizing emptiness which quickly cuts the root  of cyclic existence.  
 One should think about the many positive qual ities of calm abiding in this way, whereby 
one’s joy in cultivating them will increase. One will then continually strive to develop 
meditative stabilization and will easily achieve it . Having achieved it, one should continue to 
engage in it whereby it will not degenerate. In short, one should strive constantly to develop 
more meditative stabilization.   
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
714 If we have courage, we can even destroy the elephant-shaped mountain that overlooks 
Pomaia! On the other hand, if our mind is lack ing in strength and courage, we will not be 
able to overcome the interferences that arise.  Therefore, we need to develop a good and 
strong mental attitude. If we make effort, we, like the many holy beings of the past, both 
Buddhist and Christian, can develop concentratio n and other high realizations. To do this, 
we need to put effort into meditation. If, on the other hand, we do not make this effort and 
do not meditate but instead only eat, talk, wand er about, watch movies, and so forth, we will 
not achieve anything at all. We might enjoy ourselves for a short time but afterward our mind 
will return to its usual stat e. Perhaps I am mistaken?!  
 Wednesday morning, 24 January 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2 What to do while focusing the mind on the meditation object 
A Identifying the base, the meditation object, on which to place the mind 
B The way to focus the mind on it 
The first one has two points: identifying th e base, the meditation object on which 
to place the mind, and the way to focus the mind on it. 
 
First the observed objects on which to focus the mind are identified and then the way in 
which to focus the mind on them is explained.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A Identifying the base, the meditation object, on which to 
place the mind 
1 Presentation of general meditation objects 
2 Identification of meditation objects for given situations 
The first one has two points: presentati on of general meditation objects and 
identification of meditation objects for given situations. 
 
There are two types of observed objects on which to focus the mind: general observed objects 
and the observed objects for specific occasions.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A-1 Presenta tion of general meditation objects 
A Indication of the meditation objects themselves 
B Indication of what person should make what his meditation object 
The first one has two points: indication of  the meditation objects themselves and 
indication of what person should make what his meditation object. 
 
These outlines show that one should not choo se just any observed object whatsoever.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A-1A Indication of the meditation objects themselves 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
715 First: The first from among two points, regarding the first one:  
1 Identifying the classifications of meditation objects  
As regards the four meditation objects of yogis taught by the Bhagavat, the 
pervasive objects are four [in number]: (1 -2) [there are] the ones where you place 
[the mind] without analyzing and analytical objects, [which makes] two, (3) the 
limits of phenomena – how they exist and in what variety – and (4) achievement of 
purpose: transformation through medi tation by way of the two previous 
meditation methods with th e focus on the meaning of how phenomena exist and 
in what variety.  
 
There are four types of observed objects, among which pervasive objects are also of four types:  1. setting without analysis,  2. observed object with analysis,  3. the limit of things that  are varieties and modes,  
4. achievement of a purpose. In setting without analysis one sets the mind  single-pointedly on its object, this being 
placement meditation. “Modes” ( ji lta , literally, as it is) refers to ultimate truths or 
emptinesses, whereas “varieties” ( ji snyed , literally whatever is) refers to conventional truths or 
the multiplicity. Observed objects that bring about the achievement of a purpose are those 
that bring about a transformation in the mind by observing their meaning. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 As regards (meditation) objects for puri fying behavior there are five meditation 
objects [serving] as antidotes to one’s pr edominant behavior in previous lives – 
attachment, anger, ignorance, pride, and discursiveness – in that order the 
repulsive, love, dependent arising, the division of elements as well as exhalation 
and inhalation.  
 There are people who have familiarized with attach ment in past lives due to which in this life 
their attachment to objects is very strong. Like wise, there are those who have familiarized with 
anger or hatred and so often become angry, as  well as those who have familiarized with 
ignorance in the past and so are presently confused and ignorant. If one has strong 
attachment in this life, one should take ugline ss or repulsiveness as one’s observed object. To 
do this one should imagine an attractive object  as having a terrible aspect, so bad that one 
does not even want to think ab out it. For example, if one has strong attachment to another 
person’s face, in order to reduce one’s attach ment to it one should imagine worms emerging 
from and entering into the apertures and pores.  If, on the other hand, one has a lot of anger 
for someone, one should strive to develop a mi nd of love toward that person thinking “May 
he have happiness and the causes of happiness” through understanding that that person is 
just like oneself in wanting happi ness and not wanting suffering.  
 If one has a lot of ignorance,  one should meditate on depend ent-relationship, that is, on 
the twelve links of dependent-arising, or on th e dependence of the whole on parts, or on the 
dependence of phenomena being imputed upon a basis. By meditating on dependent-relation 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
716 one will come to understand that all phenomena do not exist inherently or truly, this being 
the antidote to apprehending all phenomena as existing from their own side, as being self-
sufficient substantially existent, or as being in herently and truly existent. If one has very 
strong pride, one should meditate on the eigh teen elements or constituents, the sixty-four 
constituents, and so forth. When one sees that  these are difficult to understand, one’s pride 
will diminish. If one has a lot of strong co nceptualization or discursiveness, one should 
meditate on the inhalation and exhalation of th e breath while letting go of conceptualization. 
In this way, there are these five different ty pes of meditation for five different types of 
problems. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The meditation objects for the skillful ar e also five [in number]: objects of skill 
with regard to the aggregates, elements, se nse fields, the twelve links of dependent 
origination {252} as well as th e definite and the indefinite. 
 
There are also five skillful observed objects: 1. the five aggregates, 2. the eighteen elements or constituents, 3. the twelve sense fields or sources, 4. the twelve links of dependent-arising, and 
5. sources and non-sources.  
In the Treasury of Manifest Dharma  the five aggregates as well as many other aggregates are 
discussed. The form aggregate, for example, is further divided into twenty types, the feeling 
aggregate into five types, the discrimination aggregate into six types, compositional factors 
into the forty-six mental factors and so forth, and the consciousness aggregate into six types. 
the eighteen elements or constitu ents are further divided into he six objects, six sense powers, 
and six object-possessors. The twelve sources or entrances are further divided into form 
source, sound source, odor source, taste source , tangible object source, phenomena source, 
eye source, ear source, nose source, tongue source, body source, and mental source. The 
twelve links of dependent-arising are ignorance,  karmic formations, consciousness, name and 
form, sources, contact, feeling, craving, gras ping, existence, birth, and aging-death. A non-
source is “virtuous actions give rise to suffering” and “non-virtuous actions give rise to happiness,” whereas a source is “virtuous action s give rise to happiness” and “non-virtuous 
actions give rise to suffering.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The objects for purifying mental affliction s are also two: the peaceful and coarse 
[states] of the higher and lower levels and the 16 [aspects] associated with the four 
truths, impermanence etc.  
 
The observed objects for purifying afflictions are of two types:  1. a higher realm as peaceful and the lower realm as rough, that is, looking at the desire realm 
as having many faults and the first concentratio n as being free from them; looking at the first 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
717 concentration as having many faults and the second concentration as being free from them; 
looking at the second concentration as having  many faults and the third concentration as 
being free from them, and so forth; 
2. the four noble truths and their sixteen attr ibutes, which are taught  in the Middle Way – 
true sufferings, true origins, true cessations, tr ue paths. True sufferings have the attributes of 
being impermanent, suffering, empty (empty of a permanent, partless, independent self), and 
selfless (empty of self-sufficient substantially exis tent self); true origins have the attributes of 
being cause, source, strong producer, and condit ion; true cessations have the attributes of 
being cessation, pacification, auspicious highness,  and deliverance; and true paths have that 
attributes of being path, suitability,  achiever, and definite emerger.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 How [all of] these individually serve a special purpose 
In this regard, meditation objects for pu rifying behavior are special in that the 
attachment etc. of those wh o get involved in attachment  etc. more than usual is 
easily stopped and based on that concentration is easily achieved.  
 
As I said before, those who have cultivated  attachment, anger, ignorance, pride, and 
conceptuality in past lives should meditate on their respective antidotes: ugliness, love, the 
dependent-relationship of all phenomena wh ich do not exist inherently, the eighteen 
constituents, and the inhalation and exhalation of the breath. In shor t, these are the best 
objects for such people to atta in meditative stabilization. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The meditation objects for the skilful are good meditation objects of calm 
abiding because [the idea of] a personal  self apart from those phenomena is 
undermined whereby they are in confor mity with the development of special 
insight knowing selflessness.  
 
The five skillful objects are good observed objects for attaining calm abiding because by 
meditating on the selflessness of  persons one can refute a self-sufficient substantially existent 
self, whereby it becomes easier to develop spec ial insight realizing selflessness. Therefore, 
these are the best objects for developing calm abiding.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Meditation objects for purifying mental affl ictions are of great significance in that 
they become antidotes to ment al afflictions in general.  
 
The two observed objects for purifying afflictions – looking at a higher state as peaceful and at 
the lower state as rough and the four noble trut hs – are antidotes to all the afflictions in 
general. Although there are many different types of afflictions, in general there are six root 
afflictions and twenty secondary afflictions that need to be purified, due to which meditation 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
718 on these observed objects is important. The six root afflictions are attachment, anger, 
ignorance, pride, afflicted doubt, and wrong view. In this context doubt is included in 
conceptuality, and the antidote to wrong view s is to examine sources and non-sources.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The pervasive objects do not include an y objects besides the ones [mentioned] 
before. 
 
The pervasion objects are only  those mentioned earlier. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Therefore meditative stabilization should be attained based on meditation objects 
of calm abiding with a special purpose. Fr om that it is obvious that someone who 
practices meditative stabilization based on pebbles, pieces of wood, and the like is 
unaware of the orderly presentation of meditation objects associated with meditative stabilization.  
 One should take one of the four observed objects mentioned above for the development of calm abiding. If one were, on the other hand, to take a stick or pebble as an observed object 
for the development of calm abiding, this wo uld be mistaken and show that one has not 
understood the presentation of observed objects. Brahmins, for example, claim that it is easier 
to develop concentration on the face of one’s wife  because it is easy to visualize and keep in 
mind without wandering to other objects. They say that it is more difficult to visualize a statue 
and so forth. There is a story about this (b am! Geshe-la slaps his forehead). One time a 
Mongolian ex-abbot of Gomang, who lived for a lo ng time in Holland, was invited to teach a 
meditation course to Geshe Rabten’s many We stern students. This lama asked each of the 
students what were there objects of meditation . One replied that it was emptiness, for which 
the lama praised the student. Another student said that he meditated on impermanence, and 
that lama also said that was good. Another stud ent said he meditated on Vajrayogini, another 
on Yamantaka, and another on Guhyasamaja, whereupon the lama asked them: “Do you not 
meditate on your guru?” When they responded that they did not, he told them that they 
should do so and that if they could not visualiz e Geshe Rabten’s entire face they should begin 
by visualizing his nose. He said that when they  could visualize his nose clearly, they should 
gradually add his eyes, ears, and mouth to the visualization, and then slowly add his arms, 
u p p e r  b o d y ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  T h u s ,  h e  s a i d  “ Y o u  s h o u l d  m e d i t a t e  o n  G e s h e  R a b t e n ’ s  n o s e ! ”  
which made everyone laugh! I am joking but, in short, even though we can take any object as 
our observed object it is better not to meditate on a stick and so forth! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A-1B Indication of w hat person should make what his meditation 
object 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
719 1 How what person should make what his meditation object  
Second: In accordance with what is set out in [the Sutra ] Requested by Revata , it has 
been taught that persons [ranging] from those in whom attachment predominates 
to those in whom discursi veness predominates should rely on the meditation 
objects specified for them individually – from the repulsive to exhalation and 
inhalation, respectively. Those whose behavi or is balanced and those whose mental 
afflictions are small can concentrate on an y one object they are happy with and a 
specific one is not necessary.  
 
Similarly the Sutra  Requested by Revata  says that those people wh o have strong attachment, 
anger, ignorance, pride, or discursiveness shou ld meditate on respectively the topics of 
repulsiveness through the inhalation and exha lation of the breath. With respect to the 
meditation on repulsiveness, nine ways are set out in Treasury of Manifest Dharma , the last of 
which is meditation on a skeleton. When do ing this latter meditation, one begins by 
imagining that at the center of one’s forehead a bit of flesh falls off, revealing the white bone 
beneath. Then slowly more flesh falls off unti l one’s entire body is only bones. Then one 
extends this visualization even further until all the ground is covered with bones and 
skeletons. Then one gradually reabsorbs the visu alization up to one’s forehead and then re-
extends it outward again. This meditation helps to overcome attachment.   If one has familiarized equally with alls thes e afflictions in the past and therefore has less 
afflictions in this life, one can meditate on wh ichever of these objects one likes, there being 
no need for a specific object.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 Differences in the level of predominance etc. of attachment etc.  
I n  t h i s  r e g a r d  p r e d o m i n a n c e  o f  [ o n e  o f ]  the five [mental afflictions], attachment 
and the like, [means that] through habitu ation to attachment and the like in 
previous lives long term attachment and the like arise towards small objects of 
attachment and the like. {253 } As for those with balanc ed behavior: they may not 
have got habituated to attachment and the li ke in previous lives, however, as they 
do not see it as a fault, even though st rong, long term attachment and the other 
[afflictions] may not arise towards their [respective] objects, it is not like they do 
not occur [at all]. Those with small mental  afflictions have not got habituated to 
attachment etc. in previous lives and due to the fact that, among other things, they 
see them as faults, attachment etc. will arise [only] slowly towards great and lots of 
objects of attachment etc. Towards medium  and small objects they will not arise [at 
all]. Moreover, the predominance of attach ment or another one of the five [mental 
afflictions] results in a long term [a ccomplishment of quiescence]; balanced 
behavior in a not too long term [accompli shment of quiescence]; and small mental 
afflictions in a speedy accomplishment of quiescence. 
 Between people there is a difference in terms of the strength of their attachment and so forth. 
Thus, if someone has familiarized with one of th e five, attachment and so forth, in previous 
lives, that particular affliction will arise even  toward small objects of attachment, hatred, and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
720 so forth. This happens because in the past this  person continuously generated this particular 
affliction, due to which in this life it arises strongly and easily. However, even if one did not 
familiarize strongly with any the five (a ttachment, hatred, ignorance, pride, and 
conceptualization) in particular, it is not that  one has seen them as faults. Because of this, 
even if strong and continuous attachment and so forth do not arise toward their respective 
objects, it is not that they do not arise at a ll. Those with small or we ak afflictions are those 
who did not habituate with any of these afflictions in their previous lives and also saw them as 
faults. However, even for them attachment and so  forth slowly arise with respect to many and 
great objects of attachment and so forth. On the other hand, for such people attachment and 
so forth will only arise very slightly or no t at all towards middling and small objects of 
attachment. When attachment and so forth pred ominate it takes a long time to eliminate 
them, whereas when they are middl ing it does not take too long  to eliminate them, and when 
they are small they are quickly eliminated.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 253) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2A-2 Identification of meditation objects for given situations 
A General explanation 
Now, if you wonder about the meditation object based on which calm abiding is 
achieved: Generally speaking, the meditati on objects of various persons are just 
like it has been explained. In particular, the point that those wi th a great deal of 
discursiveness should meditate on  the breath is important.  
 
On what kind of object is calm abiding achi eved? In general there are specific objects for 
d i f f e r e n t  t y p e s  o f  p e r s o n s .  H o w e v e r ,  i t  i s  important that those people with a lot of 
conceptualization meditate on the breath.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B Numerous texts set out how to achieve meditative stabilization taking the Tathagata’s body as one’s 
meditation object  
Apart from that [the Sutra ] Concentration  of the Present Buddha Manifestly Abiding  as 
well as the Middle  and Last Stages of Meditation , following the King of Concentration  
[Sutra ], teach the accomplishment of meditati ve stabilization with the Tathagata’s 
body as the meditation object. The commentary on Lamp on the Path  quotes 
statements by Master Bodhibhadra [to the effect] that meditative stabilization is 
achieved focusing on the Tathagata’s body.  
 
In addition, there is a general object, the body of the Tathagata or the Buddha, that is taught 
in many texts. Since it was Buddha Shakyamuni who visited our world in this fortunate eon, 
it is taught in various sutras as well as in Kamalashila’s Stages of Meditation , that meditative 
stabilization can be achieved by focusing on his body as one’s object of meditation because it 
brings about an increase in virtue. Atisha’s Lamp on the Path  also quotes Master Bodhibhadra 
as saying that meditative stabilization is achieved by observing the Tathagata’s body.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
721 C How it is of great purpose to make such a meditation object one’s basis  
In this regard, with attention to the Budd ha’s body, limitless merit is born through 
recollection of the Buddha. If that body is clear and stable in its aspect, it makes a 
great difference with regard to visualizin g the field for accumulating merit through 
prostrations, offerings, prayers, and the like  a s  w e l l  a s  ( t h e  f i e l d  f o r )  p u r i f y i n g  
obscurations through confession, restraint,  etc. {254} The positive quality that 
recollection of the Buddha does not deteri orate at the time of death, the great 
difference it makes to deity yoga as you cultivate the path of mantra, and other 
things show that it is very purposeful.  
 
It is meaningful to take the Buddha’s body as th e observed object of one’s meditation. This is 
because if one focuses one’s mind on an image of the Buddha, infinite merit is produced due 
to recollecting the Buddha. If one’s visualizat ion of the Buddha’s body is clear and stable, 
when one makes prostrations to him, offerings,  prayers, and so forth one can accumulate a lot 
of merit and when one confesses and so forth to  him one also purifies one’s negativities and 
obscurations. Thus, visualizing the Buddha’s body  is meaningful and powerful in terms of 
creating merit and purifying negative actions,  that is, karmic obscurations. Also due to 
visualizing the Buddha, one will recollect the Bu ddha at the time of death, one’s deity yoga 
when cultivating the path of mantra will be enhanced, and so forth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 254) says: 
D What bodily form to make [one’s meditation object] and how  
In the King of Concentration  it says:  
 
With his body just like the color of gold, 
the Lord of the World is excessively beautiful – whose mind is involved in this object of meditation 
that bodhisattva is said to be equipoised
181. 
 
You should make a likeness [of what is being expressed here] your object of meditation. Furthermore, there are two [types of] visualizations: one [where the object] is newly created by the mind and one [where the object] is [as if] naturally present. The latter [type] has special qual ities with respect to  the generation of 
faith and is consistent with [relevant] sect ions from the general vehicles. Therefore, 
you should [visualize] in the latter way.  
 The body of the Buddha should be visualized as  being very beautiful and golden in color. A 
bodhisattva who sets his or her mind on this object will be called “equipoised.” 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
                                             
 
181 JN: “equation” changed to “equipoised” ( mnyam bzhag ). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
722 E How to research the meditation object 
In research of a meditation object, a basi s for the mind to hold on to, you should 
first find a good painted image, statue, etc. of the Teacher’s body, look at it again 
and again and, with a [firm] grasp of the feat ures, get into a habit of projecting it as 
an object of the mind. Or else consider the meaning of what you heard a spiritual 
master say, make it appear in the mind an d pursue [this as] your meditation object. 
However, rather than making  the meditation object appear like a painted image, 
statue, etc., you should learn to make it appear in the form of a real buddha.  
 
One should find a good image of the Buddha, li ke the statue here behind me, and then form 
an image of him in one’s mind. One should im agine the Buddha as though abiding in front 
of oneself by mentally creating an image of the Buddha. However, one should not imagine t h e  B u d d h a  a s  b e i n g  l i k e  a  s t a t u e  o r  p a i n t i n g  o f  t h e  B u d d h a  b u t  a s  a n  a c t u a l  b u d d h a .  I n  short, one should first familiarize oneself with a statue or painting of the Buddha, but then 
when visualizing the Buddha the image should not be  that of a statue or painting but that of a 
real living Buddha. If one meditates in this w ay it will become more effective and one will 
receive the blessings of the buddhas.  Wednesday afternoon, 24 January 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page says: 
F It is unreasonable to practice meditative stabilization looking at the meditati on support with one’s 
eyes 
It makes perfect sense that Master Yeshe De disputes what some [people] do, i.e., 
set up an image vis-à-vis, look at it with the eyes, and meditate by staring at it. The 
reasons for this: meditative stabilization is not achieved in a sense consciousness 
but rather in the mental consciousness,  so the actual meditation object of 
meditative stabilization is a direct object ive basis of the mental consciousness, so 
that is what the mind has to hold on to. In accordance with what has been 
explained before it is taught that [the mi nd] has to focus on the meaning generality 
of the observed object or the appearance of the image.  
 
It is not correct that one takes an object of  meditation of the eyes in order to develop 
meditative stabilization. While some people s ay that one should place an image, such as a 
statue of the Buddha, in front of oneself, look  a t  i t  w it h  w i d e  o p e n  e y e s ,  a n d  m e d i t a t e  b y  
staring at it, this was refuted by Master Yeshe De. This is because meditative stabilization is 
not accomplished in a sense consciousness such  as the eye or ear consciousness, but is 
accomplished in a mental consciousness. Therefor e, the actual or direct observed object of 
meditative stabilization is the direct object of  a mental consciousness. In other words, the 
mind must apprehend such an object, not a ph ysical object. As was explained before, one 
observes a meaning generality of the actual obse rved object or its reflection, not an object 
apprehended by the eye or ear consciousness. For example, one can visualize the Buddha by 
means of a mental image like as if the actual  Buddha were abiding in front of oneself. 
Alternatively, one can think of one’s mind as bein g like a mirror that reflects objects in it and 
visualize the Buddha in this way.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
723  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
G The need to determine just one meditation object in the beginning  
E l s e w h e r e  i t  s a y s  t h a t  p a r t  o f  t h e  f i g u r e  i s  d e t a i l e d  a n d  p a r t  o f  i t  i s  r o u g h ,  
nevertheless you first need to focus on  the rough [outlines] and once [the 
meditation has] stabilized with respect to  that you focus further on the details. 
{255} According to experience rough [featu res] appear very easily so you should 
progress from the image’s rough[er features] making them the support for 
meditation. In particular, if you practice while a fully qualified calm abiding has not come about, it is inappropriate to move between many different meditation 
objects, for, if you develop meditative  stabilization, moving between many 
dissimilar meditation objects becomes a grea t obstacle to the achievement of calm 
abiding.  
 
At the beginning it is necessary to ascertain ju st one single observed object. Some texts say 
that when one first meditates on the body of the Buddha, although one part of the body is 
subtle and one part coarse, at first one should focus on the rough aspect s and only when this 
has become stable should one focu s on the subtle aspects. For ex ample, first one visualizes the 
ushnisha of the Buddha roughly and then graduall y one visualizes it in more detail or more 
subtlety. In this way, one should try to make th e aspect of the ushnisha appear clearly to one’s 
mind. 
 Because it is easier for the coarse or rough aspect to appear to the mind, initially this 
should be taken as the observed object of one’s  meditation. If one wishes to achieve a fully-
qualified calm abiding one must take one sing le object as one’s observed object, without 
changing between many different objects by, for example, one day meditating on ugliness, the 
next day on love, and the next day on dependent- arising. If one does th is, one will not be able 
to attain calm abiding. Therefore, it is nece ssary to choose one object and meditate on it 
single-pointedly. If one moves from one observed  object to another this will become a great 
interference to achieving calm abiding.   
Says Ashvagosha
182: 
 
Relying on one meditation object stabilize the mind’s reflections. Through a series of many objects It will get disturbed by mental afflictions. 
 Ashvagosha says that one should choose one obje ct and stabilize the mind on it, whereas if 
one continually changes objects one’s mind will be disturbed by afflictions. Because of this, it 
is necessary to choose one single object right fr om the beginning and not change it until calm 
abiding is achieved.  
                                             
 
182 JN: “Aryasura” changed to “Ashvagosha” ( ‘phags pa dpa’ bo ). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
724 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
And in the Lamp on the Path :  
 
On any one meditation object – 
let the mind rest on what is wholesome. 
 
[The point] is being made by means of the specifying word “one”.  
 
Atisha’s Lamp on the Path  also says that one should take on e observed object and set the mind 
on that virtuous object. This is emphasized by explicitly saying “one.” When ordinary beings, 
for example, find a job, they do it for a short time and then give it up and look for another 
one, and then do the same again until eventual ly it becomes impossible for them to find a 
stable job with a good salary. Also there are pe ople who constantly change their friends, going 
from one to another, whereupon in the end th ey remain alone and are sad and lonely. Thus, 
we can see that even in the world it is  not good to constantly change things. 
 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
H The criterion for finding the meditation object and, upon finding it, the need for mentally holding on to 
that very object  
The criterion for thus initially finding the me ditation object to hold on to with the 
mind is this: If you visualize the head, (two ) arms, torso, and (two) legs a couple of 
times successively and at the end of that yo u are able to have half the major limbs 
appear in the mind as you consider the ge neral [features of the] body, you should 
be satisfied with that and hold on to it with the mind even if there is no radiant 
clarity. That is because if you do not ho ld on to it, satisfied with as much, but 
rather fancy more clarity, visualizing ag ain and again, the object will become 
clearer, however, not only will you fail to acquire stable meditative stabilization, it 
will become an obstacle to its acquisition.  But if the object is not very clear and 
you still hold on to just this partial object you will acquire meditative stabilization 
quickly and, as clarity will then be enha nced, the clarity aspect will also come 
about easily. This appears from Master Ye she De’s instructions and is of great 
importance.  
 
If one takes the body of the Buddha as one’s ob served object, one should initially visualize the 
head, the arms, the body, and the legs, trying to gradually make the visualization more and 
more clear. However, at the end one should ju st visualize the main limbs – the head, arms, 
and legs – as much as one can and meditate on th at. In other words, it is not necessary to be 
able to visualize the entire body with great cl arity and to strive again and again to make it 
more and more clear. Rather on e should visualize the body in general and then focus on that 
visualization. If instead one keeps striving to make the visualization more and more clear, one 
will not be able to achieve meditative stabilizat ion and this will even become an interference 
to achieving stable meditative stabilization. Thus , even if the entire object is not clear, one 
should focus on just part of the object, whereby one will quickly achieve meditative 
stabilization. Having achieved meditative stabil ization, one should then strive to make the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
725 visualization clearer, whereupon this will quickl y happen. This was taught by Yeshe De and is 
very important.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 That is to say you should {256} mentally hold on to the figure as a whole to the 
best of your abilities and if some parts of  it appear clearly you should hold on to 
those. If they get unclear again you sh ould hold on to the whole again.  
 
In order to develop meditative stabilization on e should observe the body of the Buddha in 
general and, if some parts of it appear clearly, one should apprehend them. If they become unclear, one should visualize the body in gene ral once again, rather than focusing on any 
particular part.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 At that time, if something appears that has not been specified in terms of colour, 
shape, number, and size – you want to  meditate on [something] yellow and 
[something] red appears and the like, or you want to meditate on a sitting figure and a standing one etc. appears, or you want to meditate on one and two appear 
etc., or, for example, you want to medita te on something big and something small 
appears – it is not appropriate to pursue them, so you should only make that which is the original meditation object the support for meditation. 
 While the body of the Buddha is go lden in color, if instead of th e color gold it appears to be 
red like Buddha Amitabha or Amitayus, one shou ld not follow that change and instead make 
a n  e f f o r t  t o  v i s u a l i z e  t h e  b o d y  a s  g o l d  i n  c o l o r .  L i k e w i s e ,  i f  o n e  w a n t s  t o  m e d i t a t e  o n  t h e  
Buddha in the sitting position but instead he appears standing, one should not follow that 
visualization. Similarly, if one wants to medita te on one but two arise to the mind, one should 
not follow it. Also if one wants to visualize a very big body but a small body appears to the 
mind, one should not follow it. One should always  take the original observed object as one’s 
meditation object without changing its color, sh ape, size, and so forth. In short, it should 
always remain the same. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 In the context of performing the deity yo g a  o f  s e c r e t  m a n t r a  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  
achieve a clear appearance of the deitie s and therefore various means should be 
used to produce it. However, here, if you have difficulty making the deity’s aspect 
appear, you may place the mind and focus on any one of the objects presented 
above that is suitable or the view ascert aining suchness and accomplish meditative 
stabilization, for the main purpose is to accomplish calm abiding.  
 On the occasion of accomplishing the deity yoga of secret mantra, it is necessary to achieve a 
clear appearance of the deity. Therefore, if it does not arise, one should apply different 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
726 methods to make it clear. For example, wishin g to visualize Green Tara, one should try to 
make her aspect appear clearly to one’s mind . One should do the same whatever deity one 
chooses such as Manjushri or Avalokiteshvara.  This is important. However, if one has 
difficulty making the aspect of the deity appear cl early to one’s mind, it is better to focus on 
any one of the observed objects of meditative  stabilization that were mentioned before. 
Alternatively one can meditate on the view of suchness or emptiness, focusing the mind on 
this in order to achieve meditative stabilizat ion. Since these meditations are done for the 
purpose of accomplishing calm abiding, as lo ng as one has not attained calm abiding one 
should put effort into meditating on one’s object. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 256) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B How to place the mind on it 
1 Presentation of the faultless approach 
2 Eliminating faulty approaches 
3 Indicating the measure of sessions 
The second one has three points: pres entation of the fa ultless approach, 
eliminating faulty approaches and in dicating the measure of sessions. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1 Pres entation of the faultless approach 
A Indication that faultle ss meditative stabilizati on has two distinctions 
B How it is unreasonable that some [people] add bliss and the like, making it three or four distinctions 
C Identification of sinking and excitement and the importance of skill in a method of sustaining 
concentration that puts and end to the two 
D How both mindfulness and introspection are necessary as means for the mind not to wander off from its object 
E How the mind is focused on the meditation object through mindfulness 
F Identification of mindfulness  G How it is shown through an analogy that mindfulness continuously ties the mind to the meditation 
object 
H How concentration will turn out faulty without a firm mode of apprehension of the ascertaining consciousness I Even someone wishing to achieve calm abiding by placing the mind without thinking of anything 
needs to develop the power of mindfulness  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1A  Indication that faultless me ditative stabilization has two 
distinctions 
First: The meditative stabilization that is to be accomplished here has two 
distinctions, i.e., an aspect of intense clarity, the mind being extremely clear, and 
an aspect of non-conceptual stability, [the mind] abiding single-pointedly with the 
meditation object.  
 
The faultless meditative stabilization that is to  be accomplished should have two distinctions 
or qualities:  
1. it should have the intense clarity of a very clear mind, and 
2. it should abide single-pointedly on its observed object without conceptuality.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1B How it is unreasonable that some [people] add bliss and the like, 
making it three or four distinctions 
Here some add bliss and make it three [distinctions], others add limpidity and 
make it four. However, as for limpidity there are two [aspects]: the limpidity of consciousness is felt to be more limpid than even an immaculate crystal bowl full 
of immaculate water being hit by sunlig ht in the absence of clouds. And {257} 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
727 when the aspects of objects like pillars appear, a limpidity emerges that is felt to 
allow one to count even their finest part icles. These two nevertheless also emerge 
from the intensity of the clarity aspect being generated and sustained after subtle 
sinking has been cut. Therefore it is unne cessary to mention them separately in the 
beginning.  
 
Some people say that this meditative stabilizatio n should also have a third distinction of being 
blissful and even a fourth distinction of be ing limpid in addition to the previous two 
distinctions of clarity and single-pointedness. Th ere are two types of limpidity, one of which is 
from the side of the subject or object-possessor which is likened to a crystal bowl filled with 
water and struck by sunlight. The limpidity from th e side of the object is that when a pillar or 
vase appears, it is so clear that one is able to  count even its subtlest particles. However, these 
two are also present when subtle sinking or laxi ty is eliminated. Because of this, it is not 
necessary to make any extra distinctions in that  when one strives to generate calm abiding one 
strives to eliminate subtle laxity.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Although joy and bliss in the form of pl easurable sensations arise as a result of 
the meditative stabilization to be accomplished here, they do not arise in parallel 
to the meditative stabilization belongin g to the preliminary stage of the first 
concentration and therefore are not listed here.  
 Although joy and bliss having the aspect of pleasurable feeling arise as a result of the 
meditative stabilization that is to be accompli shed on this occasion, when calm abiding is 
initially generated it is as a preparation for th e first concentration of which joy and bliss are 
not branches.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The emergence of intensity in the clarity aspect is impeded by sinking, and single-
pointed non-conceptuality [brought to bear  on the meditation object] is impeded 
by excitement. Therefore, these two, sink ing and excitement, are the very reason 
for the main obstacles to pure meditative stabilization coming [into being].  
 
The arisal of clarity is impeded by sinking or laxity, and single-pointed non-conceptuality is 
impeded by excitement. Therefore, the main ob stacles to achieving calm abiding are laxity 
and excitement, which need to be eliminated.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1C Identification of sinking and excitement and the importance of skill 
in a method of sustaining meditative st abilization that puts and end to the two 
Consequently, if you do not know a pure method for identifying subtle and gross 
sinking and excitement [respectively] and for sustaining meditative stabilization 
that puts an end to both of them, even  calm abiding – not to mention special 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
728 insight – cannot develop. Therefore the intelligent striving for meditative 
stabilization should become skilled in this  fashion. That is to say, sinking and 
excitement are adverse conditions to the accomplishment of calm abiding and 
since the identification of adverse conditions as well as the actual methods for 
putting and end to them are taught below, here, mention should [only] be made of 
how to generate meditative stabilization [as] a favourable condition to calm 
abiding.  
 It is necessary to identify both subtle and co arse laxity and exciteme nt and then cease these 
obstacles. If, on the other hand , one does not know how to identify subtle and coarse laxity 
and excitement and how to cease them, it will be  difficult to develop calm abiding. Therefore, 
the intelligent who strive for meditative stabiliz ation should become skilled in these. Because 
laxity and excitement are adverse conditions to  the accomplishment of calm abiding, how to 
recognize and eliminate them will be taught belo w, whereas here it is only explained how to 
generate the meditative stabilization that is a favorable condition to the accomplishment of 
calm abiding.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1D How both mindfulness and introspection are necessary as means 
for the mind not to wander off from its object  
Here meditative stabilization is the aspect of the mind one-pointedly abiding with 
the meditation object, that is to say it ha s to stay with the object continuously. For 
that there are two requirements: a means of making [sure] the mind does not 
wander away from its original object and an awareness of exactly what distraction 
or non-distraction there is. The first on e is mindfulness and the second one is 
introspection. In Commentary on the Ornament of the Sutras  is says:  
 
Mindfulness and introspection cause {258} complete focusing [of the 
mind], for the former causes the mind  not to stray away from its object 
and the latter is fully aware of the mind straying away. 
 In order to develop meditative stabilization bo th mindfulness and introspection are necessary. 
Meditative stabilization is the part of the mind  abiding single-pointedly on its object. That 
which ensures that the mind does not wander aw ay from its original object is mindfulness, 
whereas that which knows whether the mind is distracted or not is introspection. That these 
two are important is mentioned in the Commentary on the Ornament of the Sutras  which says 
that mindfulness and introspection make the mind focus closely because mindfulness makes the mind not stray from its object and in trospection knows when the mind strays. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
If you forget the meditation object, mindfulness having deteriorated, there is 
distraction and you will lose the object immediately. Therefore mindfulness that 
does not forget the object is the root [of meditative stabilization]. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
729 If one’s mindfulness degenerates one will forget  the observed object and the mind will wander 
away, completely losing the observed object. Th erefore, one should try never to forget the 
object by means of mindfulness. For example, even when writing a letter it is necessary to 
have mindfulness as otherwise one will make many mistakes.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1E How the mind is focused on the meditation object through 
mindfulness 
How to completely focus the mind on it s meditation object: You visualize the 
meditation object as explained above. Th en, if at least something appears, you 
s h o u l d  d e v e l o p  a  f o r c e f u l  m a n n e r  o f  a p p r e h e n d i n g  t h a t  [ w h i c h  i s  b e i n g  
apprehended] with your awareness, uplift the mind and place it without newly 
investigating anything. 
 One should focus the mind on its observed obje ct by visualizing one of the observed objects 
mentioned above. One should try to visualize it clearly and whatever appears, one should 
apprehend it mentally in a forceful manner, uplift the mind, and without investigating any 
new object set the mind on its original object.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1F Identification of mindfulness 
1 The source identifying the essence of mindfulness 
2 The distinctive features of mindfulness 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1F1 The source identifying the essence of mindfulness 
In the Compendium of All [Knowledge]  is says: 
 
What is mindfulness? The mind being active with regard to the thing it 
is familiar with, without forgetfulness nor the least distraction. 
 
That is to say it has three distinctive features. 
 
The scriptural source that identifies  the entity of mindfulness is the Compendium of All 
Knowledge . This text says that mindfulness is: (1) a non-forgetting of the mind (2) of a thing 
that is familiar (3) that has the action of be ing completely undistracted. In other words, one 
should choose one of the five observed objects,  then familiarize with it, not forget it, and 
remain undistracted by conceptualizations . This is the entity of mindfulness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1F2 The distinctive features of mindfulness 
A The object feature 
The distinctive feature of the object: As mindfulness does not come about with 
regard to a hitherto unfamiliar object it says : “the thing it is familiar with”. In this 
context [this is] the appearance of the me ditation object having been determined 
before. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
730  
If one is not familiar with an object it is difficult to be mindful of it, therefore one should take something that one is familiar with as an  object. For example, if one takes the body of 
the Buddha as one’s object, one should have ascert ained it previously in order for it to clearly 
appear to the mind. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B The feature of the mode of apprehension 
The distinctive feature of the mode of a pprehension: In this context, the aspect 
that the mind does not forget the object , “the mind ... without forgetfulness” 
implies that it does not forget the medita tion object. As for the manner in which it 
does not forget – the implication is not only  that if others ask and if you are made 
to think about it you can remember your master teaching “the meditation object is 
like this...”, but rather that once the mi nd is tied to the meditation object and 
immediately mindful of it, it does not get distracted even a little. If it does get 
distracted, mindfulness is lost through no thing but the occurrence of distraction. 
 One should not forget the observed object of one’s  meditative stabilization. It is not just that 
if others ask what is one’s observed object and one is made to think about it, one remembers one’s teacher explaining it. Rather it is that the mind is tied to its object, like a ring through 
the nose of a cow, whereupon one does not get distracted from it even slightly. If, on the 
other hand, one’s mind becomes distracted, mindfulness is lost. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Hence as soon as you have placed the mind on the meditation object you should 
give rise to the thought: “That is how I am  tied to the meditation object” and then, 
without renewed conceptual { 259} thought, withou t interrupting the force of this 
very awareness maintain it continuously . That is the essential point about how 
mindfulness is cultivated. 
 
Therefore, having set the mind on the observed  object, one should think “Now I am tied to 
this observed object,” and without any new conc eptuality one should maintain this awareness 
forcefully and continuously. This is the essential point with respect to re lying on mindfulness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C The feature of function 
Not allowing the mind to stray away from the meditation object to something else. 
 
One should not allow one’s mind to be distract ed from one observed object to another but 
should abide on it. 
 
As I said before, our mind is like a crazy elepha nt. Next this analogy is explained in terms of 
how an elephant keeper tames an el ephant with hooks and beatings.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
731  
Thursday morning, 25 January 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 259) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1G How it is shown through an analogy that mindfulness continuously 
ties the mind to the meditation object 
That being so, tying the mind to a meditation object and taming it is taught 
through the analogy of taming an elephant. In [this] analogy, a wild elephant is 
tied to a very firm tree [trunk] or pole with numerous ropes and if it follows the 
instructions of the elephant keeper – all the better; if it does not, it is repeatedly 
punched with a sharp hook and tamed by subjugation. Likewise the mind, 
resembling an untamed elephant, is tied to a firm pillar – the meditation object 
explained earlier – with the rope of mindfu lness and if it cannot stay, it is pierced 
with the hook of introspection and gradually brought under control.  
 How is an elephant subdued? It is subdued by ty ing it to a strong post, pillar, or tree, whereas 
if it is difficult to tame the el ephant keeper also uses sharp hook s to subdue it. Similarly, one’s 
mind, which is like a crazy elephant, needs to be  subdued by tying it to its observed object 
with the rope of mindfulness. In other words,  mindfulness is what keeps the mind on its 
observed object. Then, if the mind wanders, it must be caught with the hook of introspection 
and brought back to its object.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In Essence of the Middle Way  it says:  
 
The elephant of the mind going wrong 
is surely tied with the rope of mindfulness to the sturdy post of the object and slowly controlled with the hook of insight. 
 This text says that the mind, whic h is like an elephant that goes  the wrong way, should be tied 
to its observed object with the rope of mindfulness, and, if it wanders off, it is to be brought under control with the hook of wisd om, that is, with introspection.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
And in the Middle  Stages of Meditation : 
 
By means of the ropes of mindfulne ss and introspection the elephant of 
the mind should be fastened to that very tree trunk of the [meditation] 
object. 
 Similarly, Kamalashila’s text says that by mean s of the ropes of mindfulness and introspection 
the elephant-like mind is tied to the tree trunk of the observed object.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
732  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2 A2B-1H How meditative st abilization will turn out faulty without a firm 
mode of apprehension of the ascertaining consciousness 
[In the teachings] it says that meditative stabilization is accomp lished on the basis 
of mindfulness and that – like a rope – mi ndfulness continuously ties the mind to 
the meditation object. Therefore the princi pal method for sustaining the [gradual] 
accomplishment of meditative stabilizatio n is that of sustaining mindfulness. 
Again mindfulness has a mode of apprehensi on with an aspect of certainty, so 
when [it comes to] sustaining meditative stabilization, as you place [the mind] 
without a firm mode of apprehension  [on the part] of the ascertaining 
consciousness the clarity aspect of mental limpidity may come [about], however, 
the clarity aspect of stark intensity of the ascertaining consciousness does not 
emerge so that powerful mindfulness will not be generated. As subtle sinking does 
not get stopped, the meditative stabilization will become faulty. 
 Without the firm mind holding of its object, faul ts of meditative stabilization will arise. On 
the other hand, by relying on mindfulness medita tive stabilization is achieved. Mindfulness is 
like a rope that ties the mind to its observed  object. Therefore, the method for training in 
meditative stabilization is to guard mindfuln ess. Because mindfulness has the aspect of 
apprehending its object very strongly, if a st r o n g  m o d e  o f  a p p r e h e n s i o n  i s  a b s e n t  w h e n  
training in meditative stabilization or single-p ointed meditation, although there may be clarity 
it will not be strong and the object will quickly be lost, whereby one will be unable to generate strong mindfulness. Since one is unable to el iminate or cease subtle laxity, the meditative 
stabilization will become faulty, that is, imperfect.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-1I Even someone wishing to achieve calm abiding by placing the 
mind without thinking of anything needs to develop the power of mindfulness 
{260} Even someone who sustains mere non-conceptuality without placing the 
mind on any other meditation object such  as a deity’s body reminds himself that 
“The mind should be placed on non-conceptuality with regard to any object 
whatsoever” and should then undistractedly  prevent the mind from scattering. As 
non-distraction is also identical in mean ing with mindfulness not forgetting the 
meditation object, it does not depart from the method of sustaining mindfulness. 
Therefore someone meditating like that also  cultivates mindfulness giving rise to 
the power of ascertainment. 
 Someone who wishes to achieve calm abiding wi thout conceptualizing anything still needs to 
develop the strength of mindfulness. Therefore,  even if one does not place the mind on the 
body of the deity and so forth but cultivates mere non-conceptuality, one must remember “I will place my mind on an object single poin tedly without conceptuality” and prevent one’s 
mind from scattering to anything else. Sinc e “distraction” means that one has lost or 
forgotten one’s original observed object, non-di straction means that one has not forgotten the 
original observed object and is therefore identical to mindfulness. Non-distraction is therefore 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
733 never separated from mindfulness. Because of this, someone who meditates in this way also 
cultivates the mindfulness that gives rise to th e strength of an ascertaining consciousness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-2  Eliminating faulty approaches 
A Identification of a misconception that should be eliminated 
Second: There is this kind of misconception that should be eliminated: “If the 
mind is roused as explained above, held tight and placed [on the meditation object] non-conceptually, there is no si nking, however, [instead] excitement 
predominates, you realize you do not become capable of [achieving] persistent 
stability and your lofty awareness declines. If you loosen your tight grip a lot, you 
will find that stability quickly develops – th is is an excellent method.” With this in 
mind a lot of people also hold and expoun d: “Best relaxation is best meditation.” 
 There is a wrong conception that must be eliminated. What is th is wrong conception? It is the 
thought “If the mind is uplifted, held tight, an d placed non-conceptually on its object, sinking 
or laxity will not arise, whereas there is danger of excitement arising. If excitement arises, I 
will not be able to continually observe the object  as my mind will wander to another object.” 
Excitement occurs when, while focusing on an  o b s e r v e d  o b j e c t  s u c h  a s  t h e  f a c e  o f  t h e  
Buddha, the mind wanders and the face of one’s  lover or friend appears. The person here 
therefore thinks “If I loosen my hold on the observed object, my mind will quickly come to 
abide on its object, therefore this is the best me thod.” In other words, this person thinks that 
one should not hold the object tightly but leav e the mind in a relaxed or loose state, this 
being the best meditation. However, this asse rtion is not correct and must be refuted. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B Its elimination  
However, this [position] does not draw  a distinction between the occurrence of 
sinking and the occurrence of meditation, because, as explained earlier, faultless 
meditative stabilization necessarily has two distinctive features – the stability aspect 
of the non-conceptual mind by itself is not enough. If you think that “In such a 
case, if the mind has gone confused and clou dy, it is sinking whereas, otherwise, it 
is faultless meditative stabilization, beca use there is the clarity aspect of mental 
limpidity”, apparently, you do not distinguish between dullness and sinking, so 
these will explained below. 
 
The previous wrong conception is now eliminated saying that this person does not distinguish 
between the arisal of sinking or laxity and the arisal of meditation. The achievement of 
faultless meditative stabilization necessarily  has the two distinctions mentioned before: 
abiding on the object single-pointedly and wi th clarity, by the power of mindfulness and 
introspection. It is not enough that the mi nd that one part of the mind abides non-
conceptually. If someone thinks “If such a non-conceptual mind becomes clouded with tiredness, this is sinking or laxity, but it is st ill a faultless meditative stabilization because the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
734 mind is clear,” he does not distinguish between dullness and sinking. Ther efore, these will be 
explained below.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 260) says: 
C How it is difficult for faultless meditative stabilization with the two distinctive features to arise 
Consequently, if the awareness has been in tensified and it is being held overly 
tight, the clarity aspect may be present, however, excitement predominates making 
it difficult for the stability aspect to develop. If you relax it a lot while you practice, 
the stability aspect may be there, but si nking predominates and therefore intense 
clarity will be absent. Still, it is difficult to get the right amounts of tightness and 
relaxation balanced, and therefore it is {2 61} difficult for meditative stabilization 
free from sinking and excitement to arise.  
 It is difficult to generate faultless meditative  stabilization possessing the two distinctions. If 
one holds the observed object too strongly, even though the object may be clear there is a risk 
that the mind will not abide on it due to the arisal of exciteme nt as this makes the mind leave 
its object. If, on the other hand, one relaxes to o much, even though the mind abides on its 
object, there is a risk that sinking will arise and clarity lost. Therefore, since it is difficult to 
not hold the object either too tightly or too loosely, it is difficult for a meditative stabilization 
that is free from sinking and excitement to arise. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
With that in mind Chandragomin says: 
 
If I make an effort excitement comes up, if I abandon it dullness is produced. If it’s [so] hard to see and find their balance what am I – confused in mind – to do? 
 And: 
 
If I engage with effort excitement comes up, 
if I relax it dullness is produced. If it’s [so] hard to find the mean between them, what am I – confused in mind – to do? 
 Chandragomin says that if one makes strong effo rt to hold the observed object, there is the 
risk that excitement will arise. If, on the ot her hand, one abandons this effort, the mind will 
become dull, that is, laxity will arise. For this reason, it is difficult to engage the object in a balanced way. So what can one whose mind is disturbed do? In short, it is difficult for one with a disturbed mind to remain in equipoise  as the mind is disturbed by laxity and 
excitement.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
735  Again Chandragomin says that if one puts  effort into holding the observed object, 
excitement will arises and if one gives this effo rt up one will not be able to hold the observed 
object. Since the middle way in wh ich effort is neither too strong  nor too little is difficult to 
find, what can one with a confused mind do? 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[That is to say] if you try hard to concentr ate, making a [real] effort, there will be 
excitement, but if, seeing that, you relax the mind trying hard to engage [its object] 
and give up the zeal, sinking associat ed with the mind turning dull and 
[withdrawing] inward will come about. Therefore it is difficult to find a middle 
[ground] free from the two extremes of sinking and excitement – an equanimity where the mind abides evenly balanced. If the statement were to present relaxation 
as best, there would be no reason whatsoever  for difficulties and, as it is being said 
that sinking arises from it, it would be  unreasonable to cultivate meditative 
stabilization that way.  
 If one makes very strong effort, excitement will arise. If seeing this, one gives up the effort 
completely, then the mind will become dull or weak, and sinking or laxity will arise. Because 
of this, it is difficult to find a middle way free  from the extremes of la xity and excitement in 
which the mind abides in a balanced way. If givi ng up effort were the best, there would be no 
reason for difficulties. However, since laxity or sinking arises from giving up effort, it is not 
suitable to accomplish meditati ve stabilization in this way. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D How to meditate balancing medita tive stabilization and relaxation  
As for the point where meditative stabiliz ation and relaxation are [well] balanced: 
having investigated yourself you should be more relaxed than that level of 
awareness where your think: “If I heighten it just a bit, excitement will surely 
arise,” and you should also raise it above that level where you think: “If I leave it 
just a bit, sinking will surely arise”. 
 
One should engage in meditation neither too ti ghtly or too loosely. When meditating on an 
image of the Buddha, through thinking “If I hold it too tightly, excitement will arise” and “If 
I give up making effort, laxity will arise,” on e  s h o u l d  n o t  l i f t  o n e ’ s  m i n d  u p  t o o  h i g h  n o r  
dampen it down too much, but inst ead try to find the middle way.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
E Presentation of sources for this  
In the context of the first and second [ste p of stabilizing the] mind, Noble Asanga 
also taught: 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
736 That is to say in placing [the mind ] and thoroughly placing [the mind] 
there is mental activity that engages [its object] with meditative 
stabilization.”183 
 
On the occasion of the first two mental abidings , setting and perfectly or continually setting, 
from among the nine mental abidings, one need s the mental attention of forceful engaging. 
This refers to the fact that there are four mental attentions, five powers, and nine mental 
abidings.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In the First Stages of Meditation  it is also explained that:  
 
Sinking is eliminated and the meditation object is grasped tightly. 
 Kamalashila’s First Stages of Meditation  says that one should first eliminate laxity and then hold 
the observed object tightly. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
F The fault of not knowing how to apply mindfulness 
If you practice without knowing the ab ove method of applying mindfulness – 
however much you meditate – only lots of faults will come out: great forgetfulness, 
your intelligence discriminating phenomena growing dull and so forth. 
 
If one does not know the method mentioned previously for applying mindfulness to the observed object, no matter how much one strives to meditate on the object many faults will 
arise, such as great forgetfulness with respect to the object as well as the instructions on calm 
abiding, and also one’s wisdom differentiating  phenomena becoming dull. Therefore, it is 
necessary to perfectly apply mindfulness, wherea s if mindfulness is absent forgetfulness will 
arise and one’s mind will become duller.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
G The need to stand guard with introspection while grasping the meditation object with mindfulness 
{262} One may wonder: “Well then, is it  appropriate to generate conceptual 
thought observing whether or not the medi tation object is grasped well while the 
mind is being tied to the object through mindfulness?”. In the Middle  Stages of 
Meditation it says that this is what needs to be done. Specifically, it is not an 
observation such that you first abandon me ditative stabilization, but rather you 
merely observe from within the lasting state of meditative stabilization whether or 
not the mind is still abiding on the original  meditation object and, if it does not, 
                                              
183 The process of developing calm abiding is divided up into of nine stages associ ated with four types of 
attention. The first two stages, known as "placement " and "thorough placement" (often referred to as 
"continuous placement"), are associated with  the concentrated attention mentioned here. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
737 whether it has become excited or subject to sinking. Once you have established 
meditative stabilization you should do th is now and then, neither at too short nor 
at too long [intervals]. If you do this wh ile the force of the previous awareness has 
not quite run out yet, this will have the [dual] purpose that the intensity of the 
awareness which has [newly] arisen will last  longer and that sinking and excitement 
are recognized quickly. 
 
While holding the observed object with mind fulness, one needs to apply introspection. 
Someone wonders: “While mindfulness is tying the mind to its object, is it appropriate to 
investigate whether or not the mind is holding its object?” In fact it is important to do this. In 
other words, even while mindfulness is holding its object perfectly, on e should examine this 
from time to time. It is not that to do this one abandons meditative stabilization, but rather 
that from within meditative stabilization on e examines whether or not the mind is still 
abiding on its original observed object. If one finds that the mind is no longer abiding on its 
original observed object, one should examine wh ether laxity or excitement has arisen. Having 
accomplished meditative stabilization, one should examine in this way from time to time, but 
neither at too long or too short intervals. If on e does this while the forc e of the previous mind 
has not yet been exhausted, one will quickly re cognize whether laxity or excitement have 
arisen. In short, when meditating, one should  examine in this way from time to time. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
H The need to practice again and again with mindfulness so as not to forget the meditation object  
It is necessary to engage in the practice that way, by just recalling and recalling the 
initial meditation object every so of ten – with powerful mindfulness and 
continuously. That is why this mode of sustaining mindfulness is set out in the 
Shravaka Levels  and why it says in Explanations on the Discrimination of the Middle and 
the Extremes :  
 
As for the statement ‘Mindfulness consists in not forgetting the 
meditation object’ – the instruct ion to make the mind abide is 
expressed through the mind. 
 One must remember the original object from ti me to time by applying strong and continual 
mindfulness. The way to develop meditative stabil ization by means of mindfulness is taught in 
the Hearer Grounds  and Explanations on the Discrimination  of the Middle and the Extremes . The 
latter text says that mindfulness is a non-forg etting of the observed object. Therefore, one 
should instruct the mind to abide on its object.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
The application of mindfulness has the purp ose of preventing one from forgetting 
the meditation object by straying away  from it. Therefore not forgetting the 
meditation object consists in expressing the object mentally, attending to it again 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
738 and again. It is like when , for instance, you are afraid that you might forget 
something you know and recall it again an d again – you will hardly forget it.  
 
Reliance on mindfulness prevents the mind from straying from the observed object and 
forgetting it. To not forget the observed object  is to continually set the mind on its object 
without giving it up and without changing to anothe r object. It is like the fact that in order to 
remember something one knows, one must strive to remember it again and again so as to not 
forget it. For example, if one wishes to memori ze a text, one needs to recite it each day in 
order to not forget it. If, on the other hand, on e memorizes a text but then does not recite it 
regularly, it will soon be forgotten. In a simi lar way, one should recall the observed object of 
meditation again and again. 
 You should try every day to meditate on an obje ct. It is not useful to meditate one day and 
then give it up, and then a few weeks later meditate on it again. By doing this, one’s 
meditation will not improve. Instead one will beco me tired and think that since meditation is 
not useful it is better to give it up and go da ncing, watch a movie, go  car racing, motorcycle 
racing, or bike racing, and so forth. This ca n happen. There are people who first think “I 
want to do this” but then suddenly later on gi ve everything up and become a homeless beggar, 
thinking that it is better not to have any resp onsibilities. However, later on other difficulties 
arise for them. There exist many different types of  mentalities because in our previous lives we 
familiarized with the afflictions and also fami liarized with meditation, virtuous actions, 
Buddhist philosophy or other philosophies. Due to our previous familiarity, we think that it is 
best to follow whatever is easiest for us. For th is reason we need contin uous joyous effort as 
well as mindfulness. You should take one single object as your meditation object, without changing it, and then meditate on it trying to a ttain calm abiding. Although this is not easy, if 
we make effort we can achieve it and then we wi ll even be able to fly without the need to pay 
for an airplane! I am joking, even birds and mosquitoes can fly, it does not require any 
realization! However, if human beings who, having  studied and meditated, become able to fly, 
this shows that they have a ttained some realizations.  
 Thursday afternoon, 25 January 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 262) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A2B-3 The length of sessions 
A How it is taught in Stages of Meditation   
Third: Now, if you wonder whether there is a specified measure [of time] for tying 
the mind to the meditation object [so one co uld] say: ‘place it just this long’ – the 
major sources such as Shravaka Levels  do not seem to maintain a clear length. 
However, {263} in the Last Stages of Meditation  it says:  
 
Like that, gradually, you should sit for 24 minutes184, one and a half 
hours185, three hours,186 or as long as you can. 
                                              
184 One "chu tshod", a unit based on traditiona l Indian time measurement and used in the Abhidharma . It is 
equivalent to one out of 60 parts of a day i.e., 24 minutes.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
739  
Apparently, this was set out in the contex t of the time measure for special insight 
meditation once calm abiding has been ac hieved, but to start with, in the context 
of practicing calm abiding it is obviously the same.  
 
Is there or is there not a certain length of time for which to tie the mind to its observed object 
by means of mindfulness? With re spect to this texts such as the Hearer Grounds , the 
Bodhisattva Grounds , and so forth do not clearly set out the length of sessions. However, 
Kamalashila’s Last Stages of Meditation  says that the length of a session should be one hour, or 
one sixth of a day (by dividing the day in to  six parts dawn, morning, mid-morning and so 
forth as mentioned in the Six Session Guru Yoga ), or for however long one can set the mind on 
its object. This text, however, does not refer to  the length of a sessio n when achieving calm 
abiding but to the length of time of a session of special insight having already achieved calm 
abiding. However, on the occasion of practicing calm abiding the length is similar. In short, 
one should do a session that corresponds wi th how long one can keep the mind on its 
observed object. When one can no longer keep the mind on its object, one should stop the 
meditation session.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B How it is difficult for beginners to cut through [mental] sinking and excitement if the sessions are long  
In fact the method of sustaining mindfu lness and introspection as explained above 
– if you recall the meditation object ever y so often and check every so often – is 
indeed faultless even for long sessions.  H o w e v e r ,  i n  m o s t  b e g i n n e r s  e i t h e r  
forgetfulness arises if the sessions are long  – they wander off distractedly and then, 
even though sinking and excitement occur, they only recognize it after a long time 
and otherwise do not identify them quickly – or even if they do not forget what 
they are mindful of, they easily fall un der the power of sinking and excitement 
without identifying them quic kly. The former of those two [problems] impedes the 
development of strong mindfulness and the latter impedes the development of 
strong introspection, so that it is di fficult to cut sinking and excitement. In 
particular, it is a lot worse to forget the meditation object, let the mind wander 
and then fail to identify the occurrence of sinking and excitement than not to 
identify the occurrence of sinking and ex citement quickly while still remembering 
the meditation object. Therefore,  as the antidote that stops187 a deterioration of 
mindfulness upon mental wandering, the way of sustaining mindfulness explained 
above is very important.  
 It is difficult for beginners to cut laxity and ex citement if the sessions are too long. If the way 
of cultivating the mindfulness that abides  on its object without wandering and the 
introspection that examines whether laxity or excitement has arisen is that one recalls the 
                                                                                                                                                     
 
185 "half a night watch" 
186 "one night watch" – common measur e for a full meditation session  
187 JN: “the means stopping” changed to” as the antidote that stops” (‘ gog pa’i gnyen por ) 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
740 observed object from time to time, the session wi ll be faultless. However, for most beginners if 
the session is too long forgetfu lness arises and the mind wanders, losing its observed object. 
At that time it is difficult to recognize that laxity and excitement has arisen and one does not 
recognize their arisal for a long time. In other words, a beginner is unable to quickly recognize 
that laxity or excitement has arisen. And even if  one does not forget the object one is mindful 
of, one easily comes under the power of laxi ty and excitement and they are not quickly 
identified. Laxity interferes with the develo pment of strong mindfulness, and excitement 
interferes with the development of strong intros pection. Because of this, it is difficult to 
eliminate laxity and excitement.  
 In particular, to forget the observed object or  the instructions, to allow the mind to wander 
and become distracted, and fail to recognize the arisal of laxity and excitement is worse than 
not forgetting the object but allowing laxity an d excitement to arise without identifying them 
quickly. Therefore, one needs to eliminate the degeneration of mindfulness by applying the 
antidote through recalling the obse rved object from time to time. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C The need to proceed in accordance with one’s mental abilities and the like 
If forgetfulness straying here and ther e is great and if introspection quickly 
identifying sinking and excitement is weak, short sessions are needed. However, if 
forgetfulness hardly arises and it seems that sinking and excitement can be known 
quickly there is nothing wrong with slight ly longer sessions either. This is the 
intention behind the statement that the du ration – 24 minutes and so on – is not 
specified. In short, as it needs to be in a ccord with one’s mental abilities it says: “as 
long as you can”. 
 
One should proceed in accordance with one’s me ntal ability. Hence, if one’s mind wanders 
and has strong forgetfulness and if one is unable  to quickly identify laxity and excitement due 
to introspection being weak, one should do shor t sessions. If, on the other hand, forgetfulness 
rarely arises and laxity and excitement are quickl y recognized, there is no fault in doing longer 
sessions. This is why the duration of a session is not specified and can range from one hour to 
three hours and so forth. In short, because the length of the session sh ould accord with one’s 
mental abilities, it is said that it should be as long as possible. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Apart from that {264} rest in meditative equipoise unless you suffer some 
temporary physical or mental harm. If you do, you should not persist in your 
meditation but rather eliminate the consti tutional obstacles and then [continue to] 
meditate. That is the insight of experts, so you should understand this kind of 
activity to be another factor for the length of sessions.  
 Unless one suffers from physical or mental harm, such as bodily pain or mental unhappiness, one should remain in meditative equipoise. If, on the other hand, there arises pain in the 
body or unhappiness in the mind, one should not make effort in medita tion and instead stop 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
741 the session and strive to eliminate the harm. To meditate in this way is the intention of those 
who are skilled in meditation. In other words,  one should adapt the length of the session, 
meaning that if things are going well one should  make the session longer, whereas if there is 
harm to one’s body or mind one should stop  the session, eliminate the problem, and then 
return to meditation. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 264) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3 What to do once  the mind has been placed on the meditation 
object 
A What to do when excitement or sinking occur 
B What to do while free from sinking and excitement 
The third one has two points: what to do  when excitement or sinking occur and 
what to do while free from sinking and excitement. 
 
These points explain what to do when laxity an d excitement occur, and what to do when the 
mind is free from laxity and excitement. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A What to do when excitement or sinking occur 
1 Applying the remedy to non-identification of sinking and excitement 
2 Applying the remedy to a lack of effort at abandoning them even though they have been 
identified 
The first one has two points: applying the remedy to non-identification of sinking 
and excitement, and applying the remedy to  a lack of effort at abandoning them 
even though they have been identified.  
 
In order to identify laxity and excitement one needs to apply the antidote to their non-
identification. Also when there is a lack of e ffort at abandoning laxity and excitement one 
needs to apply the respective antidote.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1 Applying the remedy to non-identification of sinking and 
excitement 
A Determining the characteristics of sinking and excitement 
B The means of generating introspection that realizes them at the time of meditation 
The first one has two points: determinin g the characteristics of sinking and 
excitement and the means of generating in trospection that realizes these at the 
time of meditation. 
 
First the definitions of laxity and excitement are settled, and then the way to generate the 
introspection that realizes that laxity has arisen  or that excitement has arisen when meditating 
is explained. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1A Determining the characteristics of sinking and excitement 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
742 1 Determining the characteristics of excitement 
2 Determining the characteristics of sinking 
 
First the respective definitions of excitement and laxity are set out. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1A1 Determining the characteristics of excitement 
A Presenting the source 
First: As for excitement, it is just like it says in the Compendium of Abhidharma :  
 
“What is excitement? It is a mental restlessness that pursues pleasant 
features and belongs to attachment. It  has the function to disrupt calm 
abiding. 
 
Excitement is defined in the Compendium of Manifest Dharma  (Abhidharmasamucchaya ) as: an 
unpacified mind included in attachment that fo llows pleasant signs that has the function of 
interfering with calm abiding. In other words, when an attractive object appears to the mind 
attachment arises, disturbing one’s ability to remain single pointedly on an object. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B Three particularities – its object, aspect, and function 
There are three [particularities] here: It s object is something attractive and 
pleasant. Its aspect is the mind being restle ss and moving outward. As it is part of 
attachment it gets involved in its objects through the aspect of craving. Its function 
is to disrupt the mind abiding on an object.  
 
Excitement has three distinctions: observed obje ct, aspect, and function. The observed object 
of excitement is an attractive and pleasant obje ct. Its aspect is mind that is unpacified and 
goes outward. In fact it is opposite to calm  abiding which is a mind abiding inward. Because 
excitement is part of attachment, it engages obje cts with the aspect of cr aving. Its function is 
interfere with the mind abiding on its observed object.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C The manner in which it disrupts the mind abiding on an object 
While the mind is tied to a meditation object within, desirous excitement about 
forms, sounds and the like causes the mind to be drawn helplessly towards those 
objects and stray. Just as it is set out in the Praise of Confession :  
 
Regardless of how you are focused on calm abiding 
aiming at this and that again and again, 
the noose of the afflictions helplessly pulls your mind 
away from those things with the rope of attachment to objects. 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
743 How does excitement interfere with the mind abid ing on its object? While the mind is tied to 
its observed object, due to being overcome by th e excitement that is attachment to pleasant 
forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tangible objects, one’s mind is led to these objects and 
becomes distracted. The Praise to Confession  says that while observing calm abiding and 
focusing the mind on this and that again and ag ain, the noose of the afflictions overcomes the 
mind and pulls it from this to that with  the rope of attachment to objects.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1A2 Determining the characteristics of sinking 
A Lumping together sinking and dullness – as some do – goes against the scriptures 
{265} In many translations sinking is also rendered as discouragement. Some 
people consider mental dullness without scattering to other objects and without 
lucidity to be sinking, which is incorrect, for it says in the Middle Stages of 
Meditation  and in [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Thought  that sinking is born from 
dullness. In the Compendium of Abhidharma  sinking is indeed explained in the 
context of the secondary affliction dist raction. However, with the distraction 
explained there something positive may also come about, so it is not sure to be 
afflictive 188. 
 
H e r e  t h e  d e f i n i t i o n  o f  l a x i t y  o r  s i n k i n g  i s  t o  be settled. However, first it is explained that 
mixing laxity and dullness contradicts the scriptur es. In many translations laxity is translated 
as “discouragement” ( zhum pa ). Regarding that, some people assert that abiding without 
scattering to another object and a dull mind la cking in clarity is laxity, however this is not 
correct. This is because the Middle Stages of Meditation  and the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  say 
that laxity is produced fr om dullness. Although the Compendium of Manifest Dharma  explains 
laxity in the context of distraction, that distract ion is not necessarily afflicted as it can also be 
virtuous. For example, while meditating, when focusing single-pointedly on an object, the 
thought can arise that one needs to read one’s  sadhana, and although this disturbs one’s 
single-pointed mind it is a virtuous distract ion. Likewise, if when meditating the thought 
suddenly arises that one needs to do prostrat ions, it too is a virtuous distraction.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B How the identification of these two differs and the proof for that 
That is why in the Compendium of Abhidharma  and in the commentary on the 
Treasury  dullness refers to a heaviness, an in adequacy of body and mind that forms 
part of delusion. As for sinking, the mode of apprehension of the mind holding 
on to its object is slack and the object is  not held clearly or tightly. Therefore, 
although there is brightness – if the mode  of apprehending the object does not 
involve clarity there will be sinking. From the Middle Stages of Meditation :  
 
                                              
188 That does not mean distraction is a totally pure state without any mental affliction but rather that it does 
not necessary come under the 20 secondary afflictions,  because there are wholesom e varieties, too. (oral 
explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
744 You should understand that at time s when the mind does not see the 
meditation object clearly – like someone blind or someone entering 
darkness or someone closing his eyes – at those times there is sinking. 
 
In the other great texts I have not seen a clear take on the characteristics of 
sinking. 
 
Laxity and dullness are different. The Compendium of Manifest Dharma  and Commentary on the  
Treasury of Manifest Dharma  say that dullness is a part of ignorance or confusion and makes 
the body and mind heavy and unserviceable. In  t h e  c a s e  o f  l a x i t y  o r  s i n k i n g ,  t h e  m i n d  
apprehends its object loosely and the object is not clear or not held tightly. If the mode of 
apprehending the observed object is not clear, it becomes laxity. The Middle Stages of 
Meditation  says that when the mind does not see its object clearly, as though one were blind, 
or like a person entering darkness, or as though  the eyes were closed, there is laxity. In the 
other great texts the definition  of laxity is not clear.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C Moreover the two are not the same, because sinking may also have wholesome aspects 
Sinking may have either a wholesome or a neutral aspect whereas dullness is only 
unwholesome or neutral with respect to the obscurations189 and part of ignorance. 
 
Laxity and dullness are not the same because laxi ty is of two types, virtuous and unpredicted 
or neutral, whereas dullness is either non-virtuous  or obscured, that is, unpredicted, as is the 
case of the afflictions of the upper realm, an d is only part of ignorance or confusion.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D The need for both an aspect of mental clarity and firmness to eliminate sinking 
In the great texts it says that in order to eliminate sinking it is necessary to uplift 
the mind by meditating on an enjoyable physical form or light. Thus you 
counteract the object’s lack of clarity, which is like darkness having fallen within 
the mind, and stop the decline in the mi nd’s mode of apprehension. Then you 
require both the aspect of a clear obje ct and a firm mode of apprehension. 
 
In order to eliminate laxity there is a need fo r both clarity and firmness. The great texts say 
that in order to eliminate laxity, one should visu alize a virtuous object, such as the body of a 
buddha, or a clear light, which uplifts the mind. This eliminates  the lack of clarity of the 
object, which is like darkness that prevents the seeing of an object, and stops the decline of 
the mind’s mode of apprehension. Therefore, is  necessary to have both a clear object and a 
firm mode of apprehension.  
                                             
 
189 Although in the latter case it is not unwholesome it is nevertheless a mental affliction. Another example of 
such a "neutral mental affliction" is the attachment of be ings in higher realms. It also belongs to the afflictive 
obscurations, however, it is not cl assified as unwholesome. (oral ex planation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
745 Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 266) says: 
E The need to determine sinking in accordance with the Stages of Meditation  
{266} Excitement is easy to recognize, bu t sinking is not clearly identified in the 
great original sources which is why it is difficult to understand. Yet it is very 
important, for in it there is much ground  for the illusion that one’s meditative 
stabilization is without fault. Therefore you should examine and identify it well 
with subtle intelligence based on your experience and in accordance with the 
statements in Stages of Meditation . 
 
It is necessary to ascertain laxity in accordance with the Stages of Meditation . Excitement, a 
scattering outward of the mind, is easy to re cognize, whereas because laxity is not clearly 
identified even in the great scriptural sources it is difficult to understand. However, it is 
important to recognize it because when laxity arises one can mistake it for faultless meditative 
stabilization. Therefore, one should examine la xity well using intelligence based on experience 
in accordance with the Stages of Meditation  so that one becomes able to identify it.  
 
Friday morning, 26 January 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 266) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-1B The method for generating introspection that realizes these 
at the time of meditation  
1 The need to generate introspection realizing whether or not sinking or excitement have occurred 
Second: It is not enough to have a mere  understanding of sinking and excitement. 
Rather, the ability to generate intros pection knowing exactly whether or not 
sinking or excitement have occurred during  meditation is needed. In fact through 
the gradual development of powerful introspection you become capable not only 
of generating introspection identifying si nking and excitement as soon as they 
arise. You also need the introspection kn owing them when they have not actually 
arisen, when they are about to arise, for in the latter two Stages of Meditation  it says: 
 
If you suspect or notice mental sinking... 
 and  
If you suspect or notice the mind is excited... 
 
In order to realize whether or not laxity an d excitement have arisen, introspection is 
necessary. However, for this to happen, it is not enough to have a mere understanding of 
laxity, a sinking mind, and excitement, a distract ed mind. In addition, one must be able to 
generate the introspection that knows exactly wh ether laxity or excitement have arisen when 
setting the mind single-pointedly on its observed object. By gradually developing stronger 
introspection, one becomes able to generate the introspection that immediately recognizes 
that laxity or excitement have arisen. After that, one needs to generate introspection that 
knows they are about to arise even when they ha ve not yet actually arisen. This is because the 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
746 Stages of Meditation  says that even if one just suspects that laxity or excitement are about to 
arise, one needs to recognize it by applying introspection.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 If you do not apply introspection your meditation will come under the influence of sinking and 
excitement 
As long as this kind of introspection ha s not developed, even though you conclude 
that “From this point till that point ther e was flawless meditation without sinking 
or excitement”, this is unfounded, for ev en if sinking or excitement occur you will 
not be able ascertain them, given that powerful introspection has not developed. 
Thus it also says in [ Discrimination of ] the Middle and the Extremes : 
 
Realizing sinking and excitement...  
 
because in order to realize sinking and ex citement you need introspection. That 
being so, if introspection which cannot fa il to recognize sinking and excitement 
has not developed, you may even meditate for long, spending years without 
noticing the occurrence of sinking and excitement. 
 
If one does not rely on introspection at the ti me of meditation, one’s mind will be overcome 
by laxity and excitement. As long as one has not generated the introspection described above, 
one may think “From this point to  that, my meditative stabiliz ation was faultless, free from 
laxity and excitement,” where it is  not so in that even if laxity  or excitement arose one was not 
able to ascertain it because one has yet not developed strong enough introspection. Likewise, 
the Discrimination of  the Middle and the Extremes  says that to realize whether laxity and 
excitement have arisen introspection is import ant. Thus, as long as one does not have the 
introspection that unfailing recognizes that laxity and excitement have arisen, one may 
meditate even for years without recognizing that  laxity and excitement have arisen and that 
one is overcome by them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3 The method for sustaining mindfulness is very important as a cause of introspection 
Now how do you generate introspection? Its most important cause is the method 
of sustaining mindfulness presented earlie r. {267} If you can generate continuous 
mindfulness in that manner, you will be ab le to stop forgetting the object and 
wandering off and thereby counteract long spells of insensitivity to the occurrence 
of sinking and excitement. That way you will recognize sinking and excitement 
easily. This is very clear from the perspect ive of personal experience: the long time 
[it takes] to recognize sinking and excitement when mindfulness has decreased and 
the short time it take s when it has not.  
 
In order to generate introspection it is necessa ry to first cultivate mindfulness. Thus, how is 
introspection generated? The gene ration of the mindfulness that  i s  a b l e  t o  r e m a i n  o n  a n  
object is an important cause for the develo pment of introspection. If one generates 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
747 continuous mindfulness, one will not forget th e object and will not wander off, whereby the 
non-recognition of laxity and excitement for long  periods will be eliminated. In other words, 
one will easily think “Now laxity has arisen ” and “Now excitement has arisen.” One can 
understand this from the fact that when mindfu lness has degenerated it takes a long time to 
recognize that laxity and excitement have  arisen, whereas when mindfulness has not 
degenerated they are quickly recognized to have arisen.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
With this understanding Entering [Bodhisattva ] Behavior  says:  
 
Once mindfulness is there to stay at  
the gate of the mind in order to guard it, 
at that point introspection will come. 
 
The Explanatory Commentary on  [Discrimination of ] the Middle and the Extremes  also 
presents mindfulness as the cause of introspection.  
 When mindfulness is guarding the mind , introspection will arise. Also the Explanatory 
Commentary on  Discrimination of  the Middle and the Extremes  says that mindfulness is the cause 
of introspection.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
4 Standing guard continuously over the mind wandering off or not is the essence of sustaining 
introspection 
This one cause consists in focusing on the aspect of the deity’s body or whatever is 
[meant] to be apprehended or else on  the aspect of the apprehender, the 
experience, mere awareness, mere clarity etc. and then, while applying mindfulness 
as explained earlier, standing guard cont inuously over [mental] wandering or the 
absence of it and fixing the mind. This should be held to be the essence of 
sustaining introspection.  
 
To continuously examine whether or the mind is wandering off is the essential point of 
cultivating introspection. The one cause is that  while the mind observes the aspect that is 
apprehended – the deity’s body and so forth – or  observes the apprehended aspect such as the 
experience that is mere cognizing and mere knowing, from within a state of relying on 
mindfulness one examines whether or not the mind has wandered to another object, and 
holds the mind on its object. This is the e ssential point of cultivating introspection. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In accordance with that, Engaging in  [Bodhisattva ] Behavior  also says: 
 
The act of examining time and again 
the current state of body and mind – 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
748 in summary – just that alone is the 
mark of guarding introspection. 
 
Shantideva’s Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva  says that one should examine one’s body 
and mind again and again, and that just this  in brief is the definition of guarding 
introspection.  
 When the body is tired it becomes more  and more heavy whereupon the mind also 
becomes more and more unclear. When the mind  becomes unclear, laxity arises, and when 
the mind moves to another object, excitement arises. This is why one needs to check one’s 
body and mind, examining again and again what they are doing.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
5 The need to differentiate well between the methods of sustaining mindfulness and introspection 
By doing this you therefore generate in trospection recognizing any sinking and 
excitement about to arise, and – by means of applying mindfulness – forgetfulness 
where the mind wanders and goes off is st opped so that you focus well. You need 
to distinguish them.  
 
By doing as above, one will generate the intr ospection that recognizes whether laxity and 
excitement are about to arise. By means of re lying upon mindfulness, the mind that forgets 
the observed object or the instru ctions and wanders off is ceased. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2 Applying the antidote to not making an effort at giving up 
sinking and excitement – although one has identified them 
A The need to intend the application of the antidote 
B How to actually apply it 
 
One must rely upon the antidote to not making  an effort to abandon laxity and excitement 
even though they have been identified.  
 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2A The need to intend the application of the antidote 
Second: As explained earlier working well at the method of sustaining mindfulness 
and introspection will generate strong mindfulness so that even subtle sinking and 
excitement can be recognized by means of  introspection. Hence there will not be 
the fault of not identifying sinking and excitement. However, the failure to try 
hard and commit yourself – not making an e ffort to stop the two as soon as they 
arise or non-application – {268} is a great fault of meditative stabilization, so you 
should cultivate the intention referred to as  application with regard to the antidote 
or endeavour.  
 
As explained previously, by understanding well the way in which to cultivate mindfulness and 
introspection, one will generate strong mind fulness whereby one will be able to recognize 
even subtle laxity and excitement by means of in trospection. Due to this, there will not be the 
fault of not identifying laxity and excitement. Ho wever, if one of them arises but one does not 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
749 strive to eliminate it immediately, it is necessa ry to apply the antidote to this non-application 
of the antidote which is a great fault to developi ng meditative stabilization. In this case, the 
antidote is the intention that is imputed as “a pplication” or “effort” in the antidote. Intention 
is included among the five omnipresent mental fact ors. In this context it is the mental factor 
that moves the mind toward the antidote. In tention is called mental action because it 
produces actions of body and speech. 
 In short, if laxity or excitement arise but one does not apply its antidote, this is a fault and, 
therefore, it is important to immediately strive  to apply it. For this, intention is necessary. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B The actual manner of application 
1 Identification of intention and how to stop sinking and excitement 
2 Identifying the causes in dependence on which sinking and excitement arise 
This [one] has two points: identification of intention and how to stop sinking and 
excitement, and identifying the causes in dependence on which sinking and 
excitement arise.  
 
First intention is identified and the way in whic h to stop laxity and excitement are explained, 
and then the causes of laxity and excitement are identified. 
 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1 Identification of intention and how to stop sinking and 
excitement 
A Identification of intention 
B How to stop sinking and excitement 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1A Identification of intention 
First: In the Compendium of Abhidharma  it says:  
 
What is intention? It is the mind  creating compositional factors – 
mental activity with the function of causing the mind to engage in 
wholesome, unwholesome, or neutral things. 
 
That means the mental factor moving th e mind and impelling it to something 
wholesome, unwholesome, or neutral, whatev er it is – like iron moving under the 
power of a magnet without any control – is  intention. Here you should therefore 
appreciate the intention motivating th e mind to get rid of any sinking or 
excitement once they occur.  
 
The Compendium of Manifest Dharma  says that intention is mental  action that has the function 
of making the mind engage in the virtuous , non-virtuous, and unpredicted (that is, the 
neither virtuous nor non-virtuous). In other word s, intention is the mental factor that moves 
the mind toward that which is either virtuous, non-virtuous, or unpredic ted. When laxity and 
excitement arise, intention is what moves the mind toward the antidote that abandons them.  
 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1B How to stop sinking and excitement 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
750 1 How to stop sinking 
2 How to stop excitement 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1B-1 How to stop sinking 
A Counteracting it by considering something joyful or the quality of light etc. 
Now, how do you stop sinking and excitement? A mind that is sinking has 
withdrawn inward too much and lost it s [firm] manner of apprehending the 
object. For that reason it says in the First Stages of Meditation  that you should 
consider a cause for the mind to move ou twards again, something joyful, in fact 
like the Buddha’s body rather than some thing joyful giving rise to mental 
afflictions. Or else if you consider the qu ality of light such as sunshine and cleanse 
the sinking [mind], this will immediately tighten the manner of apprehending the 
object and maintain it. At this point, do  not meditate on a disenchanting object, 
for weariness is a cause for the mind to withdraw inward. If you feel uplifted 
having examined any object you want to examine with discriminating wisdom, this 
will also counter sinking.  
 
How are laxity or sinking stopped? Laxity is coun teracted by mental attention to joyful things 
and to light. A lax mind has withdrawn too strongly inside due to which the mode of 
apprehension of the observed object has loosened . In order to counteract this, one must make 
the mind go a bit outward. To do this one should visualize something that makes one happy and joyful, for example, a beautiful form such as the body of the Buddha, and that does not 
cause afflictions to arise. One should not visu alize an attractive man or woman, or a nice 
horse, car, or telephone, which are causes fo r attachment to arise! Instead, one should 
imagine a virtuous object, and not an object of attachment that one likes very much such as 
delicious food. Such objects are not what are meant here.   Alternatively one can mentally imagine sunlight or moonlight, some kind of clear light, as 
this can also eliminate sinking mind. Just like when the clouds are eliminated from the sky, 
the mind becomes bright again. By doing this , the mode of apprehension of the observed 
object will immediately tighten whereupon on e should resume one’s meditation. This was 
taught by Kamalashila in his First Stages of Meditation .  
 One should not meditate on a disenchanting ob ject as this will make the mind withdraw 
even more inward and will not counter laxity. One can also uplift the mind by means of the 
wisdom of individual investigation, whereby laxity is eliminated.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
From the Summary of Perfections :  
 
Becoming slack uplift the mind through the 
power of striving for special insight. 
 By doing the force of doing analytical meditati on, slackness will be eliminated and the mind 
will be uplifted.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
751 B How to counteract [sinking] by heightening the mind’s mode of apprehension 
Thus, sinking or slackness {269} consists in the mind sinking because its manner of 
apprehending the meditation object ha s gone down, and getting slack upon 
withdrawing inside. Consequently, it is countered by heightening the manner of 
apprehension and expanding the meditation  object so as to uplift the mind.  
 
Laxity is counteracted by heightening the mo de of apprehension of the mind. Laxity or 
slackness ( zhum pa ) is that due to the mode of apprehension of the observed object declining 
there is laxity, and due to the mind withdrawin g inside there is slackness. Therefore, one 
should uplift or heighten the mode of appreh ension and extend the observed object through 
making it more vast. In this way laxity or slackness can be eliminated.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In Essence of the Middle Way  it says: 
 
When slack expand the mind [again] by 
meditating on spacious objects. 
 and  
When slack uplift yourself through seeing the benefits of joyous effort. 
 
The Essence of the Middle Way  says that when the mind is sl ack one should meditate on the 
observed object as being more vast, whereby th e mind will become more spacious and lighter. 
Also when there is slackness, one should contemplate the benefits of joyous effort. 
 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
The most important antidote for putting an end to sinking: if you consider the 
benefits of the Three Jewels and bodhichi tta as well as the great value of the 
leisures you have gained etc. it should have the same effect as cold water if it is splashed into a tired [person’s] face – refr eshing the awareness. It[s effectiveness] 
depends on the personal experience you have  got out of analytical meditation with 
discriminating awareness in the direction of the benefits.  
 The most important antidote to laxity is to co nsider the benefits of the Three Jewels and the 
benefits of bodhichitta, which fulfills one’s  own and others’ purpose, as well as the 
meaningfulness of this precious human rebirth en dowed with the eighteen qualities. Doing so 
is likened to splashing cold water on one’s face  when one is sleepy, in that the mind becomes 
refreshed and clearer. However, this depend s on the experience that comes from doing 
analytical meditation that individually  investigates the side of benefits. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
752 C Use of the idea of light, purifying meditation objec ts, and the like specifically against a vagueness of 
the meditation object such as if darkness had fallen upon the mind 
If you apply the antidote, meditation on light, to the causes that reinforce the 
development of sinking – fogginess, drowsiness, and mental states with an aspect 
of darkness inducing those two – sinkin g which depends on them will also not 
develop and that which has already developed will be countered.  
 
In particular, when darkness befalls the mind, due to which the object becomes unclear, one 
should discriminate light (sunlight or moonlight or  even electrical light!) and take an observed 
object of lucid faith. The causes of developing  laxity are darkness or fogginess, drowsiness or 
sleepiness, and a mind that has the aspect of darkness which induce s these two. It is 
eliminated by meditating on light or illumination . If one relies upon this antidote, the laxity 
that depends on them will not develop and that which has already been developed will be countered.  
 The Shravaka Levels  also talk about having a break from one’s practice, taking to 
mind the characteristics of light and fa miliarizing oneself with them again and 
again, uplifting the mind with any of six [topics]: the Three Jewels, ethical 
discipline, giving and the recollection of deities, or other purifying meditation 
objects, reciting teachings indicati ng the disadvantages of fogginess and 
drowsiness, looking to the sides or at th e moon and the stars, washing one’s face 
[with water] and so forth. 
 When complete darkness and sleepiness arise, on e should take a break and go for a walk, or 
imagine a light pervading one’s body, or recall the six: (1-3) the Three Jewels (the Buddha 
Jewel, Dharma Jewel, and Sangha Jewel), (4) mo rality, (5) the mind of  giving, and (6) one’s 
deity. Alternatively, one should uplift the mind with an observed object of clear faith that is other than them, read texts ab out the disadvantages of darkne ss and drowsiness, look to the 
ten directions or at the moon or stars, wash one’s face with cold water, and so forth. In this 
way it is possible to eliminate darkness and dr owsiness. One should examine which of these 
methods works for oneself. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D How to apply special corrective measures against subtle and gross sinking separately 
Furthermore, if the mental sinking is very slight and does not occur more than 
every so often you should tauten the mode  of apprehension of  the mind as you 
[continue to] meditate. However, if the mind is sinking deeply again and again 
{270} stop your meditation, apply the an tidotes as appropriate and [continue to] 
meditate once sinking has been cleared away . If the object the mind is holding on 
to is unclear and whatever aspect, slight  or strong, of something like darkness 
falling upon the mind emerges, take up the characteristics of lights such as a butter 
lamp, fire, and sunshine. If you familiariz e yourself with them again and again a 
great mental lucidity will develop.  
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
753 I f  l a x i t y  i s  v e r y  s l i g h t  o r  d o e s  n o t  o c c u r  very often, one should tighten the mode of 
apprehension and continue meditating. If, on the other hand, laxity is thick and occurs 
repeatedly, one should stop one’s meditati on and apply an appropriate antidote, and 
continue to meditate only when the laxity has been eliminated. If the apprehended object is 
unclear and the mind is dark, whether slightly or  thickly, one should imagine light, such as 
that of a butter lamp, fire, or sunshine, and familiarize with it, whereby the mind will become 
very clear and lucid.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B1B-2 How to stop excitement 
A The need generally to take to mind sobering matters as an antidote to excitement 
When it comes to excitement, the mind ru ns after forms, sounds and the like due 
to attachment, so for that you should take  to mind sobering matters, causes for the 
mind to withdraw inward. However, as s oon as the excitement has thereby been 
calmed, you rest your mind in equipoise.  
 
The antidote to excitement in general is to take to mind something that makes the mind 
despair. Excitement, due to attachment, makes th e mind go after attractive forms (beautiful 
colors and shapes), sounds (pleasant music or chanting), odors, tastes, and tactile objects. 
Since the mind is wandering outward, in order to counteract this one needs to withdraw the 
mind inward by thinking of something that on e does not like. When the excitement has been 
pacified, one should immediately resume one’s meditation.  
In Essence of the Middle Way  it says: 
 
Pacify excitement by considering things like impermanence”  
 and  
You should collect the distracted mind by looking at faults of the marks of distraction. 
 
The Essence of the Middle Way  says that excitement is pacified by thinking about 
impermanence and so forth. For example, one ca n meditate on the fact that an apparently 
beautiful object can change into an ugly obje ct. One can also do the nine-round meditation 
on death-impermanence, or meditate on the vari ous types of sufferings such as the suffering 
of suffering, suffering of change, and pervasive suffering. By meditating on such topics, 
excitement is eliminated. This text also says th at when the mind is distracted one should look 
at the faults of distraction, whereby the mind wi ll once again be withdrawn inside rather than 
wandering outside.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 22-26 January 2007 (16) 
754 B How to apply special corrective measures against subtle and gross excitement separately 
If intense or long lasting excitement occurs, it is effective to relax the meditation 
for a while and meditate on something disi llusioning, rather than to keep drawing 
in and placing the mind because of its tendency to move outward. Once the 
excitement is not as significant [anymore], draw in the distracted mind and tie it to 
the meditation object. In the Summary of Perfections  it says:  
 
Whenever your mind has got excited 
counter this through peaceful calm. 
 With an excited mind, you should not consider inspiring or joyful objects, for they are causes of external distraction. 
 When strong and continuous excitement arises  during meditation, one should give up the 
meditation for a while, that is, take a break fr om the observed object of one’s meditation, and 
meditate on something that makes one despair, such as the fact that everything in cyclic 
existence is imperfect and faulty . In this way one should rein force the thought of definite 
emergence by thinking about the fact that although there seem to be objects of enjoyment in 
cyclic existence, in fact they only deceive us in that they bring only suffering and problems.  
 When the excitement is no longer strong, one should once again tie the mind to its 
observed object. The Summary of Perfections  says that when excitement arises, one should 
counteract it by means of calm abiding. In short, when the mind is excited, one should not take a pleasant and enjoyable object as one’s observed object, since this will only cause the 
mind to wander outward even more.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3A-2B2 Identification of causes which the development of sinking 
and excitement depend on 
A Common causes of sinking and excitement 
Second: The common causes of both sink ing and excitement are not to guard 
one’s sense doors, not to eat judiciousl y, not to make an effort at one’s 
[meditation] practice without sleeping duri ng the first and last part of the night, 
and to remain without introspection.  
 
Next the cause for the arisal of laxity and ex citement are identified. Common causes for the 
arisal of laxity and excitement are to not guar d the doors of the senses, the eyes, ears, nose, 
tongue, and body; to not eat the right amount bu t instead too overeat; to not put effort into 
not sleeping in the first and last parts of the night; and to not have introspection. Therefore, 
one should guard the senses, eat the right amou nt, and sleep at the right times. Although 
some people think that a lot of sleep, even ten or  eleven hours, is good for the body, this is 
not the case. For example, Choden Rinpoche’s attendant does not sleep at night but when 
everyone else is asleep he does his mantras an d so forth, and then goes to bed about two in 
the morning. He then sleeps until eleven the ne xt morning, has breakfast at eleven thirty, 
lunch at five or six in the evening, and then di nner after midnight! This is not a good habit to 
get into.         END 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
755 Monday afternoon, 29 January 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 270) says: 
B Causes of sinking 
The causes of sinking are great sleepiness, {271} excessive looseness with regard to 
the mind holding on to its meditation object, not getting the balance of calm 
abiding and special insight right and cult ivating calm abiding too much, the mind 
remaining as though in darkness, and no t enjoying placement on the meditation 
object.  
 
The causes of sinking or laxity are: 
1. very strong sleepiness,  
2. excessive looseness with respect to the mind holding its observed object,  
3. strong reliance on calm abiding without ca lm abiding and special insight being balanced,  
4. the mind abiding as though dark, and 5. not liking to focus on the observed object.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C Causes of excitement 
The causes of excitement were taught to be [too] little disillusionment, the mind 
being to high-strung with regard to the me ditation object, a lack of effort, and the 
mind being distracted by thoughts of close ones etc. 
 
The causes of excitement are: 
1. little disillusionment or renunciation, 
2. excessive tightness of the mind wi th respect to its observed object, 
3. a lack of familiarity with effort, 4. the mind being distracted by conceptions about one’s loved ones.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D If you have not persevered in getting rid of even su btle sinking and excitement you will not realize the 
achievement of perfect m editative stabilization  
Therefore you need to be[come] aware, through introspection, of even subtle 
aspects of sinking and excitement and stop them all entirely. If you give up, 
thinking: “In the beginning, although I cut through excitement, distraction and 
the like, they were never cut off [completel y], so I shall not cut through them [any 
longer]” or if you think “Unless they are intense, continued, and long-lasting, there 
is no need to cut through them, because th ey are brief and weak, so that no karma 
will be accumulated”, you will not realiz e the achievement of perfect meditative 
stabilization. That is because you will be  departing from the conclusion Venerable 
Maitreya and others have reached on how to achieve meditative stabilization. 
 
Without putting effort into abandoning subtle laxity and excitement it is not possible to 
achieve meditative stabilization. Therefore, it is  necessary to recognize even subtle laxity and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
756 excitement by means of introspection and put a st op to them entirely. If one gives up through 
thinking “If I do not eliminate excitement, distra ction, and so forth at the beginning, later on 
it will be difficult to eliminate them, therefore I will not strive to eliminate them,” and thinks 
“Unless they are intense and a long-lasting co ntinuum there is no need to eliminate them, 
whereas if they are short lasting and weak there is a need to eliminate them,” this shows that 
one does not understand how to achieve pure meditative stabilization. Thus, one will be far 
from understanding how Venerable Maitreya and others have settled the way in meditative 
stabilization is accomplished.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
E When you only have the factors of st ability and the limpidity,  that of brilliance be ing weak, there is no 
hope for meditati ve stabilization 
Therefore, lure your mind away from distra ction and excitement so as to tie it to 
the meditation object within and seek th e stability factor. Whenever the stability 
factor has emerged beware of sinking and br ing out the brilliance factor. Intent on 
both of these in turn, you will achieve im peccable meditative stabilization, but do 
not trust mere limpidity without the factor  of brilliance which has an intensity 
about its mode of apprehension. 
 
When one merely has the factors of abiding and li mpidity but lacks the factor of clarity, it is 
not possible to achieve meditative stabilization. One should pull the mind away from 
scattering and excitement, tying the mind to its observed object, and seek the factor of 
abiding. Whenever the factor of abiding arises ,  o n e  s h o u l d  b e w a r e  o f  l a x i t y  a n d  m a k e  t h e  
factor of clarity strong. Throug h alternating these two, one will achieve faultless meditative 
stabilization. However, one should not trust in mere limpidity that is without the factor of 
clarity. Instead, it is necessary to see the object  clearly and for the mind to be very lucid. If 
both factors – abiding and limpidity – are not pr esent one’s meditative stabilization will be 
faulty.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A3B What to do at times without sinking or excitement 
1 As it is a mistake to keep applying antidotes although sinking and excitement have been cut off, there 
is a need to resort to the antidote of that, the equanimity of natural composure 
Second: when even subtle sinking and exci tement have been cut off as explained 
earlier and the mind enters into [a st ate of] perfect equa nimity without the 
imbalance of either sinking or excitement  developing through meditation, at that 
time it would be a mistake if you applie d antidotes or made an[y] effort, so you 
should practice equanimity as the antidote. {272}  
 
If one applies an antidote when the mind is free from laxity and excitement, it is a fault. In 
this case one needs to rely on equanimity as th e antidote to this over  application. If when 
subtle laxity and excitement have been cut off and neither laxity or excitement have arisen, that is, the mind is neither sinking or wanderin g off, one applies an antidote or makes effort, 
this becomes a fault with respect to attaining single-pointed meditative stabilization. The 
antidote to this is equanimity.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
757  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
This is how you go wrong through applicat ion and effort: as you keep bringing the 
mind back inward and uplifting it whenever  it is sinking, you grow confident that 
sinking and excitement will not [continue to] come on in every session. At that 
stage it would be a mistake to worry about sinking or worry greatly about 
excitement. If you do, your mind is goin g to wander, so you will need to know 
[how to] relax then. That is to say rela x the effort rather than let go off the 
intensity of your mode of apprehension.  
 
In this case application and making effort become  a fault. In other words, if the mind is free 
from laxity and excitement but still one makes an effort, it becomes a fault with respect to attaining meditative stabilization. One should  bring the mind inside and uplift it when 
sinking, whereby one becomes confident that laxity  and excitement will not arise. At that time 
worrying “Perhaps laxity will arise” and “Perhaps  excitement will arise” will cause the mind to 
become distracted, therefore one needs to keep the mind relaxed and quiet. In other words, 
one should relax one’s effort but without givi ng up holding the observed object strongly. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 That holds once you are past the peak of sinking and excitement 
Therefore this cultivation of equanimity applies once you are past the peak of 
sinking and excitement, it is not practiced every time sinking or excitement do not 
occur190, because when you have not yet passed the peak for sinking and 
excitement there is no equanimity.  
 
The cultivation of equanimity is not done on a ll occasions on which laxity and excitement do 
not occur, but only after having passed the peak of laxity and excitement as before this there 
is no equanimity. In other words, one needs to  cultivate equanimity when one has passed the 
peak of laxity and excitement.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3 How to identify that very equanimity 
Now, what is this equanimity? Among the three kinds of equanimity – equanimity 
of feelings, immeasurable equanimity, and eq uanimity of application – it is the last 
one [we are dealing with here]. Its essence is just as explained in the Shravaka 
Levels : it is the mind in equipoise on its obje ct from the sphere of calm abiding or 
special insight, falling into its natural stat e, engaging [in its object] spontaneously, 
and attaining pliability. Once you have achieved this kind of equanimity you 
should fully actualize it, not striving too hard, as long as there is no sinking or 
excitement.  
 
                                              
190 JN “occur” changed to “do not occur” ( ma byung ba ) 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
758 What type of equanimity is this equanimity? Equanimity that is a feeling, immeasurable 
equanimity, or the equanimity that is a composit ional factor? It is the equanimity that is a 
compositional factor ( ‘du byed btang snyoms ). The Hearer Grounds  says that its entity is a mind 
equipoised on its observed object that is in th e direction of calm abiding and special insight, 
rests in its natural state, engages naturally, and has attained serviceability. Having achieved the 
equanimity that is a compositional factor, wh en cultivating meditative stabilization and 
neither laxity or excitement has arisen, one sh ould manifest that equanimity but not make 
strong effort.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
4 Presentation of the sour ces for these explanations  on how to develop perfec t meditative stabilization 
like that 
Like it says in [ Discriminating Between ] the Middle and the Extremes : 
 
On that basis, pliancy, 
all purposes will be attained. 
They spring from the causes relied upon: 
the eight applications removing five faults – 
laziness, forgetfulness 
of the instructions, excitement and sinking, 
non-application and application, these are held to be the five faults. The base and what is based on it, 
the cause and the effect of it
191, 
not to forget the object perceived, 
realizing excitement and sinking, application to remove them, when stilled {273} getting into a state of ease. 
 By means of serviceability of body and mind, all purposes are achieved. By abandoning the five faults and relying on the eight applications , meditative stabilization is achieved. The five 
faults are (1) laziness, (2) forgetting the observ ed object or the instructions, (3) laxity and 
excitement, (4) the non-applicatio n of the antidote when either laxity or excitement have 
arisen, and (5) the application of the antidote wh en neither laxity or excitement have arisen.  
 The antidotes to laziness are set out saying “t he base and what is based on it, the cause and 
the effect of it.” The antidotes to the other four faults are: (1) to not forget the observed 
object, (2) to investigate whether laxity or excitement have aris en, (3) to manifestly apply the 
antidote that abandons them, and (4) to set the mind in its natural stat e when they have been 
pacified.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
                                             
 
191 cf. 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2A1B: Individual explanations on the four  antidotes to laziness 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
759 5 Explaining the meaning of the quotation in detail 
Here “on that basis” is on the basis of mustering up joyous effort in order to 
eliminate unfavourable conditions – from  that the meditative stabilization of 
mental pliancy is born. Furthermore, as it  is the footing or basis of miraculous 
powers bringing about all purposes such as clairvoyance, it achieves those 
purposes. Such meditative stabilization is born from the cause of giving up five 
faults and relying on eight applications.  
 
“Based on that” means that based on genera ting joyous effort in order to eliminate 
unfavorable conditions, this being laziness, the meditative stabilization that is a serviceable 
mind arises. Since this meditative stabilization is the cause of achieving the legs of magical 
emanation that accomplish all purposes, such as  the six clairvoyances, the five eyes, and so 
forth; it is the basis or source, whereby all purposes are achieved. Such meditative 
stabilization, which is mainly calm abiding, co mes from the cause that is abandoning the five 
faults and relying on the eight applications.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
The five faults: when it is time for you to  apply yourself, laziness is a fault, because 
you will not apply yourself to meditative st abilization. When you make an effort at 
meditative stabilization, forgetting the inst ructions is a fault, for if you forget the 
meditation object there will be no medita tive equipoise of the mind on the object. 
With regard to equipoise, sinking and ex citement are faults, because they cause 
mental pliancy to be lacking. When there is  sinking or excitement, it is a fault not 
to try hard, for that way these two will no t be pacified. Once you have got rid of 
sinking and excitement, the intention to a pply remedies is a fault. If you count 
sinking and excitement as one they come to five, if divided up there is six as set out 
in Stages of Meditation . 
 
At the time of application, laziness is a fault because due to it one does not apply oneself to 
meditative stabilization. Instead one thinks “Tod ay I am too tired, I cannot concentrate. It is 
better for me to sleep. It is better for me to watch a movie. It is better for me to go for a walk, 
to go dancing, and so forth,” due to which one does not meditate in order to develop 
meditative stabilization.   Then even when one puts effort into meditati ve stabilization, when setting the mind on its 
observed object one forgets the instructions one received regarding meditation. This is a fault 
because if one forgets the observed object, ther e is no meditative equipoise on the observed 
object. When equipoised, if laxity or excitement  arise, these two are faults because they make 
the mind unserviceable. When laxity and exciteme nt arise, if one does not make an effort to 
apply the antidote this is a fault because these tw o will not be pacified. Therefore, at this time 
the intention the moves the mind toward the anti dote is necessary. On the other hand, if the 
mind is free from laxity and excitement, the intention to apply the an tidote is a fault.  
 When laxity and excitement are counted toge ther as one fault there are a total of five 
faults, but when they are counted separate ly there are six faults as mentioned in Stages of 
Meditation . 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
760  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Among their eight antidotes, applications  for abandoning them, laziness has four. 
They are faith, aspiration, effort, an d suppleness. Then the antidotes to 
forgetfulness, sinking and excitement , non-application [of antidotes], and 
application [of antidotes] are mindfulness,  introspection, the intention to apply 
antidotes and [settling the mind into] the equanimity of natural ease, respectively. 
They have already been explained above. 
 
The five faults are laziness, forgetfulness, la xity and excitement, non-application, and over-
application. There are four antidotes to laziness:  (1) faith, (2) aspiration, (3) effort, and (4) 
pliancy. The antidote to forgetfulness is mindfuln ess, the antidote to la xity and excitement is 
introspection, the antidote to non-application is the intention to apply the antidote, and the 
antidote to over-application is th e equanimity in which the mind is  set in its natural state (this 
being the equanimity of compositional factors from among the three types of equanimity).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
6 How this manner of  sustaining [meditative stabilization] is  common to all of sutra and mantra 
This is common to all the instructions on  sustaining the mind in single-pointed 
meditative stabilization having freed it  from sinking and excitement through 
mindfulness and introspection. Therefore, you should not consider it a specific 
detail of the sutra system which, however, is  not required in mantra. {274} It is also 
taught in many highest yoga tantras.  
 
This way of cultivating meditative stabilization is common to both sutra and tantra. In other 
words, the instructions to cultivate meditative stabilization by freeing the mind from laxity 
and excitement by means of mindfulness and introspection are common to sutra and tantra. 
In other words, one should not make the mist ake of thinking that these instructions are 
specific to the perfection vehicle and do not a pply to mantra since they are also taught in 
many highest yoga tantras. In ot her words, these instructions ar e applicable to both sutra and 
tantra. Whereas some people like sutra and othe rs like tantra, there are some people who do 
not like either sutra or tantra. Instead they sit in the meditation posture with their eyes closed 
and empty their mind of all thoughts, thinking  that this is the BEST meditation. Other 
people want to meditate on mahamudra. Once someone asked me to teach mahamudra 
meditation but I responded saying that I did no t know this practice! Someone else asked me 
for instructions on dream yoga, and I told him that if he went to sleep, dream yoga would 
arise! Someone else asked me for instructions on  the Six Yogas of Naropa but I told him that 
I did not remember anything about them! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 274) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B The stages in which mental abiding arises based on it 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
761 1 The actual stages of mental abiding 
2 The method for achieving them by means of the six powers 
3 How it has four types of attention 
The second one has three points: The actual  stages of mental abiding, the method 
for achieving them by means of the six powers and how it has four types of 
attention. 
 
Next the stages of the nine mental abidings are explained, as well as ho w they are achieved by 
the six powers and the four types of mental attention.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B1 The actual stages of mental abiding 
[A Placement of the mind 
B Continuous placement 
C Patchy placement 
D Close placement 
E Taming 
F Pacification 
G Complete pacification 
H Making single-pointed 
I Even placement] 
First: There are nine [of them]: 
[A] Placing the mind on such and such  consists in gathering the mind [, 
withdrawing it] from all external objects and fixing it on th e meditation object 
within. In Ornament of the Sutras  it says:  
 
Having fixed the mind on the object...192 
 
One should place or set the mind on its observ e d  o b j e c t  b y  n o t  a l l o w i n g  i t  t o  g o  o u t  t o  
external objects such as forms, sounds, and so  forth and instead withdrawing it inward and 
focusing it on the observed object. Likewise, the Ornament  of Sutras  says to focus the mind on 
the observed object.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[B] Placing the mind continuously: Having  initially fixed the mind you keep it 
placed on the meditation object over a period of time without wandering off to 
anything else.  
 
Do not let it wander at all in that period. 
 Having focused the mind, one should not allow it to be distracted to other objects but set it 
continuously on its observed object. Likewise, the Ornament  of Sutras  says not to be distracted 
to other objects. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
                                             
 
192 Unless identified otherwise al l the following quotations are taken from the same text. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
762  
[C] Patchy placement: If you get distract ed through forgetfulness and your mind 
wanders outward, you notice and tie it to the true meditation object again. 
 
Knowing mental wandering quickly, 
you should patch it up again. 
 
Resetting or patchy placement is that when the mind is distracted by forgetfulness and 
wanders outward, one should recognize this and once again set the mind on its observed 
object. The Ornament  of Sutras says that having quickly realized  that the mind is distracted, 
one should once again set it on its object.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[D] Close placement is explained as follows in the Instructions on th e Perfection of 
Wisdom : The mind, extensive by nature, is ga thered again and again and thus made 
more subtle, so that placement gets be tter and better – in agreement with the 
statement: 
 
Intelligent people should more and more gather the mind internally. 
 
Close setting or close placement is, as explained in the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom , 
that the mind which is very vast by nature is withdrawn again and again, thus making it more 
subtle, whereby setting improves. The Ornament  of Sutras  also says that the intelligent, 
improving more and more, should gather the mind inside.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[E] Taming: Having considered the positive  traits of meditative stabilization you 
rejoice in it. 
 
Then, as you see the positive traits, you tame the mind in meditative stabilization. 
 Taming or subduing is that through thinking ab out the qualities of meditative stabilization, 
one comes to enjoy or like it. The Ornament  of Sutras  says that by seeing its qualities, the mind 
becomes subdued with respect to meditative stabilization.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[F] Pacification: Having recognized distract ion as a fault, you pacify aversion to 
meditative stabilization. 
 
Seeing distraction as a fault 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
763 you should still aversion to it. 
 
Pacification means that by seeing distraction as  a fault, one pacifies dislike for meditative 
stabilization. The Ornament  of Sutras  also says that seeing distractio n as a fault, dislike for it is 
pacified. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[G] Complete pacification: completely pacifying instances of desire, mental 
unhappiness, dullness, sleepiness etc.  
Desire, unhappiness and the like should be pacified as they appear. 
 
Complete pacification is the pacification of attachment, mental unhappiness, darkness, sleep, 
and so forth. In other words, when there is attachment to pleasant forms, sounds, odors, 
tastes, and tactile objects, as well as when th ere is mental unhappiness, they are immediately 
pacified. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[H] Making single-pointed: making an effort for one’s mental engagement to 
become effortless.  
Then, by means of restraint and effort, {275} along with actual application you get it to come about naturally. 
 M a k i n g  t h e  m i n d  s i n g l e - p o i n t e d  i s  t o  m a k e  e f f o r t  i n  o r d e r  t o  e n g a g e  e f f o r t l e s s l y .  T h e  
Ornament  of Sutras  says that by means of restraint with  effort, together with application in 
intention it will arise naturally. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[I] ‘Even placement’ is what the Stages of Meditation  says for establishing equanimity 
once the mind has become even. In the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  it is 
the expression [used] for spontaneous, natural engagement due to the habit of 
unifying the mental continuum. In accordance with that it also says [in Ornament 
of the Sutras ]:  
 
As it’s habitual, you do not apply means. 
 
Even placement or equipoise is that when the mind  is balanced there is the equanimity that is 
a compositional factor. By means of continuous familiarity one will engage spontaneously and 
naturally, whereupon one will be overcome by the power of meditative stabilization. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
764  
Tuesday morning, 30 January 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 275) says: 
 
The terms for these nine mental states are as quoted from the First Stages of 
Meditation  and elsewhere: 
 
This path of calm abiding is expl ained in the Perfection of Wisdom 
[sutras] etc. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2 The method for achieving them by means of the six powers 
A Identifying the six powers 
B What minds are achieved through them in what manner 
C How during the ninth mental  abiding you effortlessly en ter meditative stabilization 
D How the ninth mental abiding has to be preceded by the earlier ones in turn 
E The summarized meaning of all that 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2A Identifying the six powers 
Second: The six powers are those of hearin g, thinking, mindfulness, introspection, 
effort, and acquaintance. 
 
The power of hearing refers to listening to  teachings on how to develop meditative 
stabilization, that is, a single-pointed mind. Th e other five powers are: the power of thinking 
or contemplation, the power of mindfulness, th e power of introspection, the power of effort, 
and the power of acquaintance or familiarity.  The power of thinking means to think about 
what one has heard and read. Mindfulness is ne cessary in order to no t forget the observed 
object and the instructions on developing medi tative stabilization. Introspection counters 
laxity and excitement which are discordant to meditative stabilization. Effort is also necessary 
in order to achieve meditative stabilizatio n, as is acquaintance or familiarity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says:  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2B What minds are achieved through them in what manner 
1 The power of hearing 
Through the power of hearing, placement of the mind is achieved, for, as you 
follow instructions you have heard from  someone on placing the mind on an 
object, it is initially a mere tying to the meditation object rather than something 
that has become a habit through your own repeated reflections.  
 
What minds are achieved by the six powers? The nine mental abidings are achieved by means of the six powers. The first mental abiding is placement or setting the mind on its observed 
object, which is achieved by the power of hear ing. By receiving and following instructions 
from others on how to set or place the mind on  its object, initially one merely ties the mind 
to its observed object, whereas there is not ye t the familiarity that arises from repeatedly 
thinking about it.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
765 2 The power of thinking 
Through the power of thinking, continuous  placement of the mind is achieved, 
for, having first tied it to the medita tion object, [placement] is sustained by 
thinking of its continuity again and again.  From that you will achieve an initial 
capacity for a somewhat connected continuity.  
 
The second mental abiding is continuous plac ement or setting, which strives to continually 
think about the observed object, even though one is not yet able to abide on the it for much 
time. This is achieved by the power of thinking.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3 The power of mindfulness 
Through the power of mindfulness, both patchy placement and close placement of 
the mind are achieved, for, if the mind gets distracted and wanders off from the 
meditation object, you are mindful of the earlier object and gather the mind 
within. Developing the strength of your mindfulness from the start, you will not 
give rise to distraction.  
 
The third and fourth mental abid ings, patchy or repeated placement and close placement, are 
achieved by the power of mindfulness. When  the mind becomes distracted and loses the 
observed object, one brings the mind back to it through remembering it and gathers the mind 
inside. By generating strong mindfulness ri ght from the beginning, the mind will not be 
distracted from its observed object.  STUDENT: What is the meaning of “inside”? Does it mean to focus inside the body or to focus within the mind itself? 
GESHE JAMPA GYATSO: It means to not allow the mind to go outside to other objects, but 
to keep it abiding inside the heart or brain! In  short, it means that the mind is set on its 
object and does not wander off to other objects.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
4 The power of introspection 
Through the power of introspection bo th a tamed and a pacified mind are 
achieved, {276} for, through introspection recognizing the fault of moving towards 
discursive thought and towards the marks of  secondary afflictions, through seeing 
them as faults, you do not allow the mind  to move towards those two [sources of 
distraction]. 
 
The fifth and sixth stages of me ntal abiding – tamed or subdued and pacified – are attained 
by means of the power of introspection. Th is is because when discursive thoughts 
(conceptualizations) or secondary afflictions aris e, introspection sees and recognizes them as 
faults, whereby it does not allow th e mind to wander toward them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
766 5 Effort 
Through the power of effort you achieve bo th a fully pacified and a single-pointed 
mind, for you diligently abandon even subtle occurrences of conceptual thought 
and secondary afflictions, thereby not acq uiescing to them. As you do so, sinking 
and excitement etc. cannot obstruct your meditative stabilization [any more] and 
you achieve meditative stabilization arising continuously.  
 
The seventh and eighth mental abidings – a th oroughly pacified mind and a single-pointed 
mind – are achieved by the power of effort. This is because with diligence one abandons 
subtle discursive thoughts and secondary affl ictions without acquiesc ing to them. Thereby, 
laxity and excitement, as well as conceptualiz ations and the secondary afflictions, can no 
longer interfere with the development of single -pointed meditative stabilization, whereupon 
the meditative stabilization that ar ises continuously is achieved.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
6 The power of acquaintance 
Through the power of acquaintance you achieve a mind placed in equipoise, for 
through the power of intense familiariz ation with the foregoing, meditative 
stabilization is born that oper ates naturally and effortlessly. 
 
The ninth mental abiding – a mind of equipoise – is achieved by the power of acquaintance 
or familiarity. By means of familiarity with the previous stages, a meditative stabilization that 
engages naturally and effortlessly arises. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
This is all in conformity with  the intended meaning of the Shravaka Levels , so you 
should not rely on any other explanations.  
 Since this explanation concords with the explanation found in Hearer Grounds , one should 
not trust in other explanations. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2C How during the ninth mental abiding you effortlessly enter meditative 
stabilization 
Now when you achieve the ninth mental abiding it is like in this analogy: if you 
form a very strong habit of reciting a text or something like that then, when you 
recite it with the initial motivation to recite, even though your mind may wander 
off to something else in the meantime, the recitation itself will come to be continuous and effortless. Similarly, once you have placed your mind in equipoise 
through being mindful of having initially di rected it towards the meditation object, 
if you are then alert, even though you may not keep it up each time, you will become capable of entering a meditative stabilization continuously over a long 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
767 period without distraction disrupting it. [This stage where] there is no need for 
effort at keeping it up is said to be without application or exertion.  
 
On the occasion of the ninth mental abiding, one effortlessly engages in meditative 
stabilization. An analogy that illustrates this is that it is similar to having a strong familiarity 
with a certain text, sadhana, or prayer, due to which, when one begins to recite it with the 
initial motivation to do so, even though the mind  then wanders off, the recitation will remain 
continuous and effortless. Similarly, having set the mind in equipoise on its observed object, 
without the need to apply mindfulness and intr ospection one will abide on the object for a 
long time. At this point it is  said that there is no longer  any need to make effort.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2D How the ninth mental abiding has to be preceded by the earlier ones in 
turn 
For it to arise, long-lasting meditative  stabilization that cannot be impeded by 
unfavourable conditions like sinking and excitement has to arise first through 
mindfulness, introspection and effort applie d each time [they are needed]. Yet that 
is the eighth one. {277} It is like the nint h one in that unfavourable conditions like 
sinking and excitement cannot disrupt your  meditative stabilization. As it is 
nevertheless necessary here to rely on mindfulness and introspection constantly, it 
is said to be associated with application or exertion.  
 In order to achieve the ninth mental abiding, the previous mental abidings must have been 
successively generated. In other words, in orde r to generate the ninth mental abiding, one 
must first rely on mindfulness, introspection, and effort whereby one’s meditative stabilization will no longer be impeded by the ar isal of laxity and excitement, this being the 
eighth mental abiding. It is similar to the nint h mental abiding in that the discordant classes 
of mindfulness and introspection can no longer  obstruct one’s meditative stabilization. 
However, since during the eight mental abidin g it is necessary to rely constantly on 
mindfulness and introspection,  effort is still needed.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 For that to arise there is a need to stop even subtle si nking, excitement, and so on 
as soon as they arise without acquiesc ing in them which is why you need the 
seventh [abiding of the] mind. For that to arise there is a need for powerful 
introspection standing guard so that there is no outward movement towards 
conceptual thought and secondary afflicti ons, mental wandering brought on by 
those two having been understood to be faults – therefore you need the fifth and 
sixth [abiding of the] mind, because thos e two are achieved through the power of 
introspection.  
 For the eighth mental abiding to arise, one must generate the seventh mental abiding in 
which subtle laxity and excitement are immedi ately stopped upon their arisal. Prior to the 
seventh, it is necessary to generate the intr ospection that sees discursive thoughts and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
768 secondary afflictions as faults, whereby the fi fth and sixth mental abidings are necessary 
because they are achieved by the power of introspection. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
For something like that to arise, again, there is a need for mindfulness that soon 
remembers the meditation object even if one’s mind has been distracted [away] 
from it and [there is a need for] mindfu lness that does not allow any distraction 
from the meditation object from the star t – therefore you need the third and forth 
[abiding of the] mind, beca use those two [minds] are achi eved by the two [types of] 
mindfulness. For that to arise, again, there is a need first of all to tie the mind to 
the meditation object and not to wander off while it is tied, which means prior 
generation of the first and se cond [abiding of the] mind. 
 
For the fifth and sixth mental abidings to be gene rated, it is necessary to previously generate 
the mindfulness that immediately remembers the ob served object when the mind is distracted 
from it as well as the mindfulness that from  the beginning does not allow the mind to be 
distracted. Therefore, one needs the third an d fourth mental abidings because they are 
achieved by the power of mindfulness. Then, for the third and fourth mental abidings to 
arise, it is necessary to first generate the first and second mental abidings – setting and 
continuous setting – that tie the mind to the observed object an d do not allow the mind to be 
distracted. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B2E The summarized meaning of all that 
Thus in short you should first follow the instructions you have heard and do your 
best at the method of plac ing the mind in equipoise. Then think again and again 
of the placement sustaining the continuit y by way of the ability to piece short 
periods together. Then, if mindfulness deteriorates and your mind wanders, you 
should gather it quickly, and quickly become mindful of having forgotten the 
meditation object. Then you should ge nerate even stronger mindfulness and 
generate a power of mindfulness [such that] the mind does not wander off from 
the meditation object from the start.  
 
In short, one must first follow the instructions that one has heard and strive to set the mind 
on its object. Then, at the time of continuo us setting, one needs the power of thinking 
whereby one becomes able to set the mind for short periods of time on its observed object. If one’s mindfulness degenerates and the mind wa nders, one should quic kly gather the mind 
inward without forgetting the observed obje ct. Then one should generate even strong 
mindfulness such that the mind is not distra cted from its object right from the start. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Accomplishing powerful mindfulness, seeing  the fault of sinking, excitement, and 
so on where you wander off from the meditation object to something else, you 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
769 should develop intense introspection stan ding guard [over it]. Then you should 
generate the strong endeavour that immediately recognizes distraction brought on 
by forgetfulness – however subtle – that cuts  it short and, once it is cut, lengthens 
the time where it is not impeded by  unfavourable conditions. {278}  
 
By means of generating introspection one shou ld stop laxity and excitement. Even if the 
distraction is subtle one should immediately reco gnize this and generate the strong effort that 
cuts it off.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Once that has arisen, with effort, having perfected the habit through 
familiarization, you will achieve the ninth [abiding of the] mind that moves into 
meditative stabilization without any exerti on. In fact before, when you have not 
achieved the ninth mind, it is necessary to make an outward effort [at] putting the mind into meditative stabilization by me ans of yoga. But once you have attained 
the ninth mind, even though you do not make an effort [at] putting the mind into meditative equipoise deliberately, it will move into meditative stabilization completely.  
 By means of familiarity, one then achieves the ninth mental abiding whereby remains in 
single-pointed meditation without effort. As lo ng as one has not achieved the ninth mental 
abiding, the yogi needs to make effort, whereas when the ninth mental abiding has been achieved effort is no longer needed.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 When despite the achievement of the ni nth mind, which is like that, you have 
not achieved pliancy, you cannot claim to have achieved calm abiding yet, either, 
let alone special insight, as will be explained later. 
 
Even though one has achieved the ninth mental  abiding, as long as one has not achieved 
pliancy one has not yet achieved calm abiding. Only when one’s meditative stabilization is 
conjoined with a pliancy that produces physic al and mental bliss, has calm abiding been 
achieved. Since prior to this one has not achieved  calm abiding, there is no need to mention 
that special insight has not been achieved.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 278) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1B2B-2B3 How there are four types of attention 
A The actual [types] 
The Shravaka Levels  explain that the nine mental abidings are associated with four 
types of attention. Explained in accordance with that there is forced engagement  at 
the time of the first and second minds, be cause there is a need to force it with 
effort. Then, at the time of [the following] five minds you cannot sustain 
meditation sessions for long [yet] due to  interruptions caused by sinking and 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
770 excitement, so at that time there is interrupted engagement . Then, the eighth mind 
can sustain meditation sessions for long, interruptions by sinking and excitement 
having become impossible, so at that time there is uninterrupted engagement . Then, 
the ninth mind is not interrupted and do es not require constant effort, so the 
attention of effortless engagement  is established. 
 
The Hearer Grounds  says that there are four types of mental attention that assist the 
attainment of the nine mental abidings. At the time of the first and second mental abidings, 
there is forced engagement. At the time of the third through the seventh mental abidings – 
resetting, closely setting, disciplining or taming , pacifying, and thorough ly pacifying – there is 
interrupted engagement, meaning that the engage ment is interrupted from time to time. At 
the time of the eighth mental abiding, there is uninterrupted engagement, and at the time of 
the ninth mental abiding there is effortless en gagement. These four types of engagement are 
necessary in order to achieve the nine mental abidings. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B Presenting a doubt 
Now, there is interrupted engagement at th e time of the first and second [abidings 
of the] mind and there is also a need to force it at the time of the five intervening 
minds. Why is it that the first and second are not said have interrupted 
engagement and that the intervening five ar e not said to have forced engagement?  
 
A doubt is raised here: since at the time of setting and continuous setting there is also 
interrupted engagement, and at the time of th e middle five mental abidings there is also 
forced engagement, why are the first and second mental abidings not said to have interrupted engagement and the next five to have forced engagement?  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C The response to that 
Between the [spells of] meditative stabiliz ation and non-meditative stabilization you 
go through, the latter are far longer with  the first and second [abidings of the] 
mind. With the intervening five, abiding in meditative stabilization is far longer. 
Therefore, the term “interru ption of meditative stabiliz ation” has been applied to 
them rather than to the fo rmer. {279} That is why al though the two [sets] are 
indeed the same in having forced engageme nt they are not the same in the context 
of having or not having interrupted enga gement. The five intervening minds have 
not been categorized as attentions  that have forced engagement.  
 
During the first and second mental abidings, th e periods of non-meditative stabilization are 
longer than the periods of meditative stabiliz ation, whereas during the middle five mental 
abidings, the periods of meditative stabilization,  in which the mind abides on its object, are 
longer than the periods of non-meditative stab ilization. Because of this, the five mental 
abidings are said to be “interrupted,” whereas the first and second mental abidings are so 
short that they cannot be said to be “interrupt ed.” Thus the first two mental abidings require 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
771 forced engagement but are not said to requir e interrupted engagement, whereas the middle 
five mental engagement are not said to need  forced engagement because the periods of 
meditative stabilization are longer but still have periods of interruption. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D The need for continuous efforts along those lines 
In the Summary of Perfections  it says: 
 
Through uninterrupted yoga try hard 
to realize stable concentration. If you rest again and again, you will not get fire by means of friction. The method of yoga is like that: Do not give up till you gain the distinction. 
 You should achieve it in accordance with that statement. 
 
As is mentioned in the Summary of Perfections , continuous effort is necessary. By means of an 
uninterrupted yoga, one should put effort into  accomplishing concentration. If one relaxes 
the mind, that is, does not put much effo rt into equipoise, one will not accomplish 
concentration, just like fire will not arise with out constant friction. Therefore, one should not 
give this yoga up. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C The measure of having achieved calm abiding 
1 Indication of the dividing line between having achieved it or not 
2 General indication of how to tread the path in reliance on calm abiding 
3 Indication of how to tread a worldly path in particular 
The third one has three points: indication  of the dividing line between having 
achieved it or not, general indication of how to tread the path in reliance on calm 
abiding, and indication of how to tr ead a worldly path in particular.  
 
First the boundary between having achieved or not having achieved calm abiding is set out. 
Then it is explained in general how to progress on  the path in reliance on calm abiding. This 
is followed by an explanation of how to progre ss on the worldly or mundane path of the four 
concentrations and so forth in particular. Becaus e the latter is not a path to liberation, it is 
called a mundane path.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1 Indication of the dividing line between having achieved it or not 
A Indication of the actual point 
B The signs of having [gained] attention along with a clarification of doubts 
The first one has two points: indication of the actual point and the signs of having 
[gained] attention along with a clarification of doubts. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
772 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A Indication of the actual point 
1 Indicating whether or not calm abiding has been achieved in terms of whether or not pliancy 
has been perfectly achieved 
2 Indicating the method by which calm abiding is accomplished once pliancy has been 
achieved 
The first one has two points: indicating whether or not calm abiding has been 
achieved in terms of whether or not pl iancy has been perfectly achieved and 
indicating the method by which calm ab iding is accomplished once pliancy has 
been achieved. 
 
When pliancy is perfectly achieved, calm abidin g is achieved, whereas as long as pliancy has 
not been achieved, even though one has a single -pointed mind, one has not yet achieved calm 
abiding. Then the way in which calm abiding is  achieved once pliancy has been achieved is 
explained.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-1 Indicating whether or not calm abiding has been achieved in terms 
of whether or not pliancy has been perfectly achieved 
A Presenting a doubt 
First: With the ninth [abidi ng of the] mind – if you can sustain long meditation 
sessions free from subtle sinking and excitement as has been explained earlier, and 
if you attain meditative stabilization th at operates spontaneously regardless of 
efforts at applying mindfulness and intr ospection continuously, has calm abiding 
been achieved or not?  
 
Here the question is raised: when with the ni nth mental abiding one is able to remain in 
meditation for long periods free from subtle la xity and excitement and one has achieved the 
meditative stabilization that no longer needs effort in applying mindfulness and introspection, has calm abiding been achieved or not?  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B The response to that 
As regards the attainment of meditative stabilization there are two [types], [one] 
where pliancy has been achieved and [one ] where it has not. If pliancy has not 
been achieved it is a similitude of ca lm abiding rather than calm abiding.  
 
The response to the question is that as long as  one has not achieved pliancy, it is not actual 
calm abiding but is only a similitude of calm ab iding. In order to achieve actual calm abiding 
the pliancy that induces physical and mental  bliss is necessary, and only when one’s 
meditative stabilization is conjoined with  these has calm abiding been achieved. 
 Tuesday afternoon, 30 January 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 279) says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
773 C The reason  
In [the Sutra ] Unravelling the Intent  it says: 
 
‘Bhagavat, if the bodhisattva directs his mental activity inwards at the 
mind [itself] while physical and mental pliancy have not been achieved, 
what do you call that mental activity ?’ {280} ‘Maitreya, it is not calm 
abiding, but should be referred to as  attention that is a similitude of 
calm abiding and of the same kind.’ 
 The sutra says: “’Bhagavan, however much the bodhisattva sets his mind on the observed 
object, focusing inside, as long as pliancy of bo dy and pliancy of mind have not been attained 
what kind of mind is that?’ Ma itreya, that is not calm abiding,  but is said to be concomitant 
with the aspiration that is a similitude of calm abiding.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In Ornament of the Sutras , too, it says:  
 
Thanks to habit ther e’s non-application. 
Then his body and mind obtain 
extreme, overwhelming pliancy and he is said to possess attention. 
 
In this context “attention” is calm abiding. 
 
This sutra says that through fami liarity with meditative stabilizat ion there is no need to apply 
oneself, and that having attained physical and mental pliancy one attains that called “together 
with mental attention.” This single-pointed me ditative stabilization which is effortless and 
held by pliancy is calm abiding.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In the Middle  Stages of Meditation  it also clearly says: 
 
When body and mind of the one who has thus formed a habit of calm 
abiding become extremely pliable and [when] his mind becomes 
subservient with regard to meditation objects at will, he should understand that to be the point wh ere calm abiding is accomplished. 
 When one who has familiarized with calm abid ing obtains pliancy of body and mind and is 
able to meditate on an observed object for as long as is wished with a subdued mind free from 
distraction, one has achieved calm abiding.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
774 And from the Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom : 
 
Here, the bodhisattva dwelling alone in seclusion should direct his 
attention to the object just like it  is meant to be thought of. Having 
abandoned the mind’s discourse he should oftentimes direct his attention to the mind itself as it a ppears. As long as extreme pliancy of 
body and mind has not arisen, it is an  attention that is a similitude of 
calm abiding, while, once it has, it is calm abiding. 
 This text says that a bodhisattva who abides alon e in solitude should take to mind his desired 
purpose. Having abandoned mental talk, that is, conceptualizations, he should try as much as 
possible to mentally attend to the mind itself. However, as long as pliancy of body and mind 
have not arisen, this remains a mental attention that is a similitude of calm abiding. Only 
when pliancy of body and mind have arisen does one achieve calm abiding.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D Although the meditative stabilization before the achi evement of extreme pliancy belongs to the desire 
[realm] level, it is not a level of meditative equipoise in the desire [realm]  
Now, what level does meditative stabiliz ation before the achievement of extreme 
pliancy belong to? It belongs to the desire [realm] level. Although it has such single-
pointedness of mind, it is not a level of equipoise and it is not included within the 
so-called level of equipoise. The Actual Basis of the Levels  e x p l a i n s  t h i s  o n  t h e  
grounds that there is no regret and that it is not achieved through supreme bliss 
and pliancy.  
 
The meditative stabilization that arises prior to  the achievement of pliancy is included in the 
level of the desire realm, but it is not a leve l of meditative equipoise of the desire realm. 
Although it is a single-pointed mind included in the level of the desire realm, it is a level of 
non-equipoise and is not called “a level of equipo ise.” This is because this single-pointed mind 
is not accomplished by a lack of regret , supreme joy and happiness, and pliancy.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
E That meditative stabilization is the meditative stabilizat ion of a single-pointed mind of the desire 
[realm] 
If pliancy has not been achieved, meditati ve stabilization that does not rely on 
constant mindfulness and where the mind moves of its own accord without 
conceptual thought, still is {281} referred to as single-pointedness of the desire 
realm; it is not actual calm abiding. Appa rently, it can in fact be combined with 
any physical activity: moving, wa lking, lying, and sitting.  
 
That meditative stabilization is a meditative stab ilization of a single-pointed mind of the desire 
realm. If pliancy has not been achieved, the meditative stabiliz ation that is the mind moving 
by its own strength without conceptuality even  without relying on continuous mindfulness 
and that appears to be able to  be combined with all the cond ucts of walking moving, lying, 
and sitting, is a single-pointed mind of the de sire realm; it is not actual calm abiding. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
775  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 281) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-2 Indication of how calm abiding is achieved once pliancy has been 
fully accomplished 
A Explanation of how pliancy is identified and generated 
B Actual indication of how – once it has been fully accomplished – calm abiding is achieved  
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-2A Explanation of how pliancy is identified and generated 
1 Identification 
Now what is the method for attaining plianc y? Once it has been attained, what is 
the method for proceeding to calm abiding? This is what the Compendium of 
Abhidharma  says with regard to pliancy: 
 
What is pliancy? It is that work ability of body and mind due to 
breaking the continuity of taking on bad physical and mental states. Its 
function is to eliminate all obscurations. 
 
First pliancy is identified. What is the method for attaining pliancy? Having attained it, what 
is the method for progressing to calm abiding? The Compendium of Manifest Dharma  says that 
pliancy is a serviceability of body and mind be cause of having cut the continuity of negative 
physical and mental states, and that it has th e function of eliminating all obscurations.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 The meaning of the quotation from Compendium of Abhidharma  
Taking on bad physical and mental states [implies] that body and mind are unfit to 
be employed for any wholesome activity at will. Its antidote, physical and mental 
pliancy, [implies] an extreme workabilit y with regard to body and mind being 
employed for wholesome activities, which is due to freedom from taking on bad 
states, both physical and mental. Specific ally, if you strive to give up mental 
afflictions and bad physical states that tend towards mental afflictions and which 
are an obstacle to the joy of giving up me ntal afflictions, you will get rid of [the 
aspects of] unworkability such as heaviness of the body and then what will emerge 
is workability of the body.  
 
Negative states of body and mind arise when the body is tired the mi nd does not wish to 
engage in the virtuous action of meditating. Th eir antidotes, physical and mental pliancy, are 
free from all negative states of body and mind, whereby one’s body and mind become 
serviceable with respect to virt uous actions. When striving to  abandon the mental afflictions 
and the negative states of body that interfere with wanting to abandon the afflictions and that 
are the afflicted class, one must become free from an unserviceability of body, such as physical 
heaviness. Thereby the body becomes as light as cotton.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Similarly, if you strive to give up mental afflictions and bad mental states that 
tend towards mental afflictions and which are an obstacle to the joy of giving up 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
776 mental afflictions, you will get rid of the un suitability of the mind for being tied to 
the meditation object and engaging [in it ] with pleasure. Then the mind engaging 
in the meditation object unobstructed ly constitutes mental workability.  
 
Similarly, when striving to abandon the afflic tions and negative states of mind, one becomes 
free from the unsuitability of the mind to enga ge as one wishes in focusing on a virtuous 
object. The mind engaging its observed object without obstruction is serviceability of mind. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3 The reason for that  
In accordance with that Acharya Sthiramati says: 
 
In this regard physical workability is what gives rise to lightness and 
mobility with regard to activities of  the body itself. Workability of the 
mind is the other factor, produced from mind, the cause of the mind 
becoming happy after entering into [a state of] perfect attention. {282} 
If you are possessed of it, you will engage in objects unobstructedly, 
which is why it is called workability of the mind. 
 Serviceability of body is a lightness with respect to activities of the body. Serviceability of mind 
is a freshness and lightness of mind which engage s in perfect mental atte ntion. If one has it, 
one will engage the observed object withou t obstruction, due to which it is called 
“serviceability of mind.”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In brief, once pliancy has been achieved, the unworkability of body and mind – 
the difficulty engaging in something out of concern as one engages in one’s own 
unworthy affairs despite the desire to strive at giving up mental afflictions – stops, 
and body and mind become extremely serviceable. In the Shravaka Levels  it says 
that such perfect workability of body and mind emerges in subtle parts right from 
the beginning when you [first] gain meditative  stabilization. So, as it increases, it 
eventually turns into pliant, single-pointed ca lm abiding. In fact at first it is subtle 
and therefore hard to recognize, but later on it becomes easy to recognize.  
 
In brief, once pliancy has been achieved, thro ugh averting the unserviceability of body and 
mind that makes it difficult to engage out of  concern for one’s own ba d activities, one comes 
to possess a body and mind that are easily employ ed, that is, one is able to engage as much as 
one wants in virtuous actions without any he aviness of body and mind. Such complete 
serviceability of body and mind arises righ t from the beginning when one first attains 
meditative stabilization. It gradually increases,  eventually becoming pliancy and single-pointed 
calm abiding. However, because at first it is subt le, it difficult to recognize, whereas later on it 
is easily recognized.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
777 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
4 How, among the two types of pliancy, mental pliancy is the first one to arise 
An early sign of such pliancy about to ar ise, complete with all its characteristics 
and easy to perceive, is a feeling of heav iness at the skullcap, experienced by the 
person striving for concentrative meditation . It is not an unco mfortable [sense of] 
heaviness. As soon as it arises you are rid of negative mental tendencies causing 
obstacles to the joy of giving up mental afflictions and its antidote, pliancy arises 
first193.  
 From among physical pliancy and mental pliancy, mental pliancy is the first one to arise. An 
early sign of having generated a fully qualified and easily perceived plia ncy is that the person 
striving to cultivate meditative stabilization ha s a heaviness in the brain, but it is not an 
unpleasant heaviness. As soon as it is generate d, one becomes free from the negative states of 
mind that interfere with wanting to abando n the afflictions and their antidote, mental 
pliancy, arises.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In Shravaka Levels  it says:  
 
As an early sign of the emergence of  gross and easily perceptible single-
pointedness of mind as well as pliancy of mind and body not being 
delayed much longer, his skullcap will seem heavy. In fact this symptom 
is not painful. As soon as it arises whatever negative mental tendencies belonging to the [sphere of] mental afflictions and causing obstacles to 
the joy of giving them up are abandoned and furthermore their antidote, workability of mind and mental pliancy, arise. 
 The sign that a single-pointed mind as well as pliancy of mind and body are about to arise is 
that a heaviness in the brain is produced, how it is not harmful. As soon as it has arisen, one 
abandons the negative mental states included in the afflicted class that interfere with wanting to abandon them and their antidotes, serviceabi lity of mind and mental pliancy, arise.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
5 How physical pliancy is born from that 
Then, based on the force of that pliancy of  the workable mind having arisen, {283} 
the energies that will cause physical plianc y to arise circulate within the body. If 
those energies pass through your body parts and pervade them you will get rid of 
                                              
193 Getting rid of negative mental tendencies and the deve lopment of the antidote are in direct opposition to 
one another: the more you have of one, the less the ot her one will be present. Otherwise the obvious question 
would be why the antidote develops if you are already rid of negative states. The rela tionship should rather be 
understood in these terms: at the point where the negative  states have come to an end, the antidote is fully 
developed – according to Geshe Thubten Soepa: "Like ho t and cold. One comes [as] the other one goes away." 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
778 negative physical states and the antidote to taking on negative states, physical 
plian cy, w il l aris e. F urt herm o re, aft er t hey h av e s pread in  t he en t ire bo dy it  will 
seem as though filled with the power of workable energy.  
 
From mental pliancy comes physical pliancy. By  the force of mental pliancy, the winds that 
are the cause that produces physical pliancy move in the body. When the winds pervade the 
parts of the body, one becomes free from negative states of body, such as physical heaviness, 
and their antidote, physical pliancy, arises. When t he body is filled with the winds, it is as 
though filled with the power of serviceable wind s. At this time there is physical pliancy. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In the Shravaka Levels  it says:  
 
Through its occurrence, the energies of the great elements arising in 
harmony with the occurrence of ph ysical pliancy move through the 
body. As they move, one is freed from  any negative states of the body 
that belong to the sphere of afflicti ons and cause obstructions to the joy 
of abandoning [them]. Their antidote, physical pliancy, spreads in the entire body so that it seems as  though it is full [of it]. 
 The winds of the great elements that accord  with generating physical pliancy move 
throughout the body without blockage. When th ey move, one becomes free from the negative 
states of body included in the afflicted class that interfere with wanting to abandon them and 
one’s body becomes completely filled wi th their antidote, physical pliancy. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
6 The difference between those two kinds of pliancy 
In this regard physical pliancy is a physic al, internal, extremely pleasant sensation, 
it is not a mental event. Says Master Sthiramati: 
 
If you are seized by the distinctive joy of the physical sensation, you 
should know it to be physical pliancy, for in the sutras it says that if the 
mind rejoices, the body will become pliant. 
 
What is the difference between mental pliancy an d physical pliancy? Physical pliancy is an 
extremely pleasant tactile object inside the body; it  is not a mental factor. If one is held by the 
special joy that is a tactile object of the body, it should be understood to be physical pliancy 
because the sutras say that a joyful  mind becomes physical pliancy. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
779 7 How among the two kinds of bliss, [that] of physical and [that] of mental pliancy, the bliss of physical 
pliancy arises first 
Thus when physical pliancy first arises , through the force of energies, a great 
experience of bliss is born within the bo dy based on which within the mind, too, a 
very exquisite experience of joyful bliss is produced.  
 
The bliss of physical pliancy arises before the bliss of mental pliancy.  When physical pliancy 
first arises, by the force of the winds moving in  the body, a great bliss arises in the body. In 
dependence on that, a great experience of joy and bliss also arises in the mind.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 283) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-2A7B Indicating the actual method of accomplishing calm abiding once pliancy 
has been fully achieved 
1 The actual [method] 
Then the force of [sensations associated with] that pliancy having occurred for the 
first time gradually diminishes. In fact this  process is not due to an exhaustion of 
pliancy. Rather the gross kind of plianc y has moved the mind excessively, so that 
once it has neutralized unshakable pliancy that is delicate like a shadow and in 
accord with meditative stabilization aris es. As the disappearance of joy reverses 
again, the mind {284} stays firmly on it s meditation object and calm abiding free 
from the disquiet of agitation caused by great joy is achieved. 
 
Having achieved pliancy, what is the actual method for accomplishing calm abiding? After 
that, the strength of the initially generated pl iancy gradually diminishes. It is not that the 
pliancy is exhausted, but due to that coarse pliancy moving the mind excessively it is averted 
and the unmovable pliancy that is thin like a shadow arises. As the vanishing of mental joy 
reverses, the mind abides firmly on its observed object and the calm abiding that is free from the disturbance of being agitated by great joy is achieved. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2 The reason for that 
From the Shravaka Levels : 
 
When that first arises the mind is joyful, at ease and supremely 
delighted and even the meditation  object appears endowed with 
manifest joy. Then that very force of pliancy which first develops, little 
by little turns extremely subtle and the body becomes possessed of 
shadow-like pliancy. The mind ab andons joy, and through calm 
abiding, becoming completely firm, engages in the meditation object utterly peaceful. 
 When that happens “attention” and calm abiding included in the preparatory 
stage of the first [level of] concen tration has been achieved. In the Shravaka Levels  it 
is explained that thereby the lesser a ttention of someone settling the mind in 
equipoise is achieved.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
780  
When that is first generated, the mind is joyful , the mind experiences much bliss, the mind is 
supremely joyful, and one manifestly enjoys the observed object. The strength of that pliancy 
that initially developed slowly becomes more an d more subtle, and the body comes to possess 
shadow-like pliancy. The mind th at was joyful abandons that, abides firmly on the object due 
to calm abiding, and engages the observed obje ct with the aspect of complete pacification. 
When this happens, one attains me ntal attention and the calm abid ing that is included in the 
preparation of the first concentration, whereby one attains the small mental attention of the 
level of meditative equipoise. There are seven le vels of preparation of the first concentration, 
such as the mental attention or  contemplation of a mere beginner and so forth, on which the 
afflictions of the desire realm have been abandoned.  
 Wednesday morning, 31 January 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 284) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1B The signs of being endowed with attention and clearing up doubts 
[about this] 
1 The actual signs of being endowed with attention 
2 Clearing up doubts [about them] 
The second one has two points: explaining the actual signs of being endowed with 
attention and clearing up doubts [about them]. 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1B-1 The actual signs of being endowed with attention 
A How this is set out in the Shravaka Levels  
First: The marks revealing whether oneself or someone else has attained 
“attention” are set out in the Shravaka Levels : through this attainment four minor 
ones are achieved: a mind belonging to the form realm, physical and mental 
pliancy as well as single pointedness. [F urthermore,] one is enabled to purify 
mental afflictions by means of calm and coarse194 kinds of paths or paths associated 
with aspects of the [four noble] truths, physical and mental pliancy arise very 
quickly when[ever] the mind settles in eq uipoise, the five impediments, craving for 
sense pleasures, sleepiness and the like do not occur for the most part, and even 
after rising from equipoise one is [still] imbued with some physical and mental pliancy.  
 The marks that make it understood that oneself or others have achieved the levels of mental 
attention are that the four are attained: (1) a mind included in the level of the form realm,  (2-3) physical pliancy and mental pliancy, and (4) single-pointedness. In addition, one is able to puri fy the afflictions by the paths having the as pect of peacefulness 
and coarseness (that is, seeing the lower realm, for example, the desire realm, as coarse and seeing the upper realm, for example, the firs t concentration, as peaceful) and having the 
                                             
 
194 A so-called worldly special insight that consists in lo oking at lower levels as coarse and higher levels as 
peaceful (cf. 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C2 B). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
781 aspect of the four noble truths,. When setting the mind in equipoise on the observed object, 
physical and mental pliancy arise very quickly. The five obscurations – aspiration for desirable 
objects, sleep, and so forth – do not occur for the most part. Having arisen from meditative 
equipoise into post-meditation or subsequent  attainment, the body and mind still possess 
some physical and mental pliancy.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B Once this attention has been achieved calm abiding easily becomes pure 
Once attention with these characteristics is  achieved {285} the path of calm abiding 
easily becomes pure195. After meditative equipoise of the mind in single-pointed 
calm abiding, physical and mental plianc y can quickly be induced so that pliancy 
increases. The Shravaka Levels  explain that the more pliancy increases, the more 
calm abiding also increases, whereby they cause one another to increase 
reciprocally. In brief, if the mind is workable, the energies become workable, at 
that stage special physical pliancy em erges and upon its emergence special 
meditative stabilization is born. Through that, again, special workability of the 
energies is achieved whereby physical and mental pliancy is induced. 
 Having achieved the mental attention that po ssesses such signs, the path of calm abiding 
easily becomes pure. At the conclusion of the meditative equipoise of single-pointed calm 
abiding, physical and mental pliancy can be quickly induced, whereby pliancy increases. 
However much pliancy increases, so too does ca lm abiding, whereby they  cause each other to 
increase. In brief, if the mind is serviceable, th e winds also become serviceable. At that time a 
special physical pliancy arises, and upon its arisal a special meditative stabilization is 
produced. Due to that, a special serviceability of the winds is achieved, whereby physical and 
mental pliancy are induced.   Although this is not easy to achieve, we shou ld try to achieve it. However, there is no point 
to doing such meditation for one or  two days and then giving it up. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C Statements from the Shravaka Levels  about how other positive qualities are also gained  
Furthermore the Shravaka Levels  explains that at the time the mind is first placed 
single-pointedly, it is placed without mind fulness or attention of anything else at 
all: 
 
In order not to turn to [any] marks and for the sake of non-distraction, 
you cause mindfulness and attention to be absent from the start by 
means of firm placement. 
 In order to not turn to any signs and to remain  without distraction, right from the beginning, 
by means of focusing firmly, one should not be mindful of or pay attention to anything else. 
                                             
 
195 In this context "becomes pure" means ‘becomes a hi gher level path’ (oral explanation by Geshe Thubten 
Soepa). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
782 In other words, initially when setting the mind  single-pointedly on its observed object, one 
should not be mindful of or pay attention to anything else.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Once you have got used to that, the Shravaka Levels  go on to say:  
 
Through fixing closely on single-poi ntedness itself, come what may, and 
by gradually fixing closely on that calm abiding of the mind within, the 
mental continuum and all the continua of mind become free from marks, free from discursive though t and absolutely calm – in that 
manner, in just that manner, fix the mind.  
 
One should focus one’s mind single-pointedly in side on the observed object of calm abiding 
without allowing it to wander outside, whereb y the mental continuum and all the continua of 
mind will become free from marks, free from conceptualization or discursive thought, and 
completely pacified. In that way one should fo cus the mind single-pointedly on its object. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Once you have achieved the mental  state of calm abiding in that 
manner, if marks arise due to the fa ults of forgetfulness and lack of 
familiarity or if appearances arise through secondary mental afflictions, 
if holes start showing, if conceptual ization arises, you should not mind 
such occurrences nor attend to them  from the perspective of having 
seen them as faults earlier. Throug h not minding them nor attending to 
them in this manner those objects completely fall to pieces, and {286} when they have been cleared away placement will be on the very absence of appearances. “Sir, this object of meditation is subtle and hard to comprehend, therefore aspire and try hard in order to 
comprehend it.” 
 
The way meditative stabilization develops is set out in these terms. 
 Having achieved the mind of calm abiding in th is way, if marks and conceptualizations arise 
due to the faults of forgetfulness and lack of familiarity, if appearances arise due to secondary afflictions, if the doors of the senses are revealed, through immediately seeing them as faults, 
one should not be mindful of and pay attentio n to them. Due to not being mindful of or 
paying attention to them, these observed objects will be completely destroyed, and, when they 
have been eliminated, they will not appear at all, whereupon one should once again set the 
mind in equipoise. Oh handsome face, the observed  object is subtle and difficult to realize, 
therefore aspire and strive intensely for the sa ke of realizing it. An example of a subtle 
observed object is emptiness and the imperman ence of changing momentarily, these being 
difficult to realize.  
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
783 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D Explaining the meaning of that [in detail] 
Up to “fix the mind,” it is being show n how the absence of marks and the other 
two develop gradually from sustaining [meditation] as before. Then up to “you 
should not [mind such occurrences],” it is being explained that in case marks etc. 
do appear in the mind even though calm abiding is present – because there is no 
great familiarity with it [yet] – you should remember the disadvantages of 
submitting to such mental states, not pu rsue them, and place [the mind] without 
any thoughts. 
 The citation up to “fix the mi nd” shows how the three, the abse nce of marks and so forth, are 
g r a d u a l l y  g e n e r a t e d .  T h e n  u p  t o  “ y o u  s h o u l d  n o t  [ m i n d  s u c h  o c c u r r e n c e s ] ”  s h o w s  t h a t  although one has developed calm abiding, if th e marks and so forth still appear to the mind 
i n  d e p e n d e n c e  o n  a  l a c k  o f  f a m i l i a r i t y  w i t h  i t  a n d  s o  f o r t h ,  o n e  s h o u l d  r e m e m b e r  t h e  
disadvantages of coming under the control of su ch minds, and without following them set the 
mind without thoughts. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Then the section up to “[placement]  will be ...,” explains that through 
familiarizing oneself in that way, whicheve r of the three, marks and so on, emerges, 
through the force of familiarity with not th inking anything at all it will subside by 
itself regardless of deliberate fixation of the mind. Then you abide in the non-
appearance of the three and you will not be ravished by them. The remaining [bit] 
indicates that this calm abiding is subtle and that it is difficult to comprehend the 
explanation of it. 
 Then up to “[placement] will be ...” indicates that whenever any of the three – marks and so 
forth – arise due to having familiarized thus , it will be pacified without depending on 
deliberately focusing the mind due to strong fa miliarity with not thinking about anything at 
all. Then one will abide in the non-appearance of the three and one will not be captivated by 
these distracted minds.  
 The rest of the citation shows that calm ab iding is subtle and difficult to realize the 
explanation of it. For example, if one puts a candy on one’s tongue, while oneself experiences 
its taste one is unable to descri be it to others, whereas one can show visible forms such as a 
pen, book, and so forth to others. Like this, th e experience of calm abiding is difficult to 
explain to others.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
E How awareness is not directed at marks  
In this regard “marks” are explained in te rms of ten marks – those associated with 
the five [sense] objects, forms etc., those a ssociated with the three poisons, as well 
as those associated with male and female . How they disappear: first a multiplicity 
of marks associated with forms etc. appear and as soon as they appear they subside 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
784 of their own accord getting purified. At la st, once equipoise has been established, 
the marks of forms, sounds, etc. do no t appear, only the mental aspects of 
knowing, clarity, and vibrant happiness do.  
 
One should not direct the mind to marks. Marks or signs are also explained in the Treasury of 
Manifest Dharma , but here they are explained to be the ten marks: (1-5) the marks of the five 
objects, forms (colors and shape), sounds (m usic and other sounds both pleasant and 
unpleasant), and so forth; (6-8) the marks of  the three poisons, attachment, hatred, and 
ignorance; and (9-10) the marks of males and females, that is, the bodily charac teristics that 
identify someone to be a man or a woman.  
 The way in which they become non-existent is that at first a variety of marks of objects, 
such as forms and so forth, appear to the mind  when meditating on calm abiding. Then as 
soon as they appear, they are naturally pa cified and purified. Then, at the end when 
equipoised, the marks of the five sense objects, forms and so forth, do not appear, and all that 
appears is the aspects of the mind of mere knowing, clarity, and vibrant happiness. In other words, having accomplished calm abiding, all that  appears is the nature of the mind itself of 
being knowing and clear.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
F How all conceptual thoughts also subside 
How they disappear: since you do not mind them nor attend to them as 
[described] before, conceptual thoughts th at have arisen, like bubbles emerging 
from water, cannot proliferate greatly or conjoin {287} and subside by themselves. 
Then, through sustaining [meditation] as  [explained] before, awareness of the 
experience and the appearance of bliss, without being stopped deliberately, subside 
by themselves and get purified as soon as they arise like a husk unable to withstand 
the pressure. Bliss and awareness of the experience become more subtle.  
 
Having achieved calm abiding, all concep tualizations are naturally pacified. How 
conceptualizations become non-existent is th at due to not being mindful of and paying 
attention to other objects, when conceptualizat ions arise they do not abide but are naturally 
pacified, like bubbles that arise from water an d quickly disappear again without remaining for 
long. Then, through cultivating such medita tion, the experience of knowing and the 
appearance of bliss, without being deliberately stopped, are naturally pacified and purified as 
soon as they arise, like a husk of rice unab le to withstand pressure, whereupon the bliss and 
the experience of knowing become subtle.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
G Differences between the time of meditative equipoise and thereafter 
At that time, when equipoise has been esta blished, there is no appearance of one’s 
body etc. and there is a sense that the mind  is no longer separate from space. As 
one arises [from meditation], it feels as if one’s body had suddenly emerged [again]. 
Afterwards, even afflictive conceptual thoughts associated with anger and the like 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
785 that arise are also different from before or originally: they are weak and incapable 
of conjoining over long periods of time.  
 
There are differences between the occasion of  meditative equipoise and the occasion of 
subsequent attainment. At the time of meditative  equipoise, that is, calm abiding, there is no 
appearance of the body and so forth, and the mind is experienced as though it has become 
inseparable from space. When one rises from that meditative equipoise into subsequent 
attainment or post-meditation, one’s body is  suddenly experienced again. At the time of 
subsequent attainment, although the conceptual izations of the afflictions such as hatred, 
attachment, pride, jealousy, excitement, and so forth arise, they are not the same as before, 
but are weak and unable to last for long. In stead they cease as soon as they arise. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
H Experiences of great clarity and the like also occur 
These periods are periods of what is ca lled “complete pacification”: in the 
experience of great clarity you feel you ca n count the minute particles of pillars and 
walls of a house. Due to strong stability the kind of sleep from the time before 
achieving meditative stabilization does not even come during the hours of sleep; it 
is as if mixed with meditative stabil ization and there are many pure dream 
appearances and the like. 
 
These occasions are called “complete pacification.” There is the experience of great clarity, as 
though one could count the subtle particles of th e pillars, walls, and so forth of one’s house. 
Due to the factor of abiding being dense, at th e time of sleep, sleep like that prior to the 
attainment of meditative stabilization does not come. Rather it is as if it were mixed with 
concentration and many pure dream appearances and the like arise. In other words, one has 
very clear dreams, whereas presently we have ma ny different types of dreams, including those 
that are bad. For example, some people dream of being dragged off by another person and so 
forth, some dream of flying though in actualit y they do not fly, and some dream that while 
their coarse body remains on the bed, their subtle body leaves it and travels to other places. 
Someone once asked me whether I could do that  but I said that I could not travel in my 
dreams. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 287) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1B-2 Eliminating a doubt 
A A doubt 
When the kind of meditative stabilizatio n explained above is achieved, which of 
the five paths is the context to place it in?  
 
Which of the five paths – the path  of accumulation, path of prep aration, path of seeing, path 
of meditation, and path of no-more-learning – is the meditative stabilization that was explained above?  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
786 B Its elimination  
If it is the meditative stabilization explai ned above, if it was cultivated after the 
view of selflessness had been uncontrovertibly ascertained and if it was established 
within the view196, it can be placed in the contex t of the path of liberation of 
ordinary beings. However, if it is a medita tion that has been cultivated otherwise, 
the Shravaka Levels  says that worldly paths associ ated with the view which has 
coarse and subtle aspects and which accomplishes the actual level of the first 
concentration, those paths are also accompli shed in dependence on this meditative 
stabilization. Therefore non-Buddhist sa ges {288} who free themselves from 
attachment by means of worldly paths up to that of Nothingn ess and those below, 
also need to move on to higher paths in dependence on it. It is thus a meditative 
stabilization common to non-Buddhists and Buddhists.  
 If it is the meditative stabilization explained ab ove that is cultivated after having unmistakenly 
ascertained the view of selflessness, it can be posited as a path of liberation of ordinary beings, that is, the path of accumulation. However, if  not such a meditation, it is a meditative 
stabilization that is a mundane path, for example,  an actual first concentration, that sees the 
upper level as peaceful and the lower level as coarse. Therefore, non-Buddhist sages, through 
meditating on the mundane path of the four co ncentrations and the first three of the four 
formless absorptions, can separate from the atta chment of these levels but cannot become free 
from the attachment of the Peak  of Existence. Thus, the first concentration and so forth are 
paths that are shared by both  Buddhists and non-Buddhists.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C If it is also seized by any of the three principal aspects of the path it becomes a path of liberation and 
so on 
Furthermore if it is seized by revulsion wi th samsara [born] from the view correctly 
realizing selflessness and from realizing the fa ults of limited existe nce, and if it is 
seized by the thought of re nunciation that seeks libera tion, it becomes a path of 
liberation. If it is seized by bodhichitta  it also becomes a Mahayana path. Likewise, 
for instance, if it is seized by the genero sity of giving [as little as] one small food 
offering to an animal and the intentio n of guarding any one type of ethical 
discipline, it will gradually turn into th e accumulations of the paths of liberation 
and of omniscience.  
 
If one’s calm abiding is held by any of the three principal aspects of the path – definite 
emergence, bodhichitta, or correct  view, it becomes a path to liberation and so forth, meaning 
t h a t  d u e  t o  i t  o n e  c a n  b e c o m e  f r e e  f r o m  c y c l i c  e x i s t e n c e  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  I f  i t  i s  h e l d  b y  a  repulsion for cyclic existence through the view  that unmistakenly realizes selflessness and 
through excellently realizing the fa ults of cyclic existence, and if  i t  i s  h e l d  b y  t h e  d e f i n i t e  
emergence that seeks liberation, it becomes a path  of liberation. If it is held by bodhichitta, 
the mind of enlightenment, it also becomes a ma hayana path. For example, if it is held by the 
                                             
 
196 A given meditation does not need to have this view as its object. Still, it remains linked with in so far as it is 
shaped by it, deriving its particular taste from  it (oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa). 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
787 generosity of giving one morsel of food to an animal and the guarding of  any type of morality, 
it becomes a collection of the path to liberation and omniscience. In other words, if it is held 
by definite emergence it becomes a path to libera tion, whereas if it is held by bodhichitta it 
becomes a path to omniscience.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 However, here, what is being examined is not whether or not it becomes a path 
of liberation and omniscience when seized  b y  o t h e r  p a t h s .  R a t h e r  w h a t  i s  b e i n g  
examined is what the path becomes thro ugh the own essence of this meditative 
stabilization.  
 However, what is being examined here is not whether it becomes a path to liberation or a path to omniscience by means of being held by other paths. Rather what  is being examined is 
whether meditative stabilization becomes a path by means of its own entity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D The consequent need to differentiate with regard to happiness, clarity, and non-conceptuality whether 
or not the meditation is associated with emptiness 
When it comes to meditations without mi ndfulness and mental activity which are 
called “unfabricated by the mind” and “wit hout grasping,” there are two [types] 
with respect to happiness, clarity, and no n-conceptuality: that which is and that 
which is not an emptiness meditation wi th equipoise established on the meaning 
of suchness. That is why it is absolutely crucial to differentiate them well, for there 
is much ground for mistaking that which is not a realization of suchness as [its] 
realization. If you do not differentiate them  as explained earlier, you will even take 
the meditative stabilization which is commo n to this Dharma and other [teaching]s 
to be the essence of completion stage of highest yoga tantra, so you should 
examine this at depth. 
 
It is necessary to differentiate  between what is and what is not a meditation on emptiness. 
The happiness, clarity, and non-conceptuality that are imputed “unfabricated by mind” and 
“without apprehension” with respect to medita tion that is without mindfulness and without 
mental attention are of two type s: that which is meditation on  emptiness which is equipoised 
on the meaning of suchness and that which is not.  It is very important to differentiate them 
since it is possible to mistake that which is no t a realization of emptiness for a realization of 
emptiness. If one does not diffe rentiate them, one will consider the meditative stabilization 
that is common to the Dharma and non-Buddh ist teachings to be the main point of the 
completion stage of highest yoga tantra. Because of this, it is necessary to investigate them 
well. In short, it is important not to mist akenly think that one has accomplished the 
completion stage of highest yoga tantra and that  therefore one no longer needs to do anything 
else.     
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
788 Wednesday afternoon, 31 January 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 288) says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C2 General indication of how to travel along the path relying on calm 
abiding 
A How important it is to cultivat e special insight relying on it 
Second: [Now] Should someone who has th us {289} achieved attention, the non-
conceptual meditative stabilization explained above, sustain just that non-
conceptuality characterized by clarity, non-conceptuality, and so on? Such 
meditative stabilization having been prod uced in the mental continuum is for the 
sake of producing special insight which dest roys the [mental] afflictions. Therefore, 
if special insight does not arise in depend ence on it, however much that meditative 
stabilization is trained it will not ev en be possible to abandon the mental 
afflictions of the desire realm, and if so no need to speak of all the mental 
afflictions. For that reason it is ne cessary to cultivate special insight.  
 
First there is a general indication of how to progress on the path in dependence on calm 
abiding, the first point being that it is importan t to cultivate special insight in dependence on 
calm abiding.   Having achieved the non-conceptual meditative  stabilization, mental attention, explained 
above, should one cultivate that mere non-conc eptuality that has the feature of clarity, non-
conceptuality, and so forth? Such meditative st abilization is produced in the continuum is for 
the purpose of generating the spec ial insight that destroys the affl ictions. Therefore, if special 
insight is not generated in dependence on that single-pointed meditative stabilization, no matter how much one familiarizes with this medi tative stabilization it will not be possible to 
abandon even the afflictions of the desire realm.  This being so, there is no need to mention 
that it will not be possible to abandon all the affl ictions. For this reason it is also necessary to 
meditate on and develop special insight.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B How there are two special insights to be cultivated 
In this regard there are two special insights, one that progresses along worldly 
paths abandoning manifest afflicti ons and one that progresses along 
transcendental paths abandoning the se eds of afflictions from the root. The 
former is a meditation with the coarse and peaceful aspects of seeing lower levels as 
coarser and higher ones as more peaceful and the latter is a view meditation with 
the sixteen aspects such as impermanence re lative to the four truths. The principal 
one [of these] set out in the Shravaka Levels  is the view realizing the selflessness of 
persons197.  
 
There are two types of special insight or higher seeing: 
                                              
197 "Selflessness" forms part of the 16 aspects of the four  noble truths. It is the most important one in this 
context. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
789 1. the special insight that prog resses by means of the mundan e paths that abandon manifest 
afflictions, and 
2. the special insight that progresses by mean s of the supramundane paths that abandon the 
seeds of the afflictions from the root. 
The mundane paths have the aspect of peaceful ness and coarseness that view the lower level 
as coarse and the higher level as peaceful. By means of them, one can temporarily abandon 
the manifest afflictions up to and includin g those of Nothingness, whereas one cannot 
abandon those of Peak of Existence. The supr amundane paths are meditations that view the 
four noble truths as having the aspects of th e sixteen, impermanence and so forth. However, 
the main one, as taught in Hearer Grounds , the view realizing the selflessness of persons, by 
which all the afflictions are abandoned. 
 The four noble truths are: true sufferings, tr ue origins, true cessations, and true paths. 
Each one of them has four attributes. For exampl e, the four attributes of true sufferings are 
impermanence, suffering, empty (empty of bein g a permanent, independent, and partless 
self), and selfless (empty of a self-sufficient subs tantially existent self). However, according to 
the Prasangika Madhyamikas the realization of  the emptiness of in herent existence is 
necessary in order to abandon th e root of the afflictions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C How calm abiding constitutes the basis for the progress of all non-Buddhist and Buddhist yogis on the 
path  
That being so, everyone – non-Buddhists  abandoning manifest afflictions by 
meditating on the path with coarse  and peaceful aspects and Buddhists 
abandoning afflictions from their root by meditating on the meaning of 
selflessness – requires the calm abiding explained above as the basis for 
abandoning afflictions of both non-Buddh ist and Buddhist yogis. Not only that, 
any Mahayana or Hinayana yogi also needs to accomplish that meditative 
stabilization, and as for Mahayana prac titioners, again, all Mantrayana and 
Paramitayana yogis need to accomplish th at calm abiding. Therefore this calm 
abiding is crucial as the basis of progress on the paths of all yogis. 
 Calm abiding is the basis for progressing on th e paths of all non-Buddhist and Buddhist yogis. 
Non-Buddhists abandon the manifest afflictions by  meditating the path that has the aspect of 
peacefulness and coarseness, and Buddhists abandon the afflictions from the root by 
meditating on the meaning of selflessness. Howe ver, both of these require the calm abiding 
explained above as a basis for abandoning the a fflictions, both the coarse and the subtle. In 
addition, mahayana and hinayana yogis must also  accomplish that meditative stabilization. 
Also all practitioners of both the mantra vehi cle and the perfection vehicle must accomplish 
calm abiding. Therefore, this calm abiding is  important as the basis for progressing on the 
paths of all yogis.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
790 D How it is unacceptable for us Buddhists not to have special insight realizing selflessness  
For Buddhists {290} it is not unacceptable to lack the former of those two special 
insights, but the latter special insight real izing selflessness is an element [of the 
path] whose lack is unacceptable. In fact if you attain the calm abiding explained 
above which is part of the level of the preparation [stage] for the first 
concentration, you can achieve the libe ration which is freedom from all the 
various fetters of cyclic existence by cult ivating special insight based on it – even 
without achieving the calm abiding of higher concentrations or formlessness. If 
you do not realize the very essence of self lessness and fail to meditate on it, you 
will not escape from cyclic existence even if, based on calm abiding explained 
above, you abandon all manifest afflic tions up to [the level of] “complete 
nothingness” by means of worldly special in sight and thus attain [the mental state] 
“peak of existence”. 
 Buddhists need the special insight realizing se lflessness as without th is they cannot progress 
on the path. Thus, although amon g the two types of special insi ght it is acceptable to not 
develop the mundane special insight that views th e lower level as coarse and the upper level as 
peaceful, it is not acceptable to lack the spec ial insight realizing selflessness, the branch or 
cause without which one cannot trav el the path to liberation. If one attains the calm abiding 
included in the level of the preparation of the first concentration, even without achieving the 
calm abiding of the higher concentrations or formless absorptions up to the Peak of 
Existence, one can achieve the liberation that  is a freedom from all the bonds of cyclic 
existence by cultivating special insight in de pendence on that. However, if one does not 
realize and does not meditate on the thusness that  is selflessness, even if one attains the mind 
of the Peak of Existence by abandoning all the manifest afflictions up to and including those 
of Nothingness, the third level of the formless absorptions, by means of calm abiding and the 
mundane special insight that depends on it, si nce one has not abandoned the afflictions from 
the root one will not become free from cyclic existence. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
E The reason for that 
From Praise of the Praiseworthy : 
 
Beings who fail to turn to your teachings, 
who are blinded by ignorance, 
having gone to the Peak of Existence still gain lives again where there is pain. Those who follow your  teachings, without 
attaining the basis of stabilization still avert existences, while being looked over by the Maras. 
 Those beings who do not turn to the Dharma bu t are blinded by ignorance due to lacking the 
eye of wisdom, even though they go up to the Pe ak of Existence, they are unable to completely 
abandon suffering and later on, having exhausted th e virtue of their past meditation, they will 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
791 once again fall to the lower realms as animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings. In other words, 
suffering will arise for them once again and th ey will accomplish exis tence. Those, on the 
other hand, who follow the teachings of the Buddha will avert existence even without 
achieving an actual concentration while being watched by the maras. This will come about 
due to their realization of realizing selflessness which abandons the afflictions by the root and 
makes it impossible for the maras to harm th em. Among the four maras – the mara of the 
aggregates, the mara of the afflic tions, the mara of death, and th e mara of the sons-of-the-gods 
– no matter what harm the sons-o f-the-gods try to inflict on th em, they will not be able to 
harm them.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
F Yogis of highest yoga tantra also need to journey along the path based on calm abiding 
For that reason even yogis of highest yo ga tantra who do not develop the special 
insight directed at the multiplicity of peaceful and coarse aspects and the calm 
abiding accomplished by means of it, those yogis still need to develop one kind of 
calm abiding. In fact the point where it firs t arises is during the generation stage.  
 Even practitioners of highest yoga tantra need to  rely on calm abiding in order to travel their 
path. Because of that, even those yogis of highes t yoga tantra who do no t generate the special 
insight observing the varieties, that is, conv entional truths, that have the aspect of 
peacefulness and coarseness as well as the calm abiding accomplished by that, must generate 
one calm abiding. In fact during the generati on stage when one meditates on carrying death 
into the path to the truth body, the intermedia te state into the path to the enjoyment body, 
and rebirth into the path to the emanation bo dy, calm abiding is necessary in order to 
visualize, for example, the thirty-two deities of  Guhyasamaja, the sixty-four deities of Heruka 
Chakrasamvara, the thirteen de ities of Yamantaka, and the many deities of Kalachakra. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C3 Indication of how to progress on worldly paths in particular 
A How the distinguishing features of two [kinds of] beginners are explained in the Shravaka Levels   
Here the Shravaka Levels  explain that from the ninth mental abiding onward,198 you 
are a beginner with regard to attention as long as you have not achieved 
attention,199 while someone who has achieved atte ntion and wants to purify mental 
afflictions cultivating the attention th at knows the various characteristics200 is a 
beginner with regard to purifying afflictions.  
 
                                              
198 JN: “from [the point of view of] the nine stages of  mental abiding” changed to “from the ninth mental 
abiding onward” ( sems dgu pa nas bzung ). 
199 This term for the stage where calm abiding has b een accomplished was mentioned in 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-
3B2F-1C1A-1C and 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-2A7B-2. 
200 One out of six special attentions taught in the context of the access stage to the first concentration. Cf. also 
note 20. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
792 There are two different kinds of beginners explained in the Hearer Grounds . From the ninth 
mental abiding onward, as long as one has not attained a mental attention ( yid la byed pa , also 
translated as ‘mental contemplation’), one is a be ginner at mental attention. This first level of 
mental attention, a mere beginner, is not able to abandon any affliction s, whereas the first of 
the six mental attentions purifying affliction s is the mental attention of the individual 
knowledge of the character. The afflictions of the desire realm are divided into three main 
divisions: the great, middling, and small, which are each further divided into great, middling, 
small. Thus, there are the great of the great, th e middling of the great, the small of the great, 
the great of the middling, middling of the middlin g, small of the middling, great of the small, 
middling of the small, and small of the small afflictions, due to which their respective 
antidotes are also divided into nine. 
 [Having attained mental attention, one who meditates the mental attention of individual 
knowledge of the character out of the wish to purify the affliction s, is a beginner at completely 
purifying the afflictions.] 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B The need to differentiate those two properly 
{291} If this point explained in the Shravaka Levels  is not ascertained properly, the 
false impression will arise that the lo west of the paths of concentration and 
formlessness is the access stage of the fi rst concentration, and that the first 
instance of mind gathered by means of th at access stage [concentration] constitutes 
realization of the various characteristics,  as it is the first of six attentions201 that are 
explained, realizing the various characteristics.  
 
It is important to differentiate these two well as otherwise it will erroneously seem that the 
lowest of the paths of the concentrations and formless absorptions being the preparation of 
the first concentration, that sinc e the first of the six mental atte ntions explained is individual 
knowledge of the character, the first mind gene rated that is included in a preparation is 
individual knowledge of character. In other words,  it is mistaken to think that when the first 
of the six mental attentions – the mental a ttention of the individual knowledge of the 
character – is generated, that one has achieved a preparation of the first concentration. This is 
because the previous mind, that of calm abid ing, is also included in the level of the 
preparation of the first concentration. This mi nd of calm abiding is called “mere beginner.” 
The six mental attentions are: (1) individual  knowledge of the character, (2) belief, (3) 
isolation, (4) joy-withdrawal, (5) analysis, and (6) final training. They are discussed in detail in 
the text Concentrations and Formless Absorptions . 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
                                              
201 Those six attentions are not equivalent to the four  attentions described above (p. 43). Rather they are 
another set of attentions associated with special co ntemplations which, howeve r, Tsongkhapa does not 
elaborate on here. Cf. also notes 25 and 20. 
FPMT Basic Program  Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path    ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
793 C Establishing that this is well founded  
This position is inadmissible because there is no developing the access stage of the 
first concentration without thus achieving calm abiding, and if that access stage 
has not been achieved, calm abiding is not achieved202. Also, since realization of 
the various characteristics is an analytical meditation, it is impossible by means of 
that meditation to newly accomplish the calm abiding that has not been achieved 
before.  
 
This position is incorrect. Without achieving ca lm abiding, it is not possible to generate the 
preparation of the first concentration. If the preparation of the first concentration is not 
achieved, calm abiding is not achieved. Since the individual knowledge of the character is 
analytical meditation, it is not possible to newl y achieve calm abiding by means of meditating 
it. In other words, first it is ne cessary to achieve calm abiding. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D The need for beginners to achieve calm abiding from the attention which is the access stage to the 
first [concentration] before the attention that realizes the various characteristics,  access stage of the first 
concentration 
Therefore the first of six attentions of  the access stage is the beginning of 
cultivating the special insight belonging to the access stage. However, it is not at 
the beginning of the mere first [level] a ccess stage [concentration] – calm abiding 
belonging to the access stage has to go be fore. All high meditative stabilizations 
prior to achievement of the meditative st abilization belonging to the first access 
stage are single-pointed minds of the desire realm203, which is also why, according 
to the great texts, those who achieve calm abiding seem to be very few. 
 The way to get rid of attachment to th e desire realm by means of the six access 
stage attentions is not written down here for fear of wordiness. 
 
In order to achieve the mental attention of in dividual knowledge of the character, it is 
necessary to first achieve calm abiding. Ther efore, the mental attention of individual 
knowledge of the characte r, the first of the six mental attentions, is included in special 
insight. It is not the beginning of the mere fi rst preparation because it must be preceded by 
the calm abiding that is included in the prepar ation. All meditative stabilizations prior to 
attaining the meditative stabilization included in  the preparation of the first concentration are 
single-pointed minds of the desire realm. For th is reason, according to the great texts very few 
people achieve calm abiding, meaning that al though there are many people who think that 
they have achieved calm abiding, in fact they have not actually achieved it. Because it would 
                                              
202 In other words calm abiding and th e access stage to the first concentrat ion are attained simultaneously and 
may be thought of as synonymous. This access stage is not the first concentration pr oper and therefore not its 
lowest path. Between the realization of calm abiding and the attainment of the actual first concentration there 
is a phase of investigative meditation – the so-called six attentions. It follows that the first of those is not the 
first mental state of the access stage, as the latter is pr eceded by actual calm abidin g which is the first mental 
state of the access stage. (Expla nation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
203 cf. 2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2F-1C1A-1E 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
794 take a lot of words to explain how to separate  from the attachment of the desire realm by 
means of the six mental attentions of th e preparation this is not explained here. 
 
 
Wednesday afternoon, 31 January 2007 cont’d 
 
Special Insight 
From Dzong-ka-ba’s 
Medium Exposition of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment  
Practiced by Persons of Three Capacities  
Translated by Jeffrey Hopkins 
 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 291) says: 
 
PART ONE: IGNORANCE 
 
The presentation of the mode of training  in special insight has four parts: its 
prerequisites, divisions, mode of cultivatio n, and the measure of having established 
it through cultivation. 
 
In order to train in special insight it is necessa r y  t o  r e l y  o n  t h e  c o l l e c t i o n  o r  c a u s e s  ( t h e  
prerequisites) of special insight.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Introduction 
The presentation of the prerequisites for special insight has two parts: a general 
exposition of the prerequisites and ho w to settle the view in particular. 
General exposition of the prer equisites for special insight 
Kamalashila’s second [o f three works on the] Stages of Meditation1 says that relying 
on an excellent being, seeking hearing of  the doctrine from him/her, and proper 
contemplation are the three prer equisites for special insight. 
 
In general in order to develop special insight it is  necessary to rely on holy beings, to seek to 
hear the Dharma, that is, receive teachings, from them, and then, having received their 
teachings, to reflect on them properly. These are the three collections  o r  c a u s e s  t h a t  a r e  
necessary for the development of spec ial insight which are set out in the Middle Stages of 
Meditation . 
 
                                              
1 bhavanakrama 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
795 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Need for hearing and thinking about the scriptures: 
 The generation of the view realizing suchness by the wisdoms of hearing and 
thinking—having heard the stainless te xts in dependence on a scholar who 
unmistakenly knows the essentials of the scriptures—is an essential prerequisite for 
special insight. For, if you do not have  the view penetrating the meaning of the 
mode of being, it is impossible to gene rate a realization of  the special insight 
cognizing the mode [of being of phenomena, that is, emptiness]. 
 
First it is necessary to hear or listen to teachi ngs. The causes of specia l insight are relying on 
the wise who understand the essential points of  the Buddha’s teachings correctly, to hear or 
listen to stainless texts, and to develop the view realizing suchness by means of the wisdom 
arisen from hearing and the wisdom arisen from thinking. If one of these causes is missing it 
will not be possible to develop special insight, therefore all three are in dispensable. This is 
because if one does not have the view that has come to a decisive conclusion about the final 
nature of phenomena, that is, if one does no t understand emptiness or suchness perfectly, 
one will not be able to generate the special insi ght realizing suchness, that is, realizing things 
as they are. In short, due to lacking one of th ese causes, it will not be possible to generate 
special insight.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Need to follow any of the great  chariots: 
 F u r t h e r m o r e ,  s u c h  a  v i e w  m u s t  b e  s o u g h t  b y  o n e  w h o  i s  r e l y i n g  n o t  o n  t h e  
interpretable meaning but on the definitive  meaning. Hence, it is necessary to 
understand the meaning of scriptures of  definitive meaning within knowing the 
difference between the interpretable and the definitive. 
 Concerning this, if you do not rely on a treatise by one of the great valid openers 
of a chariot-way who commented on [Buddh a’s] thought, you will be like a blind 
person without a guide going in a directio n of fright. Thus, you should rely on a 
non-mistaken commentary [of Buddha’s thought]. 
 It is necessary to this view by relying on defi nitive meaning teachings and not on interpretive 
meaning teachings. Therefore, through clearly understanding the difference between interpretive meaning and definitive meaning, one must comprehend the Buddha’s teachings 
or scriptures that are definitive meaning. For this one needs to rely on the treatises by the 
great trail-blazers who are valid. Without rely ing on them, one will be like a blind person 
without a guide who is unable to arrive at any destination but wanders off in the wrong 
direction. In short, one must rely on commentaries that teach the unmistaken meaning of the 
Buddha’s scriptures.   
Thursday morning, 1 February 2007 
 It is necessary to understand the difference between definitive meaning and interpretive 
meaning, teachings and then to rely on the de finitive meaning teachings given by the Buddha. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
796 It is also necessary to rely on the treatises of valid beings, as otherwise one will be like a blind 
person without a guide who goes  to the wrong destination.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 292) says: 
Need to seek view in dependence on Nagarjuna’s system: 
 On whom should you rely? He is the Superior Nagarjuna widely renowned in the 
three levels [below, above, and on the ground] whom the Supramundane Victor himself prophesied very clearly in many  sutras and tantras as unraveling the 
essence of his teaching—the profound meaning [of emptiness] free from all 
extremes of [inherent] existence and no [n ominal] existence. Therefore, you should 
seek the view realizing emptiness in dependence on his texts. 
 
It is necessary to seek the view that relies  on Nagarjuna’s system . The Buddha Bhagavan 
prophesied that one called Nagarjuna, renowned  throughout the three levels (above, on, and 
under the ground) would explain the essence of  the teachings, the profound meaning free 
from all extremes of existing and not exis ting. Therefore, through depending on his 
scriptures, one should seek th e view realizing emptiness. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Identification of the model Madhyamikas: 
 S i n c e  A r y a d e v a  i s  t a k e n  t o  b e  a s  v a l i d as the master [Nagarjuna] by the great 
Madhyamikas such as the masters Buddh apalita, Bhavaviveka, Chandrakirti, 
Shantarakshita, and so forth, both the father [Nagarjuna] and his spiritual son 
[Aryadeva] are sources for the other Madh yamikas. Therefore, earlier [Tibetans 
rightly] called those two the “Madhyamik as of the model texts” and called the 
others “partisan Madhyamikas”. 
 
Aryadeva is considered by Buddhapalita, Bhav aviveka, Chandrakirti , Shantarakshita, and 
others to be similar to the master, Nagarjun a (Buddhapalita is a Prasangika Madhyamaka, 
Bhavaviveka a Svatantrika Madhyamaka, Chan drakirti a Prasangika Madhyamaka, and 
Shantarakshita a Yogachara Svatantrika Madhyam aka). Therefore, the father, Nagarjuna, and 
his son, Aryadeva are the source of other Madh yamikas. Earlier scholars called Nagarjuna and 
Aryadeva “past Madhyamikas” and called the ot hers “partisan Madhyamikas” because they 
claim that their tenets are right wh ereas other tenets are mistaken.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Designation of names of Madhyamikas by how conventionalities are posited: 
 Some earlier [Tibetan] spiritual guides [wrongly] said that from the viewpoint of 
how Madhyamikas posit conventionalities they are designated as of two types—
Sautrantika-Madhyamikas who assert that ex ternal objects exist conventionally and 
Yogachara-Madhyamikas who assert that conventionally there are no external 
objects.  
 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
797 The names designated by earlier scholars are examined. Some spiritual friends of earlier 
generations said that there are two kinds of  Madhyamikas who are na med in terms of how 
they posit conventionalities. Th ose that assert that external objects exist conventionally are 
the Sautrantika Madhyamikas, wher eas those that assert that ex ternal objects do not exist 
conventionally are the Yogachara Madhyamika s, so-called because they resemble the 
Chittamatrins.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Designation of names of Madhyamikas by how the ultimate is asserted: 
 They also [wrongly] said that from the viewpoint of how they assert the ultimate 
Madhyamikas are designated as of two types—(1) those propounding an 
establishment of illusion by a reasoning consciousness who assert that a composite of the appearances of the subject, such as a sprout, and of its absence of true 
existence is an ultimate truth and (2) those propounding a thorough non-abiding 
who assert that the affirmative eliminativ e phenomenon which is  an elimination of 
the elaborations [of thing, non-thing, both , neither, and so forth] with respect to 
appearances is an ultimate truth. Th ey identified those propounding an 
establishment of illusion by a reas oning consciousness as the masters 
Shantarakshita, Kamalashila, and so forth. Some Indians also used the 
designations “like illusion” and “thoroughly non-abiding”. 
 Also from the point of view of how the ultimate  truth is asserted ther e are two designations. 
Those who assert that the collect ion of the substratum, such as a sprout, and the appearance 
of non-true existence as ultimate truth are the exponents who establish the illusory by 
reasoning. Those who assert the determinations that have completely cut elaborations with 
respect to appearances as ultimate truths are th e exponents of complete non-abiding, that is, 
of the non-abiding of appearances. It is assert ed that Master Shantarakshita, Kamalashila, and 
others are the first of these two, whereas some Indians also assert the terms illusory-like and 
completely non-abiding. In Tibet, on the othe r hand, there are the Jonangpas; for example, 
there is one well-known lama from Drepung Go mang who gave up his vows when he arrived 
in India, married, and had children.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
The names and meanings of this assertion are obscured: 
 The great translator [Lo-den-shay-rap2 rightly] says [in his letter, the Drop of 
Ambrosia ], “The positing of the two from th e viewpoint of how the ultimate is 
asserted is an obscured presentation generating amazement.”3 
 
                                              
2rngog lo chen po blo ldan shes rab. 
3 In the mchan bzhi this is interpreted differently as  “generating amazement in the obscured but not in the 
wise”. However, Tri-jang Rin- bo-chay, author of the subheadings, clearl y affixes “obscured” to the presentation. 
Those are two types of amazement, at the good and at the bad. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
798 The Great Translator Loden Sherab said that this  way of naming in terms of how the ultimate 
truth is asserted is the cause of confusion. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Ye-shay-day is correct on author of Treatise and history of founders of S autrantika-Madhyamika and 
Yogachara-Madhyamika but wrong in excluding Prasangika division: 
 Concerning this, the master Ye-shay-day4 explains: 
In the Madhyamika treatises by the father, the Superior [Nagarjuna], 
and his spiritual son [Aryadeva], whether external objects exist or not is 
not clear. After them, the master Bhavaviveka refuted the system of 
Mere Knowledge [Mind-Only, Chittamatra] and established a system in 
which external objects exist co nventionally. Then, the master 
Shantarakshita made a different Ma dhyamika system, teaching—based 
on Yogachara treatises—that conventionally external objects do not exist and that ultimately the mind is wi thout inherent existence. Thereby, 
two forms of Madhyamika arose; the former is called Sautrantika-Madhyamika and the latter,  Yogachara-Madhyamika. 
The history of the clarification [of the mo del texts by those masters] through great 
treatises is as he says. 
 The way in which Yeshe De explained the author s of the Madhyamaka tr eatises and the stages 
of development of the systems of Svatantr ika Madhyamaka and Yo gachara Madhyamaka, 
which are respectively similar to the positions of the Svatantrikas and the Chittamatrins, is 
correct. Yeshe De said that Arya Nagarjuna and hi s spiritual son Aryadeva did not clearly state 
in their treatises whether external objects are established or not. After them, Master 
Bhavaviveka refuted the Chittamatra system and asserted a system in which external 
phenomena exist conventionally. Master Shanta rakshita, based on the Chittamatra system, 
said that phenomena are not established from ex ternal particles and that ultimately the mind 
does not exist. Thereby, two kinds of Madhya mikas appeared: the Saut rantika Madhyamikas, 
who base their assertions on the sutras, and the Yogachara Svatantrikas, who assert that 
phenomena are the nature of the mind and aris e from imprints. This presentation accords 
with the stages of development set out in the great treatises. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Unsuitability of those designations  for the master Chandrakirti: 
 However, although the master Chandrakir ti asserts that external objects exist 
conventionally, he does not do so in comparison with another tenet system. 
Therefore, it is not suitable to call him a Sautrantika[-Madhyamika]. That he 
asserts external objects in accordance with  the Vaibhashikas is also not feasible. 
 
                                              
4 Ye shes sde. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
799 Although Chandrakirti posits th at external phenomena exist conventionally, it is not suitable 
to call him a Sautrantika, nor is it suitable  to say that his assertions accord with the 
Vaibhashikas, even though they also assert the existence of external phenomena that are 
c o m p o s e d  o f  e i g h t  s u b t l e  p a r t i c l e s .  T h i s  i s  because Chandrakirti makes the additional 
assertion that such external phenomena do not exist inherently or truly.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Correctness of designation of Svatantri ka and Prasangika by [Ga-dam-ba] scholars of later dissemination: 
 The terminology of Svatantrika and Pr asangika was used with respect to 
Madhyamikas by scholars of the later disse mination [of Buddhism] into the land of 
snowy mountains [Tibet]; this accords with Chandrakirti’s Clear Words5 [in which 
he refutes the usage of autonomous syllogisms6 and shows that using only 
consequences7 is sufficient for generating in another the Madhyamika view]. 
 Thus, Madhyamikas are definite as of tw o types—those assertin g and not asserting 
external objects conventionally. Furthermor e, when names are designated from the 
viewpoint of how the view ascertaining emptiness is generated in the mental 
continuum, they are definite as of tw o types—Svatantrikas and Prasangikas. 
 
That the terms “Svatantrika” and “Prasangika” we re given by scholars of the later propagation 
accords with Chandrakirti’s Clear Words , a commentary on Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom . 
Thus, there are those who assert conventionally existent extern al phenomena, such as forms 
and so forth, and those who do not assert them. When designated  from the point of view of 
how the view ascertaining emptiness is generate d in the mental continuum, they are given the 
names “Prasangika Madhyamaka” an d “Svatantrika Madhyamaka.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Ga-dam-bas, in accordance with Atisha, sought view following Chandrakirti 
 Then, following whom did those master s seek the thought of the father, the 
Superior [Nagarjuna], and his spiritual son [Aryadeva]? Following the Great Elder 
[Atisha] who took the master Chandrakirti’s  system to be chief, the earlier great 
lamas of these precepts also he ld his system to be chief. 
 
That the earlier Kadampas sought the view thro ugh following Chandrakirti is the intention of 
Atisha. If one is seeking the intention of Na garjuna and Aryadeva, which master should one 
follow? Through following Atisha who took Chan drakirti’s system to be the main one, the 
great lamas of the past of these instructions al so held Chandrakirti’s system to be the main 
one.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
                                             
 
5 prasannapada. 
6 svatantranumana. 
7 prasanga. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
800 Assertion of system of Buddhapa lita and Chandrakirti as chief and importance of Bhavaviveka: 
 The master Chandrakirti saw that among the commentators on Nagarjuna’s 
Treatise on the Middle8 the master Buddhapalita commented in a complete way on 
the Superior’s thought. Thus, putting Budd hapalita’s system as his basis, taking 
many good explanations even from Bh avaviveka, and refuting those [within 
Bhavaviveka’s works] that appeared to be  a little incorrect, he commented on the 
Superior’s thought. 
 
Lama Tsongkhapa himself also asserted the sy stems of Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti to be 
the main systems, and after them asserted Bhavav iveka’s system to be im portant. Chandrakirti 
saw that among the commentaries on Fundamental Wisdom , Buddhapalita explained the 
intention of Arya Nagarjuna completely and then posited this system as a basis. Chandrakirti 
also took some of Bhavaviveka’s explanations  but corrected them and thereby clarified the 
intention of Nagarjuna.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Importance of these two mast ers for the profound meaning 
 Because the commentaries by these two masters [Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti] 
are seen to be very highly developed with  regard to explaining the texts of the 
Superior—the father—and his spiritual son,  here their thought will be delineated 
following the masters Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti. 
 
These two masters – Chandrakirti and Buddhapa lita – are important for the explanation of 
the profound meaning. Since th ey excellently explained the texts of Nagarjuna and Aryadeva, 
the intentions of the arya father and his spirit ual sons are settled by following Buddhapalita 
and Chandrakirti.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 295) says: 
1 Root of Cyclic Existence 
The presentation of how to settle the view in particular has three parts: identifying 
afflicted ignorance, showing that it is the root of revolving in cyclic existence, and 
that one wishing to abandon the concepti on of self should seek the view of 
selflessness. 
 
First afflicted ignorance is identified and then it is shown to be the root of cyclic existence. It 
is said that the root of all the afflictions is ignorance. Also th e first of the twelve links that 
explain how one takes rebirth in cyclic existence is ignorance. Therefore,  ignorance is the root 
of cyclic existence. What kind  of ignorance is this? Because there are different types of 
ignorance, this particular igno rance first needs to be identified. This ignorance is the non-
knowing of suchness, selflessness, or emptin ess, that is, the nature of phenomena. 
Alternatively it is the ignorance not knowing th e selflessness of persons or the selflessness of 
                                             
 
8 madhyamakashastra . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
801 phenomena. The particular ignoranc e that is the root of cyclic ex istence is this ignorance. In 
our daily life the root of all our problems is ig norance, in the sense that due to it we create 
actions of body and speech that are non-virt uous and bring the result of suffering and 
problems, without ever bringing the result of happiness and well-being. 
 Ignorance is the grasping at a self, it need s to be abandoned. Wishing to abandon it, one 
must seek the view of selflessness. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Identifying afflicted ignorance 
(This has five parts, the first of which is: that although desire and so forth are in a class contrary to knowledge they are 
not chief:) 
The antidotes to the other afflictive emot ions—desire and so forth—set forth by the 
Conqueror are partial ones, but the antidote  to ignorance that he described serves 
as an antidote to all [afflictive emotions].  Therefore, ignorance is the basis of all 
faults and defects.  
 
Although attachment, hatred, pride, doubt, wr ong view, and the secondary afflictions are the 
discordant class of knowledge, they are not the root of cyclic  existence. Thus , although the 
Conqueror, Buddha Shakyamuni, taught particular  antidotes to the various afflictions, they 
are only partial antidotes, whereas the antidote to ignorance is a complete antidote because it 
is the antidote to all the afflic tions. Hence, ignorance is the ba sis of all faults and defects. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Chandrakirti’s Clear Words  says: 
In the nine forms of the Buddha’s teachings based on the two truths—
the sets of sutras and so forth— 
Proclaimed with respect to the extensiv e forms of behavior of worldly beings, 
Those spoken for the sake of removi ng desire do not remove hatred, 
Those spoken for the sake of removing hatred do not remove desire, 
Those spoken for the sake of removing pride and so forth do not overcome the 
other defilements. 
Therefore, they are not very pervasiv e and those teachings are not of great 
meaning. 
Those spoken for the sake of removing ignorance overcome all afflictive emotions. 
All afflictive emotions thoroughly depe nd on ignorance; this is what the 
Conquerors said. 
 
The buddhas taught twelve branches of scripture as well as nine types of teachings based on 
the two truths – the conventional truth and ulti mate truth. In these whatever is vast with 
respect to the conduct of worldly beings is pe rfectly renowned. However, the teachings that 
Buddha Shakyamuni gave for the purpose of elim inating attachment cannot eliminate hatred. 
For example, he taught that the antidote to attachment is to meditate on ugliness, such as 
skeletons; but though this meditation can reduce attachment it cannot reduce hatred. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
802 Likewise the antidote to hatred taught by th e Buddha – meditation on love and compassion – 
can eliminate hatred and anger but cannot exhaus t attachment. Therefore,  these antidotes do 
not exhaust all afflictions, wherea s the antidote that exhausts igno rance or delusion is also the 
antidote that destroys all afflictions, that is, the six root afflictions as well as the twenty 
secondary afflictions. This is because the Conq ueror, Buddha Shakyamuni, taught that all the 
afflictions are dependent on delusion or  ignorance, this being their root.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, you must meditate on suchness as an  antidote to ignorance. Moreover, if 
ignorance is not identified, you will no t know how to cultivate its antidote; 
therefore, identification of ignorance is extremely important. 
 
Therefore, it is necessary to meditate on such ness or emptiness as the antidote to ignorance. 
However, since without first identifying ignorance,  it is not possible to meditate its antidote, 
initially it is important to identify ignorance. Because of this, one should strive to recognize 
the root of cyclic existence an d the root all the problems th at arise in our daily life – 
ignorance. Having identified th is ignorance, one should then apply its antidote – meditation 
on emptiness or selflessness.  Thursday afternoon, 1 February 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 295) says: 
(Second, though in general ignorance is posited as the mere  opposite of knowledge, here ignorance is to be taken as 
the opposite of knowledge realizing the absence of true existence:)  
Ignorance is the opposite of knowledge, bu t knowledge should not be taken as just 
any [knowledge]; rather, it is the wisd om knowing suchness —selflessness. Its 
o p p o s i t e  i s  n o t  s u i t a b l e  t o  b e  j u s t  t h e  n o n - e x i s t e n c e  o f  i t  o r  j u s t  o t h e r  t h a n  i t ;  
hence, its opposite is its contradictory equivalent. 
 
In general ignorance ( ma rig pa ) is the discordant class of knowing ( rig pa ), but in this 
particular context it is the discordant class of the knowing that is the re alization of emptiness. 
Ignorance (literally, non-knowing) does not know its object, and is therefore the exact 
opposite of knowing. Here knowing is the wisdom  realizing selflessness. Its discordant class or 
opposite class is not the mere absence of wisdom  nor is it that which is other than wisdom. 
The ignorance apprehending self-sufficient substa ntial existence or inherent existence and the 
wisdom realizing thusness or selflessness have completely opposite modes of apprehension. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, describing the two subtle conceptions  of self as afflictive emotions:)  
That [ignorance] is a superimposition of self; furthermore, it is the two 
superimpositions of a self of phenomen a and of persons. Therefore, both the 
conception of a self of phenomena and th e conception of a self of persons are 
ignorance. 
 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
803 The two subtle conceptions of a self – the concep tion of a self of persons and the conception 
of a self of phenomena – are afflictions. They are a superimposition of a self. In the case of 
the conception of a self of phenomena the basis of imputation is the aggregates of a being – 
the form aggregate, feeling aggregate, disc rimination aggregate, compositional factors 
aggregate, and consciousness aggregate – upon which one superimposes a self. The 
conception of a self of persons,  on the other hand, apprehends th e person to be self-sufficient 
substantially existent or inherently existent. Therefore, both the conc eption of a self of 
phenomena and the conception of a self of pe rsons are ignorance. Ig norance is the main 
discordant class to the re alization of emptiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, how ignorance superimposes what sort of inherent existence:)  
The manner of superimposition by ignoranc e is to conceive that phenomena exist 
by way of their own entity, by way of th eir own nature, or by way of their own 
being. The  Questions of Upali Sutra9 says that phenomena are posited through the 
power of conceptuality: 
Here the various mind-pleasing blossoming flowers 
And attractive shining supreme golden houses 
Have no [inherently existent] maker at all. They are posited through the power of conceptuality.  Through the power of conceptuality the world is imputed. 
 What kind of nature does ignorance superimp ose? The way in which ignorance superimposes 
is that it apprehends persons or phenomena to  exist by way of their own entity, by way of 
their own characteristics, or inhe rently. This sutra says that bo th the blossoming flowers that 
make the mind happy and attractive golden mansions are not created by anyone. This 
statement refutes that the assertion that they  are the creations of a God, a primordial 
principle, Brahma, Vishnu, and so forth. Instea d they are posited by the power of conception. 
In fact the entire world is imputed by the power of conception, whereby all phenomena are 
imputed by the power of conception. This indi cates that phenomena do not exist from their 
own side but are merely imputed. For example, just as a pregnant woman gives a name to her 
unborn child and then thinks “Cristina” with re spect to it, in a similar way we impute a name 
to a phenomenon and then think of  the phenomenon as being that.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, Nagarjuna’s Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning
10 says: 
Because the perfect Buddha said 
The world is caused by ignorance, 
Why is it not correct that  
This world is [posited by] conceptuality? 
                                              
9 upaliparipriccha. 
10 yuktisastika . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
804 In commentary on the meaning of this, Chan drakirti explains that the worlds are 
not established by way of their own entity  and are only imputed by conceptuality. 
 
Also the Sixty Verses of Reasons  by Nagarjuna says that the entire  world, that is, all phenomena, 
has ignorance as a condition. There are two kinds of ignorance, one that is a causal 
motivation and one that is a time motivation which is present simultaneous with the action. 
These two ignorances produce actions that give  rise to the world. For example, the many 
buildings in our cities come about as the result of an architect drawing the building plan of 
where the kitchen, bathroom, windows, doors, an d so forth will be located, after which the 
building plan is given to the builders who then construct the house. Since similarly all 
phenomena arise from thought, it is not incorre c t  t o  s a y  “ T h e  w o r l d  i s  c o n c e p t i o n . ”  T h i s  
means that all the world – the mountains, lakes, rivers, and so forth – do not exist by way of 
their own entity but are merely imputed by conception. If phenomena existed truly or 
inherently there would be no need to build or  create them. For example, it would not be 
necessary for a cook to make food as the food  would be established inherently without the 
need for anyone to make it.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Aryadeva’s Four Hundred
11 says: 
If without conceptuality the existence 
Of desire and so forth does not exist 
Who with intelligence would hold [that things] 
Are ultimate realities and [imputed by] conceptuality? 
Chandrakirti’s commentary on this says: 
Those which exist only when the co nceptuality [imputing them] exists 
and do not exist when conceptualit y does not are without question 
definite as not established by way of their own entities, like a snake imputed to a coiled rope. 
Thus, he explains that desire and so fort h are like a snake imputed to a rope in 
terms of the factor of being imputed to be established by way of their own entities 
whereas they are not. [However] a rope-s nake and desire and so forth are not 
similar in terms of whether they exist co nventionally or not [since a rope-snake 
does not exist conventionally whereas desire and so forth do]. 
 
Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses  says that attachment and so  forth do not exist without 
conception. For example, upon seeing something attractive we think “O h, how beautiful” and 
develop attachment to it. Similarly upon seeing an unattractive object we think “How awful” 
and develop hatred for it. If, for example, a 100 people were to look at the same object, such 
as a particular man or woman, each person would have a different idea about him or her, 
with some of them liking him or her and others not liking him or her.  
                                             
 
11 catuhshataka. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
805  Another example is that upon seeing a stri ped rope coiled in a dim corner, we become 
frightened thinking “Oh, there is a snake,” alth ough in reality a snake does not exist there. 
Similarly, although phenomena do not exist from  their own side or by their own entity, they 
appear to us to exist from their own side and inherently. Whereas in the case of the striped, 
coiled rope which appears to be a snake, the ob ject ‘snake’ does not exist at all, attachment 
and hatred, although imputed, do exist conventi onally, as do pride, jealousy, resentment, and 
so forth. However, they do not exist inherent ly or from their own side but exist by being 
merely imputed by name and conception. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The fifth, a detailed description of the conception of self, has two parts, an explanation of the conception of self as 
twofold and the difference between a conception of self and a view of the transitory.  
 
The two types of conception of a self are th e conception of a self of persons and the 
conception of a self of phenomena. There is a difference between the conc eption of a self and 
the view of the transitory collection.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
The former has two parts, the first of which is: how even though the two conceptions  of self have the same subjective 
aspect, they are differentiated by wa y of their object of observation:) 
For those reasons—the mode of conceiving true existence—the object of negation—
is to conceive [that object s] are not posited through the force of beginningless 
conceptuality but are established object ively by way of their own entity. The 
referent object of that conception is ca lled self or inherent existence. The non-
existence of that with a person as the subs tratum is said to be a selflessness of a 
person, and the non-existence of that with [other] phenomena such as an eye, ear, 
and so forth as the substratum  is said to be a selflessnes s of phenomena. Therefore, 
we can implicitly understand that the conceptions12 of inherent existence with 
respect to persons and [other] phenomena are the conceptions of the two selves. 
 
The two conceptions of a self are similar in te rms of their aspects but are differentiated in 
terms of their observed objects.  The object of negation, the wa y of apprehending true existe nce, is the apprehension of 
objects as established by way of their own en tity without being imputed by the power of 
beginningless conceptions. For example, it is to think that a table is established by way of its 
own entity without being imputed by the power of beginningless conceptions. Its determined 
object is said to be “self” or “nature.” The abse nce of this on top of a person is the selflessness 
of persons, and the absence of this on top of  a phenomenon, such as an eye, ear, nose, 
tongue, or body, is the selflessness of phenomen a. Apprehending that na ture to exist on top 
of persons and phenomena is to be understand as being the apprehension or conception of 
the two selves.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
                                             
 
12 “Conception” (’dzin  pa) means a conscious conceiving or holding or apprehending, in this case, inherent 
existence. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
806 (Second, a source for the differentiation of t he two conceptions of self in that way:)  
Chandrakirti’s Commentary on (Aryadeva’s) “Four Hundred”13 says: 
Concerning that, “self” is an entity of things that does not depend on 
others—inherent existence. Its non-ex istence is selflessness. Through the 
division of phenomena and persons it is understood as twofold, “a 
selflessness of phenomena and a selflessness of persons.” 
 The two types of apprehension of a self – the se lf of persons and self of phenomena – are to 
be distinguished. The commentary on the Four Hundred Verses  says that that called “self” is an 
entity or nature that does not depend on an y other phenomena; its absence is selflessness. 
Selflessness is divided into the selflessness of persons and selflessness of phenomena. In other 
words, a person’s absence of existing inhere ntly or independently is the selflessness of 
persons, whereas a phenomenon’s absence of ex isting inherently or independently is the 
selflessness of phenomena.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The second, the difference between the conception of a self of  persons and the view of the transitory, has three parts, 
the first of which is: that the object of  observation of a view of the transitory  conceiving an inherently existent I is 
necessarily a person:) 
With respect to the object of observation of a conception of a self of persons, 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”14 explains that 
one Sammitiya sect asserts that all five aggregates are the basis or object of 
observation of a view of self whereas anot her asserts that just the mind is. Also 
with respect to the mind, some Chitta matrins and Madhyamikas who assert a 
mind-basis-of-all15 assert that the mind-basis-of-al l is the object of observation, 
whereas other Madhyamikas such as Bhavav iveka who do not assert a mind-basis-
of-all and many Hearer sects assert that the mental consciousness is the object of 
observation.  
 With respect to the observed object of the concep tion of a self of persons, there are different 
positions. The Supplement to the Middle Way  says that some Sammitiyas , for example, assert all 
five aggregates and others assert only the mind to be the support or observed object of the view of a self. The Chittamatrins and some Ma dhyamikas assert the mind-basis-of-all, the 
mind that is the basis on which all imprints ar e deposited, to be the observed object of the 
conception of a self of persons. On the othe r hand, some Madhyamikas, such as Bhavaviveka 
and so forth, who do not accept it as well as many exponents of the he arer schools assert the 
mental consciousness to be the observed object of the conception of a self of persons. In short, some say that all five aggregates, the mind-basis-of-all, and only the mental 
consciousness is the observed object of the conc eption of a self of persons. The Chittamatrins 
assert eight consciousnesses – the usual six plus the mind-basis-of-all and an afflicted 
                                             
 
13catuhshatakarika. 
14 madhyamakavatara. 
15 alayavijñana . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
807 consciousness. In addition, ther e is a presentation of nine co nsciousnesses in which case the 
ninth is a stainless consciousness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
With respect to the meaning—in these syst ems—of the designation “person”, as in 
the cultivator of a path and the revolver in  cyclic existence, you need to know the 
two modes of [the Prasangikas’] positing  the mere I and [the other schools’] 
positing the mind-basis-of-all, and so forth, as  an illustration of that I [that is to say, 
as something that is the I].  
 
It is necessary to understand how these system s posit the person – the one meditating paths 
and the one circling in cyclic existence. There are two different ways of positing the person. 
The Prasangika Madhyamikas say that the person  is the mere I, whereas other tenets posit 
either the mind-basis-of-all, the sixth consciousn ess, that is, the mental consciousness, or the 
five aggregates as the illustration of that I.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 With respect to the innate view of the transitory which is a conception of self, 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s ) “Treatise on the Middle”  refutes that the 
aggregates are the object of observation,  and in his commentary he says that the 
dependently imputed self is the object of ob servation. Since he says that even just 
the collection of the aggregates is not th e conventional self, neither the collection 
at one time nor the collection which is th e continuum of the aggregates over time 
are the object of observation. Rather, the mere I which is the object observed in 
generating the mere thought, “I”, or the me re person, is the object of observation. 
Neither one from among the aggregates no r the collection of the aggregates is 
posited as an illustration of that I [in other words, none of these can be said to be 
the I]. I have explained at length el sewhere that this is an unsurpassed 
distinguishing feature of this  Prasangika-Madhyamika system. 
 
The Supplement to the Middle Way  refutes that the innate view of  the transitory collection that 
apprehends a self has the aggregates as its obse rved object. The commentary to this text says 
t h a t  i t s  o b s e r v e d  o b j e c t  i s  t h e  s e l f  t h a t  i s  imputed on the basis of the aggregates. In other 
words, the mere I is the observed object of th e innate view of the transitory collection that 
apprehends a self. Also the mere collection of aggregates is not the conventionally existent 
self, nor is the collection of aggregates of the pr esent being, the collection of aggregates of the 
past being, or the collection of aggregates of th e future being. None of these are the observed 
object of the innate view of th e transitory collection that appr ehends a self. So what is its 
observed object? The merely imputed I is the observed object of the innate view of the 
transitory collection that apprehends a self. Th us, none of the individual aggregates nor the 
collection of the aggregates are posited as an illu stration of I. This spec ial presentation of the 
Prasangika Madhyamaka system is ex plained in other texts such as the Ocean of Reasoning  and 
the Great Stages of the Path to Enlightenment .  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
808  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the difference between the objects of obs ervation of the two conceptions of self:) 
 The object of observation of an innate view of the transitory must be something 
that naturally generates an awareness thinki ng, “I”. Therefore, although [your own] 
innate conception of a person whose continuum is other [than your own as 
inherently existent] is an innate conception of a self of persons, it is not an innate 
view of the transitory of that person. 
 
With respect to the observed object of the inna te view of the transitory collection, the mind 
that thinks “I” necessary arises naturally. Theref ore, although the innate  apprehension of the 
person of another continuum, such as Laura, as established by way of its own characteristics is 
the innate conception of a self of  persons, it is not an innate vi ew of the transitory collection 
of that person.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 With regard to the object of observation of an innate view of the transitory that 
conceives of an [inherently existent] mine, the object of observation of an innate 
awareness thinking, “mine,” is just mine; it  should not be held that one’s own eyes 
and so forth are the object of observation.  
 
The view of the transitory collection apprehends  both I and mine. The observed object of the 
innate view of the transitory collection apprehen ding mine is only mine-ness, it is not “my 
eyes,” “my nose,” “my body,” an d so forth. The apprehending of “my eyes” and so forth is the 
conception of a self of phenomen a, not the view of the transitory  collection or the conception 
of a self of persons. In short,  the view of the transitory coll ection does not observe my hand, 
my house, and so forth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
The subjective aspect [of such an innate misconception] is that within observing 
the mind it conceives the mine to be established by way of its own nature. 
 
The aspect of the view of the transitory collec tion is that through observing that observed 
object, it apprehends mine as establis hed by way of its own characteristics. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The objects of observation of the innate  conception of a self of phenomena are 
the form aggregate, and so forth, and the eyes, ears, and so fort h, in one’s own and 
others’ continuums as well as the envi ronments and so fo rth which are not 
included within the personal continuum . The subjective aspect [of such a 
misconception] is as explained before [tha t is, within observing these to conceive 
them to exist by way of their own nature]. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
809  
The observed object of the innate conception of  a self of phenomena can be either the form 
aggregate of one’s own continuum  or the form aggregate of an other person’s continuum and 
so forth, as well as eyes, ears, and so forth,  and phenomena of the environmental world that 
are not included in anyone’s continuum such as ho uses and so forth. Its aspect is the same at 
that mentioned before, that is, through observin g such observed objects, it apprehends them 
to exist by way of their own ch aracteristics, by way of their own entity, or inherently.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the 
Middle’”16 says: 
Stupidity or ignorance is a superimpos ition of an inherent existence of 
things [even though such] does no t exist; it has the nature of 
obstructing perception of the nature [emptiness]—a concealer.17  
 
The Commentary on the  Supplement to the Middle Way  says that delusion ( gti mug ) is ignorance 
that superimposes that which does not exist – existence by way of it own characteristics or 
inherent existence. Its nature is  to obscure the seeing of the final nature of phenomena, due 
to which it is called “all concealing”) ( kun rdzob ). 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Also: 
Thus, through the force of the afflic ted ignorance included within the 
links [of the dependent-arising] of a cyclic existence … 
 
Afflicted ignorance is fully included in the br anches or links of existence, meaning in the 
twelve links, the first one being ignorance. Unde r the power of this igno rance, the first link, 
one is obscured from seeing the nature of phenomena. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Hence, he asserts that [a cons ciousness] conceiving an obje ct as truly existent is an 
ignorance and that this is an afflicte d ignorance. Therefore, between the two 
modes of positing the conception of a self  of phenomena as an afflictive emotion 
or as an obstruction to omniscience, he re [in the Prasangika system] it is the 
former. 
 
                                              
16 madhyamakavatarabhasya . 
17 samvrti.  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path         ILTK – 29 January-1 February 2007 (17) 
810 The ignorance that apprehends objects as truly existent is afflicted ignorance. There are two 
ways of positing the conception of a self of ph enomena. From point of view of the Prasangika 
Madhyamaka the conception of a self of phenomenon is an affl ictive obscuration and not an 
obscuration to knowledge, whereas from the poin t of view of the Svat antrika Madhyamaka it 
is an obscuration to knowledge and not an afflictive obscuration. An obscuration to 
knowledge is an obscuration that prevents th e simultaneous and direct seeing of the two 
truths – conventional truth and ultimate truth.  
 The time is finished. Namaskar. Buon viaggio.  
END 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
811 Monday afternoon, 5 February 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (translation by Jeffrey Hopkins, Tibetan text page 299) says: 
(Third, showing that this identification of the ignorance conceiving true existence is asserted by the Superior father and 
his spiritual son:)  
This was set forth by the Superior—the father [Nagarjuna]—and his spiritual son 
[Aryadeva]. Nagarjuna’s Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness18 says: 
That which conceives things produced 
From causes and conditions to be real 
Was said by the Teacher to be ignorance. 
From it the twelve links arise. Through knowing well that things are empty Due to seeing reality, ignorance does not arise. That is the cessation of ignorance, Whereby the twelve links cease. 
 The way in which to identify the ignorance a pprehending true existence was taught by the 
Arya father, Nagarjuna, and his spiritual son, Aryadeva. Nagarjuna’s Seventy Verses on 
Emptiness  says that the Teacher Buddha taught that  that it is ignorance that apprehends 
functioning things – that is, results which ar e produced when causes and conditions are 
complete – to be real, that is, to be truly existent. In other words,  that which apprehend 
phenomena to be truly or inherently existent is ignorance, then from it arise the other links of 
the twelve links.   The twelve links are divided into two sets: (1) a set of projecting causes and projected 
results and (2) a set of actualizing causes and ac tualized results. The first link is ignorance, 
which is the main cause. This is the ignorance th at apprehends the person to be inherently or 
truly existent, or according to other tenets to be  self-sufficient substantially existent. It is the 
causal motivation due to which one creates ac tions, which are of two types – virtuous and 
non-virtuous. However, it is the simultaneous time motivation, which can be either virtuous 
or non-virtuous, that makes the action respec tively virtuous or non-virtuous. In general 
virtuous actions are of ten types, likewise no n-virtuous actions are also ten. The three non-
virtuous actions created by body are killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct. The four non-
virtuous actions created by speec h are lying, divisive speech, ha rsh words, and idle talk. The 
three non-virtuous actions of mind are: cove tousness, harmful mind or malice, and wrong 
view. The abandonment these actions are the vi rtuous actions of body, speech, and mind. 
While we can stop ourselves from doing negati ve actions of body and speech, like a dam 
blocking the flow of a river, we are not able to stop those of mind. These virtuous and non-
virtuous actions are the second link of karmic formations. These actions or karmic formations 
deposit an imprint on the consciousness, the th ird link. This can be likened to putting the 
money that we have earned as a result of workin g in the bank, whereby we ensure that it does 
not get lost. Then comes the fourth  link of name and form, the fi fth link of the six sources or 
entrances, the sixth link of contact, and the seve nth link of feeling. These belong to one set of 
links. Then when we are dying the eighth link of craving and the ninth link of grasping cause 
                                             
 
18 shunyatasaptati . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
812 an imprint left on the consciousness to ripen,  this being the tenth link of existence or 
becoming. The result of this link is the eleventh  link, birth, and then, having taken birth, the 
next link of aging-death arises. Having been co nceived, we immediately begin to age, that is, 
our body immediately begins to change. Then co mes death. We can die at any time, even in 
the womb. This is due to impermanence.  
 Through understanding dependent-relation we will understand well that all phenomena 
are empty of inherent existence, due to which ig norance will no longer arise. In other words, 
ignorance ceases. Having ceased ignorance, wh at happens? All the other links cease because 
the main cause, ignorance, has ceased.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
To conceive things to be real [means] to  apprehend them as established as [their 
own] reality or as truly established. 
 This is similar in meaning to Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland,
19 which says that until 
the conception of the aggregates as trul y existent is overcome, the view of the 
transitory cannot be overcome: 
As long as conception of the aggregates exists, 
So long is there conception of an I in them. 
 We apprehend all phenomena to exist truly or inhe rently or to exist from their own side, that 
is, to be established as real or as true. This a pprehension is the root of  ignorance, and is what 
needs to be overcome. Likewise, the Precious Garland  says that as long as we think “my body,” 
“my feelings,” “my discrimination,” “my compos itional factors,” and “m y consciousness,” that 
is, as long as we apprehend our body and so forth to be truly existent, for that long will the conception of I with respect to th em exist; this is the view of the transitory collection of I and 
mine. That is, for that long we will conceive ou rselves to exist inherently  and truly. Hence, as 
long as we continue to apprehend the aggregates to be truly existent, for that long we will not 
be able to counteract the view of the transi tory collection. The view of the transitory 
collection means to apprehend the I imputed on the body, which is the transitory collection.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, Aryadeva’s Four Hundred  says: 
Just as the body sense power [pervades] the body, 
Stupidity abides in all [afflicti ve emotions] as their basis. 
Therefore, all afflictive emotions are overcome Through overcoming stupidity. 
When dependent-arising is seen, 
Stupidity does not arise; Therefore, with all endeavor here [in this text] 
                                             
 
19 ratnavali . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
813 I will set forth just talk on this.20 
 
Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Verses  says that our body – from the cr own of our head to the soles of 
our feet – is pervaded by the body sense powe r, meaning that the body sense power is found 
everywhere in our body. Similarly as long as  there exists delusion or ignorance or the 
conception of true existence th at apprehends all phenomena to exist truly and inherently, for 
that long other afflictions will be produced, that  is, for that long there will be attachment to 
“my friend,” “my wife,” “my husband,” “my son, ” “my daughter,” and so forth, as well as 
hatred, jealousy, and so forth toward “my enemy. ” Just as if the body is destroyed, all the 
other organs will cease to function, similarly if ignorance is destroyed, all the other afflictions 
will be destroyed. Hence, if we see dependent- arising or dependent-relation, all delusion be 
stopped. Therefore, we should put as much effort as possible into realizing dependent-
relation. By understanding dependent-arising directly, we will understand that no 
phenomenon whatsoever exists inherently, bu t that all phenomena exist in dependence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Concerning the stupidity so described, sinc e this is at a poin t of identifying the 
stupidity which is one of the three poison s [desire, hatred, and stupidity], it is 
afflicted ignorance. 
 Also, Aryadeva says that in order to over come this ignorance it is necessary to 
realize the meaning of the profound depe ndent-arising such that the meaning of 
emptiness appears as the meaning of de pendent-arising. Therefore, afflicted 
stupidity should be taken in accordance with the explanation of it—in Chandrakirti’s commentary on that passage —as a superimposition of true existence 
upon things. The honorable Chandrakir ti, following Buddhapalita’s commentary 
on the Superior [Nagarjuna’s] though t, clearly speaks to this point. 
 
Stupidity or delusion or ignorance ( gti mug ) is one of the three mental poisons of attachment, 
hatred, and ignorance. Just as poison harm us and never benefits us, so too are these mental 
poisons so-called in that they only harm us an d never benefit us. Just as even a small amount 
of poison in our food can harm and even kill us , so too does ignorance harm us. This type of 
ignorance is afflicted ignorance. In order to cease it, it is nece ssary to realize the meaning of 
profound dependent-arising, that is, that the meaning of emptiness is the meaning of 
dependent-arising. The commentary to the Four Hundred Verses  explain that afflicted 
ignorance is a superimposition of true ex istence upon things. In accordance with 
Buddhapalita’s explanation, given in his text which is called Buddhapalita , Chandrakirti 
clearly set out this meaning.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Second, showing that afflicted ignorance is th e root of revolving in cyclic existence 
(This has six parts, the first of which is: that the innate conception of self must be posited as the root of cyclic existence 
and that the artificial one is not suitable to be posited so:) 
                                              
20 The translation of the last two lines is confirme d by Chandra. 113b.2 (blue) and Ren-da-wa 172.12-13 
(Sarnath: Sakya Students' Union, 1974; and Gyel chap. 6, 8 2-4 Sarnath: 1971). 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
814 Also, the ignorance explained above which co nceives of the two selves in that way 
is not an artificial conception of a se lf or persons and phenomena as in the 
assertions of the truth21 of (1) a permanent, unitary, and independent person, (2) 
external objects of apprehension (a) whic h are partless in terms of directions—east 
and so forth—or (b) which are gross object s that are composites of directionally 
partless particles, (3) internal appreh ending consciousnesses which are (a) 
temporarily partless—there being no earlier or later portions, and so forth—or (b) a 
continuum of consciousness which is a se ries [of temporally partless moments], 
and (4) self-consciousness which is non-du alistic in the sense of being empty of 
such object and subject, these being im puted by the uncommon assertions of the 
non-Buddhist and [non-Prasangika] Buddhis t systems of tenets. Rather, ignorance 
is the two innate conceptions of self, wh ich all those whose minds are and are not 
affected by tenets have in common and which have operated beginninglessly 
without depending on the mind’s being affected by tenets.  Just that [ignorance] is here held to  be the root of cyclic existence,  
 In order to demonstrate that igno rance is the root of cyclic existence there are six sections, the 
first being that the innate  conception of a self must be posite d as the root of cyclic existence, 
the artificial or acquired conception of a self no t being suitable as the root of cyclic existence. 
Just as there are two selves, a self of persons and a self of phenomena, likewise, there are two 
selflessnesses, the selflessness of persons and th e selflessness of phenomena. There is also an 
innate ignorance and an artificial or acquired ignorance.   There are systems of tenets, non-Buddhist and Buddhist that assert: 1. a person that is permanent, unitary, and independent, 2. external forms that are composed of subtle pa rticles that are partless, that is, that do not 
have eastern, western, and so fort h sides in the various directions, 
3. inner consciousnesses that are temporally partless, that is, which are not composed of 
moments, and that are a continuum of consciousn ess composed of a series of such partless 
moments, 
4. a self-knower that is non-dual in the sense of apprehenders (consciousness) and 
apprehendeds (objects) being empty (a self-kno wer does not apprehend external objects, but 
only apprehends consciousness). 
These are artificial conceptions of a self of persons and a self of phenomena and therefore 
exist only in those whose mind has been influe nced by tenets. However,  the conception of a 
self or ignorance referred to here is not that which arises due to tenets. Instead it is the 
ignorance that does not rely on tenets but arises due to familiarity, that is, it is the ignorance 
that has operated since beginningless time.   In short, the conception of a self of phenomena and the concep tion of a self of persons are 
the two conceptions of a self. It is the innate conception of a se lf that arises without studying 
tenets that is the root of cyclic existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
                                             
 
21 “The truth” could be interpreted as going with just number 4. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
815 for Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
This non-produced permanent [self imputed by false systems] is not 
perceived 
By those spending many eons as animals, 
Yet the [mis]conception of I is  seen to operate in them. 
Through this reasoning [it can be understo od that] what binds sentient beings in 
cyclic existence is innate ignorance, and since artificial ignorance occurs only in 
proponents of tenets, it is not feas ibly the root of cyclic existence. 
 
Those who wander for eons as animals do not perceive a permanent, partless, and 
independent self, however they still apprehend a self. For example, while cats recognize their 
own babies and even birds take care of their young, the recognition of “my baby” does not 
arise from having studied tenets. Therefore, th at which binds all sentient beings in cyclic 
existence is innate ignorance, whereas since arti ficial or acquired ignorance exists only in 
those who are proponents of tenets, it is not suitable as the root of cyclic existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, since the innate mode of apprehensi on does not involve the artificial one, stopping [only] the artificial mode of 
apprehension does not help:) 
Gaining specific ascertainment with respect to  this is very import ant. If you do not 
understand this, you will not know—when settling [emptiness] through the view—to 
hold as chief the ascertainment that objects as apprehended by the innate 
ignorance are non-existent and you will no t know that the objects of artificial 
conceptions are refuted as a branch of this [process]. If the two selves are negated 
within neglecting to refute the mode of apprehension by the innate ignorance, you 
will ascertain only a selflessness which negates [the objects] imputed by only the 
proponents of tenets mentioned earlier. Thereby, since ascertainment though the 
view is for the sake of meditation, even during meditation you will have to 
meditate only on such. 
 I n  s h o r t ,  s i n c e  i t  i s  n o t  e n o u g h  t o  s t o p  t h e  a p p r e h e n s i o n  o f  a  p e r m a n e n t ,  u n i t a r y ,  a n d  independent self, it is important to distinguis h between these two – the innate and acquired 
conceptions of a self. In other words, it is very  important to ascertain wh at is innate ignorance 
and what is acquired ignorance. If one does not ascertain this difference, at the time of 
settling the correct view one will not unders tand the way in which innate ignorance 
apprehends the object. If, while wanting to re fute the two selves, one does not understand 
how to negate innate ignorance, one will only refute the mere self imputed by other tenets. 
Therefore, at the time of medi tation one should meditate on ly on this, that is, having 
established the correct view one must put effort into familiarizing with this, otherwise one will 
not be able to realize selflessness.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, it would be very absurd if through merely refuting the referent object of the ar tificial conception the innate 
afflictive emotions were overcome:) 
Therefore, even if [the emptiness of such an artificially conceived self] were made 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
816 manifest through meditating on it and ev en if the familiarization with it were 
brought to completion, it would be exhauste d as only that. Thus, it would be very 
absurd to assert that through seeing the non-existence of the two selves merely as 
imputed by artificial conceptions the inna te afflictive emotions are overcome.  
 
It is absurd to think that by merely refuting the determined object of the acquired conception 
of a self the innate afflictions are overcome. In  other words, even if one were to familiarize 
with refuting the artificial conception of a self, nothing more than that would happen. 
Therefore, to say that by seeing the non-existenc e of the two selves that are merely imputed by 
the innate conception of a self, all innate a fflictions are overcome is completely incorrect. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
[You propound] that when selflessness is realized 
One abandons [only] the permanent self, [but] it is not asserted  
As the base of the conception of self. Hence, it is fantasy to propound That through knowing [such] selflessne ss the view of self is eradicated. 
 While the realization of the lack of a permanen t, unitary, and independent self abandons the 
grasping at a permanent, unitary, and independent self, such as self is not asserted to be the 
base of the conception of a self , that is, the view of the transi tory collection. Therefore, to 
think that knowing this selflessness elimin ates the view of a self is absurd.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Chandrakirti’s commentary says, “In order to clarify by way of an example this 
meaning of mutual unrelatedness [that is, senselessness] the text says: 
That while seeing a snake living in  a hole in a wall of your house, 
Your fears can be removed and the fright of a snake abandoned 
By [someone’s saying] “There is no elephant here,” Is, alas, laughable to others! 
 An analogy of this absurdity is then set out. If  upon seeing a snake in one’s house, although 
in reality it is a coiled rope, one were to say “T here is no elephant here!” in order to eliminate 
one’s fear of the snake, since this cannot abandon the fear of the snake, it would make one 
the object of others’ laughter. In other words, la ughing at one, they would say “Why does he – 
worried about the presence of a snake – say that there is no elephant in  his house? That is 
ridiculous!”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Although this is said with respect to the se lflessness of persons, it is the same also 
with respect to the selflessn ess of phenomena. [The stanza] could be put together 
this way: 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
817 [You propound] that when selflessness is realized  
One abandons [that is, refutes only] the artificial self, [but] it is not asserted  As the base of ignorance. Henc e it is fantasy to propound 
That through knowing [such] selflessness ignorance is eradicated. 
 The verse above sets out the selflessness of pe r s o n s ,  b u t  i t  c a n  a l s o  b e  a p p l i e d  t o  t h e  
selflessness of phenomena. In other words, it is also absurd to say that ignorance is eliminated 
by seeing the selflessness of phenomena that is  the non-existence of a partless particle that 
cannot be divided into different directions. Like wise, to say that ignorance is eliminated by 
seeing the lack of a consciousness that is comp osed of temporally partless particles is equally 
absurd.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, although the view of the transitory and ignorance are the root of cyclic existence, there are not two roots of 
cyclic existence:) 
Objection : Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland  says: 
As long as there is a conception of the aggregates  
So long does one have a conception of I. 
When the conception of an I exists, 
There is action; from action there is birth. 
Thus, he explains that the conception of  a self of phenomen a—the conception of 
the aggregates as truly existent—is the root of cyclic existence.  
 Although both the view of the transitory co llection and ignorance are the root of cyclic 
existence, it is not that there are two roots of  cyclic existence. Someone makes an objection 
based on Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland  which says that as long as  one there is the conception 
of aggregates, for that long there will be the conc eption of I; that if the conception of I exists, 
actions are created; and that from those actions comes birth. This person says that this means 
that the conception of a self of phenomena that apprehends the aggregates to be truly existent 
is the root of cyclic existence.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
[However] Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
Seeing with his mind that all afflictive emotions and defects 
Arise from the view of the transitory collection ... 
Thus, he explains that the view of the tran sitory is the root of cyclic existence.  
These two explanations are contradictory be cause it is not feasible to have two 
discordant roots of cyclic existence. 
 
On the other hand, the Supplement to the Middle Way  says that all the faults of the afflictions 
come from the view of the transitory collection , meaning that the root of cyclic existence is 
the view of the transitory collec tion. Therefore, this person says  that it would seem that these 
two texts are contradictory. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
818  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Answer:  There is no fallacy. For this Pras angika-Madhyamika system differentiates 
the two conceptions of self [only] by way of object of observation, and the two do 
not have different aspects in their mode of apprehension because they both have 
the aspect of conceiving [their object] as being established by way of its own nature. 
A contradiction of two roots of cyclic ex istence occurs when two [consciousnesses] 
having discordant modes of apprehension  in their operation on an object are 
posited as roots of cyclic existence. 
 Therefore, when it is taught that the conception of a self of phenomena is the 
cause of the view of the transitory, it is being shown that the two inner divisions of 
ignorance are cause and effect [the conc eption of the inherent existence of 
phenomena causing the conception of such wi th respect to the person]. When it is 
taught that both of those ar e the root of the afflictive emotions, it is being shown 
that they are the root of all other afflicti ve emotions the mode of apprehension of 
which is discordant with them. Since this fact  is [true] for both of them, there is no 
contradiction, just as there is not cont radiction in both the former and later 
[moments] of a similar type of ignoranc e being the root of cyclic existence. 
 However, there is not the fault that there are two roots of cyclic exis tence. The Prasangika 
Madhyamikas distinguish the conception of a se lf of persons and conception of a self of 
phenomena in terms of their observed objects, no t in terms of their mode of apprehension in 
that both of them have the aspect of conceivi ng existence by way of its own characteristics. 
There would only be two roots of cyclic ex istence if there were posited to be two 
consciousnesses with different modes of apprehensi on as the root of cycl ic existence. When it 
is said that the conception of a self of phenomenon is the caus e of the view of the transitory 
collection, this shows that ther e are two internal divisions type s of ignorance, one that is a 
cause and one that is a result. When both are said  to be the root of the afflictions, it means 
that all other afflictions do not have the same mode of apprehension as them. Thus there is 
no contradiction, just as it is not contradictor y for earlier and later instances of ignorance to 
be the root of cyclic existence.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Although the honorable Chandrakirti does  not clearly and specifically describe 
the view of the transitory as ignorance, he does say—without differentiating persons 
and phenomena—that the conception of th ings in general as truly existent is 
afflicted ignorance, and he does assert that  the conception of a self of persons is a 
conception of persons as established by way of their own nature. He also 
frequently describes the innate view of the tr ansitory as the root of cyclic existence. 
Furthermore, if he did assert [the view of  the transitory] as another thing from the 
ignorance which is the conception of true existence, there would be the 
contradiction of positing two roots of cyclic existence which have discordant 
modes of apprehension. Therefore, both [conceptions of the true existence of 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
819 persons and phenomena] should be taken as ignorance. 
 
Chandrakirti did not clearly expl ain the view of the transitory collection as being ignorance. 
Without distinguishing persons and phenomena, he  says that the conception of true existence 
is in general afflicted ignorance. He also says that the conception of a self of person is the conception of persons as being established by way of their own characteristics, and he often 
explains the innate view of the transitory collection  to be the root of cyclic existence. If he had 
asserted the them to be different from the ig norance apprehending true  existence, he would 
have posited the contradiction of there being two roots of cyclic existence with different 
modes of apprehension. Therefore, both the conc eption of persons as truly existent and the 
conception of phenomena as truly existent are ignorance.  Tuesday morning, 6 February 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 302) says: 
(Fifth, showing that the Superior father [Nagarjuna] and his spiritual son [Aryadeva] assert that the conception of true 
existence is the root of cyclic existence:) 
All other afflictive emotions—innate and artificial—operate within apprehending 
individual features of just that object which has been superimposed [with a sense 
of inherent existence] by the innate igno rance explained above. Therefore, just as 
the other four sense powers—the eye and so forth—abide in dependence on the 
body sense power and are not located in their own independen t place other than 
[where the body sense power is], so a ll other afflictive emotions operate in 
dependence on innate ignorance;  thus, stupidity is chief.  
 
That the conception of all phenomena as truly or  inherently existent is the root of cyclic 
existence was taught by the father, Arya Nagarj una, and his spiritual son, Aryadeva. Innate 
ignorance superimposes true existence on obje cts, and then all other afflictions operate 
through apprehending their indivi dual features. Just as the eye,  ear, nose, and tongue sense 
powers rely on the body sense power and do not have their own independent locations, so 
too do all other afflictions operate in depend ence on the innate ignorance apprehending a 
self of persons and a self of phenomena, that is, apprehending true or inherent existence. 
Therefore, stupidity or delusion  is the main affliction.   
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[Aryadeva’s Four Hundred ] says: 
Just as the body sense power [pervades] the body 
Stupidity abides in all [afflictive emotions]. 
 Just as the body sense power pervades the enti re body, so too does stupidity or ignorance 
abide as the root of all the afflictions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the (Aryadeva’s) “Four Hundred”  says: 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
820 Also, desire and so forth engage in superimposing features, such as 
beauty and ugliness, on just the inherent nature of things imputed by stupidity. Therefore, they operate in a manner that is not different from stupidity and depend on stupidity, for stupidity is chief. 
 Attachment and so forth, that is, hatred, je alousy, miserliness, resentment, and the other 
afflictions, superimpose beauty, ugliness, and so forth on just the nature of things imputed by 
stupidity. Therefore, they do not engage their object in a way that differs from ignorance and 
they depend on it, since ignorance is the princi pal affliction. In other words, it is ignorance 
that gives rise to all other afflictions, the si x root afflictions as well as twenty secondary 
afflictions. Ignorance, in fact, is their root.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, when stupidity holds objects to be established by way of their own nature, if 
the apprehended object is agreeable with one’s mind, desire is generated observing 
it. If it appears to be disagreeable with one’s mind, anger is generated with respect 
to it. If the object does not appear to be either agreeable or disagreeable with one’s mind but abides as an ordinary thing in the middle, even though desire and hatred 
are not generated observing it, a continuati on of the same type of stupidity is.  
 Ignorance – the conception of true existence or the conception of inherent existence – 
apprehends objects to be established by way of their own characteristics.  Then, if the observed 
object is agreeable to one’s mind, through observ ing it attachment is ge nerated. For example, 
upon observing an observed object that one like s, such as one’s girlfriend, boyfriend, house, 
or car, attachment arises. If, on the other hand , the observed object is something that is not 
agreeable to one’s mind, through observing it ange r or hatred arises. If one observes an object 
that is neither agreeable to disagreeable, but in between, through observing it neither 
attachment or hatred are generated, whereas a later similar type of ignorance is generated. 
Similarly, it is often taught that one generates attachment for friends and strives to take care 
of them, one generates anger toward enemies and strives to harm them, and one generate 
ignorance for strangers and ignores them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Nagarjuna’s Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning  says: 
Why would the great poisonous a fflictive emotions not arise 
In those whose minds have a basis [an inherently existent object]? 
Even when [the object] is ordinary, [their minds] 
Are grasped by the snake of the afflictive emotions. 
Chandrakirti’s commentary explains it as above. 
 Just as a poisonous snake is dangerous to our we ll-being, so too are the afflictions that abide 
in our mind dangerous in that they destroy our happiness. Although we tend to point to 
external beings as our main enemies, in reality our main enemy lies within our own mind. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
821 What is it? It is the mental poisons of a ttachment, hatred, and ignorance. These mental 
poisons destroy all our happiness and bring much unhappiness, suffering, and problems.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 That the view of the transitory is produc ed from the conception of the aggregates 
as truly existent appears to be the thought also of Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland . 
How the remaining afflictive emotions are produced should be known through 
inferring it from the explanation at the point of beings of middling capacity 
[earlier in the book]. 
 
First there arises the conception  of the aggregates as truly or inherently existent, and then 
from it comes the view of the transitory coll ection. For example, when we first see someone 
who we do not know, we see his body and to our mind appears a man, whereupon we apprehend his body to be truly existent. Then wh en that person introduces himself as George, 
we also apprehend a self of persons. In this way, first the aggregates  appears and then the 
person or being appears. Due to this, first we apprehend the aggregates to be truly existent, 
and then we apprehend the person to be truly existent. In addition, we also apprehend our 
own body as I, this being the view of the transito ry collection of I, and then from this arises 
the view of the transitory collection of mine . Both of these views are included in the 
conception of a self of persons. When one ap prehends “my body,” “my head,” and so forth, 
this is the conception of a self  of phenomena, it is not the conception of a self of persons. 
 How the other afflictions are produced was explained earlier in the context of middling 
beings.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 304) says: 
(Sixth, how to understand the stages of the produc tion of afflictive emotions from Dharmakirti’s Commentary on 
(Dignaga’s) “Compendium of Prime Cognition ”22
:)  
How the afflictive emotions are produced  should also be known in accordance 
with Dharmakirti’s Commentary on (Dignaga’s) “Compendium of Prime Cognition ”:  
In one who sees self, 
There is always adherence to “I.” Through that adherence, there is attachment to pleasure. Through attachment, faults are obscured 
And advantages seen, whereby there is strong attachment. 
The “mine” are taken up as means of achieving [pleasure]. Thus, as long as there is attachment to self, So long does one revolve in cyclic existence. 
 Upon seeing oneself, there is adherence or clin ging to “I.” Due to that adherence, there is 
craving for happiness. Due to that  craving, all faults are obscur ed, that is, they are not seen. 
Due to seeing qualities, there is thorough craving.  At that time “mine” arises. As long as there 
is manifest attachment to a self, one will continue to circle in cyclic existence. 
                                             
 
22 Pramanavarttika . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
822  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Although the system of this [passage] and the mode of positing two conceptions of 
self [in the Prasangika system] as explai ned above are different, the stages of how 
afflictive emotions are produced can be understood in dependence on it. 
 
Although the way of positing the two conception s of a self – the conception of a self of 
persons and conception of a self of phenomena – in the Prasangika system and in the above 
explanation are different, the order of how th e afflictions arise can be understood in 
dependence on it.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Initially, when the I which is the object  of observation of the thought “I” is 
conceived to exist by way of its own nature , attachment to the self is generated. 
That generates attachment to the self’s pleasure. Also, since the self’s pleasure is 
not independent but depends on the mine, there is attachment to the mine. That 
causes obscuration of the faults of the mi ne and perception of its advantages. Then, 
the mine are taken up as means of achievin g the self’s pleasure. Out of afflictive 
emotions produced in this way, actions are done. Through these actions, in turn, 
the connection is made to cyclic existence.  
 
One thinks “I, I, I.” Through observing this I,  it is conceived to ex ist by way of its own 
characteristics, whereby attachment  to the self is produced. This attachment to an I that exists 
by way of its own characteristics or inherent ly produces craving for one’s own happiness. 
Since the self’s happiness depends on mine, th ere is craving for mine (my belongings, my 
things, my face, and so forth). This obscures the faults of mine and causes one to see its good 
qualities, which in reality do not exist. Due to this, one collects many things, a house, jewelry, 
and so forth, as a means of achieving happiness.  For example, when rich women go shopping, 
immediately upon seeing a nice piece of jewelry th ey buy it even though they have no need of 
it.   In short, first there arises the thought “I,” and then the thought “min e.” Due to afflictions, 
actions are performed. Due to these actions, one joins with cyclic existence, that is, one takes 
birth again and again, continuing to wander in cyclic existence without being able to get out. 
We are just like pigs who walk with their head down even in very dirty places, thinking that they are very pleasant. Instead we must try to l ook upward and to get out of cyclic existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Nagarjuna’s Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness  says: 
Compositional activity is caused by afflictive emotions. 
The afflictive emotions that put together [or motivate actions] have a nature of 
[contaminated] actions. 
The body is caused by [contaminated] actions. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
823 All three are empty of inherent existence. 
You should train in the stages of how one revolves in cyclic existence in this way 
until ascertainment is gained. 
 
All actions or karmic formations are caused by  afflictions, that is, they are motivated by 
afflictions. In other words, they arise from ig norance. The body is caused by actions, for 
example, the human body is produced by contam inated virtuous actions. However, all three 
are empty of inherent existence, true exis tence, or existence by way of their own 
characteristics. One should train in gaining ce rtainty with respect to to how one circles in 
cyclic existence.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Third, showing that one wishing to abandon the concept ion of self should seek the view of selflessness 
This has two parts: the reason why, if yo u wish to abandon ignorance, you should 
seek the view realizing selflessness an d how to generate the view realizing 
selflessness. 
 
If one wishes to abandon ignorance it is necessa ry to seek the view realizing selflessness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
First, the reason why, if you wish to abandon ignoranc e, you should seek the view realizing selflessness 
(This section has four parts, the first of  which is: first, that not striving to gener ate the pure view in your own continuum 
despite wanting to abandon ignorance is dumb:) 
A state of removal in which the two conc eptions of self—the ignorance explained 
before—have been abandoned should certainl y be wanted and appears indeed to be 
wanted. Nevertheless, despite its being want ed, there are those who do not strive at 
understanding how the conception of self co mes to be the root of cyclic existence 
or, although they see a portion of that, do not strive for the sake of generating the 
pure view of selflessness in their contin uum, having refuted well, with reasoning 
and scriptures of definitive meaning, the ob ject conceived by the conception of self. 
They have very dull faculties, for althou gh they have lost th e life of the path 
progressing to liberation and omniscie nce, they are not concerned about it. 
 
If one wishes to abandon ignorance it would be foolish and dull not to strive to generate pure view. Although it is necessary to want to  abandon the two conceptions of a self, the 
conception of a self of persons and the concep tion of a self of phenomena, there are those 
who wish to abandon ignorance or the conception  of a self but do not strive to understand 
how the conception of a self becomes the root of cyclic existence. Th ere are also those who 
see a portion of that, but do not strive to ge nerate the pure view of selflessness in their 
continuum through refuting – by means of reason ings and definitive meaning scriptures – the 
object apprehended by the conception of true  existence of persons and phenomena. Such 
persons have very dull faculties because even thou gh they have lost the life of the path that 
proceeds to liberation and omniscience, they are not concerned about it. In other words, 
although if someone were to try to take our li f e  w e  w o u l d  b e  v e r y  c o n c e r n e d ,  i n  s p i t e  o f  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
824 having lost the life of liberation and buddhah ood we are not concerned. Therefore, because 
this is very foolish and stupid, we should not act like this but instead strive to abandon the 
conception of a self of persons and the conception of a self of phenomena. In other words, we 
must strive to apply the antidote to the view of  the transitory collection of the I and mine in 
order to abandon it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The second, showing that the conception of self must be abandoned, has two parts: how such is taught in treatises and 
in sutras. The former has five parts, the first of which is : how the glorious Dharmakirti shows that the conception of 
self must be abandoned:) 
The glorious Dharmakirti’s Commentary on (Dignaga’s) “Compendium of Prime 
Cognition ” says: 
Without disbelieving its object, 
It cannot be abandoned. The abandonment of desire , hatred, and so forth, 
Which are related with [perceiving] advantages and disadvantages, Is through not seeing those in [their] objects; Not through external ways. 
 
In his Commentary on (Dignaga’s) “Compendium of Prime Cognition” , Dharmakirti shows that the 
conception of a self must be abandoned. Withou t refuting the object of the conception of a 
self, the conception of a self cannot be aban doned. Due to the conception of a self, some 
phenomena appear to have qualities whereas ot hers appear to have faults, due to which 
attachment, hatred, and so forth arise. In order to abandon them, one must not see the 
qualities and faults as abiding inside the object , but see them as abiding in our mind. In other 
words, due to thinking  beauty, attachment arises, whereas due to thinking  ugly, hatred arises. 
These minds cannot be taken away by external means. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
When an external object of abandonment such as a thorn that has pierced oneself 
is removed, it can be removed from the root with a needle, for instance, without 
depending on [a process of] coming to di sbelieve the object that it conceives. 
However, when an internal mental object of abandonment is abandoned, it is not 
done in this way. Rather, it must be abandoned through seeing the non-existence 
of the object as it is conceived by, for instance, the conception of self. 
 
Whereas an external object such as a thorn can be removed by a needle and so forth, unlike 
this, in order to remove the conception of a se lf, one has to realize that the object of the 
conception of a self does not exist. Thus, th e ignorance that apprehends true existence or 
inherent existence or existence from its own side is abandoned by abandoning its apprehended object through realizing that it do es not exist. As a result of this, the other 
afflictions are abandoned. Hence, their ab andonment is not like removing a thorn. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, how the glorious Chandrakirti shows that the conception of self must be abandoned:) 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
825 Also, the glorious Chandrakirti says th at when one sees that all afflictive 
emotions—desire and so forth—and all defe cts—birth, death, and so forth—arise 
from the conception of self, a wish to cease and abandon it arises, whereupon a 
yogi refutes with reasoning the self of persons, the object superimposed by the 
conception of self.  
 
Chandrakirti also shows how the conception of a self must be abandoned. He says that upon 
seeing that all afflictions, attachment, anger, igno rance, and so forth, as well as all faults, such 
as birth, aging, death, and so forth, arise from the conception of a self, one will wish to 
abandon and cease it. Due to this, one refutes by  means of reasons the existence of a self – 
true or inherent existence.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
His Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  clearly says: 
Seeing with his mind that all afflictive emotions and defects 
Arise from the view of transitory collection And realizing that the self is the object of this, A yogi refutes self. 
This must be done by a meditator on suchness; hence, he says “a yogi”. 
 Upon seeing with intelligence that all afflic tions and defects arise from the view of the 
transitory collection, and realizing that the self – the conventional self – is the observed object 
of the view of the transitory collection, the yogi  refutes the self. It should be noted that there 
is a conventional self and a self that is an object of negation; the latter one being the self that 
needs to be refuted. It is due to observing th e conventional self that one thinks “I” and the 
conception of a self arises. Since it is a medita tor who must refute this self, Chandrakirti calls 
him or her “yogi.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, this is the thought also of the protector Nagarjuna:) 
This procedure is the excellent thought al so of the protector Nagarjuna, for his 
Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning  says: 
That is the cause of all [bad] views. 
Without it, afflictive emotions are not produced. Therefore, when that is thoroughly known, 
[Bad] view and afflictive emotions are thoroughly purified. 
By what is that known? 
It is said to be by the supreme knowledge of suchness, The seeing of dependent-arising, that what Is dependently produced is not [inherently] produced. 
 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
826 Nagarjuna also says that view of the transitory  collection arises from viewing the observed 
object that is the conventional self and adheri ng to it as truly existent or self-sufficient 
substantially existent. It is this truly existent or self-sufficient substantially existent self that is 
to be abandoned. 
 Nagarjuna’s Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning  says that the ignorance that apprehends true existence 
is the cause of all views. If it does not exist, the afflictions will  not arise. Therefore, when that 
is thoroughly understood, views and affliction s are thoroughly purified. By what is that 
known? It is known by realizing dependent-arisin g, that is, by seeing all phenomena as being 
dependent-arisings, that is, as dependently produced. This is the supreme knowledge of 
suchness. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, he indicates that the conception of  true existence—called the assertion of 
inherent existence,23 which is the cause of all afflic ted views and all other afflictive 
emotions—is abandoned through realizing the suchness of thin gs, the absence of 
inherently existent production, by means of the reason of dependent-arising. The 
perception that inherent existence does not exist does not occur without coming 
to disbelieve the object of the conception  of things as inherently established. 
 
There are five afflicted views, such as the view of the transitory collection and so forth. The 
conception of true existence is the cause of al l these afflicted views as well as all the other 
afflictions, such as attachment, anger, pride, and so on. The co nception of true existence is 
abandoned through realizing the lack of inhere ntly existent production by means of the 
reason of dependent-arising, whereby all afflicted views and all other afflictions are also abandoned. The seeing that inherent existe nce does not exist does not arise without 
repudiating the object of the conception of thin gs as inherently existent. Therefore, it is 
necessary to realize the selflessness of pe rsons and the selflessness of phenomena.  
 Tuesday afterno
on, 6 February 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 306) says: 
(Fourth, how Aryadeva shows that the conception of self must be abandoned:) 
A statement by Aryadeva that accords with this was quoted earlier; also, his Four 
Hundred  says: 
When selflessness is seen in objects, 
The seed of cyclic existence ceases. 
He says that through seeing the non-existenc e of the self [inherent existence] of the 
object of observation conceived by the co nception of self, the root of cyclic 
existence—ignorance—is cut. 
 Aryadeva says that when selflessness is seen with respect to objects, the seed of cyclic existence 
will cease. Seeing the selflessness of persons direct ly is the antidote to th e afflictions or to the 
                                             
 
23 dngos  po, bhava.  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
827 afflictive obscurations. A seed is what has the potential to produce an affliction in the 
continuum. Through seeing that the self that is observed object – a truly existent, inherently 
existent, or self-sufficient substantially existent person – of the conception of a self does not 
exist, the root of cyclic existe nce, ignorance, is cut. Thereby,  due to their root having been 
eradicated, the sufferings of birth, aging, de ath, and so forth will no longer arise.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, how Shantideva shows that the conception of self must be abandoned:) 
Also, the venerable Shantideva says: 
Thus, the emptiness of the person is thoroughly established. Therefore, 
by cutting their root all afflictive emotions do not arise in any way. 
 
Shantideva also says that through establishing  the selflessness of persons, the root of the 
afflictions is cut whereby they will no longer ar ise again in any way. In other words, since the 
root of all the afflictions is th e ignorance apprehending persons to  be truly existent, when it is 
eliminated the afflictions no longer arise.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, how it is shown in sutra that the conception of self must be abandoned:) 
It is as the Sutra on the Secrecies of the Tathagatas  says:  
Shantimati, it is like this. For exampl e, when the roots of a tree are cut, 
all the branches, leaves, and twigs dr y. Shantimati, similarly, when the 
view of the transitory collection is pacified, all afflictive emotions and 
secondary afflictive emotions are pacified. 
 
This sutra says that just as when the roots of a tree are cut, all its branches, leaves, and twigs 
dry up, similarly when the view of the transitory  collection is pacified, all root and secondary 
afflictions are also pacified.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, it is being said that through cultivating realization of the person as empty of 
inherent existence the view of the transi tory is overcome and that when it is 
overcome, all other afflictive emotions are overcome. Furthermore, without 
coming to disbelieve the object of the conc eption of a self of persons, a realization 
of selflessness cannot occur. The passage fr om sutra indicates that the view of the 
transitory is the root of all other afflicti ve emotions; if it were another thing from 
ignorance, there would be two discordant ro ots of cyclic existence; thus, it should 
be taken as ignorance. 
 Through familiarizing with the realization that th e person is empty of inherent existence, the 
view of the transitory collection is overcome. When it is overcome, all other afflictions are 
also overcome, that is, they cease. However, wi thout repudiating the object of the conception 
of a self of persons, a realization of selflessn ess is not possible. The citation from the sutra 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
828 above indicates that the root of all other afflic tions is the view of the transitory collection. 
Therefore, if the view of the transitory collect ion were something other than ignorance, there 
would be two discordant roots of cyclic existe nce. Therefore, the view of the transitory 
collection is ignorance, that is, it is the ig norance not knowing selflessness or emptiness. In 
short, since the view of the tran sitory collection is the root of  cyclic existence, it is the 
ignorance that is a non-knowing of  the nature of all phenomena.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, analysis by way of scripture and reasoning is important for abandoning the conception of self:) 
In brief, when the many supreme schola rs who commented on the meaning of the 
scriptures on the profound [emptiness] settled the meaning of suchness, they 
analyzed by way of scripture and reasoning. They did this from having perceived 
that selflessness and emptiness cannot be re alized without seeing that the self as 
conceived by erroneous conception do es not exist and without seeing the 
emptiness of that self. It is important to  gain ascertainment with respect to this. 
 
In order to abandon the conception of a self it is necessary to analyze it by way of scripture 
and reasoning. In brief, when many supreme scholars who commented on the meaning of the 
scriptures on the profound settled the meaning of suchness, they anal yzed it by means of 
many scriptures and reasonings. Without seeing th at the self that is apprehended by mistaken 
conception, the object of negation, does not exis t, it is not possible to realize selflessness or 
emptiness. therefore, it is important to understand  this and gain certainty with respect to it by 
analyzing this in the same way as the past scholars. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The fourth has two parts, the first of which is: that in order to abandon the conception of self it is necessary to come to 
disbelieve its referent object:) 
For, if you do not meditate on the me aning of the negation of the erroneous 
object which is the root of being bound in cyclic existence, even though you 
meditate on the meaning of something else which you consider to be profound, it 
w i l l  n o t  h a r m  t h e  c o n c e p t i o n  o f  s e l f  a t  a l l .  T h i s  i s  b e c a u s e ,  u n l e s s  t h e  m i n d  becomes absorbed in the suchness of selfle ssness and emptiness, an overcoming of 
the conception of self cannot occur. Also, without coming to disbelieve the object 
of the conception of self, although you perform the mere withdrawal of the mind 
that moves there to its object, this cannot constitute being absorbed in selflessness. 
 
It is necessary to repudiate the referent or determined object ( zhen yul ) of the conception of a 
self in order to abandon the conception of a self. If one does not meditate on the meaning 
that negates the mistaken object which is the root  of bondage in cyclic existence, even though 
one meditates on something else that is asse r t e d  t o  b e  p r o f o u n d ,  i t  w i l l  n o t  h a r m  t h e  
conception of a self at all. Fo r example, although it is good to meditate on the impermanence 
that is momentary change, this meditation ca nnot harm the conception of a self. This is 
because without engaging the suchness of selfle ssness or emptiness, it is not possible to 
eliminate the conception of a self. Also, without repudiating the object of the conception of a 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
829 self, even though the mind goes out and retu rns inward, it cannot be posited to engage 
selflessness. 
 In short, in order to cut the root of cyclic ex istence, the conception of a self, it is necessary 
to realize selflessness or emptiness. By medita ting on this continually , the root of cyclic 
existence can be cut and one can abandon cycl ic existence and achieve the state of foe-
destroyer or nirvana.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The second, the reason for that, has three parts, the first of which is: the existence in general of three modes of 
conceiving I:)  
The reason for this is that there are th ree modes of the mind’s operating on an 
object—(1) apprehending the object of obse rvation to exist truly, (2) apprehending 
it not to exist truly, and (3) apprehending it without qualifying it with either of 
those. Therefore, although one is not conceiving [an ob ject] as not truly existent, 
one is not necessarily conceiving it as tr uly existent. Just so, although one is not 
involved in the two selves, it is not necessary that one is involved in the two 
selflessnesses. For, there are limitles s minds abiding in the third category. 
 There are three modes in which the mind engages an observed object: 
1. it apprehends the observed object to be truly existent, 
2. it apprehends the observed object  to be empty of true existence, 
3. it apprehends it without it being qualified by  either true existence or non-true existence. 
Thus, although one is not conceiving an object to be non-truly existent, one is not necessarily 
conceiving it to be truly existent since there is  also a third mode. Likewise, even if one is not 
engaging the two selves, it is not necessar ily the case that one is engaging the two 
selflessnesses. This is because there are limitle ss minds in the third category, that is, there are 
many minds that apprehend an object without conc eiving it to be either truly existent or non-
truly existent. For example, there is a mind appr ehending its object to be impermanent rather 
than to be truly existent or non-truly existent.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 308) says: 
(Second, the need to ascertain just that basis—with res pect to which a consciousness conceiving true existence is 
mistaken—as not existing in the way that it is conceived:) 
Furthermore, because the two conceptions of  self operate mainly within observing 
persons and phenomena, you need to asce rtain just those bases—with respect to 
which the error is made—as not existing in the way that they are conceived. 
Otherwise, it like searching for robber on the plain after he  has gone to the 
woods.24 
 
The conception of true existenc e is of two types: a conception  of a self of persons and a 
conception of a self of phenomena. The concepti on of a self of persons observes persons and 
the conception of a self of phenomena observ es the aggregates. Therefore, one needs to 
                                              
24 The same example is used in Dzong-ka-ba’s Illumination of the Thought  at the end of identifying the object of 
negation (dgag bya ngos ’dzin), (r je’i gsung dbu ma’i lta ba’i skor , vol. 2, Sarnath: The Pleasure of Elegant 
Sayings Printing Press, n.d. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
830 ascertain that the basis with respect to which the mistake is made, that is, with respect to 
which one conceives a self or inherent existenc e, does not exist in the way in which it is 
conceived. Otherwise, like searching for a robbe r on a grassy plain after he has gone to the 
forest, one’s meditation will be useless.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Since error is removed by meditating on  the meaning which has been ascertained 
in that way, such an empt iness is the supreme meaning of suchness. Ascertainment 
of the meaning of suchness as something else that forsakes this is exhausted as only 
something imputed by one’s own wish. Th us, hold [in mind] that this is a 
deviating from the meaning of the scriptures. 
 
Having established the meaning of emptiness on e must meditate on it continually, whereby 
mistaken conceptions will be eliminated. This  meaning of emptiness is the supreme meaning 
of suchness. If, on the other hand, one fors akes this and looks for another meaning of 
suchness, one will deviate from the meaning of th e Buddha’s scriptures. Thus, it is necessary 
to study the scriptures and treatises that expl ain the meaning of suchness and try to realize 
this very meaning. In short, one should not se arch for another type of emptiness invented by 
oneself as this will only be a waste of time and will not fulfill any aim whatsoever.    
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the need to value realization of the view of suc hness upon seeing that when the conc eption of true existence is 
overcome, cyclic existence is overcome:) 
 Therefore, the ignorance which conceives the elaborat ions of persons—such as 
man and woman—and of phenomena—such as form and feeling—as truly existent is 
overcome by finding the view realizing empt iness, selflessness, and cultivating it in 
meditation. When that ignorance is ov ercome, one overcomes the conceptuality 
which is the improper mental application superimposing signs of beauty, ugliness, 
and so forth upon observing the objects of the conception of true existence. When 
that is overcome, the other afflictive em otions—desire and so forth—which have the 
view of the transitory as their root, are overcome. When they are overcome, actions motivated by them are overcome. When they are overcome, powerless birth in cyclic existence impelled by acti ons is overcome, whereby liberation is 
attained. 
 
Since cyclic existence is overco me when the conception of true  existence is overcome, it is 
necessary to cherish the realization of the view  of suchness. The ignorance that conceives the 
elaborations of persons, such as men and wome n, and phenomena, such as forms, feelings, 
and so forth, as truly existent is overcome th rough finding the view realizing selflessness and 
emptiness and meditating on that. When that ignorance is overcome, the conceptualization 
that is improper mental attention which superi mposes signs of beauty, ugliness, and so forth 
through observing the object of the conception of true existence is ov ercome. When that is 
overcome, other afflictions, such as attachment , anger, pride, and so forth which have the 
view of the transitory collection  as their root are also overcome. When they are overcome, the 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
831 actions motivated by them are overcome. When they are overcome, the powerless taking of 
rebirth in cyclic existence which is  projected by them is overcome. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Thinking on that [process], you should generate firm ascertainment and then unerringly seek the view of suchness. Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says: 
By removing actions and afflictive emotions, there is liberation. 
Actions and afflictive emotions [arise] from conception [improper mental 
application]. 
It arises from fictional elaborations  [conceptions of true existence]. 
Fictional elaborations cease by [cul tivating realization of] emptiness. 
You need to value understanding the stages of how one enters into and disengages from cyclic existence in this way and th ereupon realizes the meaning of suchness. 
It will not come through vague invo lvement in which the points are not 
differentiated well.  
 Therefore, one should generate firm ascertainm ent thinking “I will attain liberation,” and 
then seek the view of suchness. Nagarjuna says that by exhausting the afflictions and actions, 
there is liberation. In short, by realizing em ptiness the afflictions cease, and due to their 
ceasing actions also cease.   It is important to understand the stages of how one enters into and reverses from cyclic 
existence and realize the meaning of suchne ss. (I have never come across the word tom ‘jug  – 
here translated as “vague involvement.”) In  short, this will not happen without clearly 
distinguishing the observed object. In other wo rds, we need to understand the exact meaning 
of selflessness and emptiness, distinguish it clea rly, and then meditate on it, as this will 
definitely bring a result.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 309) says: 
 
PART TWO: THE VIEW 
 
The presentation of how to generate the vi ew realizing selflessness has three parts: 
the stages of generating the two views of selflessness, the actual generation of the 
two views in stages, and a presentation of conventional and ultimate truths. 
 
First the order of generating the two views of se lflessness is explained, then the generation of 
the two views is explained to have an order, an d then conventional truths and ultimate truths 
are presented.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
832 2 Order of Realization 
Stages of generating the two views of selflessness 
(This has two parts: the act ual explanation and the reason. 
First, the actual explanation:) 
With respect to the stages  of generating the two conceptions of self, the 
conception of a self of phenomena generate s the conception of a self of persons. 
However, when entering into the suchness of  selflessness, you should first generate 
the view of the selflessness of persons an d then generate the view realizing the 
selflessness of phenomena.  
 
With respect to the order of generating the two conceptions of a self, first the conception of a 
self of phenomena is generated and then the co nception of a self of persons. On the other 
hand, with respect to the order of generating th e two selflessnesses, first the realization of the 
self of persons is generated and then the re alization of the selflessness of phenomena.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
It is as Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland  says: 
If the persons is not earth, not water, 
Not fire, not wind, not space, Not consciousness, and not all [of them] What person is there other than those? 
Just as a person is not [established in] reality 
Because of being [designated in dependence upon] an aggregation of the six 
constituents, 
So each constituent also is not [established 
In] reality because of being [designated in dependence upon an aggregation. 
Thus, he speaks first of the absence of in herent existence of persons and then of 
the constituents—earth and so forth—wh ich are the bases of designation of a 
person. 
 The person or being is not the collection of the six elements or constitu ents, nor is the person 
the earth element, water element, fire el ement, wind element, space element, and 
consciousness element. So what is the person? Th e person or being is imputed on the basis of 
the collection or aggregation of the six elemen ts, therefore the person is not established in 
reality. Just as the being is not established as  the individual elements but is imputed on the 
collection of elements, so too are the individual  elements or constituents also not established 
in reality. In this way, Nagarjuna first sets  out the selflessness of  persons and then the 
selflessness of the six constituents which ar e the basis of designation of the person.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Also, Chandrakirti’s Clear Words  and Buddhapalita’s Commentary on (Nagarjuna’s) 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
833 “Treatise on the Middle”25 explain that when entering into suchness, one initially 
enters by way of the selflessness of pe rsons. Shantideva also says the same. 
 
Both Chandrakirti and Buddhapalita explain th at when engaging suchness, one does so 
initially by way of the selflessness of persons. Shantideva also says this. Why is it this so? It is 
because it is easier to realize the selflessness of persons than the selflessness of phenomena. 
Because the person or being is im puted on the basis of the five a ggregates, it depends or relies 
on the aggregates. Since it is relatively easy to  understand how the person exists in terms of 
being imputed on the aggregates, it is easier to realize the selflessness of persons. However, the 
conception of a self of phenomena arises before the conception of a self of persons. As I said 
before, when someone we do not know enters  the room, we initially see his body and 
apprehend it to be truly existent. It is only af ter that, when the person introduces himself to 
us, that we come to apprehend a truly existent person.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 309) says: 
(The second, the reason for this, has two parts, th e first of which is: a proof through reasoning:) 
The reason why it must be done this way is  that, although there is no difference in 
subtlety with regard to the selflessness to be ascertained in terms of the persons or 
phenomena that are its base, selflessness is easier to ascertain in terms of a person 
due to essentials of the substratum,26 w h e r e a s  i t  i s  m o r e  d i f f i c u l t  t o  a s c e r t a i n  i n  
terms of [other] phenomena. For example, si nce it is more difficult to ascertain the 
selflessness of phenomena in terms of an eye, ear, and so forth and easier to 
ascertain it in terms of a reflection and so  forth, the latter are posited as examples 
for settling selflessness in terms of the former. 
 The selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena are not di fferent in terms of 
their subtlety. However, it is ea sier to realize the selflessness of  persons than the selflessness of 
phenomena in terms of the base. The emptiness of inherent existence of phenomena such as 
the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body is more di fficult to ascertain, whereas it is easier to 
ascertain it in terms of a reflection in a mirro r, an echo, and so forth which are examples of 
things that do not exist from their own side. This is because we all understand that the 
reflection of our face in a mirror appears to be our face but is not. Th erefore, the selflessness 
of phenomena such as eyes and so forth is se ttled by means of positing such examples.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 310) says: 
(Second, a proof through scripture:) 
In consideration of this fact, the King of Meditative Stabilization Sutra27 says: 
Just as you have known the discrimination of self, 
Apply this mentally to all [phenomena]. 
All phenomena are completely devoid 
                                              
25 buddhapalitamula madhyamakavrtti . 
26 The person is already considered by the othe r Buddhist systems to be imputedly existent. 
27 samadhiraja . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
834 Of their own entityness, like space. 
Through one all are known. Through one all are also seen. 
 This sutra says having understood the discrimina tion of the self, one should apply this to all 
other phenomena. All phenomena are the nature of selflessness, that is, purified of true 
existence, like space. By one, all ar e known. By one, all are also seen.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
It says that when you know well the mo de of subsistence of I—with respect to 
which the discrimination of self, thinki ng “I”, operates—you should apply its 
reasoning to all phenomena, internal such as eye and ear and external such as pot, 
and understand them in the same way. Thereby, through knowing and seeing the 
natural mode of one phenomenon, the na ture of all other phenomena is known 
and seen. 
 
When one knows the mode of abidance of the I with respect to which the discrimination of 
self thinking I engages, one should apply th is reasoning to all other phenomena including 
inner phenomena such as the eye, ear, nose, and so forth as well as external phenomena such 
as pots, pillars, houses, mountains, lakes, and so forth. Through knowing and seeing the 
mode of abidance of one phenomenon, one will know and see the nature of all other phenomena.   In this way, we should try to understand  that all phenomena are empty of true and 
inherent existence, that is, that they do not ex ist truly, inherently, or independently but exist 
dependently, that is, by relying on other.  Wednesday morning, 7 February 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 310) says: 
3  Selflessness of Persons 
The presentation of the actual generation of the two views in st ages has two parts: 
settling the selflessness of persons and settling the selflessness of phenomena. 
Settling the selflessness of persons 
This section has two parts: identifying pe rsons and settling them as not inherently 
existent. 
 
The two views of the self are ge nerated in a particular order in  that first the selflessness of 
persons is settled and then the selflessness of phenomena is settled. To  settle the selflessness 
of persons it is necessary to first identify persons or beings, after which it is necessary to settle 
them as not inherently existent.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
835 IDENTIFYING PERSONS  
(This section has four parts, the first of wh ich is: the actual ident ification of persons:) 
“Persons” are the persons of the six ty pes—gods, demi-gods, humans, animals, 
hungry ghosts, and hell-beings—as well as persons who are common beings and 
Superiors, and so forth, They are the accumulators of wholesome and 
unwholesome actions, the experiencers of the fruits of those actions, the revolvers 
in cyclic existence, the cultivators of path s for the sake of liberation, the attainers 
of liberation, and so forth. 
 
Persons are identified as the persons of the si x classes, that is, as gods, demigods, human 
beings, animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings. They are also persons who are ordinary beings 
and persons who are aryas or superiors. They ar e the accumulators of white actions, that is, 
virtuous actions, and black actions, that is , non-virtuous actions. They are also the 
experiencers of the results of white or vi rtuous actions, that is, happiness, and the 
experiencers of the results of black or non-virt uous actions, that is, suffering. They are also 
those who circle in cyclic exis tence, those who meditate paths in order to achieve liberation, 
and those who attain liberation and omniscie nce. In this way the actual persons are 
identified. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, commenting on the meaning of a sutra teachi ng that persons are designated to the aggregates:) 
A sutra cited in Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) 
‘Treatise on the Middle’” and so forth says: 
Self is a devilish mind. 
You are under the control of a [bad] view. These conditioned aggregates are empty. There is no sentient being here. 
Just as a chariot is designated 
In dependence on collections of parts So conventionally a sentient being [Is designated] depending on the aggregates. 
 It is taught in sutra that the person or being is merely imputed on the aggregates. 
Chandrakirti says: 
• that which is called “self,” that is, the concepti on of a self, is the mind of a mara or demon, 
• we are under the control of views such as th e view of the transitory collection, extreme 
view, and so forth, 
• the compounded aggregates are empty, that  is, empty of inherent existence, and  
• a sentient being does not exist on them, that is, a truly exis tent sentient being does not 
exist on the aggregates, meaning that if one l ooks for a sentient being in the aggregates, it 
will not be found.  
The next verse says that although “chariot” is designated in depend ence on its parts, if each of 
the individual parts is taken away none of them are found to be the chariot. In a similar way, 
conventionally a sentient being exists in dependence on the aggregates.   
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
836  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
The first stanza indicates the selflessness of  persons—that ultimately persons do not 
exist. The first line says that  the conception of a self of  persons is a devilish mind. 
The second, that one who conceives such is under the control of a bad view. The 
third and fourth, that the aggregates are empty of a self of persons. 
 The second stanza indicates that person s exist conventionally. The first two lines 
of it give an example; the last two conne ct it to the meaning, indicating that 
persons are only designated in dependence on the aggregates. 
 The first stanza shows the selfle ssness of persons which is that persons do not exist ultimately 
. The first line says that the conception of a self of person, that is , the conception of the 
pers o n  as  in heren t ly exis t en t  o r self-s ufficien t  substantially existent, is a mind of a mara or 
demon. Just as a demon or mara only harms and never helps, so too does the conception of a 
self only harm and never help. The second line shows that one who conceives this is under the control of a bad view. The third and fourth line show that the aggregates are empty of a 
self of persons. It is also often said that the a ggregates do not exist as the object of utilization 
of a self-sufficient substantially existent person or inherently existent person, that is, they are 
empty of being such an object of utilization.  The second stanza shows that persons exist conventionally. The first two lines show an 
example and the last two lines connect the ex ample to the meaning, thereby showing that 
persons are merely imputed in dependence on th e aggregates and do not exist inherently. In 
other words, the person is merely imputed by name and conception on the basis of 
imputation, the aggregates.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, how the person—the phenomenon designated—is posited as the object of observati on of the innate conception 
of an [inherently existent] I:) 
This sutra speaks of the collection of the ag gregates as the basis of designation of a 
person. Also, since a basis of designation is not feasible to be the object designated 
and since the collection of the aggregates mu st be taken as both a collection at one 
time and a collection over former and later [moments], it is not feasible to posit 
the continuum of the collection of the aggr egates as a person. When the collection 
is posited as the basis of designation, th e possessors of the collection [that is, the 
parts] are also posited as the bases of de signation, and thus bo th of those are not 
fit to be a person.  
 
The person is posited as the observed object of the innate conception of I or the innate view 
of the transitory collection. This sutra shows that  the collection of the aggregates is the basis 
of imputation of the person. The basis of imputa tion, the aggregates, is not suitable to be the 
imputed phenomenon. Since the collection of aggr egates is necessarily both the collection at 
one particular time and the collection of former and later moments, it is not suitable to posit 
the continuum of the collection of the aggregates  as the person. If the collection is posited as 
the basis of imputation, the possessor of the collection is also posited as the basis of 
imputation. Therefore, both are not suitable to be the person. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
837  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
Sutra says it is in dependence on the aggregates. 
Thus the mere composite of the aggregate is not the self. 
Also: 
Objection:  The Teacher asserts the aggregates as the self 
Because he said, “The a ggregates are the self.” 
[Answer: ] That refutes a self other than the aggregates, 
For other sutras say that form is not the self, and so forth. 
 Sutra says that the person depends on the aggreg ates, therefore the composite of aggregates is 
not the self, that is, not the person. Here this is  not discussing the self that is the object of 
negation.   Chandrakirti’s text says that someone makes the objection that Buddha Shakyamuni 
asserts the aggregates to be the self given that he said “The aggregates are the self.” However, 
the answer is that this does no t mean that the aggregates are the self, but rather means that 
the aggregates are one entity with  the self whereby it refutes a se lf that is a different entity 
from the aggregates, because other sutras say that form is not the self and so forth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, even the statement [in sutra], “The view of I and mine by practitioners of 
virtue and Brahmins is a viewing only of these five aggregates,” refutes through the 
term “only” that a self—which is a different  entity from the aggregates—exists as the 
object of observation of an innate concepti on of an [inherently existent] I. Having 
refuted such, it does not indicate that th e aggregates are the object of observation 
of a conception of [an inherently existent ] I. If it did, it would contradict the 
refutation in other sutras that the five a ggregates are the self. For, the object of 
observation—from within the object of observation and subjective aspect of a 
conception of [an inherently existent] I—is necessarily posited as the self. Therefore, 
the meaning of the statement in sutra [abo ve] about viewing the aggregates must be 
explained as referring to observing the self that is imputed to the aggregates. 
 
Sutra says: “Trainees in virtue and brahmins, the view of I and mine views only the five 
aggregates.” I is the being and mine is the a ggregates such as my head, my feeling, my 
discrimination, and so forth. By means of the te rm “only” this statement refutes that a self 
which is a different entity from the aggregates exists as the observed object of the innate 
conception of I. Having refuted that, it does no t indicate that the aggregates are the observed 
object of the conception of I. If it were so, it  would contradict the sutras that refute the five 
aggregates as being the self. From among the two – the observed object and the aspect – of the 
conception of I, the object that is observed is necessary posited as the self. This self refers to the conventionally existent self and not to the ul timately existent self. In short, the observed 
object of the conception of I is the se lf that is imputed on the aggregates.  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
838  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, the need, therefore, to differentiate between the self that exists and the self that does not:) 
Hence, you should differentiate between th e references to the mere I, called self, 
which exists conventionally and the inherently existent person, called self, which 
does not exist even conventionally. You shou ld not say that this system asserts that 
a self [inherent existence] of persons exis ts  co n v en t io n ally [ev en  t ho ugh it  is the  
case that self, meaning person, exists conventionally]. 
 Such an identification of persons is a distinguishing feature of this unsurpassed system. Ascertaining this well is a g ood technique for realizing the uncommon 
selflessness of persons. 
 Since there are two selves, one that exists and one that does not exist, it is necessary to 
differentiate between them. The mere I, considered  to be a self, exists conventionally, whereas 
the inherently existent person, considered to be a self, does not exist even conventionally. 
One should not say that the Prasangika Madhyamaka  system asserts that a self of persons, that 
is, an inherently existent person, exists conv entionally. This particular identification of 
persons is a distinguishing feature of this unsu rpassed system. To ascertain the identification 
of the persons in the Prasangika Madhyamaka system as being the mere I imputed on the 
basis of imputation, the aggregates, is th e best method for realizing the uncommon 
selflessness of persons.  The common selflessness of persons is the em ptiness of the person of self-sufficient 
substantial existence in that th is selflessness is common to all four Buddhist tenet systems as 
well as to both the Svatantrika Madhyamaka an d Prasangika Madhyamaka. However, the view 
of the emptiness of the person of inherent existence is unique only to the Prasangika 
Madhyamaka. This is because Svat antrika Madhyamaka asserts that if something exists it must 
exist inherently, and if it does not exist inherently  it does not exist at all, like the horns of a 
rabbit or a sky-flower. Prasangika Madhyamaka, on the other hand, says that if something 
exists inherently it cannot change and cannot co me into being due to ca uses and conditions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
SETTLING PERSONS AS NOT INHERENTLY EXISTENT 
This has three parts: settling I as not in herently existent, settling mine as not 
inherently existent, and showing how, in dependence on this, persons appear as 
like illusions. 
Settling I as not inherently existent 
(This has two parts, how to generate the view realizing the selflessness of persons by way of the four essentials in 
complete form and an extensive explanation of the third and fourth essentials in particular. The former has four 
parts, the first which is: 
The essential of ascertaining the object of negation:) 
Concerning this, the first of the four e ssentials is to identify the mode of 
conceiving a self of persons through analyzing your own continuum. It was 
explained earlier. 
 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
839 The first essential point is to ascertain the object  of negation. This is because if the object of 
negation is not recognized, it cannot be refuted.  For example, when figh ting a war if one does 
not recognize who is a friend and who is an en emy, one will shoot randomly, perhaps killing 
even those who are friends. Similarly in this case, one first has to recognize the object of 
negation, that is, one has to identify the way in  which one conceives a se lf of persons through 
analyzing one’s own mental continuum. This has already been explained before.  
 I n  s h o r t ,  f i r s t  o f  a l l  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  r e cognize the object of negation. The object of 
negation is not the conventionally existent self, ra ther it is the self that is conceived to exist 
from its own side, to exist inherently, or exist se lf-sufficiently and substantially. This is what 
has to be recognized. Therefore, the first the essential point is to re cognize the object of 
negation.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The second, the essential of ascertaining pervasion, has two pa rts, the first of which is: that if a person is inherently 
established, it does not pass beyond being either one or different:) 
The second essential is the decision that if  a person is inherently established, it 
must be established as either one entity  with or a different entity from the 
aggregates and that there is no mode of establishment other than those two. 
 
Then one must analyze the fact that if the person  is inherently established, it must be either 
inherently established as one or as many. In othe r words, the self is either one or many, there 
being no third alternative. Thus, the second esse ntial point is that if the person or self is 
inherently existent, it must be either an inhe rently existent one or an inherently existent 
many. It cannot be established in another way.  One must come to a strong determination 
regarding this, after which one will be able to de cide that the self does not exist inherently 
because it does not exist as an inherently exis tent one or as an inherently existent many.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, since in general not being single and single are explicitly contradictory [a  dichotomy], a third category which is 
not either one or many is excluded:)  
It is established through experience that  when “pot and pillar,” for instance, are 
positively set off as not single,28 it is eliminated that they are single. [Similarly] 
when “pot,” for instance, is positively set off as single, it is eliminated that it is not 
single. Hence, there is no third category  which is not either one or many. Thus 
[the second essential] is to ascertain th at something which is not one entity or 
different entities does not occur.  
 
Not being single and being single are directly co ntradictory, and there is no third category of 
neither being one or many. When “pot and pillar, ” for example, are established as not single, 
that is, as many, it is automatically eliminat ed that they are single. Also when “pot” is 
established to be one, it is eliminated as bein g many. Therefore, there is no third category of 
being neither one or many. Therefore, there is no phenomena that is neither one entity or 
different entities. This means that the person or being, for example, is either one entity with 
the aggregates or a different entity from the a ggregates, there being no third category of that 
                                              
28 zla bcas = having an equivalent, having a mate; zl a med = not having an equivalent, not having a mate. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
840 which is neither one entity or a different entity  from the aggregates. Such a third category is 
impossible. Therefore, the imputed person is one entity with the basis of imputation, the 
aggregates, and a not different entity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The third essential is to see the damage to [the position that] a person and the 
aggregates are one inherently existent enti ty. The fourth essential is to see well the 
damage [to the position that] those two are inherently different. 
 
The third essential point is to see that there is harm to the position that the person and 
aggregates are one inherently existent entity. If  they are one entity, they are just one. They 
cannot be one entity but different. If they are established as one entity, they must be one. 
Thus, if the aggregates and the person are one en tity, they must be one. Since it is not like 
this, there is harm to the asse rtion that the person and the aggregates are one inherently 
existent entity.   The fourth essential point is to see the harm to the position  that the two, the person and 
the aggregates (its basis of imputation), are inherently different. If the aggregates and the 
person were inherently different, they woul d not depend on each other and would be 
completely separate. However, it can be seen that  they are not like this in that the person and 
the aggregates are commonly seen to be differe nt. For example, when we  have a headache, we 
say “I have a headache.” This is  because we think of ourselves, the I, as the owner of our head. 
We could also say “My head hurts” but usually we  say “I have a headache.” Therefore, it is 
clear to us that the person depends on the a ggregates, we can see this directly. Therefore, 
there is harm to the assertio n that the person and aggregates are inherently different.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 When in that way the four essentials ar e complete, then the pure view realizing 
the suchness which is the selfle ssness of a person is produced. 
 
When these four essential points are complete, one will realize the selflessness of persons. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 312) says: 
(The second, an extensive explanation of the third and fourth essentials has two parts, the fi rst of which is: a refutation 
that the two—the self and the aggregates—are inherently one. It has ten parts, the first of which is:) 
Concerning that, if the two—the self and the aggregates—are one inherently 
established entity, from among three fallacie s the first damage to this position is 
that the assertion of self would be sensele ss. If the sameness of entity of those two 
were inherently established, then they would become an utterly indivisible one. 
This is because if a sameness of entity were  ultimately established, then to whatever 
awareness those two appeared they would necessarily not appear to be different. The reason for this is that although am ong falsities—conventionalities—it is not 
contradictory for the mode of appearance and mode of being to be in disagreement, such is necessarily contradictor y in what is truly established. For, the 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
841 mode of being of what truly exists must appe ar just as it is to any mind to which it 
appears. 
 
If the person and the aggregates are one inherent ly existent entity, among the three faults the 
first harm to this position is that it would be meaningless to assert a self. If the person and the 
aggregates were one inherently existent entity , they could not be distinguished but would be 
an utterly indivisible one. If they are one inhere ntly existent entity, they could not appear to 
an awareness as different. In other words, if they are one inherently existent entity, they 
would be just one and so could not appear to an y awareness as two. Although among falsities, 
that is, conventionalities, it is  not contradictory for their mode  of appearance and their mode 
of abidance to be different, these are necessarily  contradictory for what is truly existent. For 
example, there are people who externally appear to  be very kind while internally their mind is 
quite malicious and harmful. Thus, such contra dictions between the mode of appearance and 
the mode of abidance can exist conventionally, wh ereas if things were inherently existent this 
could not happen. In other words, if something is truly existent its mode of appearance and 
its mode of abidance must be the same, they canno t be contradictory. In short, if it is truly 
existent, when it appears to the mind, the way in which it appears and the way in which it 
exists must be exactly the same.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The assertion of an inherently established self is for the sake of establishing an 
assumer and discarder of the aggregates; howe ver, if it is one with the aggregates, 
those are not feasible. About that, Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says: 
When it is taken that there is no self 
Separate from the appropriated [aggregates], 
Then if just the appropriated [aggregates] are the self, Your self does not exist. 
 Someone says that an inherently existent self is asserted for the purpose of establishing one 
who discards and one who appropriates the aggr egates, that is, one who dies and one who is 
reborn. However, if the person and the aggreg ates are one, such an assumer and discarder 
would not be feasible. Regarding that, Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom  or Treatise on the 
Middle  says that a self that is separate from the appropriator of the aggregates does not exist, 
because that which takes rebirth is the self or the person. Since the appropriator of the 
aggregates is the self, an inherently existent self does not exist. While it is said that the self or 
person takes rebirth, it is not said that the aggr egates take rebirth, for example, it is not said 
that the hand takes rebirth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 The second [damage to the position that the self and the aggregates are one] is 
that the self would be many. If the self we re one with the aggregates, then just as 
one person has many aggregates, so even  one person would have many selves.  
 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
842 If the self and the aggregates were one it would also be that case that, because the aggregates 
are many, the self would also be many. In short, if  each of the five aggregates exists inherently, 
each of them would be one enti ty with the self, whereby the se lf and the form aggregate would 
be one entity; the self and the feeling aggr egate would be one entity; the self and the 
discrimination aggregate would be one entity, th e self and the compositional factors aggregate 
would be one entity, and the self and the cons ciousness aggregate would be one entity. This 
would have the consequence that one single person  or being would have to be five persons or 
beings. In that case when putting on a pair of pants, one would have to put on five pants! 
Also when one goes to sleep, one would need a ve ry big bed since it would have to hold five 
persons!   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
[Or] just as there is no more than one self , so the aggregates would have to be one. 
Those are the fallacies. Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the 
Middle”  says: 
If the aggregates were the self, then since 
They are many, the selves also would be many. 
 On the other hand, if the self is only one, then  the aggregates would also have to be one. But 
do the five aggregates become on e aggregate? They do not. A single being has five aggregates. 
However, if the person and the aggregates ar e one inherently existent entity, then the 
aggregates would also only be one, that is, the five aggregates would have to be a single one. 
Chandrakirti says that if the aggregates were th e self, that is, if the aggregates and self were 
one inherently existent entity, because the aggreg ates are many it would follow that the selves 
would also have to be many. This is the conseque nce of asserting the self and the aggregates to 
be one inherently existent entity. If, on the othe r hand, the self and aggregates are asserted to 
be one entity conventionally , there is not this absurd consequence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 The third [damage to the position of oneness] is that the self would have 
production and disintegration. Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says: 
If the aggregates were the self, 
It would have production and disintegration. 
Just as the aggregates are produced and disintegrate, the self also would be produced and disintegrate because those two are one. [This is now explained at length in points four through ten.] 
 If the self and the aggregates are asserted to be  one inherently existent entity, it would also 
follow that just as the aggregates are produc ed and disintegrate, so too would the self be 
produced and disintegrate. Nagarjuna also says that if the aggregates were one inherently 
existent entity with the self, the self would have production and disintegration. This would 
mean, for example, that just as the aggregates grow bigger and stronger as a baby’s body grows 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
843 into a teenager and so forth, so  too would the self have to grow . Also just as the aggregates 
disintegrate and become unhealthy and old, so too would the self have to become sick and 
old. Similarly, if the aggregates and the self were one inherently existent entity, when the 
person dies and the form aggregate is buried in a cemetery or cremated in a fire so too would 
the self be buried in a cemetery or cremated in a fire.  
 These are the faults associat ed with the self and the aggregates being one inherently 
existent entity.  Wednesday afternoon, 7 February 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 314) says: 
(Fourth, one is forced to assert that the self is pr oduced and disintegrates inherently , not just conventionally:) 
Objection:  It is accepted that the self or person is produced and disintegrates each 
moment. 
Answer:  There is no fault in asserting such conventionally, but the opponent asserts 
that persons are established by way of thei r own nature and thus has to assert that 
persons are produced and disintegrate inherently. 
 
S o m e o n e  s a y s  t h a t  i t  i s  a s s e r t e d  t h a t  t h e  s e l f  o r  p e r s o n  i s  p r o d u c e d  a n d  d i s i n t e g r a t e s  e a c h  
moment. Although there is no fault in assertin g that conventionally the self or person is 
produced and disintegrates each moment, howe ver this opponent asse rts that persons are 
established by way of their own characteristics and therefore asserts that inherently existent 
persons are produced and disintegrate inherently. This is not acceptable because if the person 
exists inherently and truly, it cannot be produced and cannot disintegrate.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, thus it follows that memory of former lives would impossible:) 
That has three fallacies as set out in Chandrakirti’s Commentary to the “Supplement 
to (Nagarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the Middle’” . With respect to th e first fallacy, his 
Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
Those which are separate by way of their own nature 
Are not feasible to be included in one continuum. 
 I f  i t  w e r e  a s  s t a t e d  a b o v e ,  i t  w o u l d  f o l l o w  t h a t  t h e  m e m o r y  o f  f o r m e r  l i v e s  w o u l d  b e  impossible, but this too is incorrect and cannot be accepted. There are three faults, the first 
one being that if the person exis ts inherently or by way of its own characteristics then the past 
and present person would not be suitable to be  included in one continuum. In other words, a 
past person who exists inherently cannot beco me the present person who exists inherently. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, it is not feasible for former and later individuals which are established by 
way of their own entityness to have the re lationship of the latter depending on the 
former. Since the former and later are establ ished in the mode of being able to set 
themselves up under their own power, it is not suitable for them to depend on 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
844 others. 
 
Former and later individuals who are establishe d by way of their own entity cannot have a 
relationship of the later depending on the fo rmer. Since the former and later continuum are 
established as able to set themselves up under th eir own power, that is, are established to exist 
inherently and truly, they cannot depend on other.   For example, the Tashi of yesterday and the Tashi of today would be completely different 
because Tashi exists inherently. Also if a smal l child existed inherently it could not grow 
bigger. There are many such absurd consequences  that follow from the assertion of inherent 
existence.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 When in that way a sameness of continuum  is not feasible, memory of a former 
life—“At such and such a time, in that life , I was such and such”— is not possible. It 
is like the fact that when Devadatta reme mbers a [former] life, he does not think, 
“I was Yajñadatta,” who [is his contem porary and] has a separate continuum. 
 
If being one continuum is not feasible, the memory  of a former life thinking “I was such-and-
such a man or woman” is not possible. It like the fact that Jonathan does not remember that 
in a previous life he was George, who is a separate continuum.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, the correctness of our own system:) 
In our own system, although there is [con ventionally existent] disintegration in 
each moment, it is not contradictory for the former and later to be one continuum. 
Due to this, memory of lives is feasible. 
 
In our own system, there is disintegration in each moment but it is not contradictory for 
former and later to be one continuum. Therefore,  it is possible to remember previous lives. 
Buddha, for example, was able to remember and say “In the past I was such-and-such a king.” 
However, if the person were inherently existent  this would not be possible in that the former 
person and later person would be completely independent and therefore could not remember 
past lives.    
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Seventh, how it is an extreme view to hold that a Buddha and a sentient being are one:)  
Those who do not understand the meaning of the above [think] that because in 
the sets of discourses29 Buddha frequently says, “In the past I was such and such [a 
person],” the two persons—the one after en lightenment and the one at an earlier 
time—are one. Furthermore, [they think that ] it would not be suitable for them to 
be one if they were caused phenomena, since they would disintegrate moment by 
moment, and therefore they say that both are permanent. In this way the first of 
                                              
29 sutranta.  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
845 the four bad views based on a former extreme is generated in them. So that we 
might not fall to such [a view], when Buddha remembered a life, [he spoke of] 
remembering in general, saying “I” without qualifying it with a place, time, or specific nature. You need to understand well this feature of his mode of remembering. 
 It is an extreme view to assert that a buddh a and a sentient being are one. In the sutras 
Buddha often said “In the past I was such and such…” due to which those who do not 
understand the meaning of the above think th at the person before enlightenment and the 
person after enlightenment are one. However, this  is not correct. These pe ople also think that 
if they are compounded phenomena it would not be suitable for them to be one since they 
disintegrate in each moment, and therefore say that both are permanent. In this way they 
generate the first of the four bad views based on an earlier end which is related to the self and 
the world. These four are included among the four teen unspecified views that are the result of 
the Buddha not replying to particular question s posed to him. Wrong view is one of the ten 
non-virtuous actions. In order to not fall in to this view, when the Buddha remembered a 
previous rebirth he said “I” in general without qualifying it with a sp ecific place, time, or 
nature. In other words, he did not say “I lived at  this time in this pl ace as this particular 
being.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Eighth, the consequence that actions done would be wasted:) 
The second fallacy [of an inherently produced and disintegrating person] is that 
actions done would be wasted. The tw o—the agent of the action and the 
experiencer of the effect—could not be incl uded within the one base of the mere I. 
 
There would also be the consequence or second fault that actions done would be wasted. This 
is because the creator of the action and the expe riencer of the result would not be included in 
one base, the mere I. It is usually said that fi rst there is the creator of the action and later 
there is the experiencer of the result, but this  would not be possible if the person were 
inherently existent, due to which acti ons done would not be experienced. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Ninth, the consequence of meeting with [t he effects of] actions not done [by oneself]:) 
The fallacy of meeting with actions not do ne [by oneself] is the greatly absurd 
consequence that all the effects of acti ons accumulated by other [persons] of 
different continuums would have to  be experienced by a person. 
 
There would also be the consequence or fault of experiencing the results of actions not 
created by oneself. In other words, one woul d experience the results of actions done by 
another beings of different continua. Thus even  though one particular person created many 
actions, their results would be experienced by other persons. However, this is very absurd. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Tenth, the unsuitability of the former and later being one continuum if they are inherently established:) 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
846 These two fallacies come by way of the e ssential—as in the earlier explanation of 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle” —that if a person 
is established inherently, the former and later moments are not suitable to be of 
the same continuum. Furthermore, Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says: 
If the god and human were other, 
A continuum would not be feasible. 
 If the former and later are inherently establis hed they could not be one continuum. In other 
words, if the person exists inherently, former  and later moments of the person could not be 
of the same continuum because they would not depend on each other at all but would be 
completely unrelated. For example, if the past  god and the present human were separate, they 
could not be one continuum.    
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The second, the fourth essential, which is the refutation of  inherently different self and aggregates, has five parts, the 
first of which is: an i ndication of a source:) 
Question : What fallacy is there if the self and the aggregates are asserted as 
inherently established other? 
Answer:  There is the fallacy described in Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle : 
If it is other than the aggregates, 
It would not have the character of the aggregates. 
 What is the fault of asserting that the self an d aggregates are inherently different? Nagarjuna’s 
Fundamental Wisdom  says that if the self is other than the aggregates, it would not have the 
characteristics of the aggregates  because the self would be inherently established as different 
from the aggregates. Thus, if the self were inhe rently different from the aggregates, it would 
not possess the characteristics of the aggregates such as having parts and so forth. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the consequence that if those two are inherently different, the self would not have the character of the 
aggregates:) 
Concerning that, if the self were inherent ly different from the aggregates, it would 
not possess the characteristics that ch aracterize the aggregates as caused 
phenomena—production, abiding, and di sintegration. For example, because a 
horse is established as a thing factually o t h e r  t h a n  a n  o x ,  i t  d o e s  n o t  h a v e  t h e  
characteristics of an ox. 
 
If the self and aggregates were different by w ay of their entity the se lf would not possess the 
characteristics of the aggregates. Whil e compounded phenomena have the three 
characteristics of being produced, abiding, and disintegrating, if the self were inherently 
different from the aggregates, the self would no t possess the characteristics that characterize 
the aggregates as being compounded phenomena. For example, since a horse is established as 
being completely different from an ox, it does no t have the characteristics of an ox. Also an ox 
does not have the characteristics of a horse. Similarly, if the self and the aggregates are 
inherently different, there would be the cons equence that the self does not have the 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
847 characteristics that characterize the aggregates  as being compounded phenomena, these being 
production, abidance, and disintegration. Howe ver, the self is a functioning thing or a 
compounded phenomenon that arises from caus es and conditions. A baby, for example, is 
conceived, born, and grows in dependence on  causes and conditions, it does not arise 
independently. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, an other-approved syllogism [showing] by the sign of being an uncaused phenomenon that [this so-called self] is 
not suitable as the basis of the designati on self or to be conceived as a self:) 
If you think, “That indeed is so but” [that is, if you are not entirely convinced], 
then it [this so-called self] is not feasible as the object which is the base of 
designating the verbal convention “self”  by innate conception because it is 
uncaused, like a flower in the sky or nirvana. 
 
If it were like this, the self would not suitable to be the observed object  that is the basis of 
conventionally imputing a self by the innate  conception because it is an uncompounded 
phenomena, like a sky-flower or nirvana. Be cause nirvana is a true cessation, it is an 
uncompounded phenomenon that is not prod uced by causes and conditions, whereas 
because a sky-flower does not exist, it is not produced.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, from the consequence that the self would be appr ehended as other than the character of the aggregates [we 
can understand] that it is not apprehended in this way:) 
Moreover, if [the self] exists as inherently  different from the ch aracteristics of the 
aggregates and so forth—such as being s uitable [to be called] form—it must be 
apprehended in that way, just as, for example, form and mind are apprehended as 
different. Further, since there is no such apprehension, the self does not exist as a 
thing factually other [than the aggregates]. Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says: 
It is not feasible that the self 
Be other than the appropriated [aggregates]. 
If it were other, then it would be apprehendable 
Without the aggregates, whereas it is not. 
 If the self were inherently different from the ch aracteristics of the aggregates (such as “suitable 
to be form” which is the definition or characte ristic of the form aggregate), it should be 
observed to be different from them, for exampl e, like form and mind are observed to be 
completely different. Form and mind are obse rved to be different because mind has the 
nature of clarity and knowing whereas form is established from the eight particles. Since the 
self and the aggregates are not observed to exis t as different, like the mind and form, the self 
does not exist as a different entity from the aggregates. Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom  also 
says that the self and the appropriated aggregates are not feasible as other,  that is, as different 
entities. If the self and aggregates were inhere ntly other, the self could not appropriate the 
aggregates, that is, it could not take rebirth.  This, however, is not apprehended by a valid 
cognizer.   
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
848 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
Thus, there is no self ot her than the aggregates 
Because apprehension of it aside from  the aggregates is not established. 
 
There is no self that is other than the aggregat es because there is no self apprehended separate 
from the aggregates. Thus, the self necessarily depends on the aggregates. In other words, the 
self appearing to the mind depends upon the aggregates appearing to the mind. Without the 
aggregates appearing, the self does not appear to the mind.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, the importance of gaining ascertainm ent with respect to such reasonings:) 
You should train until gaining firm ascert ainment, seeing through such reasonings 
the damage to [the position that] the self  exists as a different entity from the 
aggregates. For, if you do not induce pu re ascertainment of the damage to these 
two positions of sameness and difference, although you might de cide that persons 
do not inherently exist, it would be just a thesis; the pure view  would not be found. 
 
It is important to gain certainty with respect to such reasonings. Having seen, through such 
reasonings, the harm to the position that the self exists as a different entity from the 
aggregates, one should train until one gains firm  certainty or understanding that the self and 
aggregates are not different entities but are on e entity. If one does not gain certainty with 
respect to the harm done to th e two positions of the self and aggregates being inherently one 
or being inherently different, even though on e might think that persons do not inherently 
existent it would be just a thesis. Although the self and aggregates are conventionally one 
entity, they are not inherently one entity. If ultimately they were one entity, the self and 
aggregates would become one single phenomenon. Bu t this is not so. Theref ore, it is necessary 
to analyze this based on good reasonings.  
 Some people say that the creator of the world is God or a primordial principle but without a clear understanding of how such a creator woul d be if it existed. When asked where such a 
creator exists, they might just answer “In the sk y.” These kind of assertions show that they 
have not analyzed how God or a primordial princi ple, if it existed, would have to exist.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Settling mine as not inherently existent 
(This has two parts, the first of which is: that the reasoning refuting an inherently existent self also refutes inherently 
existent mine, together with sources:) 
When whether the self has or does not ha ve inherent establishment is sought in 
this way through reasoning, it is not foun d to be either one or many; thereby, the 
inherent existence of the self is negated. At that time, inherently established mine 
will not be found by the reasoning analyz ing suchness, just as, for example, when 
the son of a barren woman is not observed, the mine  of the son of a barren 
woman—eyes and so forth—are not observed.  
 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
849 The reasoning that refutes an inherently existent self also refutes an inherently existent mine. 
Having analyzed whether or not th e self is inherently existent, it  is not found to be either one 
or many, whereby an inherently existent self is  refuted. At that time, also an inherently 
existent mine is not found by the reasoning anal yzing suchness. It is like, for example, when 
the son of a barren woman is not observed (giv en that a barren woman does not have a son!), 
also the mine of the son of a barren woman, hi s eyes, ears, nose, tongue, legs, and so forth, 
are also not observed.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says: 
If the self does not [inherently] exist, 
How could the mine [inherently] exist? 
 Nagarjuna says that if the self does not exist, the mine does no t exist. Without the I existing, 
the mine cannot exist.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
Because the object of a non-ex istent agent does not exist, 
Without [an inherently existent] self, [inh erently existent] mine does not exist. 
Thus, through the view of th e emptiness of I and mine, 
A yogi will be released. 
 
Also Chandrakirti says that just as without an agent, actions do not exist, so too without an 
inherently existent self, an inherently existent  mine does not exist. Through the view of the 
emptiness of I and mine, a yogi is liberated fr om cyclic existence and achieves nirvana. In 
other words, by realizing the lack of inherent existence of I and mine, one achieves liberation 
by abandoning the conception of a self – ignora nce or the view of the transitory collection.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 317) says: 
(Second, the need to know how those r easonings establish all other persons and t heir mine as not inherently existent:) 
Those reasonings settle that the I of the conception thinking “I” in your own 
continuum—or self, or person—is not esta blished by way of its own entityness. 
Through them you should also realize all the meaning of the suchness of the 
selflessness of persons— that all persons, ranging from hell-beings through Buddhas, 
and all their mine, are not inherently established as the same entity with or 
different entities from the contaminated  and non-contaminated aggregates which 
are the bases of [their] designation. Yo u should also know how, through that 
reasoning, all their mine30 is established as without inherent existence. 
 
                                              
30 Since the previous sentence speaks of realizing the se lflessness of both persons an d their mine, perhaps here 
the “mine” refers to phenomena such as eyes and ears. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
850 It is necessary to know how these reasonings es tablish all other persons and their mine as not 
being inherently existent. These reasonings establ ish that the I of the conception thinking “I” 
or self or person in one’s own continuum does not exist by way of its own nature or 
inherently. By means of these reasonings, one shou ld also realize that all persons ranging from 
hell beings to buddhas and all their mine, eye, ear, nose, and so forth, are not inherently 
established as one entity or different entiti es from the contaminated and uncontaminated 
aggregates that are their bases of imputation. By means of this reasoning, one should also 
realize that all their belongings are also not inherently existent.  Thursday morning, 8 February 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 317) says: 
4 Illusion 
The presentation of how, in dependence on [settling I and mine as not inherently 
existent,] persons appear as like illusi ons has two parts: the meaning of setting 
forth illusory-like appearance and the meth od in dependence on which illusory-like 
appearance occurs. 
The meaning of setting forth illusory-like appearance 
This section has two parts: the unerring mode of illusory-like appearance and a 
fallacious mode of illusory-like appearance. 
 Having settled I and mine as no t inherently existent, persons appear as being like illusions. 
Thus, the meaning of illusory-like is now expl ained and then the method in dependence on 
on which phenomena appear as like illusi ons. Then the unmistaken way in which 
phenomena appear as like illusions  and mist aken illusory-like appearances are set out. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
THE UNERRING MODE OF ILLUSORY -LIKE APPEARANCE  
(This section has nine parts, the first of  which is: that all phenomena, like illusi ons, ultimately have no signs [such as 
color and so forth]:) 
The King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra  says; 
Like a mirage, city of gandharvas, 
A magician’s illusions, and dreams, 
Meditation on signs is em pty of inherent existence 
Know all phenomena as like that. 
A Mother of the Conquerors [ Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ] says that all phenomena 
from forms through exalted knowers of all aspects are like a magician’s illusions 
and dreams. 
 
All phenomena are ultimately without signs like illusions. This sutra says that one should 
meditate on all phenomena as being empty of in herent existence and like a mirage, a city of 
gandharvas, an illusion, and a dream. The Mo ther of the Conquerors, that is, the 80,000, 
20,000, and 100,000 Stanza Perf ection of Wisdom Sutras, say that all 108 phenomena, from 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
851 forms through an exalted knower of all aspects, are like illusions and dreams. Although 
dreams appear to be real at the time of dr eaming, when one wakes up nothing solid remains 
of them. Likewise, the illusions created by a magi cian appear to be real but are not. Yesterday 
I saw a program on television in which a man wa s put in a box and cut in two, but still he 
continued to talk and his legs continued to move.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, between the [two] of being illusory-like this one is appearance:) 
There are two meanings of the teaching of being like an illusion. In the description 
of an ultimate truth as being like an illu sion, it means that although [an ultimate 
truth or emptiness] is established as merely  existent, [its] true existence is negated.31 
The second is an illusory-like appearance in which [an object] appears while being 
empty. Between these two, here [being li ke an illusion refers to] the latter. 
 There are two meanings of illusory -like. When the ultimate truth is  said to be like an illusion, 
it means that it does not exist inherently. In ot her words, the fact that ultimate truths exist 
but do not exist truly is what is negated when saying that ultimate truths are like illusions. The second case of illusory-like is that of an illusory-like appearance which appears while 
being empty, that is, which in reality does not exist. Here illusory-like refers to the latter. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the need for a composite of two [factors], a convent ional awareness of appearance—it not being that there is no 
appearance at all—and a reasoning consciousness to which [t he object] appears to be empty of existing in the way 
it appears:) 
Concerning this, the two—appearance as th at and emptiness of existing the way it 
appears—are needed for a person trying to comprehend this view.  
 
It is not that there are no appearances at all.  In fact there are conventional awarenesses to 
which object appear, for example, there is an eye consciousness to which forms appear, an ear 
consciousness to which sounds appear, and so  forth. In addition, there is a reasoning 
consciousness, one that knows emptiness or thusness, to which all phenomena appear as 
empty of existing as they appear. Whereas things  appear to a conventional awareness, such as 
eye consciousness and so forth th ings, it is a reasoning consciou sness that realizes their final 
mode of abidance, emptiness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Also, if [objects seem] to be utterly non- existent even as mere appearances like a 
horn of a rabbit or the son of a barren woman, and do not dawn as empty of 
existing the way they appear, the meanin g of illusory-like appearance has not 
appeared to the mind. 
 
                                             
 
31 Perhaps, just as an illusory horse ex ists but is not established as horse, so an ultimate truth exists but is not 
inherently established. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
852 There is the appearance of true or inherent existence to our mind, although phenomena do 
not exist in this way. In other words, they appear to be truly existent but in reality they are 
empty of inherent existence. Thus, if phenomena seem to be utterly non- existent even as mere 
appearances, like the horns of a rabbit and th e son of a barren woman, and if they do not 
dawn as empty of existing in th e way that they appear (that is, as empty of true existence), the 
meaning of illusory-like appearance has not yet dawned to the mind, that is, it has not yet 
been understood. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, the mode of knowing other phenomena as like the example of an illusion:) 
Therefore, the mode of knowing other phenomena as like the example of an 
illusion is as follows. For example, alth ough the illusions emanated [or conjured 
up] by a magician are from the start empty of being horses and elephants, 
appearances of horses and elephants are un deniably cast. Just so, you should know 
that although phenomena, persons and so  forth, are from the start empty of 
inherent existence—that is, of their bein g objectively established by way of their 
own entities—it is undeniable that they appear as if established that way. 
 
The way in which other phenomena are also known to be like the example of an illusion is 
that even though illusions, su ch as horses, elephants, beauti ful woman, and so forth, are 
created on the basis of a pebble or stick by applyi ng medicine to the eyes of the spectators and 
reciting mantras, they appear to be real ac tual horses, elephants, and so forth but never 
existed in that way right from the beginning. In  other words, while all that exists is the 
pebbles or stones, still horses and elephants undeni ably appear, that is, th ey cannot be said to 
not appear. Similarly, while all phenomena have been empty of inherent existence right from 
the very beginning, still they undeniably appear  as if they were established from their own 
side, solidly and inherently. In other words, it cannot be said that they do not appear as if 
they exist from their own side.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, such an emptiness is not an annihilatory emptiness or a mentally fabricated, or partial emptiness, and so forth:) 
The appearances as a god, human, and so  forth are posited as persons and the 
objects which are the appearances as form s, sounds, and so forth are posited as 
phenomena. Therefore, although person s and phenomena do not have even a 
mere particle of inherent existence—an establishment by way of their own nature—
all the dependently arisen actions, agen ts, and objects—accumulator of actions32 
and so forth, viewing, object of hearin g, and so forth—are feasible. Because all 
actions, agents, and objects are feasible, th is is not an annihilatory emptiness.  
 
The emptiness of persons and phenomena, wh ich range from forms through the exalted 
knower of all aspects, of existing by way of their own characteristics is not an annihilatory 
emptiness or a mentally fabricated emptiness or a partial emptiness.  
                                              
32 las, karma.  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
853  The appearances as gods, humans, animals an d so forth are considered to be persons. 
Although not all these beings, such as gods an d hell beings, appear to us human beings, these 
beings appear to each other (that is, hungry ghos ts appear to hungry ghosts, hell beings to hell 
beings, and so forth). The appearances as forms,  sounds, odors, tastes, tactile objects, and 
other phenomena such as nirvana, uncompou nded phenomena, space, and so forth are 
considered to be phenomena. Although pers ons and phenomena do not have even a mere 
particle of inherent existence or existenc e by way of their own characteristics, the 
accumulators of actions such as making paper, books, cotton cloth, and so forth, the actions 
of looking, listening, and so forth, and the ob jects of looking (forms), the objects of hearing 
(sounds), and so forth are still feasible, that is , they still exist. Because actions, agents, and 
objects are perfectly feasible, this is not an annihilatory emptiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Also, because phenomena, which from the primordial start have been empty in 
this way, are just being known as empty, th is is not a mentally fabricated emptiness. 
Furthermore, since all objects of knowledge are asserted  this way, it is not a partial 
emptiness. Therefore, meditati on on it goes as the anti dote to all the exaggerated 
adherences of the concepti on of true existence. 
 
Also because all phenomena have primordially b een empty of inherent existence, it is not a 
mentally fabricated emptiness. The emptiness that  is being discussed here is not the emptiness 
of a house of people, nor is it the emptiness of the cup of tea, or the emptiness of the stomach 
of food, and so forth, rather it is the emptiness of inherent existence. 
 In addition, because all objects of knowle dge are asserted to be empty of inherent 
existence, it is not a partial emptiness. Theref ore, meditation on the emptiness of inherent 
existence of persons and phenomena is the antido te to all the adherenc es of the conception 
of true existence.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 It is not that the meaning of the profou nd [emptiness] is not suitable to be the 
object of any awareness. Through settlin g it by means of the correct view and 
through meditating on the meaning of the re ality [that has been settled], it can be 
taken as an object [of the mind]. Therefor e, it is not that it cannot be practiced 
during the time of path, and it is also not a vacuousness in which there is nothing 
to be known and nothing to be realized.  
 
It is not that emptiness is not suitable to be the object of an awareness. Through settling the 
emptiness of inherent existence or true existenc e by means of the correct view and meditating 
on the perfect meaning, it can be taken as an object. Therefore, it is  not that it cannot be 
practiced at the time of the path and it is al so not a vacuousness in which there is nothing 
known and nothing realized. In other words, at th e time of the path it is possible to meditate 
on and realize emptiness and it is not an em ptiness like the emptiness that is the non-
existence of the horns of a rabbit.  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
854  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, stating the qualm that ascertaining a reflection as empty of what it appears to be involves ascertaining that it is 
empty of inherent existence:) 
Objection:  If this ascertainment that reflection s and so forth are empty of what they 
appear to be is a realization of their abse nce of inherent existence, then the direct 
perceivers of common beings would realize the absence of inherent existence, then 
the direct perceivers of common beings would realize the absence of inherent 
existence, and due to that, they would be Superiors. If the ascertainment that 
reflections and so forth are empty of what th ey appear to be is not a realization of 
their absence of inherent existence, how co uld these be suitable as examples of the 
absence of inherent existence? 
 
Here the doubt is raised that ascertaining a refl ection in a mirror or in still water as empty of 
what it appears to be is an ascertainment of its emptiness of inherent existence. When one 
looks at one’s face in the mirror,  although the reflection appear s to be one’s actual face in 
reality it is empty of being one’s face. If this  ascertainment that reflections and so forth are 
empty of what they appear to be is a realizatio n of their absence of in herent existence, then 
the direct perceivers of ordinary beings woul d realize the emptiness of inherent existence 
(because they realize that the reflection of a fa ce is empty of being an actual face) and they 
would therefore be aryas. However, ordinary bein gs are not arya beings in that they have not 
attained the path of seeing, th e path of meditation, or the pa th of no-more-learning, and in 
most cases have not even attained the path of accumulation or path of preparation. Based on 
this, the doubt arises: “If the as certainment that reflections an d so forth are empty of what 
they appear to be is not a realization of th eir absence of inherent existence, how could 
reflections and so forth be suitable as exam ples of the lack of inherent existence?”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Seventh, though one has realized that a reflection is empty of being a face, si nce one has the conception of the true 
existence of the reflection this is not a realization of its suchness:) 
Answer : Aryadeva’s Four Hundred  says: 
That which is the viewer of one thing 
Is explained to be the viewer of all. 
That which is the emptiness of one Is the emptiness of all. 
 Although one has realized that the reflection of a face in a mirror is em pty of being an actual 
face, because one has the conception of true existe nce of this reflection, it is not a realization 
of suchness. Because the reflection in a mirror is a visual form, upon seeing it the innate 
conception of true existence arises. Therefore, th e understanding that it is not an actual face 
is not a realization of emptiness. In other words, just realizing that the reflection of a face is 
empty of being a face is not a realization of  the emptiness of inherent existence of the 
reflection of a face.  
 With respect to this, Aryadeva s ays that the viewer of one thin g is the viewer of all things. 
For example, if one realizes the emptiness of on e thing, such as a vase, of inherent or true 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
855 existence, one will also realize that pillars do not exist truly, that human beings do not exist 
inherently, and that all other phenomena do not exist inherently. If one sees the emptiness of 
one phenomena, one will also see the emptiness of all other phenomena. For example, if one 
sees the emptiness of inherent ex istence of this table, one will gradually come to see that this 
emptiness of inherent existence also applies to all other phenomena. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, he explains that the viewer, or re alizer, of the emptiness of one thing can 
realize the emptiness of other things. Howeve r, the realization that a reflection of a 
f a c e  i s  e m p t y  o f  b e i n g  a  f a c e  d o e s  n o t do any damage to the object of the 
conception33 of true existence which conceives th e reflection to be established by 
way of its own entity. Furthermore, without coming to disbelieve [that is to say, 
without realizing as non-existent] the obje ct of that conception, the emptiness of 
inherent establishment of the reflection cannot be realized. Hence, that awareness 
does not realize the suchness of the reflecti on. Though one realizes illusions to be 
empty of being horses and elephants and realizes dream appearances and so forth 
as empty of what they appear to be , one has not found the Madhyamika view 
realizing [objects] as like illusions and dreams. 
 The viewer of the emptiness of one thing can al so realize the emptiness of all other things. 
However, the realization that the reflection of  a face is empty of being a face is not a 
realization of true existence and does not harm the object of the concep tion of true existence 
which apprehends the reflection to exist truly. This is because without repudiating the object 
of that conception, one cannot realize the emptin ess of inherent existe nce. Therefore, that 
awareness does not realize the emptiness of true existence of the reflection. Likewise, although 
one realizes illusory horses and elephants to be  empty of being horses and elephants, one has 
not yet found the Madhyamaka view realizing that all phenomena are like illusions and 
dreams in the sense of their not existing inherently.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Eighth, the reason, nevertheless, for stating reflections and illusory horses and el ephants, and so forth, as examples:) 
However, these are used as examples due to  the fact that the realization that these 
do not inherently exist is easier than th e realization that other phenomena such as 
f o r m s ,  s o u n d s ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h  d o  n o t .  I f  a n  o b j e c t  i s  t r u l y  e s t a b l i s h e d ,  i t  i s  n o t  
suitable for it to appear to a mind in any way other than just what its mode of 
subsistence is. Therefore, that these [refle ctions and magical illusions] are empty of 
inherent existence in the sense of being es tablished by way of their own entities is 
proven through showing the contradiction in  those two [i.e., a reflection appearing 
to be a face or an illusory horse’s appear ing to be a horse constitutes its appearing 
in a way other than its mode  of subsistence and this contradicts its being truly 
established]. 
 
                                              
33 “conception”: consciousness conceiving. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
856 The reason that reflections and illusory horses an d elephants are used as examples is that it is 
easier to realize that they do not exist inherent ly than it is to realize that other phenomena 
such as forms and so forth do not exist inhe rently. If objects were truly or inherently 
established, it would not be feasible for them to appear in any other way than their actual 
mode of abidance. However, although form, for example, appears to exist truly it does not 
exist truly, due to which its mode of appearance  and its mode of abidance are contradictory. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Initially, one must enter into realizing that these examples, which are renowned 
as false in the world, are without inhe rent existence, and then generate the 
realization that other phenomena which are not renowned as false in the world are 
without inherent existence. Because thes e have a temporal order, it is not 
[Aryadeva’s] thought [in the passage cite d on the previous page] that when the 
emptiness of one phenomenon is realized , the emptinesses of all other phenomena 
are realized, the emptinesses of all other phenomena are explicitly realized. Rather, 
his meaning is that when [after realizin g the emptiness of on e phenomenon] one’s 
awareness is directed toward whether anot her phenomenon truly exists or not, it 
can realize [its emptiness through the functioning of the former reasoning]. 
 Reflections and so forth are renowned in the wo rld to as untrue or false. One must first 
realize that they lack inherent  existence, after which one shou ld realize that those phenomena 
that are not renowned as false in the world ar e also without inherent  existence. These two 
realizations do not arise simultaneously but must  be generated one after the other. Therefore, 
it not the intention of the prev ious citation that when the em ptiness of one phenomenon is 
realized, all other phenomena are simultaneously realized to be empty of inherent existence. 
Rather it means that having realized one phen omena to be empty of in herent existence, one 
can gradually come to realize that all other ph enomena are also empty of true existence. For 
example, it is like having invented one thing, one can also invent other similar things just by 
changing it in some small way.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Ninth, the need to distinguish between the realization of appearances, such as reflections , as empty of what they 
appear to be and the realization of appearances  as empty of inherent existence:) 
Thus, (1) within knowing a dream as a drea m, to realize the appearances as men, 
women, and so forth [in the dream] as em pty of being those and (2) to view in 
dreams all phenomena as like dreams as described in Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear 
Realization34—”Viewing all phenomena even in dreams as like dreams, and so 
forth”—do not have the same meaning [for the latter involves realization of their 
emptiness whereas the former does not]. 
 
It is necessary to distinguish between (1) the re alization of appearances as being empty of what 
they appear to be and (2) the realization of ap pearances as empty of inherent existence. Thus, 
                                              
34 abhisamayalamkara . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
857 to realize in a dream that the appearances in a dream of men, women, and so forth do not 
exist and to view all phenomena in dreams as li ke dreams, illusions, mirages, reflections, and 
so forth are not the same.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Similarly, to realize the pots, woolen cloth, and so forth which appear in the 
visions of one who has cultivated meditative stabilization as empty of being what 
they appear to be and to realize them as like non-inherently existent illusions and 
dreams do not have the same meaning. Thus, you should investigate well the 
uncommon mode of illusory-like appearance in the prescriptions in scriptures and 
treatises of definitive meaning to realize [phenomena] as like illusions and dreams. 
 
Likewise, to realize the visions of vases, woolen  cloth, and so forth th at appear to those who 
have cultivated meditative stabilization as empty of being what they appear to be, that is, as 
appearing in one way but not existi ng in that way, is different fr om realizing them to not exist 
inherently. Therefore, one should determin e the uncommon mode of appearing like an 
illusion according to the definitive meaning scriptures and treatises.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 (1) Whether a mirror-image is conceived to be a face, and so forth, by a child not 
versed in terminology, (2) whether magica l appearances are conceived to be horses, 
elephants, and so forth by a member of the audience unfamiliar with magic, (3) 
whether dream appearances of mountains, houses, and so forth are conceived as 
real by one who does not recognize dreams as such, or whether those appearances 
are known as untrue by (1) mature pe rsons trained in terminology, (2) by 
magicians, (3) and by those who know dreams  as dreams, it is similar; both have 
not found the view of suchness. 
 A child not versed in terminology conceives the refl ection of a face in a mirror to be an actual 
face. Members of an audience unfamiliar with  magic conceive the magical appearances of 
horses and elephants to be actual horses and elephants. Those who do  not recognize dreams 
and so forth as dreams conceive the dream appe arances of mountains, houses, and so forth to 
be actual mountains, houses, and so forth. On the other hand, mature persons trained in 
terminology, magicians who create illusions, and those who know dreams as dreams know 
that these appearances are untrue. However, th ese two sets of persons are similar in not 
having found the view of suchness, that is, they have not found the correct view. 
 Thursday afternoon, 8 February 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 321) says: 
FALLACIOUS MODE OF ILLUSORY -LIKE APPEARANCE  
(This has eight parts, the first of whic h is: that unidentified chaotic appearance, in which there is no [discrimination], “It is 
this, not that,” is a view of annihilation and not the m eaning of illusion since the measure of the object of negation 
has been mistaken and the object analyzed and the analyzer [are considered to be] non-existent:) 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
858 When the measure of the object of negati on explained before is not grasped well 
and an object is analyzed with reasoning,  breaking it down, initially the thought 
arises, “The object does not exist.” Then , seeing the same wi th respect to the 
analyzer also, there is no ascertainer of non-existence, whereby it comes that there 
is nothing to ascertain as, “It is this, no t that.” The dawning th en of unidentified 
chaotic appearance arises in dependence on not differentiating inherent  existence 
and non-existence from mere existence and non-existe nce. Hence, such an 
emptiness is an emptiness destroying depe ndent-arising. Therefore, the dawning of 
unidentified chaotic appearance induced by realizing this is not at all the meaning 
of being like an illusion. 
 Since someone who does not unders tand the correct measure of th e object of negation thinks 
that the object of analysis and the analyzer do no t exist, he does not know “It is this. It is not 
that.” This chaotic or vague appearance is no t the meaning of illusion but is a view of 
annihilation. When the measure of the object of  negation explained before is not identified 
well and one analyzes an object with reasoning,  breaking it into parts, initially the thought 
arises “This object does not exis t.” Then, seeing oneself, the anal yzer, to be similar, one thinks 
that there is no ascertainer of non-existence. Th en one comes to think th at there is nothing to 
be ascertained as “It is this. It is not that. It is hot. It is cold” and so forth. The dawning of 
appearances that have become unidentified chao tic appearances arises in dependence on not 
distinguishing between (1) inherent existenc e and inherent non-existence and (2) mere 
existence and mere non-existence.  Hence, this is not actual emptiness and is an emptiness 
that destroys dependent-arisings, that is, it makes dependent-arisings non-existent. Thus, the 
dawning of unidentified chaotic a ppearance which is induced by re alizing this is not at all the 
meaning of illusory-like. “Illusory-like” does not mean not existing truly or inherently or from 
its own side, but means that things do not exist in the way that they a ppear. Nor also it refer 
to the illusions that arise due to a collection of causes and conditions. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, although there are many cases of generating such  unidentified chaotic appearance when analyzing the view, it 
is not the Madhyamika [understanding of] illusion:) 
Therefore, it is not difficult when analyz ing with reasoning to think, “Persons and 
so forth do not in the least have an obje ctive mode of subsis tence which is their 
being established by way of their own enti ties,” and in dependence on that for 
these appearances to shine forth unasso ciatedly. Such happens to all who are 
interested in Madhyamika tenets and have heard a few scattered doctrines showing 
the mode of the absence of inherent existence. 
 
Although when analyzing the vi ew there are many cases of generating such unidentified 
chaotic appearance that does not correctly identi fy inherent existence and the lack of inherent 
existence, it is not th e Madhyamaka meaning of illusory-lik e. Therefore, when analyzing with 
reasoning it is not difficult to come to thin k “Persons and so forth are not in the least 
established as objects from their own side or by  way of their own entities” and, in dependence 
on that, for those appearances to merely dawn va guely or without clarity. This happens to all 
those who are interested in the Madhyamaka tenets and have heard some occasional 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
859 teachings on the emptiness that is the lack of inherent existence. However, there is not much 
benefit to this in that such people have not correctly identified the object of negation and 
therefore have not correctly identified the emptiness of that object of negation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the difficult part about the correct illusory appearanc e is the composite of the two, an absence of inherent 
existence and the existence of  merely nominal objects:) 
However, the difficult point is that  one must, from the depths, induce 
ascertainment with respect to refuting  without residue inherent existence—
establishment by way of its [the object’s] own entity—and positing just non-
inherently existent persons and so forth as the accumulators of actions, 
experiencers of effects, and so forth. A co mposite of these two in which there is an 
ability to posit these hardly occurs; hence,  the Madhyamaka view is very difficult to 
find.  
 To understand correct illusory appearance is difficult because a comb ination of the two are 
necessary: the absence of inherent existence and the existence of merely nominal objects. The 
difficult point is that one must induce asce rtainment with respect to refuting inherent 
existence without anything remaining and yet si multaneously posit that a person who does 
not exist inherently is the accu mulator of actions, the experien cer of results, and so forth. 
Because it is very rare that these two are able  to be combined, the Madhyamaka view is very 
difficult to find. In short, it is valid or correct that because persons do not exist inherently  they can 
accumulate actions, experience their results, and so forth. On the other hand, if persons 
existed inherently they would not be able to accumulate actions, experience the results of 
actions, and so forth; in that, they would no t be able to perform any function at all.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 322) says: 
(Fourth, if, mistaking the measure of the object of negation, one refutes all, then [phenomena] could only be similar to 
the horns of a rabbit and could not be like illusions:) 
Therefore, when analyzed with the reas oning analyzing suchness, production and 
so forth are not found, whereby inherently existent production and so forth are 
refuted, but all whatsoever [phenomena]— production, cessation, and so forth—are 
not refuted. If they were, it is said that there would be the fallacy that [everything] 
would be like the horns of a rabbit or the son of a barren woman, empty of all 
performance of functions. Furthermore, ther e would be the fallacy that it would be 
that all dependently-arisen agents, actions,  and objects are not feasible within the 
mere illusory-like appearance that is left over.  
 
If, mistaking the measure of the object of negation, one refutes all phenomena, these 
phenomena would be similar to the horns of a rabbit and could not be like illusions. When 
production, abidance, and disintegration are not found through analyzing them with the 
reasoning analyzing suchness, inherent production and so forth are refuted. However, it is not 
that production, cessation, and so forth are refuted. In other words, conventionally 
phenomena are produced, cease, abide and so fort h, and this is not refuted. If, on the other 
hand, production, cessation, and so forth were refuted, there would be the fault that compounded phenomena would be empty of being able to perform a function and would 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
860 instead be like the horns of a rabbit or the so n of a barren women, that is, non-existent. In 
addition, there would be the fault that all de pendently-arisen agents, actions, and objects 
would not be feasible within the mere il lusory-like appearance that remains.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Aryadeva’s Four Hundred  says: 
If that were the case, cyclic existence 
Would not be like an illusion. 
Chandrakirti’s commentary says: 
When dependent-arisings are seen as th ey are, they become like illusory 
creations, not like the son of a barren woman. If it is asserted that this 
analysis refutes production in all respects and that thereby the non-production of caused phenomena is indicated, then they would not be 
like illusions but would be comprehended by way of [examples] such as the son of a barren woman. Therefore,  fearing that this would entail 
the consequence that dependent-aris ings do not exist, [we] do not 
compare [phenomena] with those. Use magical illusions and so forth which do not contradict dependent-arisings. 
 Aryadeva says that if it were like that, cyclic existence would not be like an illusion but would 
be like the horns of a rabbit. Sometimes from a distance the long ears of a rabbit can be 
mistaken for horns, although such horns do not in  reality exist. An illusion is something that 
appears and performs a function but does not exist inherently.  Chandrakirti’s commentary says that when depe ndent-arisings are seen exactly as they are, 
they become like illusory creations such as illu sory horses and elephant s, and not like the son 
of a barren women. If it is asserted that such  analysis refutes the production of compounded 
phenomena in all ways and thereby shows th at compounded phenomena are not produced, 
then such phenomena would not be like illu sions but would instead be understood by 
examples such as the son of a barren women. Since this woul d entail the consequence that 
dependent-arising would not exist, phenomena are not likened to the son of a barren women, but are likened to magical illusions, dreams, mi rages, moons in water, and so forth which do 
not contradict dependent-arisings but show that they lack solidity. While compounded 
phenomena depend on causes and conditions , uncompounded phenomena depend on being 
imputed by name and conception. Thus , neither compounded phenomena or 
uncompounded phenomena exist inherently or truly.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, it would be a fault if the subject [the phenomenon being realized as empty] existed in the face of a reasoning 
consciousness, but there is no fault for an illusory-like appearance to be left over as a remainder after the reasoned 
negation:)  
Chandrakirti also says: 
Therefore, when thoroughly analyzed in this way, an inherent existence 
of things is not established. Just an illusory-like [appearance] remains 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
861 left over with respect to things individually. 
 
There would be a fault if a phenomenon were  analyzed and found to not exist truly but 
existed in the perspective of a reasoning consci ousness. On the other hand, there is no fault 
in illusory-like appearance remaining after true  existence has been negation by reasoning. 
Chandrakirti says that when thoroughly analyzed in this way, an inhere nt existence of things 
is not established. All that remains with respect to  things is an illusory-l ike appearance. In this 
way all phenomena are like illusions.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, therefore, although it is a fault to conceive illusory appearances as trul y having their own entityness, there is no 
fault in conceiving them as only illusory:) 
Thus, conceiving [objects] as merely existe nt dependent-arisings which are illusory-
like appearances is not a faulty conception  of illusion. If illusory-like appearances 
were conceived to be established by way of their own entityness or were conceived 
to be truly existent, it would be a fault. 
 
It is a fault to apprehend illusory appearances as truly existent in their own entityness, but 
there is no fault in apprehending them to be mere illusions. Therefore, apprehending merely 
existent dependent-arisings which are illusory-l ike appearances is not a faulty conception of 
illusion but is correct. If illusory-like appearance s are conceived to exist from their own side or 
truly, this is a fault and needs to be abandoned.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 323) says: 
(Seventh, a source for those points:) 
The King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra  says: 
Migrators in cyclic existence are like dreams. 
No one is [inherently] born here and no one [inherently] dies. 
No [inherently existent] sentient being,  human, or living being is found. 
These phenomena are like bubbles, banana trees, 
Magician’s illusions, lightning in the sky, Moons in water, and mirages. In this world no one [inherently] dies and goes, Passing over to another life. But actions done are not wasted, they ripen As wholesome and unwholesome effects in cyclic existence. 
 The migrating beings who wander in existence, th at is, in cyclic existence, are like dreams. 
Since there is no one who is born, there is no one who dies. No sentient being, human being, 
or living is found – that is, no inherently existe nt sentient being, human being, or living being 
is found – whereas a conventiona lly existent sentient being, hu man being, and living being is 
found. Such phenomena are like banana trees, which, when their bark is peeled away, no 
essence is found. They are also like bubbles, like  illusions, like a flash of lightning in the sky 
that quickly finishes, like the moon reflected in  pools of water which appear to be the actual 
moon, and like mirages. There is no one who havi ng died in this world transfers and migrates 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
862 to another world, that is, there is no inherent ly existent person who dies and migrates to 
another world. Actions done are never wasted bu t ripen as white and black results in cyclic 
existence. White results are the results of vi rtue, happiness and good rebirths. Black results 
are the results of non-virtue, suffering and bad re births as cats, birds, and other animals or as 
hell beings or hungry ghosts.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
When sought with the reasoning analyz ing suchness, persons—who are born and 
transmigrate—and so forth, able to with stand analysis, are no t found, not even a 
particle. Nevertheless, phenomena give  rise to wholesome and unwholesome 
effects within being illusory-like. You need to form understanding of such 
statements. 
 When sought with the reasoning analyzing suchne ss, not even a small particle of persons who 
are born and migrate that are able to bear analysis are found. Although phenomena are 
illusory-like they give rise to white and black resu lts, that is, white or virtuous actions give rise 
to happiness and black or non-virtuous actions gi ve rise to suffering. It is necessary to 
understand the meaning of such statements.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Eighth, furthermore, although [phenomena] appear as empt y of gross obstructiveness, this is not illusory-like 
appearance:) 
Moreover, instead of sustaining in meditative equipoise a setting within the view 
penetrating the mode of being, [some] gain  a stability of a mere one-pointedness in 
which the mind does not conceive anythi ng. Through its power, when they rise 
from it, appearances of mountains and so forth—rather than appearing as they did 
before as hard and obstructive—appear vagu ely, like rainbows or light smoke. Even 
this is not the illusory-like appearance mentioned in scripture because it is an 
appearance [of objects] as empty of gro ss obstructiveness whereas those objects are 
not appearing as empty of inherent establishment.  
 
Appearing as empty of coarse ob structiveness is not the meaning of illusory-like appearance. 
For example, while a very small particle is em pty of coarse obstructiveness this is not the 
meaning of it appearing like an illusion. Ther e are people who cultivat e meditative equipoise 
without really understanding the meaning of em ptiness or correct view and, thinking that 
they are meditating on emptiness, abide sing le-pointedly without their mind apprehending 
anything. When such people, who think that th ey have been equipoised firmly on emptiness 
for a long time, rise from that equipoise, mounta ins and so forth, instead of appearing to be 
solid and obstructive like before, appear to them like rainbows or fine smoke. However, this is 
not the illusory-like appearance taught in the Buddha’s scriptures but just an appearance of 
things as empty of coarse obstructiveness, ther efore they do not appear as empty of inherent 
existence.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
863 Also, the non-existence of obstructive hard ness is not at all suitable to be the 
meaning of the emptiness which is the abse nce of inherent existence. Otherwise, 
there would be the fallacies that when rain bows and so forth are taken as substrata, 
it would not be possible to generate a conc eption of true existence [with respect to 
them] and that, when obstruct ive objects are taken as su bstrata, it would not be 
possible to generate a consciousness real izing the absence of  true existence. 
 
The lack of obstructive hardness is not at all th e meaning of the emptiness that is the lack of 
inherent existence. If it were, there would be th at fault that if one we re to take rainbows and 
so forth as a basis, it would no t be possible to generate a conception of true existence with 
respect to them. There would also be the fault that  if one were to take obstructive objects as a 
basis, it would not be possible to generate a wi sdom realizing the lack of inherent existence 
with respect to them.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 324) says: 
The method in dependence on which illusory-like appearance occurs 
(This section has five parts, the first of whic h is: how to generate appearance as like illusions:) 
Question : What has to be done for the meanin g of illusion to appear unerringly? 
Answer:  For example, the eye consciousness sees  illusory horses and elephants, and 
the mental consciousness ascertains the non-existence of those horses and 
elephants in accordance with how they  appear. In dependence on those, 
ascertainment that the appearance of horses  and elephants is an illusory or false 
appearance is generated. 
 
What is to be done for the meaning of illusion to appear unmistakenly? The eye 
consciousness, for example, sees illusory horses and elephants, whereas the mental 
consciousness ascertains that those horses and elephants do not exist in the way that they 
appear. In short, it is the eye consciousness that sees illusory horses and elephants, but it is 
the mental consciousness that understands that th ey do not exist in the way that they appear. 
In this way the appearances of such horses and el ephants are ascertained to be illusory or false 
appearances. 
 
Friday morning, 9 February 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 324) says: 
(Second, a composite of the two—a reasoning consci ousness and a conventional consciousness—simultaneously 
appear:) 
Similarly, there is undeniable appearance of persons and so forth to a 
conventional consciousness, and a reason ing consciousness ascertains them as 
empty of inherent existence—establishm ent by way of their own entities. In 
dependence on those, ascertainment of persons as illusory or false appearances is 
generated. 
 A composite of a reasoning consciousness and a consciousness of conventionalities can arise 
simultaneously. A reasoning consciousness ( rigs shes ) is a knower of suchness, thusness, or 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
864 emptiness, whereas an awareness of conventionalities ( tha snyad pa’i blo ) or conventional 
consciousness is any ordinary consciousness such  as an eye consciousness, ear consciousness, 
and so forth. These two can arise simultaneous ly. That persons and so forth appear to a 
conventional consciousness cannot be denied s aying “They do not appear” in that houses, 
mountains, the aggregates of people, and so fo rth are seen by an ordinary conventional eye 
consciousness. At the same time a reasoning consciousness can know them to be empty of 
inherent or true existence. In dependence on these two consciousnesses, the ascertainment of 
persons and so forth as being illusory  or false appearances is generated. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Due to this fact, in meditative equipois e one meditates on space-like emptiness, 
[realizing that] the target aimed at by th e conception of signs [inherent existence] 
does not exist—not even a particle. When  that has gotten down to the essential 
point35 and one rises from it viewing the appe arance of objects, an illusory-like 
emptiness [which is a composite of appe arance and emptiness] subsequent to 
meditative equipoise appears. 
 
At the time of meditative equipoise there is no  appearance of true existence as well as no 
appearance of conventionalities, and all that appears is space-like emptiness. That is the 
essential point of this meditation. Then, when  one arises from meditative equipoise into 
subsequent attainment, one views all appearances as being like illusions. Just as an illusion is 
something that appears but does not exist fr om its own side, similarly in subsequent 
attainment all phenomena appear – that is, form s appear to the eye consciousness, sounds to 
the ear consciousness, odors to the nose consci ousness, tastes to the tongue consciousness, 
and tactile objects to the body co nsciousness – as truly exist, but mentally one knows that they 
are not truly existent and therefore s ees them as being like illusions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, therefore, a separate reasoning for sett ling [appearances] as illusory-like is not needed:)  
In that way, through analyz ing phenomena frequently with the reasoning analyzing 
whether they are established by way of  their own entities or not, strong 
ascertainment with respect to the absenc e of inherent existence is generated. 
When, after that, one views the dawning of  appearances, they appear as like 
illusions; there is no separate way of  settling the illusory-like emptiness. 
 
There is no need for another reasoning to settle appearances as being like illusions. In other 
words, through analyzing phenomena with th e reasoning analyzing whether they exist 
inherently or not, one generates the strong as certainment that they do not exist inherently, 
and, after that, when appearances dawn they a ppear as illusory-like, due to which there no 
need to separately settle illusory-like emptiness.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
                                             
 
35 That is, when the space-like meditative equipoise has been successful. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
865 (Fourth, everything should be done within the illuso ry-like state subsequent to meditative equipoise:) 
Therefore, even when engaging in the cl ass of deeds such as bowing down and 
circumambulating, you should do them wi thin being affected by the force of 
analysis as [explained] earlier and thereby train in illusory-like appearance. 
Activities should be done within this. Through having trained in it, merely by 
becoming mindful of the view those will appear as like illusions. 
 
One should do everything – prostrations, circum ambulating, making offerings, tsa-tsas, and so 
forth – within illusory-like subsequent attainment . In other words, having previously analyzed 
the illusory-like, when doing actions as such prostrating, circumambulating, making offerings 
or tsa-tsas, going for refuge, confessing, reciti ng the Samayavajra practice, doing the Vajradaka 
burnt offering ritual, and so forth, one should cons tantly strive to train in seeing everything as 
illusory-like appearances.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The fifth, the instructions with regard to  seeking ascertainment of the illusory-like,  has three parts, the first of which is:  
to train in emptiness since one needs to induce ascert ainment with respect to [a composite of] appearance and 
emptiness:)  
Let us express how to seek that ascertai nment in terms easy to understand: As 
explained earlier, cause the generality of the object of negation by reasoning to 
appear well; contemplate well inherent existence as it is superimposed by the 
ignorance in your own continuum and identify it.  
 
With respect to the instructions on seeking asce rtainment of the illusory-like, one should first 
train in emptiness since it is necessary to in duce ascertainment with respect to appearance 
and emptiness. An easily understandable way in which to seek that asce rtainment is that, as 
explained earlier, one should first make the me ntal image of the object of negation appear 
clearly by means of reasoning. This means th at one should clearly imagine the object of 
negation thinking, “If the object of negation we re to exist, it would exist in such-and-such a 
way.” For example, just like imagining, “If th ere were horns on my head, they would point 
upward and not downward,” or “If there was a ta il on my bottom, it would be like this and 
that,” similarly one should imagine “If things were to exist truly, they would be stable, 
unchanging, and independent” and so forth. Afte r that, one should strive to contemplate and 
identify the inherent existence superimposed on all phenomena by the ignorance in one’s 
own continuum.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Then, with particular emphasis contempl ate the fact that if such inherent 
establishment exists, it does not pass beyo nd oneness and difference, and similarly 
contemplate the mode of the presence of da mage to the assertions [of the self and 
aggregates] as both of those. Inducing as certainment that sees the damage, finally 
make firm the ascertainment thinking, “A  person does not in the least have 
inherent establishment.” In this way train frequently in the factor of emptiness. 
 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
866 Then, contemplate that fact that if there was such true existence, things could not pass 
beyond being one or different, and that if th ings are asserted to be inherently one or 
different, how this assertion is harmed by reas oning. Having induced the understanding that 
sees this harm, one should make this ascertai nment firm thinking, “A person is not in the 
least inherently existent.” In this way, one should  try to arrive at a stable understanding of this 
and train in the factor of emptiness. one can also ask “Does emptiness itself exist truly and 
inherently?” It does not. In fact among the tw enty and sixteen types of emptinesses, such as 
the emptiness of the external, the emptiness of the internal, the emptiness of both, and so 
forth, there is one type of emptiness called “the emptiness of emptiness.” These emptinesses 
are taught in the Ornament for Clear Realizations  and its commentaries, as well as in the 
Supplement to the Middle Way  and its commentaries. You should try to understand them.  
  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, without forgetting emptiness, the illusory-like appearance of persons:)  
Then, let the undeniable appearances of the conventions of persons appear as 
objects of your awareness. Take to mind the dependently-arisen factors of positing 
the person as the accumulator of action s and experiencer of effects, finding 
ascertainment with respect to how dependent-arisings are feasible within the 
absence of inherent existence. 
 Then, how is it that the illusory-like person a ppears without forgetting emptiness? One should 
make the conventional appearance of the person arise as the object of one’s awareness. Then 
one should take to mind the factor of dependent- arising which is that that person is posited as 
the accumulator of actions and the experiencer of  results. In other wo rds, one should think 
about the fact that it is the person who collects  actions and experiences their results, just like 
a farmer who sows seed in the field in spring and gathers the resulting harvest in autumn. Then it is necessary to gain ascertainment with  respect to how dependent-arisings are feasible 
within the lack of inherent existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the need for the example of a mirror image w hen appearance and emptiness seem to be contradictory:) 
When those two seem to be contradictory, taking as examples [mirror] images and 
so forth, contemplate the mode of non- contradiction as follows. The image of a 
face is an aggregate in one common base  (1) of undeniably being produced in 
dependence on a face and a mirror even thou gh it is empty of the eyes, ears, and so 
forth it appears to have, and (2) of di sintegrating when ei ther of those two 
conditions [face and mirror] is absent. Just  so, even though a person does not have 
inherent establishment—not even a particle—i t is not contradictory for it to be the 
accumulator of actions, the experiencer o f  e f f e c t s ,  a n d  t o  b e  p r o d u c e d  i n  
dependence on former contaminated action s, afflictive emotions, and so forth. 
Contemplating this, you should train [in the non-contradiction of appearance and 
emptiness]. Such should be known in all 36 
 
                                              
36 That is, not just with respect to the person bu t also with respect to phenomena, and so forth. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
867 When appearances and emptiness seem to be contradictory, one should apply the example of 
the reflection of a face in a mirror. One should  think that although one’s face appears in a 
mirror, the appearance is empty of being an actual  face. That is, there is no actual face inside 
the mirror. The reflection of a face together with  eyes, ears, nose and so forth is seen in the 
mirror, even though there are no eyes, ears, nose , and so forth inside th e mirror, that is, even 
though it is empty of the appearances which ar e eyes, ears, nose, and so forth. However, in 
dependence on the face and the mirror, the refl ection of a face is undeniably produced. On 
the other hand, when one of those conditions , for example, the mirror, is absent, the 
reflection of the face disintegrates, that is, it does not exist. In other words, without the 
presence of the two conditions of  the face and mirror, the reflection of a face will not be seen. 
Similarly, although the person does not have the sm allest particle of inherent existence, still it 
is not contradictory for it to be the accumula tor of actions and the experiencer of results 
produced by previous actions and afflictions. We, for example, presently experience happiness 
and pleasure, as well as some unhappiness and suffering, but none of these can occur without 
a previous cause. Happiness and well-being arise due to virtuous actions created in past lives, 
whereas suffering, unhappiness, pain, mental illn ess, and so forth arise due to non-virtuous 
actions created in past lives. Therefore, all of them arise due to the coming together of causes 
and conditions. On the other hand, even though the cause exists, as long as the conditions 
have not arisen the result will not arise. For exampl e, although a rice seed is good, if it is not 
put in good soil it will not give rise to a result, and even if it is planted in good soil but is not 
watered and so forth it will not give rise to it s result because the necessary conditions for its 
growth are absent. Similarly, other phenomena al so come about as a result of the gathering 
together of their causes and conditions. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 325) says: 
5 Selflessness of Phenomena 
(The presentation of settling the selflessness of phenomena has two parts, the first of which is that although the objects 
of negation [in the selflessnesses of persons and phenomena] do not differ in subtlety, the two selflessnesses are 
differentiated by way of the subjects:) 
The bases of the designation of a person—the  five aggregates, six constituents [earth, 
water, fire, wind, space, and consciousness], six sense spheres [eye, ear, nose tongue, 
body, and mental sense powers], and so forth are phenomena. Their emptiness of 
inherent existence—establishment by way of  their own entities—is the selflessness of 
those phenomena. 
 
According to the Prasangika Madhyamaka the objects of negation in the case of the 
selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena are not different in terms of one 
being more coarse and one being more subtle. However, in the case of Svatantrika Madhyamaka the two objects of negation are completely different.   The basis of designation of the person, such as Annamaria, Jonathan, and so forth, is the 
five aggregates – the form aggregate, feeling ag gregate, discrimination aggregate, compositional 
factors aggregate, and consciousness aggregate. Th e person is also designated on the basis of 
the six constituents or elements : the earth constituent, water constituent, fire constituent, 
wind constituent, space constituent, and consciou sness constituent. It is also designated on 
the basis of the six spheres: the eye sphere, ear sphere, nose sphere, tongue sphere, body 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
868 sphere, and mental sphere. All of these – the five aggregates, six constituents, and six spheres 
– are phenomena. The emptiness of inherent ex istence or emptiness of establishment by way 
of their own entity of all these phenomena is the selflessness of those phenomena.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the mode of settling that selflessness:) 
The mode of settling that selflessness has two parts: a refutation through moving 
over the reasoning explained earlier and a refutation through another reasoning 
not explained earlier. 
 
One way of settling selflessness is by way of th e reasonings explained above, for example, the 
reasoning of one and many or the reasoning of  one and different. For example, one analyzes 
whether the aggregates, constituents, and spheres ex ist as an inherently existent one or as an 
inherently existent many. Selflessness is also se ttled by means of other reasonings that were 
not explained above.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 326) says: 
Refutation through moving over the reasoning explained earlier 
There are two types within the phenomen a of the aggregates, constituents, and 
sources [the physical and the mental. Their inherent existence] is to be refuted as 
before through analyzing with respect to  the physical whether the parts—their 
directional parts such as the eastern part, and so forth—and the whole are 
established as inherently one or different,  and analyzing with respect to the mental 
whether the parts—their own temporal part s such as earlier and later [portions]—
and the whole are established as inherently one or different. 
 
There are two types of phenomena included in the aggregates, constituents, and spheres: (1) 
those that have form, the physic al, and (2) those that are cons ciousnesses. One investigates 
those that have form as to whether their dire ctional parts and their whole are inherently one 
or inherently different. For example, one can inve stigate a pen in terms of whether its eastern, 
southern, western, northern, upper, and lower parts and the whole pen are inherently one or 
inherently different. Likewise, one investigates those that are consciousnesses as to whether 
their earlier and later temporal parts and the whole consciousness are established as 
inherently one or inherently different.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 This is the meaning of the sutra quoted earlier: 
Just as you have known the discrimination of self, 
Apply this mentally to all [phenomena]. 
 One should similarly apply the knowledge that  discriminates the self as not existing 
independently, solidly, partlessly, and so forth to all phenomena, such as the form aggregate. 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
869 For example, one can think: this table does not ex ist inherently because it does not exist as an 
inherently existent one or as an inherently existent many.  
 STUDENT: There are two reasonings – (1) not ex isting as an inherently existent one and 
inherently existent many and (2) not existing as an inherently existent one and inherently 
existent different – that seem to be used interc hangeably here. However, they seem to be quite 
different in that it does not mean the same to say (1) that something is either single or many 
and (2) that something is iden tical with its basis of imputation or a separate entity. 
G E S H E  J A M P A  G Y A T S O :  T w o  o f  s o m e t h i n g  i s  a l r e a d y  c o n s i d e r e d  t o  b e  m a n y  o r  a  multitude. In both Sanskrit and Tibetan there are the three: the singular tense, the dual tense, 
and the plural tense. Therefore, two are already a plurality.  STUDENT: But it seems to be different to say that the aggregates abide separately in a different place, and to say that they abide as many but in the same place. GESHE JAMPA GYATSO: The aggregates are ma ny, therefore they exist separately. For 
example, the form aggregate and discrimination  aggregate are different, as are the feeling 
aggregate and discrimination aggregate. Some texts mention “one and many” but here this 
text also says “one and different.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Refutation through another reasoning not explained earlier 
This section has two parts: showing the reasoning of dependent-arising and 
establishing uncaused phenomena also as not truly existent through that and the 
former reasoning. 
 
The reasoning of dependent-arising and the reason ing of one and many can also be applied to 
establish that uncompounded phenomena are empty of inherent existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
SHOWING THE REASONING OF DEPENDENT -ARISING  
(This section has ten parts, the first of which is: a citation of sources:) 
With regard to the reasoning of dependent-arising, the Questions of Sagaramati 
Sutra37 clearly describes a refutation of inherent establishment by the sign of 
dependent-arising: 
Those which arise dependently 
Do not exist by way of their own entityness. 
 The reasoning of dependent-arising refutes in herent existence by the sign “dependent-
arising.” An example of this reasoning is: the tabl e is empty of inherent existence because it is 
a dependent-arising. The reason that is applied here is “because it is a dependent-arising.” 
This is clearly stated in the Questions of Sagaramati Sutra . 
 
                                             
 
37 sagaramatipariprccha . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
870 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 Also, the Questions of the King of Nagas, Anavatapta, Sutra38 clearly says: 
Those which are produced from conditions are not produced; 
They have no inherently  existent production. 
Those which depend on conditions are said to be empty. 
One who knows emptiness is aware. 
This is [said] very frequently in the precious scriptures. 
 Whatever is produced from conditions is not produced inherently. Thus, there is no 
production by entityness. Whatever depends on conditions is said to be empty of inherent 
existence. Whoever knows emptiness is conscien tious. Such statements often occur in the 
Buddha’s teachings.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, commenting on the meaning of the sutra:) 
The meaning of the “not produced” mentioned in the first line is explained by the 
second, “...no inherently existent producti on.” Thus, a qualification of the object 
of negation is affixed to the refutation of production. 
 
“Whatever is produced from conditions is  not produced” means that they are not inherently  
produced. Therefore, the qualificatio n of the object of negation, “not  inherently  produced,” is 
necessary affixed to the refutation of production.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Chandrakirti’s Clear Words  cites the Descent into Lanka Sutra,39 “Thinking of no 
inherently existent production I said, ‘A ll phenomena are not produced.’” Fearing 
that his statements of no production with out a qualification affixed might be held 
[as indicating that] all production wh atsoever was non-existent, the Teacher 
himself identified the thought of the sutra,  explaining that it means the absence of 
inherently existent production. 
 The Buddha said in this sutra “Intending that they are not inherently  produced, I said ‘All 
phenomena are not produced.’” Fearing that with out qualifying his statement with the word 
“inherently” that all phenomena might be held to  be non-existent, the Buddha said that “not 
produced” means empty of inherently existent production. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
                                             
 
38 anavataptanagarajapariprccha . 
39 lankavatara . 
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
871  Then, the third line says that depending40 and relying on conditions is the 
meaning of being empty of inherent establis hment. Thereby, it indicates that being 
empty of inherent establishment is the me aning of dependent-arising, and not an 
emptiness of the ability to perform a func tion—a negative of mere production.  
 
The third line explains that depending and re lying on conditions is the meaning of being 
empty of inherent existence. This shows that  being empty of inherent existence is the 
meaning of dependent-arising, and that depend ent-arising is the meaning of being empty of 
inherent existence. This is because if phenomen a were inherently existent they could not arise 
in dependence on anything. This is not an empt iness of the ability to perform a function, that 
is, it is not a refutation of mere production.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says that by reason of being dependent-arisings 
[phenomena] are pacified of or empty of inherent existence: 
That which is a dependent-arising 
Is pacified of inherent existence. 
Therefore, you should know that those who propound any and all creations of 
darkness, such as that the Madhyamika syst em must propound that by reason of 
dependent production there is no production, are refuted. 
 Nagarjuna also says that whatever is a dependent- arising is pacified of inherent existence, that 
is, is without inherent existence. By the reas on of being dependent-arisings, phenomena are 
pacified of or empty of inherent existence. Among the three doors of liberation, signlessness 
r e f e r s  t o  c a u s e s  b e i n g  p a c i f i e d  o f  s i g n s  o f  inherent existence; emptiness refers to all 
phenomena being pacified or empty of inherent existence; and wishlessness refers to results 
being pacified of being inherently existent wished for results. Thus, those with mental 
darkness who say that the Madhyamaka system propounds that by the reason of dependent 
production there is no production at all are refuted, in that the Ma dhyamaka system only 
refutes inherent  production.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 327) says: 
(Third, praising the reasoning of dependent-arisi ng as the eliminator of all bad views:) 
Such reasoning of dependent-arising is greatly praised; the Questions of the King of 
Nagas, Anavatapta, Sutra  says: 
Realizing the doctrines of dependent-arising, 
The wise do not at all rely on extreme views. 
Thus, it says that through realizing dependen t-arising as it is one does not rely on 
views holding to extremes.  
 
                                              
40 rag las .  
FPMT Basic Program          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path          ILTK – 5-9 February 2007 (18) 
872 The reason of dependent-arising is greatly praise d as being the best. This sutra says that the 
wise or skilled, through realizing dependentl y-arising phenomena, do not rely on extreme 
views, that is, on the view of annihilation and the view of permanence. In other words, 
through realizing dependent-arising exactly as it is, one does not rely on the view holding to 
the extreme of annihilation and the view holdin g to the view of permanence. Extreme view is 
one of the five views: (1) the view of the tran sitory collection, (2) extreme view, (3) the view 
holding a bad view as supreme, (4) the view holding bad morality and conduct as supreme 
morality and conduct, and (5) wrong view (den ying the existence of the law of cause and 
effect, past and future lives, and so forth). 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s ) “Treatise on the Middle”  sets forth the 
meaning of that: 
Since things are dependently arisen 
They cannot sustain these conceptions [of be ing produced from self, other, and so 
forth]. 
Therefore, this reasoning of dependent-arising 
Cuts through all the nets41 of bad views. 
This is an unsurpassed feature of the gr eat beings, the father Nagarjuna and his 
spiritual sons. Therefore, from among th e reasonings I will describe here the 
reasoning of dependent-arising. 
 
The Supplement to the Middle Way  says that since things arise in dependence, conceptions such 
as “If they exist, they must ex ist inherently, and if they do no t exist inherently, they do not 
exist at all” are not sustained. Thus, the reas oning of dependent-arising cuts through all the 
nets of bad views. This is the unsurpassed fe ature of the father Nagarjuna and his spiritual 
sons, Aryadeva and so forth. Therefore, here  among the many different reasonings, Lama 
Tsongkhapa explains the reasoning of dependent-arising. 
 We too should try to understand and realize de pendent-arising so as to cut through all wrong 
views and gain the correct view. Together wi th correct view, we should also develop 
renunciation and bodhichitta whereby we will co me to have all three principle aspects of the 
path. Practicing in this way becomes very meaningful.  
END 
 
                                             
 
41 In Dharmakirti’s Commentary on (Dignaga's) “Compendium of [Teachings on] Valid Cognition”  one meaning is 
net. The other is a grass that prevents the growing of other things, just as bad views prevent the [growth of] 
good views. 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
873 Monday afternoon, 12 February 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (translation by Jeffrey Hopkins, Tibetan text page 327) says: 
(Fourth, identifying the extremes of superimposition and dep recation, the places where one can go wrong with respect 
to the view:) 
Here, the principal places of possible error that serve as obstacles to the pure view 
are two. One is the view of permanence or superimposition, which involves the 
mode of [mis]apprehension of the conception  of true establishment, this being to 
conceive phenomena as truly established. Th e second is the view of annihilation or 
denial, in which the measure of the object of negation has not been delimited and 
one has gone too far, whereby it is impo ssible to induce ascertainment in one’s 
own system with respect to the dependent- arising of cause and effect, without any 
way of identifying, “It is this, not that.” 
 The opposite of pure view are the extreme view  that all phenomena exist inherently, and the 
extreme view that if phenomena do not exist in herently they do not exist at all. In other 
words, there are two extremes that are obstac les to pure view, the first is the view of 
permanence or the view of superimposition wh ich conceives phenomena to be truly existent. 
The second is the view of anni hilation or the view of deprec ation which denies, for example, 
the existence of a relationship be tween causes and their results.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, the simultaneous avoidance of the two ex tremes through the reasoning of dependent-arising:) 
Those two are abandoned without residue when inherent establishment is refuted 
based on a reason inducing ascertainment with respect to the arising of such and 
such an effect from such and such causes and conditions. For, through 
ascertaining the reason, the view of a nnihilation is eradicated, and through 
ascertaining the meaning of the thesis, the view of permanence is eradicated. 
 
Through the reasoning of dependent-arising,  which abandons true existence, the two 
extremes of superimposition and deprecation ar e simultaneously abandoned. With respect to 
the arising of a specific result, for example, a table, from specific ca uses and conditions, one 
can say: the table does not exist inherently  because it is a dependent-arising. The 
ascertainment of the reason “because it is a dependent-arising” eliminates the extreme of 
annihilation. The ascertainment of the meanin g of the thesis “the table is a dependent-
arising” the view of permanence is eradicated. In “dependent-relation” or “dependent-arising” 
the word “dependent” eliminates the extreme of superimposition,” and the word “relation” or 
“arising” eliminates the extreme of deprecation or non-existence by indicating that there is 
something arises.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
a. (The sixth, the presentation of dependent-arising, has tw o parts, the first of which is: that shared with the 
Chittamatrins:) 
Therefore, external things such as sprouts and internal things such as 
compositional activity arise in dependence respectively on seeds, and so forth, and 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
874 ignorance, and so forth. 
 
One presentation of dependent-arising is common to both the Chittamatrins and the 
Madhyamikas, whereas another is unique to the Madhyamikas . External things, such as 
sprouts, are dependent-arisings because they ar ise from seeds and so forth. Also internal 
things such as the second of the twelve links, karmic formations (compositional activity), are 
dependent-arisings because they arise from the first link of ignorance and so forth. Such 
karmic formations are also called projecting actions since they project a rebirth in cyclic 
existence. Both Chittamatrin s and Madhyamikas assert these external and internal 
phenomena to be dependent-arisings.    
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the uncommon mode of positing dependent-arising by the Madhyamikas:) 
If that is so, that those [sprouts, compositional activity, and so forth] are 
established by way of their own nature is not feasible because whatever is established by way of its own entityness must  be inherently established—that is, be 
able to set itself up under its own power—whereby it is contradictory for it to rely 
on causes and conditions.  
 The Madhyamikas’ uncommon mode of positing dependent-arising is that they say that 
external phenomena such as sprouts and seeds,  and internal phenomena, such as karmic 
formations and so forth, are not established by way of their own characteristics because if they 
were established by way of their own characterist ics they would be able to set themselves up 
without depending on anything else and would ther efore be inherently existent. If it were like 
this, it would be contradictory for them  to rely on causes and conditions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Aryadeva’s Four Hundred  says: 
That which has a dependent arising 
Is not under its own power. All these are not under their own power; Therefore, self [inherent ex istence] does not exist. 
Through this you should understand that persons, pots, and so forth are without inherent establishment because of being imputed in dependence on their own 
collection [of parts]. Those are the tw o presentations of the reasoning of 
dependent-arising. 
 
Aryadeva says that that which arises in depend ence is not under its own power. Because all 
functioning things are not under their own powe r, they do not exist inherently. Because of 
that, a self, the object of negation, does not exis t. By means of these citations, it should be 
understood that persons, pots, and so fort h are imputed in dependence on their own 
collection. For example, the person is imputed in dependence on the aggregates, and pot is 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
875 imputed in dependence on its parts or on the ba sis of the collection of eight or nine subtle 
particles. Therefore, these phenomena do not exist inherently.  
 The two presentations of the reasoning of dependent-arising are: 1. the reasoning common to the Chittamatrins and Madhyamikas, and 
2. the reasoning uncommon to the Madhyamikas,  specifically the Pras angika Madhyamikas. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Seventh, how these refute truly existent oneness and difference:) 
What is dependently produced or dependently imputed is not an inherently 
existent one with that upon which it depends; [for] if it  were, all agents and objects 
would be one. Those two are also not inhe rently existent others because if they 
were, a relationship [between them] would be refuted, whereby dependence on 
[causes or a basis of imputation] would be contradictory. 
 How do these reasonings refute being truly existe nt one and being truly existent different? If it 
is dependently produced and dependently imputed,  it is not an inherently existent one with 
that upon which it depends. If it were an inherently existent one, all agents and actions would 
be one. These two are also not inherently other or inherently different because if they were 
inherently different a relationship between them  could be refuted, whereby reliance would be 
contradictory. In other words, if two things we re inherently different, they could not rely on 
each other and could not have any kind of relationship whatsoever.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 329) says: 
(Eighth, statements of this in Nagarjuna’s texts:) 
Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says: 
That which arises dependently, 
Respectively is not one [with what it depends on,] 
And is also not [inherently] other than that. 
Hence, it is not annihilated and not permanent. 
 
Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom  also says that that which aris es in dependence on something, 
for example, a son who arises in dependence on a mother, is not that itself. Also that son is 
not inherently other than or different from his mo ther as if he were inherently different from 
her, he would not need to depend on his mother  having given birth to him. Hence, this is 
neither annihilation nor permanence. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, Nagarjuna’s Praise of the Supramundane42 says: 
The philosophers assert that suffering 
Is created by itself, created by another, 
Created by both, and causelessly. 
You said it is dependently arisen. 
                                              
42 lokatitastava . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
876 That which arises dependently 
You asserted as empty. That things do not exist under their own power Is the lion’s roar by the unequalled you. 
Thus, he says that conceptions of oneness,  difference, the extremes of permanence 
and annihilation, as well as the four extreme types of production are refuted by the reasoning of dependent-arising. 
 The logicians – that is, those who accept other tr eatises – who assert that suffering is created 
by s elf, t ha t  it  is  creat ed by o t her, t hat  it  is  created by both, and that it is created without 
causes. For example, the Samkyas assert that ph enomena arise from their own nature, that is, 
from themselves. Those who assert that phenom ena are produced by other are most of the 
Buddhist schools, all those from the Svatan trika Madhyamaka downward, who assert that 
from an inherently existent cause is produced an inherently existent result. Those who assert 
that phenomena are created by both self an d other are the Nigranthas, the Naked Ones. 
Those who assert that phenomena, results, ar e produced without causes are the Charvakas, 
for example, they say that the roundness of peas , the sharpness of thorns, and so forth are not 
made by anyone but arise naturally. They say that  if there were a cause that makes peas round, 
it should be possible to see it. Some years ago there was a meeting in Sarnath in which a 
Charvaka propounded his views to which anothe r Indian responded: “It follows that you do 
not have a liver, lungs, kidneys, and so forth inside your body because you do not see them. 
Also there is no hair on the back of your he ad because you cannot see it.” The Charvaka was 
not able to reply and brushed aside the debate. In  fact, all these tenets still exist nowadays in 
India.   The Buddha taught that ph enomena that arise in dependence are empty of existing 
inherently, that is, existing from their own side. His speech teaching dependent-arising is 
likened to the roar of a lion, which is able to  frighten all other anim als. The reasoning of 
dependent-arising refutes being inherently one and inherently different, the extremes of annihilation and permanence, and the four extr emes of production from self, other, both, 
and without a cause.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Ninth, praising the view in which appearance and emptiness dawn as mutually compatible:) 
Inducing ascertainment in that way of the emptiness of all the targets aimed at by 
conception of signs [inherent existence], one does not forsake ascertainment of the 
relationship of actions and their effects.  The consequent reliance on discarding 
[non-virtues] and assuming [virtues] is greatly praised.  
 
The ascertainment of the emptiness of inherent  existence does not fo rsake the ascertainment 
of a relationship between actions and results. Th erefore, to rely on discarding the object of 
negation, that is, discarding the conception of true existence, and adopting the correct view 
that sees all phenomena as dependent-arisings, is greatly praised.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
877 Nagarjuna’s Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment43 says: 
Reliance on actions and their fruits 
Within knowing this emptiness of phenomena 
Is more wonderful than the wonderful, 
More fantastic than the fantastic. 
 Through knowing all phenomena to  be empty of inherent existence to rely on actions and 
their results, that is, the law of cause and ef fect, is more wonderful than wonderful, more 
amazing than amazing. His Holiness gave the tr ansmission of this text by Nagarjuna in 
Sarnath in December 2006 and gave some explanation on it.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The tenth, advice on the need to differentiate the four, inherent existence and absence of inherent existence and in 
general existence and non-existence, has six parts, the first of which is : the actual advice:) 
I n  o r d e r  f o r  s u c h  t o  h a p p e n ,  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  d i f f e r e n t i a t e  b e t w e e n  i n h e r e n t  
existence and mere existence as well as between the absence of inherent existence 
and non-existence. It is as Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Supplement to 
(Nagarjuna’s)  ‘Treatise on the Middle’”  says: 
What wise person, while knowing the presentation of non-inherently 
existent cause and effect which are reflections would—through observing as merely existent forms, feelings, and so forth which do not 
abide separately from causes and effects—ascertain them as having 
inherent existence? Therefore, although  observed to exist, they have no 
inherently existent production. 
 It is necessary to distinguish between (1) inhe rent existence and mere existence and between 
(2) non-existence by way of its own characteri stics and non-existence. While knowing that 
causes and results, like the reflection of a face  in a mirror, do not exist inherently what wise 
person, through observing the form aggregate, feeling aggregate, discrimination aggregate, 
compositional factors aggregates, and consciou sness which do not exist inherently but are 
observed to be merely existent, would ascertai n them to be inherently existent? Therefore, 
although these phenomena are observed to exist by a valid cognizer, they are not observed to 
have inherently existent production.  Existence in general and inherent existence ar e different, as are not existent in general and 
not inherently existent. For example, the horns of  a rabbit do not exist in general, but while 
the head of the rabbit does not exist inherently it  does exist. Also while horns do not exist on 
my head, my head does exist (in fact, it is ve ry hard like the head of George W. Bush!).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 330) says: 
(Second, together with a source, how one falls to th e two extremes when those are not differentiated:) 
When those are not differentiated, one do es not pass beyond the two extremes of 
superimposition and deprecation, since then once something exists it exists by way 
                                              
43 bodhicittavivarana . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
878 of its own entity and once something does not exist by way of its own entity it is 
totally non-existent.  
 
If one does not differentiate be tween them – (1) existence in general – mere existence – and 
inherent existence, and (2) non-existence in ge neral and non-inherent existence – one will not 
pass beyond the extremes of superimposition an d deprecation which think, respectively, that 
if something exists it exists by way of its own en tity, and if it does not exist by way of its own 
entity it does not exist at all.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Chandrakirti’s Commentary on (Aryadeva’s) “Four Hundred”  says: 
According to the proponents of things as inherently existent, as long as 
a thing’s existence occurs, its own enti tyness also exists and when it is 
devoid of its own entityness, that th ing does not exist in all ways, like 
the horn of a donkey. Thus, si nce they do not pass beyond 
propounding the two [extremes], it is difficult to fit together all their 
assertions. 
 The proponents of things, that is, those who propound things to  be inherently existent, say 
that if things exist, they must exist by way of their own entity or from their own side, and that 
if they do not exist by way of their own entity, th at is, if they do not exist inherently, they do 
not exist at all, like the horns of a rabbit. Si nce they do not pass be yond propounding the two 
extremes, it is difficult to fi t all their assertions together. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the means by which t hose two extremes are avoided:) 
Therefore, one is freed fr om all extremes of existe nce through the absence of 
inherent existence, and one is freed from  all extremes of non-existence through 
being able to posit non-inherently existent  causes and effects within what does not 
inherently exist. 
 
The lack of inherent existence frees one from th e extreme of existence, and the ability to posit 
non-inherently existent causes and results frees one from the extreme of annihilation. In this 
way, one is freed from both extremes.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, the mere poles of existenc e and non-existence and the poles [or extrem es] which are places of error with 
respect to the view do not have the same meaning:) 
Concerning anta [end, extreme, limit, and so forth] Vasubandhu’s Reasonings for 
Explanation44 says: 
Anta is used for finish, end, 
                                              
44 vyakhyayukti . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
879 Nearness, direction, and lowliness. 
 
The mere extremes of existence and non-existenc e and the extremes that are a deviation from 
or the opposite of correct view do no t mean the same. The word “extreme” ( mtha’ ) has the 
meaning of exhausted ( zad), conclusion (‘ jug cha ), near ( nye), direction ( phyogs ), and depreciate 
(smad pa ).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Although the antas mentioned here are accepted in our own system also, with 
respect to the anta (extreme) which is a place of erro r with respect to the view as in 
“free from the extremes” Kamalashila’s Illumination of the Middle45 says: 
If in Madhyamaka there were any ultimate nature of self-entity to the 
mind, then since it had that, how could conceptions of permanence 
and impermanence be extremes? It is not reasonable to say that proper 
mental application in accordance with the suchness of things is a 
situation of falling [to an extreme]. 
 The extremes mentioned here are accepted in  our own system. The extreme that is the 
opposite of the view indicated in “free from ex tremes” is set out in Kamalashila’s text saying 
that if in Madhyamaka the mi nd existed ultimately, how could conceptions of permanence 
and impermanence be extremes? The extreme of ex istence or the extreme of permanence is to 
hold that something is inherently permanen t and therefore cannot perform a function, 
whereas the extreme of impermanence is to hold that the aggregates are inherently 
impermanent. Thus, it is not correct to says th at proper mental attention in accordance with 
the suchness of things is a place into which to fall.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
As he says, mental application in accordance  with how an object actually is, is not 
a situation of falling [to an extreme]. Hence,  just as in the world an abyss is called 
an extreme and falling into it is called fa lling into an extreme, the conception of 
phenomena as truly existent and the concep tion that nothing at all is established 
or that nothing exists are [cases of] falling to extremes of permanence and 
annihilation—the opposite of the correct  fact. Conceptions that phenomena do 
not ultimately exist and that actions and th eir effects, and so forth, conventionally 
exist, and so forth, are not conceptions of  extremes because the objects subsist in 
the way that they are conceived. 
 
Mental attention to the way in which an object abides, that, is as not existing inherently but 
existing conventionally, is not a place into which to fall, like an abyss, and is not a holding to 
an extreme. In the world an abyss is called “an ex treme” and falling into an abyss is said to be 
“falling into an extreme.” Similarly, the co nception of phenomena as truly existent or 
inherently existent and the conception that no  phenomenon at all are established or exists 
                                             
 
45 madhyamakaloka . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
880 (this is, if phenomena are not inhe rently existent they do not exis t at all) is a falling into the 
extremes of permanence and annihilation. Th erefore, conceptions that phenomena do not 
exist inherently and that actions and their resu lts exist conventionally, are not conceptions of 
an extreme because these objects exist in exactl y the way that they are conceived to exist. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, sources:) 
For, Nagarjuna’s Refutation of Objections46 says: 
If the absence of inherent existence were disposed of, 
Then [phenomena] would be established as inherently existent. 
Thus he says that if [something] is not ul timately non-existent, then it ultimately 
exists. 
 
Nagarjuna says that if the lack of inherent existence is averted, inherent existence is 
established. In other words, if something does no t exist non-ultimately, it exists ultimately or 
inherently.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also: 
We do not propound 
A non-assertion of conventionalities. 
 Nagarjuna also says that we do not explain co nventionalities as not being asserted (that is, 
conventionalities are asserted).   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Nagarjuna’s Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness says: 
Do not refute this worldly mode 
Of “Depending on that, this arises.” 
 
Nagarjuna also says that one sh ould not refute the worldly mode of saying “In dependence on 
this, that arises.” Here “the worldly” refers to  people who are not trained in tenets, that is, 
those who merely see the fact th at vegetables arise from planting vegetable seeds, that rice 
arises from planting rice seeds, and so on.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, the distinction of not falling to extremes through [usi ng] not existent, not non-existent, and so forth is a fixation o n 
just words:) 
Therefore, differentiating between the two— is not existent and does not exist—and 
[between the two] is not non-existent and exists [in order to propound that an 
object is not existent, is not non-existe nt, is not both, and is not either] with 
                                              
46 vigrahavyavartani . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
881 respect to a base [i.e., an object] is exha usted as merely a difference in the mode of 
expression. No matter how much one analyz es how the meanings of both appear 
to the mind there is no difference at all. Therefore, to propound that one falls or 
does not fall to extremes through [how] th ose words [are used] is exhausted as an 
unfounded fixation on mere words. 
 
Differentiating between the two “not existent” and “existent” and between “not non-existent” 
and “not existent” with respect to a base, is me rely a different way of expressing them and no 
matter how much one analyzes them there is not found to be any difference in how they 
appear to the mind. Therefore, to propound that  one falls or does not fall to extremes due to 
these words is an unfounded fixation on mere words.  Tuesday morning, 13 February 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 331) says: 
ESTABLISHING UNCAUSED PHEN OMENA ALSO AS NOT TRULY EXISTENT THROUGH THAT AND THE FORMER REASONING  
(This section has twelve parts, the first of which is: to show that  it is the thought of Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  
that when caused phenomena are establis hed by reasoning as not truly existen t, it is easy to establish uncaused 
phenomena as not truly existent:) 
When in this way caused things—persons  and other phenomena—are established as 
not truly existent by way of the reasonings  described earlier, it can be established 
with little difficulty that uncaused phenomen a such as spaces, analytical cessations, 
non-analytical cessations, and suchnesses ar e not truly existent. Thinking of this, 
Nagarjuna says in his Treatise on the Middle : 
Since caused phenomena are thoroughly not established, 
How could the uncaused be established? 
 By this and the previous reasons uncompounded  phenomena are also established to not be 
truly existent. When compounded phenomena are established by reasonings to not be truly 
existent, it becomes easy to also establish un compounded phenomena as not truly existent. In 
fact, this is the intention of Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom . In other words, when 
compounded phenomena (phenomena that arise due to causes) such as persons and phenomena (for example, the aggregates) are es tablished by way of the reasonings mentioned 
earlier to not be truly existent, one can also easily establish that uncompounded phenomena 
such as space, analytical cessations (a cessati on that is an abandonm ent of an object of 
abandonment by means of wisdom), and non-an alytical cessations (a non-production of a 
phenomena ever again due to the absence of its causes and conditions) are empty of inherent 
existence. Nagarjuna, with th is intention in mind, says th at since compounded phenomena 
are not established, how can uncompounded phenomena be established?  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 332) says: 
(Second, the reason for this:) 
With regard to how it is easy to es tablish [uncaused phenomena as not truly 
existent], when the inherent establishm ent of caused phenomena is refuted as 
before, it is established that even though [phenomena] do not inherently exist, 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
882 agents, activities, and objects—bondage an d liberation, cause and effect, object 
comprehended and comprehender, and so forth—may be posited with respect to 
them. When that is established, even though uncaused phenomena such as the 
nature of phenomena and analytical cessa tions do not truly exist, one can posit 
well the presentations of the objects of attainment and objects of comprehension 
of the path as well as presenting the Jewels , and so forth, as the sources of refuge 
for trainees. When those are not asserted to  exist truly, there is no saying that 
these presentations of the need for positi ng them are incorrect; hence there is no 
point in asserting them to be truly existent. 
 
The way in which uncompounded phenomena are es tablished to be not tr uly existent is that 
when the inherent existence of compounded phenomena is refuted,  it is established that even 
though they do not exist inherently, still bondage in cyclic existence and liberation from cyclic 
existence, causes and results, objects comprehe nded and comprehenders, and so forth can be 
posited. When that is established, even thou gh uncompounded phenomena, such as reality 
(chos nyid , here translated as “the nature of phenom ena”) or thusness and analytical cessations, 
do not truly exist, one can still posit that true cessations are actualized by meditating the path, 
that there are objects of comprehension of th e path, and that there are the Three Jewels, 
among which true cessations and true paths are the Dharma Jewel. When they are not 
asserted to exist truly, the pr esentations that posit them ca nnot be said to be incorrect. 
Therefore, one should not asse rt them to exist truly, and instead assert them to exist 
conventionally and that, therefore, by meditating  the path one can attain true cessations, and 
by meditating on emptiness the root of cycl ic existence, the igno rance conceiving true 
existence, can be eliminated.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, refuting through the reasoning of dependent-arising even the assertion of uncaused phenomena, such as the 
nature of phenomena and cessations, as inherently true:) 
Even those who assert [the nature of phen omena, cessations, and so forth] as truly 
existent must indeed assert and do indeed  assert presentations of definiendum and 
definition, cause of separation and effect  of separation, comprehension by such 
and such a valid cognition, an d so forth with respect to th ose. Then, if [the nature 
of phenomena, cessations, and so forth]  are not related with one’s object of 
attainment, definition, comprehender, and so forth, it could not be refuted that all 
unrelated [phenomena] are definition and de finiendum, and so forth. If a relation 
is asserted, then since dependence on anothe r is not suitable in what truly exists or 
is inherently established, a relationship cannot be posited. 
 
The assertion that uncompounded phenomena, su ch as reality and cessations, are inherently 
true is also refuted by the reasoning of de pendent-arising. Even those who assert true 
existence, the Svatantrika Madhyamaka school an d below, must also accept the presentations 
of definiendums and definitions, the cause of se paration and result of separation (that is, by 
means of meditating the path, the cause, one attains the result that is a separation or 
cessation), and comprehension by a valid cognizer . If there is no relation to the object of 
attainment, the definition, the comprehender, and so forth, it could not be refuted that all 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
883 those unrelated phenomena are definition and de f i n i e n d u m ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  I f  a  r e l a t i o n  i s  
accepted, since relying on another is not suitable for that which is truly or inherently existent, 
a relationship could not be posited. In other word s, if something is truly existent it cannot be 
related to or depend on anything else, but would exist solidly and unchanged by anything. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, a refutation by way of the lack of being one or many:) 
Similarly, [the inherent existence of an uncaused phenomenon] can be refuted 
through analyzing whether [it and its basis of designation] are one or different. If 
the assertion of these as truly existent could not be refuted by this reasoned 
analysis, then since it would also be the sa me in all respects with regard to caused 
phenomena, true existence could not in the least be refuted. 
 
The inherent existence of uncompounded phenom ena is also refuted by  the reasoning of the 
lack of being one or many. If, on the ot her hand, the assertion of uncompounded 
phenomena as truly existent could not be refuted by this reasoning, since it would also be the 
same with respect to compounded phenomena,  true existence could not be refuted even 
slightly by the reasoning of freedom from be ing one and many. For ex ample, the Svatantrika 
Madhyamikas say that while all ph enomena do not exist truly they  do exist inherently or as 
established by way of their own characteristics,  whereas the Prasangika Madhyamikas say that 
true existence, inherent existence, and establ ishment by way of their own characteristics are 
all exactly the same. The Svatantrika Madhyamika s say that phenomena exist inherently or by 
way of their own characteristics because when th ey are sought they are found, for example, 
when the person is sought among the five aggreg ates, an illustration of the person is found, 
this being the mental consciousness. Similarl y, the Chittamatrins a ssert that because the 
mind-basis-of-all is the illustration of the pers on or being, the person or being can be found 
when sought. For these schools, if something is  not found when sought, it does not exist. 
However, according to the Prasangikas when some thing is sought ultimately and not found it 
indicates that it does not exist inherently, wher eas when it is sought conventionally it is 
found, for example, the mere I is found wh en the person is sought conventionally.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, to assert that a caused phenomenon’s emptiness of inherently existing in its own right is an annihilatory 
emptiness and to assert that suchness is trul y existent are wrong perspectives on emptiness:) 
[Wrong position :] The meaning of the statement that caused phenomena are empty 
of inherently existing by way of their ow n entities is that th ose phenomena do not 
have their own entities, whereby [empti ness] is an annihilatory emptiness. 
However, since suchness has its own entity, it truly exists.  
 
Asserting that the emptiness of inherent ex istence of a compounded phenomenon is an 
annihilatory emptiness and asserting that suchne ss is truly existent are wrong understandings 
of emptiness. Here someone wrongly asserts th at the meaning of saying that compounded 
phenomena are empty by way of their own entities  of inherent existenc e means that they do 
not have their own entities, which is an annihilato ry emptiness, that is, a view of annihilation. 
This person asserts, on the other hand, that si nce thusness has its own entity, it truly exists.  
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
884  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Answer:  [The first part of that assertion] is the final place of going wrong with 
respect to settling caused phenomena as em pty of inherent establishment, a view 
deprecating the dependent-arising of caus ed phenomena. The latter is an awful 
view of permanence superimposing true ex istence on whatever has its own entity. 
Thus, [the proponents of these] are wron gly involved with respect to the correct 
meaning of emptiness. 
 
This first assertion is a final deviation with respect to settling compounded phenomena as being empty of inherent existence, and is a view deprecating the dependent-relation of 
compounded phenomena. This second assertio n is an awful view of permanence that 
superimposes true existence on that which has its own entity. This is a wrong understanding 
of the correct meaning of emptiness.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, if to be empty of existing by way of its own entity meant  that the object did not exist in itself, then it would not be  
feasible for there to be a holder of a thesis that so me phenomena truly exist who posits that some phenomena truly 
exist, since [he also would be] empty of inher ent existence [in this annihilatory sense]:) 
If [an object’s] emptiness of its own inherent ly established entity [meant that] it did 
not exist in itself, then sinc e not existing in itself [mea ns] that existence would not 
occur anywhere, a holder of the thesis that  some phenomena truly exist as well as 
the scriptures and reasonings proving that , and so forth, would not be established 
bases [that is, would not exist] due to  being empty of their own inherently 
established entity. Therefore, the positing of a tenet that some phenomena 
[namely, suchnesses] truly exist is an unexamined propounding of whatever appears to mind. 
 If being empty of existing by w ay of its own entity means that the object does not exist (for 
example, if the table being empty of existing by way of its own entity means that the table does 
not exist), it would also not be feasible for a holder of thesis who posits phenomena as truly existing to exist (that is, since he is empty of existing by way of his own entity he too would 
not exist). In other words, the holder of this thesis as well as the scriptures and reasonings 
proving this thesis would not be  established bases (that is, exis tents) due to being empty of 
inherent existence. Therefore, to posit a tenet that some phen omena truly exist is to merely 
say whatever comes to mind (that is, it is a lot of blah-blah). The Prasangika Madhyamikas 
assert that the lack of true existence of all phenomena is the ultimate truth. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 333) says: 
(Seventh, the two—(1) asserting the absence of true existenc e having refuted through reasoning a true existence in all 
phenomena and (2) propounding the truthlessness of all phenomena with a faulty mode of understanding 
emptiness—are in all ways not the same:) 
Seeing well the implications of this mo de of reasoning, all our own [Buddhist] 
sects in the country of Superiors [India] who propound that phenomena truly exist 
are called proponents of things since they  definitely propound that things truly 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
885 exist. Once things are propounded as not truly existent, not to assert any 
phenomenon [as truly existent] appears to be  a sign of greatly surpassing those who 
propound the foolishness of this position. 
 The two – (1) to assert all phenomena as non-tr uly existent having refuted true existence by 
reasoning and (2) to propound all phenomena as non-truly existent by a faulty way of 
understanding emptiness – are not at all simila r. All the Buddhist sects – the Vaibhashikas, 
Sautrantikas, Chittamatrins, and Svatantrika Madhyamikas – who definitely propound that 
all compounded phenomena or functioning thin gs truly exist are called “proponents of 
things.” Those who propound things as not truly existent, that is, those who do not assert any 
phenomena at all to be truly established, greatl y surpass those who talk foolishly, that is, the 
Vaibhashikas, Sautrantikas, Chittamatr ins, and Svatantrika Madhyamikas. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Also, with respect to the propounding of two discordant [positions] regarding 
suchness [some saying that emptiness truly exis ts and others saying that it is not an 
object of knowledge] you should—through  the earlier explanation—understand well 
the status of their mode of debate on whet her the ultimate is ultimately established 
or not within their affinity for the form er mode of conventionalities being empty 
of their own inherently established entity. For the two—(1) not asserting true existence with respect to all things and all phenomena, having [properly] refuted 
with reasoning a true existence in phenom ena, and (2) propounding that all things 
and all phenomena do not truly exist based on an annihilatory emptiness in which 
the way of understanding emptiness is faulty—are dissimilar in all respects. 
 Also those who propound two discordant such nesses, through having an affinity for the 
former mode of conventionalities being empty by way of their own entity of inherent establishment, should understand well by mean s of the earlier explanation how these become 
ways of debating whether the ultimate is ultimate ly established or not. This is because the two 
– (1) not asserting true existence with respect to all things and all ph enomena through having 
refuted true existence with respect to phenomen a by reasoning and (2) propounding all things 
and all phenomena as not being truly existent in  dependence on an annihilatory emptiness, 
which is a faulty way of understanding emptine ss – are different in all ways. In other words, 
there are people who understand that although things do not ex ist inherently they do exist 
conventionally and people who think that things  do not exist inherently and do not exist at 
all, but these two are very different. The latter asserts emptiness but does not understand it 
correctly. The former, on the other hand, clearl y understand that while all phenomena do not 
exist inherently or truly they do exist conventi onally and are able to perform a function. They 
understand that while from the ultimate poin t of view things do not exist, from the 
conventional point of view they do exist.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 334) says: 
(Eighth, the qualm that if all uncaused phenomena are without tr ue existence, this would contradict scripture that 
teaches nirvana to be true:) 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
886 Objection:  [As quoted before , Nagarjuna said:] 
Since caused phenomena are thoroughly not established, 
How could the uncaused be established? 
If the meaning of that is as you explaine d earlier, does it not contradict other 
statements by him? For, his Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning  says: 
When the Conqueror said 
That only nirvana is a truth, 
What wise person would think, “The rest are not unreal”? 
Thus he says that only nirvana is true and that the others are not.  
 Here the doubt is raised that if all uncomp ounded phenomena are non-truly existent, this 
would contradict the scripture that shows that nirvana is true or truly existent. Although 
Nagarjuna was previously cited as saying that since compounded phenomena are not 
established, how could uncompounded phenomena be truly established, this person here points out that this seems to contradict other statements made by him. To support this he 
cites Nagarjuna’s Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning  which says that nirvana is a truth or true. In short, 
in the previous citation Nagarjuna says that  just as compounded phenomena are not truly 
existent, so too are uncompounded phenomena no t truly established, whereas in another text 
he says that since the Buddha said that only one phenomenon, nirvana, is true, what wise 
person would say “The rest are not unreal?”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, his Praise of the Element of Qualities
47 says:  
All the sutras teaching emptiness 
Set forth by the Conqueror 
Overcome the afflictive emotions; 
They do not diminish this realm. 
He explains that the sutras teaching s emptiness—the absence of inherent 
existence—are for the sake of abandoning th e afflictive emotions and that they do 
not teach the non-existence of the realm of the pure nature. 
 Also this text by Nagarjuna says that whil e all the sutras teaching emptiness eliminate 
afflictions, that is, they were taught for the purpose of disciples abandoning the afflictions, 
they do not degenerate this realm. Thus, Na garjuna explains that the sutras that teach 
emptiness, the lack of inherent  existence, are for the purpose of abandoning the afflictions 
and that they do not teach the non-existence of the realm, that is, of the buddha lineage that 
exists in the continua of all sentient beings wh ich has the potential to transform into the body 
of a buddha.  
                                             
 
47 dharmadhatustotra. 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
887 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Ninth, the answer is that although nirvana is  undeceiving to a mind that directly percei ves it, it is not a truth in the sense  
of being able to bear [ultimate] analysis; thus, ther e is no contradiction with the former scripture:) 
Answer:  Those [who say such] are wrongl y approaching the meaning of the 
scriptures. For, the meaning of the fo rmer scripture is expressed in the 
Supramundane Victor’s statement, “Monks, this ultimate truth is one, the 
undeceiving nirvana. All composed things have the attribute of falsity, 
deceptiveness.” This sutra says that nirvana is a truth whereas all composed things are false. The early part of the passage very clearly explains that truth means 
undeceiving, and the latter part very clearl y explains that falsity means deceiving.  
 The response to the objection is  that although in the perspective of a mind directly seeing 
nirvana it is undeceptive, since nirvana is not a tr uth that is able to bear analysis it too does 
not exist truly and therefore ther e is no contradiction with the previous scriptural passages. 
Those who say that there is contradiction engage  the meaning of the scriptures wrongly. The 
Buddha said that the ultimate truth is on ly one, undeceiving nirvana, whereas all 
compounded phenomena are false and deceptive. This means that nirvan a is a truth, whereas 
all compounded phenomena are not truths but ar e falsities. The first part of the passage 
clearly explains that “truth” means undeceptiv e and the latter part clearly explains that 
“falsity” means deceptive.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Furthermore, a nirvana [here refers] to an  ultimate truth, as is explained in 
Chandrakirti’s Commentary on (Nagarjuna’s) “Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning”.
48 Hence, an 
ultimate truth lacks the deception of appear ing—to the mind that directly perceives 
it—as if being established inherently wherea s it is not. The re maining [phenomena], 
conditioned things, have the deceptiveness of appearing—to the mind that directly 
perceives them—to be established inherently  whereas they are not. Therefore, when 
[an ultimate truth or natural nirvana] is analyzed with the reasoning investigating 
whether it is truly established or not, [it is  found that] it is not truly established in 
the sense of being able to bear analysis. He nce, what point is th ere in not thinking 
about the meaning in detail and being attached to mere names! 
 
Here a nirvana is an ultimate truth. In the pers pective of the mind directly perceiving ultimate 
truth, ultimate truth does not appear as if inherently existent while not being inherently 
existent. Thus, it is undeceptive. On the ot her hand, when compounded phenomena appear 
to a direct perceiver they appear to be established inherently but are not and because of this are said to be deceptive. When a nirvana is an alyzed with the reasoning investigating whether 
it is truly existent or not, it is found to not be  truly existent in the sense of being able to bear 
analysis. Therefore, there is no point to being attached to mere names.  
 In short, if one analyzes nirvana with reasoning, it will be found to not be able to bear analysis. If, on the other hand, it were found to be able to bear analysis, it would exist 
                                             
 
48 yuktisastikavrtti. 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
888 ultimately, whereupon no one would be able to attain nirvana and all practices done for the 
purpose of attaining it would be meaningless. Thus , that nirvana is a truth means that it is an 
ultimate truth and that all compounded phenom ena are not truths means that they are not 
ultimate truths, although they are deceptive or  conventional truths. This difference must be 
understood and distinguished well.  
 Tuesday afternoon, 13 February 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 335) says: 
(Tenth, establishing the correctness of that:) 
Moreover, Nagarjuna’s Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning  says: 
These two, cyclic existence 
And nirvana, do not [inherently] exist. 
The thorough knowledge of cyclic existence 
Is called “nirvana”. 
Thus, he explains that both cyclic existence and nirvana are not inherently existent 
and that [emptiness which is] just the obje ct of the knowledge that cyclic existence 
is not inherently established is posited as nirvana. Thus, how could this be the 
position of asserting emptiness—the non-tr ue existence of cyclic existence—as an 
annihilatory emptiness? 
 
Nagarjuna’s text says that the two, cyclic exis tence and nirvana, do no t exist, meaning that 
they do not exist truly or inherently. When there is the thorough knowledge of cyclic 
existence, there is also the th orough knowledge of nirvana, the state gone beyond cyclic 
existence, because both existence and peace ar e not inherently existent. The object of the 
wisdom understanding that cyclic existence does not exist inherently is also called “nirvana.” 
There are four types of nirvana, one of which is  called “natural nirvana”; this is emptiness. 
True existence or inherent existence can be li kened to suffering, in which case passed beyond 
suffering or nirvana is the lack of true existe nce or the emptiness of true existence. How can 
the assertion of cyclic existence as  not truly existent, that is, as empty of true existence, be an 
annihilatory emptiness? It is not, because it is not a view that if cyclic existence does not exist 
inherently, it does not exist at all. This view is completely unacceptable. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Eleventh, although emptiness exists, it need not be truly ex istent, and thereby the [suggested] contradiction with the 
quote from the Praise of the Element of Qualities  is dispelled:) 
The passage from Nagarjuna’s Praise of the Element of Qualities  means: 
For the sake of overcoming the concep tion of things as truly existent—
the root of all other afflictive emot ions—the sutras teaching emptiness, 
the absence of inherent establishment,  teach that the referent object of 
the conception of true existence does  not exist. They do not teach that 
emptiness—the realm of the pure natu re, a negative of the two selves 
which are the objects of the conception  of true existence—does not exist. 
 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
889 Although emptiness exists, it does not need to  be truly established, therefore there is no 
contradiction with the citation from Naga rjuna’s text. The meaning of Nagarjuna’s Praise  is 
that the sutras teaching the em ptiness that is a lack of inhe rent existence, teach that the 
determined object of the conception of true  existence does not ex ist for the purpose of 
overcoming the conception of things as truly exis tent – the root of all other afflictions. They 
do not teach that emptiness, the realm of pure  nature (the buddha essence or buddha lineage) 
that is a negation of the two selves, the self of persons and self of phenomena, which are the 
objects of the conception of true existence, does not exist. In short, emptiness does exist but it 
does not exist truly. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Since although emptiness exists  it is not truly established, that passage serves as a 
source for refuting the proposition that th e emptiness which is a negative of true 
existence—its object of negation—does not ex ist. It also refutes the proposition that 
it is not necessary to realize emptine ss, the ultimate suchness, in order to 
exhaustively abandon the afflictive emotions. 
 
Since although that emptiness exists it is not tr uly established, this passage acts to refute the 
statement “Also the emptiness that is a negation of  true existence, the object of negation, does 
not exist” and the statement “It is not necessary  to realize emptiness in order to completely 
abandon the afflictions.” In other words, it is  necessary to realize emptiness in order to 
completely exhaust the afflictions.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Twelfth, through taking a truly existent nature of phenom ena as your object of medita tion the conception of true 
existence cannot be overcome:) 
Therefore, Nagarjuna’s Praise of the Element of Qualities  says: 
Through the three called imperm anence, [coarse] emptiness, 
And suffering the mind is purified. 
The doctrine supremely purifying the mind 
Is the absence of inherent existence. 
 This section shows that if one takes a truly established reality as one’s object of meditation, 
the conception of true existence cannot be over come. Nagarjuna’s text says that by the three 
called “impermanence, empty, and suffering” the mind is purified and that the best Dharma 
for purifying the mind is the lack of inherent exis tence. This verses sets out the four attributes 
of true sufferings: impermanent, suffering, empty,  and selfless. The last, selfless, is the absence 
of inherent existence; meditation on this is the best means for purifying the mind. In 
addition, meditation on the attribute of imperm anence, meditation on the attribute of empty 
– empty of being permanent, partless, and inde pendent, and meditation on the attribute of 
suffering, the misconception that holds suffering s as pleasure, can purify the mind of the 
afflictions.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
890 Also: 
The absence of inherent existence of phenomena 
Should be meditated upon as  the element of qualities. 
 Nagarjuna also says that the absence of inhere nt existence of phenomena should be meditated 
as the dharmadhatu or element of qu alities or sphere of phenomena ( chos kyi dbyings ).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus he says that the absence of an inherently established nature in these 
phenomena is the element of qualities whic h is the object of meditation, and he 
says that just meditation on it is the su preme purifier of the mind. Therefore, how 
could it be suitable to interpret this as the position that the emptiness which is the 
absence of inherent establishment of ph enomena appearing in this way is an 
annihilatory emptiness and that, therefore, a truly existent emptiness separate from 
it is to be posited as the emptiness which is the object of meditation! This is like 
propounding that in order to remove th e suffering of fright [arising] from 
apprehending a snake in the east de spite there being none there, the 
demonstration that there is no snake in the east will not serve as an antidote to it, 
but that rather one should indicate, “The re is a tree in the west.” For, one is 
propounding that in order to remove the suffering [arising] from adhering to the 
true existence of what appears in this w ay to sentient beings, realization of those 
bases—which are conceived to exist truly—as not truly existent will not serve as an 
antidote, but that rather one must indica te some other senseless base as truly 
existent. 
 
The absence of inherent existence is the dhar madhatu or sphere of phenomena which is the 
object of meditation. Meditation on it is the be st means to purify the mind of the afflictions 
that presently cover or obscure it. How can this be an annihilatory emptiness that thinks that 
if phenomena do not exist inherently they do  not exist at all and that therefore a truly 
existent emptiness separate from it is to be posited as the em ptiness which is the object of 
meditation? This would be like propounding that  in order to eliminate the suffering of fear 
caused by apprehending a snake in the east even  though there is no such snake, it would be 
useless to point out that the apparent snake is a coiled rope, and instead one should say 
“There is a tree in the west.” In other words, th is would be like propounding that in order to 
remove the suffering of sentient beings who ad here to true existence there is no need to 
realize that the bases – persons or phenomena – do not exist truly, and instead one should 
i n d i c a t e  s o m e  o t h e r  b a s e  s u c h  a s  a  p i l l a r  o r  v a se as truly existent saying “There is a truly 
existent pillar” or “There is a truly existent vase.” However, since such declarations are not 
correct, it is necessary to understand that objects do not exist inherently.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 336) says: 
 
PART THREE: TWO TRUTHS 
 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
891 The presentation of conventional and ulti mate truths has four parts: the basis 
from which the two truths are divided, number of divisions, meaning of dividing 
them that way, and meaning of the individual divisions. 
6 Basis 
Basis from which the two truths are divided 
With respect to the basis of division of  the two truths there are many modes of 
assertion among earlier [scholars]; however, Shantideva’s Compendium of 
Instructions49 says, “Objects of knowledge are exhausted as conventional and 
ultimate truths.” Thus, here objects of  knowledge are the basis of division. 
 
With respect to the basis of divi sion of the two truths there are different ways of asserting it. 
However, because Shantideva says that objects of knowledge are divided into just the two, 
conventional truths and ultimate truths, the basis of division is objects of knowledge. Collected 
Topics , on the other hand, posits various divisions of objects of knowledge but we will not go 
into them here.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Number of divisions 
Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle  says:  
Worldly truths for a concealer 
And ultimate truths 
Accordingly, [objects of knowledge] are divided into the two truths—truths for a 
concealer and ultimate truths. 
 
The number of divisions refers to the number of divisions of objects of knowledge, these 
being the two: truths for a concealer or conventional truths ( kun rdzob bden pa ) and ultimate 
truths ( don dam bden pa ).  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Meaning of dividing them that way 
(This section has two parts, the first of which is : to state the assertion of earlier [scholars]:) 
Question : Since the two of the divi sion into two must be different, what kind of 
difference is this? 
Answer:  With respect to this, many earlier [scholars] propounded: 
Pot and woolen cloth, for instance, are different entities. Product and 
impermanent thing, for instance, are one entity and different isolates. 
In these two cases, the two that ar e different are both [functioning] 
things; however, in cases of difference when either is a non-[functioning] thing [that is, a permanent phenomenon] they have a 
                                             
 
49 shiksasamuccaya 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
892 difference which negates sameness. Among these three [modes of] 
difference, the two truths are different in the sense of negating sameness. 
Some [correctly] assert that the two trut hs are one entity and different isolates. 
 Given that there is a division of objects of knowledge into two, the two divisions must be 
different, so how are they different? Many earlie r scholars said that just as pot and woolen 
cloth, for example, are different entities, so t oo are conventional truths and ultimate truths 
different entities. Others said that just as product and impermanent thing are one entity but 
different isolates, so too are conventional truths  and ultimate truths one entity but different 
isolates. In the case of product and imperman ent thing both are functioning things, in the 
case that one of the pair is a non-functioning thing, there would be th e difference that negates 
oneness. Thus, among the three ways of being di fferent, the two truths are different in terms 
of negating oneness. Some scholars assert th at the two truths are one entity but different 
isolates, which is correct accordin g to the Prasangika Madhyamikas. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, proving the correctness of our own system:) 
I t  i s  g o o d  t o  t a k e  t h i s  i n  a c c o r d a n ce with the statement in Kamalashila’s 
Illumination of the Middle that the relationship of one entity is not contradictory 
even in non-[functioning] things [that is, permanent phenomena]. Therefore, a 
oneness of entity and difference of isolates  is not contradictory even when both of 
the different phenomena are non-[fun ctioning] things or when one is. 
 
Kamalashila says that the relationship of on e entity is not contradictory even for non-
functioning things. Therefore, being one entity but different isolates is not contradictory when both phenomena are non-functioning thin gs and also when one of them is a non-
functioning thing.   Conventional truth and ultimate truth are one entity but different isolates even with respect to non-functioning things. For exampl e, an uncompounded phenomenon such as 
space is itself a conventional truth while its em ptiness of inherent existence is its ultimate 
truth. Thus, conventional truth and ultimate truth are not contradictory even when their 
basis is an uncompounded phenomenon. Likewise , when their basis is a functioning thing, 
the base and its emptiness are one entity but different isolat es. In this case one of the 
phenomenon is a functioning thing and one,  emptiness, is a non-functioning thing. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 For, Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Supplement to  (Nagarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the 
Middle’”  says, “Two types of natures of all this are taught, conventional and 
ultimate.” Thus, with regard to the na tures of each subject there are two, 
conventional and ultimate. Also, if the tw o truths were not one entity, then since 
it would be very unreasonable for them to be different entities, the two truths 
would have to be entitiless, whereby they  would not exist, for whatever exists 
necessarily exists as one entity or many entities. 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
893  
All things have two types of entities, the co nventional and the ultimate. Therefore, each 
substratum has these two entities. If the two trut hs were not one entity, they would have to be 
different entities, but this would be very unreasonable, therefore the two truths would have to be entitiless, that is, they would have to be no n-existent, because whatever exists must exist as 
one entity or many entities. There is no third possibility.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Nagarjuna’s Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment  says: 
Conventionalities are explained as emptiness 
[And] just emptiness is the conventional Because of the definiteness that [the on e] would not occur without [the other], 
Like product and impermanent thing. 
 Conventionalities are explained to be empty of inherent existence, and emptiness is explained 
to be conventionally existent because it is defini te that if one does not exist the other does not 
arise, like product and impermanent thing.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
If a sprout, for instance, were a different en tity from its own ultimate [entity], then 
since it would be a different entity also fr om its own emptiness of  true existence, it 
would be truly established. Thus, since it  is not a different entity [from its own 
emptiness of true existence], it is the same  entity. A sprout is empty of its own true 
existence, but is not its own ultimate truth. 
 
If a sprout were a different entity from its ulti mate, it would be a different entity from its own 
emptiness of true existence, whereby it would fo llow as being truly existent. Since it is not a 
different entity from its ultimate, it is one enti ty. A sprout is empty of its own true existence, 
but it is not its own ultimate truth.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Some texts say that the two truths ar e neither one nor different. Among these, 
some are referring to inherently establ ished oneness and difference; others are 
referring to their not being either di fferent entities or one isolate.  
 
Some treatises say that the truths are neither on e nor different. In some cases this means that 
they are not an inherently existent one or an inherently existent different, whereas in other 
cases it means that they are not both different entities and one isolate.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page338) says: 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
894 7 Truths for a Concealer 
The presentation of the meaning of the individual divisions has three parts: 
conventional truths [or truths for a concealer], ultimate truths, and the 
definiteness of the number of the trut hs as two. The first has three parts: 
etymologies of concealer ( samvrti ) and truth ( satya), definition of a truth for a 
concealer, and divisions of conventionalities. 
Etymologies of concealer ( samvrti ) and truth ( satya ) 
(This section has two parts, an etymology of samvrti  and an etymology of satya . The etymology of samvrti  has two 
parts, the first of which is : the actual etymology:) 
Chandrakirti’s Clear Words  explains samvrti  as having three [usages]—(1) concealer 
of suchness, (2) mutually dependent objects, and (3) worldly conventions. He 
describes the latter as having the characte r of object of expression and means of 
expression, knower and object of knowledge, and so forth; therefore, these are not 
just subjective conventions—that is, co nsciousnesses and expressions [that is, 
words]. Also, all objects of knowledge and objects of expression should not be held t o  b e  c o n v e n t i o n a l  t r u t h s  [ s i n c e  a n  e m p t i n e s s  i s  a n  o b j e c t  o f  k n o w l e d g e  a n d  
expression but is an ultimate truth]. 
 
Svamrti  or kun rdzob , literally all-concealing or all-obsc uring, has the meaning of that which 
conceals suchness. It also has the meaning of  mutually dependent bases, as well as the 
meaning of worldly conventions. Since the latter is explain ed t o hav e the characteristics of 
object of expression and means of expression, as well as knower and object of knowledge, 
conventional truths are not just conventions,  knowers, and expressions that are object-
possessors. Also whatever is an object of know ledge and object of expression should not be 
held to necessarily be a conventional truth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The samvrti  which is the concealing consciou sness with respect to which forms 
and so forth are posited as truths [in the sense that ignorance takes them to exist 
the way they appear] is the first among the three [usages]. It is the ignorance which 
superimposes on phenomena the existenc e of their own inherently established 
entity whereas they do not have such. For,  since in fact true establishment does 
not occur, a positing of [objects that appe ar to be truly existent] as truths is in 
terms of a mind and there is no positing [o f objects that appear to be truly existent] 
as truths for a mind that is not a conceiver of true existence.  
 
The concealer that is the concea ling consciousnesses in the pers pective of which forms and so 
forth are posited as truths is the first of the three. It is the ignora nce that superimposes 
inherent existence on phenomena that do not exist inherently. Since it is not possible for 
objects to be truly existent, the positing of them as truths is in the perspective of an 
awareness, but they are not posited as truths in  the perspective of an awareness that does not 
conceive true existence. In other words, conven tional truth are truths only in the perspective 
of a conceiver of true existence,  they are not truths in the perspective of minds that are not 
conceivers of true existence.  
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
895  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In that way Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
The Subduer said that because obscuration 
Obscures the nature, it is the concealer; Those fabrications which it perceives As true are truths for a concealer. Things that are fabrications [exist] conventionally. 
 The Subduer said that obscuration or ignorance is a concealer because it obscures or covers 
the final nature of phenomena, that is, their em ptiness. The fabrications that appear to be 
true to the ignorance that conceives true existe nce are truths for a concealer. The things that 
arise from causes and conditions  and change momentarily are co nventional truths or truths 
for a concealer.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, eliminating error with respect to that:) 
Concerning this, Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Suppl ement to (Nagarjuna’s) 
‘Treatise on the Middle’”  says: 
In that way, truths for a concealer are posited through the force of the 
afflictive ignorance which is includ ed within the [twelve] links [of a 
dependent-arising] of cyclic existenc e. For Hearers, Solitary Realizers, 
and Bodhisattvas who have abandone d afflictive ignorance and who see 
compositional phenomena as like th e existence of reflections and so 
forth, [these] have a nature of fa brication and are not truths because 
they do not exaggerate [phenomena] as  truly existent. To children these 
are deceptive, but to the others they  are just conventionalities due to 
being dependent-arisings, like a ma gician’s illusions and so forth. 
 
Truths for a concealer or conventional truths  are posited by the force of the afflicted 
ignorance included in the twelve links of dependen t-arising. For hearers, solitary realizers, and 
bodhisattvas who have abandoned afflicted ignorance and who see compounded phenomena 
as being like the reflection of a face in a mirror and so forth, they have a nature of fabrication 
and are not truths, that is, ultimate truths, beca use they do not strongly adhere to true or 
inherent existence. For ordinary childish bein gs, who have ignorance, things are deceptive, 
whereas for arya beings they are mere conven tionalities due to arising dependently and 
relatedly, like illusions, mirages, reflections, echoes, moon reflected in water, and so forth. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
This passage does not teach that the positing  of truths for a conc ealer is a positing 
of [their] existence by ignorance, and it does not teach that truths for a concealer 
are not posited in the perspective of Hearer s, Solitary Realizers, and Bodhisattvas 
who have abandoned the afflictive ignoranc e. The reason for th e first is that, as 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
896 explained before, afflictive ignorance is a conceiver of true existence and thus the 
object conceived by it does not exist even  conventionally and whatever is a truth 
for a concealer necessarily exists conventionally. Therefore, whatever is the 
conventional50 in terms of which phenomena are posited as existing 
conventionally51 must be something that is not the afflictive ignorance which is 
taken as the concealer52 [in “truth for a concealer”53]. 
 
This does not teach that the positing of truths fo r a concealer as existing is a positing of their 
existence by ignorance, nor does it teach that truths for a concealer, such as forms, are not 
posited in the perspective of hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas who have abandoned 
afflicted ignorance. The reason for the first is that since afflicted ignorance is a conceiver of 
true existence, the object appr ehended by it does not exist ev en conventionally, whereas that 
which is a truth for a concealer is pervaded by  existing conventionally. When phenomena are 
posited as existing conventionally, afflicted ig norance is not taken to be the concealer. In 
other words, it is not in the perspective of  afflicted ignorance that all phenomena exist 
conventionally.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The reason for the second point is that Chandrakirti is establishing that because 
those who have abandoned the concealer— afflictive ignorance—do not have the 
concealer—a consciousness adhering to true existence—in the face of which [objects 
appearing to exist inherently] are posite d as truths, compositional phenomena are 
not truths for them. It does not establish that compositional phenomena are not 
truths for a concealer [for them]. Chan drakirti’s statement that compositional 
phenomena are only conventionalit ies for them means that between 
conventionality and truth those are not posi table as truths for them, and thus the 
term “only” [in “only conventionalities”] el iminates truth, not truth for a concealer. 
Chandrakirti’s thought in speaking of th e two—mere conventionality and truth for 
a concealer—should be un derstood in that way. 
 The reason for the second is that since thos e who have abandoned the concealer, afflicted 
ignorance, do not have a concea ler adhering to true existence which posits them as truths, 
compounded phenomena in their perspective are established as not being truths, but they do 
not establish that compounded phenomena ar e not truths for a concealer (conventional 
truths). In other words, in the perspective of hearers, solita ry realizers, and bodhisattvas who 
have abandoned afflicted ignorance, compound ed phenomena such as forms are not truths, 
but are mere conventionalities. The word “m ere” eliminates compounded phenomena being 
truths, but not their being truths for a concea ler or conventional truths. The intention in 
                                             
 
50 samvrti.  
51 samvrti-sat.  
52 samvrti.  
53 samvrti-satya.  
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                    ILTK – 12-13 February 2007 (19) 
897 saying “mere conventionality” and “conventional truth” or “truth for a concealer” should be 
understood to be just this. 
 
END 
 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
898 Tuesday morning, 6 March 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 339) says: 
(The second, the etymology of satya , has two parts, the first of wh ich is: the actual etymology:) 
Chandrakirti’s Clear Words  says, “Truths for a worldly concealer are worldly 
concealer truths” [which might be mistaken to mean “ samvrtisatya  are truly 
established conventionally”]. With respect to this, Chandrakirti’s Commentary on 
the “Supplement to (Nagarjuna ’s) ‘Treatise on the Middle’”  says: 
Those which are perceived as true by the concealer and are individually 
perceived as having inherent existenc e, whereas they do not, are truths 
for a worldly erroneous concealer; hence, they are worldly concealer 
truths. 
 
Truths for a concealer are so-called because they appear to be truly existent and are adhered to 
as truly existent, although in fact they are no t truly existent but appear in this way due to 
ignorance. In other words, due to ignorance a ll conventional phenomena appear to be true, 
that is, truly existent. Thus, even  though they are not truly exis tent, they are conceived to be 
truly existent by a mistaken conception. For this  reason they are called “truths for a worldly 
concealer.”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, the statement in the Clear Words  s ho uld be t aken  in  acco rda n ce w it h t h is  
clear description of truths for that co ncealer which is the ignorance explained 
earlier. It should not be taken as true establishment conventionally. For, otherwise 
it would contradict the system of the no n-occurrence of establishment by way of 
[the object’s] own character even conventionally. Also, the refutation of true 
establishment and the proof of the ab sence of true existence is done 
conventionally. Through this way, you should also understand the master 
Jñanagarbha’s explanation of abiding as trut hs for a concealer [not mistaking it for 
“abiding as truths conventionally”]. 
 That concealer is the ignorance that was expl ained earlier, that is , the ignorance that 
conceives all phenomena to be truly or inherently  existent. Thus, it is not that phenomena are 
conventionally established truly or inherently. Otherwise this would cont radict the Prasangika 
Madhyamaka point of view that establishment by  way of its own characteristics does not exist 
even conventionally. The refutation of true establishment and the establishment of non-true existence is done nominally or conventionally, that is, by way of words. In this way, one 
should understand the master Jñanagarbha’s expl anation of abiding as truths for a concealer, 
that is, that all conventional phenomena such as  forms and so forth are truths for a concealer 
or conventional truths. The meaning of this is that while they are not established truly, they 
are established for a concealer.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, dispelling a qualm:) 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
899 Objection:  Then, since the nature of phenomen a [which actually is an ultimate 
truth] and the two selves [which do not exis t at all] are truths for a concealer—that 
is, for a consciousness conceiving true existence—they would be truths for a 
concealer. 
 
Someone thinks that reality ( chos nyid ) or thusness and the two selves  – the self of persons and 
the self of phenomena – are truths for a concea ler. Emptiness or thus ness is not actually a 
conventional truth or a truth for a concealer. The conception  of a self of persons and the 
conception  of a self, on the other hand, of phenomena do exist conventionally.  
 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Answer:  If that which is merely true for th e concealer, the conception of true 
existence, were posited as a truth for a concealer, such would indeed be so, but 
that is not propounded. This is merely  an explanation of the concealer with 
respect to which the truths of “tru ths for a concealer” are truths.  
 
If that which is merely true in the perspect ive of the conception of  true existence, the 
concealer, were posited as truth for a conceale r it would indeed be like that. This is an 
explanation of the concealer in the context of  the etymology of the word “truth” in the 
context of “truth for a conceale r,” as in actuality truths for a concealer are not truths, the 
truth being just one. Although suchness or th usness is not a truth for a concealer, in the 
perspective of a conception of truly existent em ptiness, emptiness is a truth for a concealer. 
On the other hand, in the perspective of the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise on 
emptiness, thusness is an ultimate truth.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Definition of a truth for a concealer 
(This section has six parts, the firs t of which is: how all phenomena have two natures, together with a source:) 
Each of these external and internal things has two natures, ultimate and 
conventional. If this is illustrated with a sprout, for instance, there is the nature of 
the sprout found by a reasoning consci ousness which perceives the meaning of 
suchness, a true object of knowledge, and there is the nature of the sprout found 
by a conventional consciousness comprehe nding a deceptive object, a false object 
of knowledge. The former is the nature of the sprout’s ultimate truth; the latter is 
the nature of the sprout’s truth for a concealer.  
 All phenomena have two entities, an ultimate entity and a conventional entity. Thus, both 
external phenomena such as forms and so fo rth and internal phenomena such as sense 
powers and consciousnesses have two entities, an ultimate entity and a conventional entity. For example, a sprout has two entities: 
• the entity of the sprout found by a reasonin g consciousness (that is, that exists in the 
perspective of the meditative equipoise of an  arya) which sees the meaning of suchness, a 
real object of knowledge is its ultimate entity, and 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
900 • the entity of the sprout found by a consci ousness of conventionalities comprehending a 
deceptive object, a false object of kn owledge, is its conventional entity. 
In other words, the sprout seen with the eyes is its conventional entity.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In that way Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
[Buddha] said that all phenomena have two natures, 
Those found by perceivers of the true and of the false; Objects of perceivers of the true are suchness, Objects of perceivers of the false are truths for concealers. 
 
All functioning things have two natures, one found by that seeing the true or real ( yang dag ) 
and one found by that seeing the false ( rdzun pa ). Objects of perceivers of the real are suchness 
or thusness, whereas objects of perceivers of the false are truths for a concealer or 
conventional truths. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, showing that those are found by separate valid cognitions:) 
This teaches that with regard to the na tures of a sprout there are two—the two 
truths—and that the ultimate is found by the former consciousness whereas the 
conventional is found by the latter consciousness. Chandrakirti’s Commentary on 
the Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s ) “Treatise on the Middle”  says, “Two types of natures of 
all things are taught, conventional and ul timate.” Thus, differentiating two natures 
for each thing, he says that the ultimate is found by a consciousness perceiving the 
meaning of reality and the conventional is found by a consciousness perceiving 
falsities. 
 
The two truths are found by different valid cogn izers. The ultimate entity of the sprout is 
found by the former consciousness, whereas it s conventional entity is found by the latter 
consciousness. However, it is to be noted that this does not mean that a sprout is determined 
to be ultimate or conventional based on a former and later consciousness.   Chandrakirti says that there are two types of entity, conventional entity and ultimate 
entity. Thus, he differentiates two entities for each thing, an ultimate entity and a 
conventional entity. In the perspective of a cons ciousness seeing the meaning of reality, that 
is, an exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of an arya meditating on emptiness, ultimate truth is found. On the other hand, a consci ousness perceiving falsities, that is, a 
consciousness of an ordinary being, finds conv entional truths or truths for a concealer.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the need to find the Madhyamika view in order to ascertain a base [a phenomenon] as  a truth for a concealer:) 
Since a truth for a concealer is not a trut h in fact but only for a consciousness 
conceiving true existence, it is necessary to ascertain it as a falsity in order to 
ascertain the very meaning [of truth for a concealer]. In order to ascertain an 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
901 illustration [of a truth for a concealer] such  as a pot as a false object of knowledge, 
a deceptive object, it is necessary to find the view which through a reasoning 
consciousness causes disbelief of the referent object of the conception of [its] true 
existence. For, without refuting truene ss falsity cannot be established by valid 
cognition. 
 In order to ascertain a base as a truth for a co ncealer it is necessary to find the Madhyamaka 
view of emptiness. A truth for a concealer is no t actually a truth but is only a truth in the 
perspective of a consciousness conceiving true exis tence. Therefore, it is necessary to ascertain 
the opposite meaning of that. In order to ascertain, for example, a pot, cup, table, eyeglasses, 
and so forth as a false or deceptive object of kn owledge, that is, in order to understand that 
although it appears to be truly existent it is not truly existent, it is necessary to find the 
Madhyamaka view of emptiness. For example, in the case of a pot that is apprehended to be 
truly existent, it is necessary to understand that the referent  or determined object of the 
conception of its true existence does not exist.  This is because without refuting trueness by 
reasoning, it is not possible for falsity to be established by a valid cognizer.  
 For example, taking this cup as an example, on e can ask whether it is truly existent or not. 
Although it appears to be truly existent, it does not exist truly or inherently. Thus, this conception of true existence is mistaken, and it s determined object does not exist. This must 
be understood, whereby the emptiness or ultima te truth that eliminat es true existence is 
understood.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, although the meaning of truth for a concealer has not  been established for one’s mind, it is not contradictory [to 
be able] to ascertain an illustration of a truth for a concealer, such as a pot:) 
A l t h o u g h  p o t s ,  w o o l e n  c l o t h ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h  a r e  t r u t h s  f o r  a  c o n c e a l e r ,  i t  i s  n o t  
necessary when they are established [as ex isting] by a mind that the meaning of 
truth for a concealer be established by the mind. For instance, although pots, 
woolen cloth, and so forth are illusory-lik e appearances as if inherently existent, 
whereas they are not, a mind that establis hes them [as existing] does not need to 
establish the meaning of being illusory-like. 
 
Even though the meaning of truth for a conceale r has not been established for one’s mind, it 
is not contradictory to be able to  ascertain an illustration of a truth for a concealer, such as a 
pot. In other words, pot still appears to  the mind and can be used even without 
understanding how it is established. Pots, woolen  cloth, and so forth, which are truths for a 
concealer or conventional trut hs, are ascertained but are not necessarily ascertained to be 
conventional truths. Thus, it is not necessary to  establish that pots, woolen clots, cushions, 
tables, lights, and so forth are illusory-like appear ances in order to establish that they exist.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, it is not feasible to posit pots and so forth as conventionalities in relation to  a worldly consciousness and as 
ultimates in relation to Superiors:) 
Therefore, it is not feasible  to propound that in this system pots, woolen cloth, 
and so forth are posited as truths for a co ncealer in relation to the consciousness 
of a common being who does not have th e Madhyamika view and that the same 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
902 are posited as ultimate truths in relation to a Superior.  
 
It is not suitable to posit pots, woolen clot hs, and so forth as co nventionalities in the 
perspective of worldly consciousness and to posit them as ultimates in the perspective of aryas. 
In other words, in this system it is not feasib le to posit pots, woolen cloths, and so forth as 
conventional truths or truths for a conceale r in the perspective of the consciousness of 
ordinary beings who have not realized emptiness,  and to posit them as ultimate truths in the 
perspective of a superior or arya being.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
For, that would be propounded opposite  to what Chandrakirti says in his 
Commentary on the “Supplement to (N agarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the Middle ’”: 
Those which are ultimates for common beings are mere 
conventionalities for [the consciou snesses of] Superiors acting on 
objects involving appearance. That  which is the nature of those 
objects—emptiness—is the ultimate for them. 
 Chandrakirti says that those th at are ultimates for common beings are mere conventionalities 
for superiors who have the appearance of co nventionalities, that is, for superiors in 
subsequent attainment. on the other hand, the nature of those phenomena of lacking true 
existence – emptiness – is the ultimate for supe riors. Therefore, to propound the above would 
be to propound the opposite to this.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Common beings conceive pots and so forth to be true, and since just that is a 
conception [of pots and so forth] as existing ultimately, in relation to their 
consciousness pots and so forth are ultimately established and are not 
conventional objects. The bases—pots and so forth—which for them are ultimately 
established are conventionalities in rela tion to the perception by the exalted 
wisdom in the continuum of a Superior comprehending illusory-like appearance. 
Chandrakirti says that in relation to th is consciousness these cannot be posited as 
true, whereby they are mere conventionalities. 
 Ordinary beings conceive pots and so forth to be  truly existent. Therefore, in their perspective 
conventional truths such as pots, cups, human be ings, horses, dogs, cats, and so on appear to 
be ultimately established. Thus, they do not s ee the meaning of existing conventionally, that 
is, that although they do not ex ist truly they appear to be trul y existent. The pots and so forth 
that appear to be ultimately established in the perspective of ordinary beings are 
conventionalities in the perspective of the exal ted wisdom of an arya comprehending illusory-
like appearance. Since they cannot be posited as true in relation to that consciousness, they 
are mere conventionalities. Hence, it is necessary  to differentiate between a conventionality 
and a mere conventionality. Sometimes it is said  that one first realizes conventional truth and 
that this becomes a method for realizing ultimate truth. Sometimes it is said that one first 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
903 realizes ultimate truth and that this becomes a method for realizing conventional truth. In the 
latter case this refers to mere conventional truth. The word  “mere” indicates that while 
superiors see all phenomena as empty of inherent  existence, they see that the phenomena that 
do not exist inherently do exis t as mere conventionalities.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, the need to differentiate between pots, and so forth, and their nature:) 
Nevertheless, since their nature is said to  be an ultimate truth, a differentiation 
should be made, saying, “Pots and so fort h are conventionalities, and their nature 
is the ultimate of Superiors.” It should not be propounded that pots and so forth 
are ultimates for Superiors; for, their reasoning consciousness seeing the meaning 
of reality does not find pots and so fort h and that which is found by a reasoning 
consciousness seeing the meaning of real ity is said to be the meaning of an 
ultimate truth. 
 It is necessary to differentiate between pots an d so forth and their nature. Pots and so forth 
are conventionalities, whereas their final nature , emptiness is the ultimate for aryas. In other 
words, the final nature seen by aryas is ultimate truth; which is not seen by ordinary beings. It 
should not be said that pots and so forth are ultimates in the perspective of superiors because 
their reasoning consciousness seeing the meaning of reality, that is, their exalted wisdom of 
meditative equipoise seeing empt i n e s s ,  d o e s  n o t  f i n d  p o t s  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  I n  o t h e r  w o r d s ,  
conventional truths such as pots and so fort h do not appear to this exalted wisdom, only 
emptiness or ultimate truth appears to it. In this  context “to find” means “to realize,” it is not 
like the case that having lost on e’s flashlight one finds it again,  or having lost one’s head one 
finds it again! That which is found by a reasonin g consciousness seeing the meaning of reality, 
that is, an exalted wisdom realizing emptiness, is the meaning of ultimate truth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Divisions of conventionalities 
(This section has six parts, the first of which is: that since Prasangika and Svatant rika differ with regard to positing the 
object of negation, their differentiation of real  and unreal conventionalities is not the same:) 
The Svatantrika-Madhyamikas assert that since a consciousness which appears to 
be established by way of its own characte r necessarily exists as it appears, a 
differentiation of real and unreal is not made with respect to subjects [that is, 
consciousnesses]. Rather, appearances of ob jects are differentiated by whether they 
exist or not by way of their own character in  accordance with how they appear. It is 
as Jñanagarbha’s Differentiation of the Two Truths54 says: 
A division of real and unreal 
Conventionalities is made 
Because, though similar in appearing,  
[The one] is able and [the other] unable to perform functions. 
[However] this [Prasangika] system asserts that all appearances [of objects] as being 
                                              
54 satyadvayavibhanga . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
904 established by way of their own charac ter to those who possess ignorance are 
appearances to a consciousness polluted by ignorance. Therefore, they do not 
divide conventional objects into the two—real and unreal. 
 
Since the object of negation is not the same for the Prasangika Madhyamikas and Svatantrika 
Madhyamikas, also the way in which they differ entiate real or perfect conventionalities and 
unreal or mistaken conventionalities is no t the same. From the Svatantrika Madhyamaka 
point of view, consciousness is established by  way of its own characteristics and therefore 
necessarily exists in the way that it appear s. Therefore, the differentiation of real 
conventionalities and unreal conventionalities is not made with respect to subjects or object-
possessors, that is, with respect to knowers or consciousnesses. Rather appearing in one way 
and existing in that way, and appearing in one way but not existing in this way, are 
respectively the ways in which real and unreal conventionalities are posited.   Jñanagarbha also says that although all ph enomena are similar in appearing, not all are 
able to function in the way in which they a ppear. Those that appear in one way and also 
function in that way are real conventionalities,  whereas those that appear in one way but do 
not function in that way are posited as unreal co nventionalities. A table, for example, is a real 
conventionality because it appears as a table an d functions as a table. On the other hand, the 
reflection of a face in a mirror appears as a face but does not function as a face and is 
therefore posited as an unreal conventionality.  Likewise, the moon reflected in water appears 
to be the moon but does not function as the m oon and is therefore also posited as an unreal 
or mistaken conventionality.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, though a mirror image of a face is not a truth fo r a concealer in relation to a worldly person versed in 
terminology, it is in general  a truth for a concealer:) 
With respect to this, Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Suppl ement to (Nagarjuna’s) 
‘Treatise on the Middle’”  says, “That which is false even  conventionally is not a truth 
for a concealer.” [This means that] since an  image of a face, for instance, is not 
true as a face for a worldly conventional [consciousness] of one versed in 
terminology, it is not a truth for a conceale r in relation to it. Nonetheless, because 
it is an object found by a [consciousness]  perceiving a false object of knowledge—a 
deceptive object—it is a truth for a concea ler. Just as a consciousness to which a 
reflection appears is mistaken with respec t to its appearing object, so among those 
who possess ignorance [their consciousnesses to which] blue and so forth appear as 
established by way of their own character are similarly mistaken with respect to 
their appearing object. 
 In the perspective of those who are well versed in terminology, that is, who have studied 
philosophy, a reflection of a face in a mirror is not held to be a truth for a concealer, although 
in general it is a truth for a concealer. This is be cause if it is an existent but is not an ultimate 
truth, it is necessarily a truth for a concealer. Thus, because a reflection, for example, is a type 
of form that exists but is not an ultimate tr uth, it is necessarily a truth for a concealer. 
Chandrakirti says that that which is false even conventionally, such  as a reflection of a face, is 
not a truth for the concealer of one who is well versed in terminology. Since the reflection of 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
905 a face is not true as a face for a worldly conventional consciousness of one versed in 
terminology, it is not a truth for a concealer in  relation to that conventional consciousness. 
However, because a reflection of a face is an object found by a consciousness seeing a false 
object of knowledge, a deceptive truth, it is a truth for a concealer or a conventional truth. 
Just as the consciousness to which a reflection of  a face appears is mistaken with respect to its 
appearing object, similarly the consciousnesses of those who possess igno rance to which blue 
and so forth appear to be established by way of their own characterist ics are also mistaken 
with respect to their appearing objects. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, although a mistaken consciousness cannot posit a true object of comprehens ion, this mistakenness acts as an 
aid in positing a false object of comprehension:) 
When a true object of comprehension is posited, it would be contradictory for [a 
consciousness] mistaken in that way to po sit it. However, this acts as an aid in 
positing a false object of comprehensio n. Otherwise, whatever was not truly 
established conventionally could not be posited as a truth for a concealer, and thus 
when falsities such as illusory-like [appe arances] are posited conventionally, they 
could not be posited as truths for a concealer.  
 
Although a mistaken consciousness cannot posit a true object of comprehe nsion, it acts as a 
assisting condition for positing a false object of  comprehension. In othe r words, when a true 
object of comprehension is posited, it would be  contradictory for a mistaken consciousness to 
posit it. However, the mistaken condition acts as  an assistant in positing a false object of 
comprehension. Otherwise, whatever is not trul y existent conventionally could not be posited 
as a truth for a concealer, and when falsities such as illusory-like appearances are posited 
conventionally, they could not be posited as trut hs for a concealer. In other words, although 
conventional truths are illusory-like appearances, they do exist. Similarly the illusions such as 
a horse or elephant created by a magician on the base of a stick or pebble are a type of form 
and therefore are existents.   Tuesday afternoon, 6 March 2007  There are two types of conventionalities, the real and unreal.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 343) says: 
(Fourth, together with a source, how real and unreal conv entionalities are posited in relation just to the world:) 
The Prasangika system posits the six cons ciousnesses not affected by superficial 
causes of error and the six objects apprehended by those consciousnesses as real 
conventionalities. It posits  the six consciousnesses affected by superficial causes of 
error and the six objects apprehended by those consciousnesses as unreal 
conventionalities. Furthermore, it posits  real and unreal conventionalities in 
relation to just worldly or conventional valid cognitions, not in relation to 
reasoning consciousnesses that accord with a Superior’s perception.  
 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
906 “To the world” means in the perspective of ordi nary beings, in relation to which real and 
unreal conventionalities are posited. From the point of view of the Prasangika Madhyamikas 
there are six consciousnesses – eye, ear, nose , tongue, body, and mental consciousnesses – 
which are affected by superficial causes of error and six consciousnesses which are their 
opposites. Then there are six objects – forms,  sounds, odors, tastes, tactile objects, and 
phenomena – which are apprehended by the six co nsciousnesses affected by superficial causes 
of error and six objects which are apprehended by the six consciousnesses opposite to them, 
those that are not affected by superficial causes of error. Th e unreal or wrong objects and 
object-possessors are unreal conventionalities wh ereas the real or correct objects and object-
possessors are real conventionalities. Moreover, real and unreal conventionalities are posited 
in relation to worldly valid cognizers or valid cognizers of conventionalities, and not in 
relation to reasoning consciousnesses that understand the final nature, thusness, of 
phenomena.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 344) says: 
 
Therefore, since in the Madhyamikas’ own system the two appearances of 
reflections, and so forth, and blue, and so  forth, to those who possess ignorance do 
not differ with respect to whether they ar e mistaken or not in relation to their 
appearing object, they do not make a di vision into the two—real and unreal 
conventionalities.  
 
In this system the two appearances of reflecti ons and blue to those who possess ignorance are 
not different in terms of being mistaken or no t in relation to their appearing objects. For 
example, when an eye consciousness sees the re flection of a face in a mirror, although it 
appears to be a real face, a real face does no t exist in the mirror. Similarly, when an echo 
appears to the ear consciousness in an empty room, it appears to be a real voice although it is 
not a real voice. Hence, the Madhyamikas do not make a division into real and unreal 
conventionalities.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  (6.25) says: 
Objects realized by the world and apprehended 
By the six non-defective senses are true from only A worldly point of view; the rest are presented As unreal from the viewpoint of only the world. 
 Objects apprehended by the six non-defective sens e powers and realized by the world are true 
only from the worldly point of view. The rest  – those phenomena that  are apprehended by 
the six sense powers which are affected by a su perficial cause of error (such as reflections, 
echoes, and so forth) – are pr esented as unreal from the po int of view of the world.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 344) says: 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
907 (Fifth, the exception that a conventional  valid cognition is not able to posit the opposite of the mode of apprehension by 
[a mind] affected by the superficial c ondition of a [bad] system of tenets:) 
With respect to the conception of person s and phenomena as being established by 
way of their own character there are two ty pes, [the innate and artificial]. The 
opposite of a mode of apprehension aris ing, for instance, from the mind’s being 
superficially affected by one’s own bad system of tenets is not established by a 
conventional valid cognition, [that is, the em ptiness which is the o pposite of this is 
established by an ultimate valid cognition]. 
 A conventional valid cognizer affected by the superficial or temporary condition of a tenet 
system is not able to posit th e opposite of the mode of a pprehension. The conception of 
persons and phenomena as established by way of  their own characteristics are of two types, 
that which is innate and that which is due to tenets. The o pposite mode of apprehension 
arising from the mind being superficially affected  by a bad system of tenets is not established 
by a valid cognizer of conventionalities;  therefore, this is an exception.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 344) says: 
(Sixth, although [a consciousness] has dualistic ap pearance, it need not be a mistaken consciousness:) 
Furthermore, although dualistic appearance  occurs for an exalted wisdom knowing 
the varieties which has separated from all causes of pollution due to the 
predispositions of ignorance, it is not mist aken with respect to its appearing object. 
I have explained the reason elsewhere. 
 
Even though there is a dualistic appearance, that is, the appearance of two things, the 
consciousness is not necessarily mistaken. Alth ough there is dualistic appearance for an 
exalted wisdom knowing varieties which is separa ted from all causes of pollution due to the 
predispositions or latencies of ignorance, it is not mistaken with respect to its appearing 
object. The reason has already been explained el sewhere. In other words, the exalted wisdom 
knowing varieties can have many appearances, two, three, four, and so on, but it is not 
necessarily mistaken. In this context dualisti c appearance does not refer to a difference 
between object and object-possessor but only re fers to having two appearances and more, for 
example, the seeing of many people at the sa me time. An omniscient being’s exalted wisdom 
knowing varieties sees all phenomen a as they exist without mistake. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
8 Ultimate Truths 
This section has three parts: meaning of paramartha  (ultimate) and satya (truth), 
definition of an ultimate truth, and divisions of ultimate truths. 
Meaning of paramartha  and satya  
(This section, has three parts, the fi rst of which is: the actual meaning:) 
Chandrakirti’s Clear Words  says, “Because it is an object55 and is ultimate,56 [it is 
                                              
55 artha . 
56 parama . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
908 called] the ultimate object.57 Because just it is a truth,58 [it is called] the ultimate 
object truth.”59 Hence, he asserts both object and ultimate as [applying to 
emptiness] the ultimate object truth [o r truth which is the ultimate object.]. 
 
Chandrakirti says that be cause it is a meaning ( don) and because it is highest or supreme ( dam 
pa), it is the highest meaning or ultimate ( don dam pa ). Because it is truth,  it is called highest 
meaning truth or ultimate truth. Therefore, he  asserts both “meaning” and “highest” to be 
the highest meaning truth or ultimate truth. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, how it is a truth:) 
The mode of truth of an ultimate truth is  [its] non-deceptivene ss. Because it does 
not deceive the world through its mode of subsistence abiding one way and its 
appearing another way, Chandrakirti’s Commentary on (Nagarjuna’s) “Sixty Stanzas of 
Reasoning”  says that an ultimate truth is merely posited as existing through the 
force of worldly conventions. 
 
The mode of truth of an ultimate truth is that it is non-deceptive in that it does not deceive 
the world, that is, ordinary beings, through ex isting or abiding in one way but appearing in 
another way. Ultimate truth is merely posited as existing by the force of  worldly conventions.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the difference in the meaning of the term “truth” in the two truths:) 
Therefore, “truth” in truth for a conc ealer means a truth for a consciousness 
conceiving true existence, and thus di ffers from [the meaning of “truth” in] 
ultimate truth [which means non-deceptive]. 
 
The word “truth” in “truth for a concealer” or “conventional truth” means a truth in the 
perspective of a conception of true existence. Ultimate truth is not like this, in that an 
ultimate truth is a truth for a superior’s exal ted wisdom directly realizing the emptiness of 
true existence. Hence, ultimate truth does not exist in the perspective of the conception of 
true existence, but exists only in the perspectiv e of the exalted wisdom of a superior directly 
realizing emptiness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 345) says: 
Definition of an ultimate truth 
This section has two parts: the actual definition and dispelling objections. 
ACTUAL DEFINITION OF AN ULTIMATE TRUTH  
(This section has nine parts, the first of which is: the identification of t he definition of an ultimate truth:) 
                                              
57 paramartha.  
58 satya.  
59 paramarthasatya . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
909 The definition of an ultimate truth is that given in Chandrakirti’s Supplement as 
explained before—[an object] found by a perceiver of that object which is a true 
object of knowledge. Chandrakirti’s commentary on that says: 
Concerning that, the ultimate gain s its own entity through being the 
object of the special exalted wisdom of those perceiving the real. It is 
not established by way of its own se lfhood. This is one nature [of an 
object, the other being its conventional nature]. 
 The definition of an ultimate truth is: that wh ich is found by seeing the object of knowledge 
that is the real meaning, that is, suchness or em ptiness. That ultimate finds its own entity by 
being the object of a special exalted wisdom seei ng the real. It is not established by its own 
nature.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
His saying that it is found by the uncontaminated exalted wisdom comprehending 
suchness and that it is not established by way of its own entity refutes the 
proposition that if there is anything  found by uncontaminated meditative 
equipoise, it is truly established. His speaking of a “ special  exalted wisdom” 
indicates that what is found by any exal ted wisdom of Superiors is not sufficient 
but rather what is found by a special ex alted wisdom—the exalted wisdom knowing 
the mode—is an ultimate truth. An object  found [by such a wisdom] is an object 
established thus [as an ultimate truth] by th at consciousness; it is the same also for 
conventionalities. 
 That it is found by the unco ntaminated exalted wisdom comprehending suchness and that it 
is not established by way of its own entity refu tes the assertion that if it is found by an 
uncontaminated exalted wisdom of meditative equip oise it is truly existent, that is, ultimately 
established. Saying a “ special  exalted wisdom” indicates that ulti mate truth is not found by just 
any exalted wisdom of a superior  but is only found by an exal ted wisdom seeing modes, that 
is, seeing suchness or thusness. That which is fo und by this wisdom is established to be an 
ultimate truth by that consciousness. Likewi se that found by a valid consciousness of 
conventionalities – a valid eye consciousness, ea r consciousness, and so forth – is established 
to be a conventional truth by that consciousness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the manner in which a Superior’s exalted wisdom of  uncontaminated meditative equipoise finds [its object]:) 
With respect to its mode of finding, when  the eyes of one with cataracts see hairs 
falling—the appearance of intermediate sp ace serving as its basis—the eyes of one 
without cataracts does not see even an appe arance of falling ha irs with respect to 
that base. In the same way, those damage d by the cataracts of ignorance apprehend 
an inherent existence of the aggregates and so forth; [however] in terms of the 
mode of perception of suchness by those who have removed all predispositions of 
ignorance and by a Learner Superior’s exalted wisdom of uncontaminated 
meditative equipoise like the eyes of one without cataracts, not even subtle 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
910 dualistic appearance is perceived. The nature perceived in this manner is an 
ultimate truth. 
 
How does a superior’s uncontaminated exalte d wisdom of meditative equipoise seeing 
thusness find ultimate truth? For example, the ey es of someone with cataracts see falling hairs 
in the space before him, whereas the eyes of some one without cataracts do not see even a 
single piece of falling hair with respect to that  same base. Similarly, those whose consciousness 
is harmed by the cataracts of ignorance appreh end inherently existent aggregates, whereas for 
those who have completely abando ned the predispositions of ignorance, like those whose eyes 
are without cataracts, the uncontaminated ex alted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a 
learner superior perceives suchness without even the slightest subtle dualistic appearance of true existence. The nature seen by this exalted wisdom of a superior is an ultimate truth.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, a source:) 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  (4.29) says: 
One with pure eyes sees the nature—suchness— 
Of the falling hairs and so forth in the place 
Where these unreal entities are imputed 
Through the force of cataracts. Know it is similar here. 
 
The scriptural source for the above is Chandrakirti’s Supplement to the Middle Way  which says 
that one with pure eyes does not see falling hairs in the plac e where they are imputed by the 
force of cataracts but understands them ex actly in the way in which they exist.  
 Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, Chandrakirti’s commentary on that s ays, “The nature of the aggregates and 
so forth perceived by the supramundane buddhas free from the predispositions of 
ignorance in the manner of those without cataracts seeing falling hairs is their 
ultimate truth.” 
 
Chandrakirti’s commentary on that says that th e buddhas see the nature of the aggregates and 
so forth free from the predisposi tions of ignorance in the way th at those without cataracts do 
not see falling hairs. In other words, just as those without cataracts do not see falling hairs, 
likewise the buddhas see the final nature of the a ggregates and so forth, that is, their ultimate 
truth.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, a nirvana is an ultimate truth:) 
The ultimate perceived in that way is the ultimate nature from among the two 
natures of each phenomenon. Furthermore, it is the naturally pure nirvana which 
is the emptiness of inherent existence of subjects, and it is the nirvana which is a 
true cessation—just that [natural emptiness]  separated from any of the seeds of the 
defilements. 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
911  
Nirvana or cessation is an ultimate truth. The ul timate truth or nirvana that is perfectly seen 
by exalted wisdom is the ultimate entity. The emptiness of inherent existence of all 
phenomena is called “naturally pure  nirvana,” this being a terminolog ical type of nirvana. It is 
a nirvana that is a true cessation  that is free from any seeds of  the stains. From the point of 
view of the Prasangika Madhyamikas a true cessation is an ultimate truth and not a 
conventional truth, whereas from the point of  view of the Svatantrika Madhyamikas a true 
cessation is a conventional truth because the ob ject of abandonment is a conventional truth. 
In other words, the Svatantrika Madhyamikas s ay that because the objects of abandonment, 
the afflictions, are conventional truths, their cessations are also conventional truths and not 
ultimate truths.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, it is not the thought of Chandrakirti’s Commentary on (Nagarjuna’s) “Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning”  that a nirvana is 
a truth for a concealer:) 
Chandrakirti’s Commentary on (Nagarjuna’s) “Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning”  says, “Is a 
nirvana a truth for a concealer? It is so .” Also, “Therefore, a nirvana is only 
imputed as a truth for a concealer.” Those statements mean that with regard to 
positing a nirvana or ultimate truth as existing , it is posited as merely existent for a 
conventional consciousness; this system does  not assert that a nirvana is a truth for 
a concealer.  
 
It is not Chandrakirti’s inte ntion that a nirvana is a conv entional truth or truth for a 
concealer. His text sets out the question “Is nirvana a truth for a conc ealer?”, to which the 
reply is “It is so.” This would be said from th e point of view of the Svatantrika Madhyamikas. 
However, Chandrakirti’s text also says that a nirvana is only imputed as a truth for a 
concealer. These statements mean with respec t to positing nirvana or ultimate truth as 
existing, it is posited as merely existing  in the perspective of a consciousness of 
conventionalities. This system does not asse rt nirvana to be a tr uth for a concealer.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
The same commentary explains that the thr ee truths [true sufferings, sources, and 
paths] are truths for a concealer and a nirv ana is an ultimate truth. Chandrakirti’s 
Commentary on the “Supplement to (N agarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the Middle’”  also speaks of 
the other three truths as conventional and true cessations as ultimate truths. Also, 
as an answer to the objection that if a nirv ana is posited as existing conventionally, 
this would contradict the statement that it is  an ultimate truth, he says, “It is said 
to be an ultimate truth only by way of worldly conventions.” 
 The same commentary explains that  the three truths, true sufferings, true origins, and true 
paths are truths for a concealer or conventional truths, whereas nirvanas or true cessations are 
ultimate truths. To those who say that if a nirv ana is posited as existing conventionally this 
would contradict the statement that it is an ultima te truth, the answer is that it is an ultimate 
truth only by way of worldly conventions. 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
912  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, a source for positing all phenom ena by the force of conventions:) 
Therefore, all that is posited as existing  is posited through the force of worldly 
conventions. The One Hundred Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra60 says, 
“All these phenomena are designated in dependence on worldly conventions.”  
 
All phenomena are posited by the force of worl dly conventions or terms. In other words, 
everything that is posited as existing is posi ted through the force of worldly conventions. The 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra says that all phenomena are designated in dependence on 
worldly conventions, but they are not ultimate.   Wednesday morning, 7 March 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 347) says: 
 
Also, Nagarjuna’s Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness  says: 
Through the force of worldly expressions 
Buddha spoke of abiding, production, or disintegration, Existence or non-existence, low, equal, or Special—not through th e force of reality. 
 The Buddha taught abiding, production, or disi ntegration, existence or non-existence, and 
low, equal, or special by the force of worldly ex pressions, not by the force of what is real.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
He says that all the various presenta tions of the three— low, middling, and 
supreme—as well as, “This exists, that do es not exist” were only posited by the 
Conqueror through the force of worldly co nventions. He says that they are not 
posited through the force of a real status  which is not just posited through the 
force of conventions. 
 
All functioning things are first produced, th en abide, and then disintegrate. All those 
phenomena that are low, equal, and special we re all taught by the Buddha by the force of 
worldly expressions or conventions. They were not posited through the force of a real status 
which is not posited by the force of conventions.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Seventh, establishing the correctness of the fact that a truth for a reasoning consciousness and a truth able to bear 
analysis must be differentiated and, therefore, it is not nece ssary that whatever is true as an ultimate necessarily be 
truly established:) 
With respect to the master Jñanagarbha’s statement, “Because of being a truth for 
the ultimate [consciousness], it is an ul timate truth,” he describes a reasoning 
                                              
60 shatasahasrikaprajñaparamita . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
913 consciousness as the ultimate and thus says  that what is non-deceptive for it is a 
truth. His thought is not that [an ultimate truth] is truly established in the sense of 
being able to withstand analysis because in his text the true establishment of all 
phenomena is refuted.  
 A truth in the perspective of a reasoning co nsciousness – an exalted wisdom realizing 
emptiness – and a truth that is able to bear an alysis must be differentiated. Because of this, 
whatever is true as an ultimate or is an ultimate truth is not necessarily truly established. Master Jñanagarbha says that a truth for the ulti mate is an ultimate truth. Since there exists 
an ultimate with respect to both objects and ob ject-possessors, Jñanagarbha says that in this 
case the ultimate refers to a reasoning consciou sness, an object-possessor, and that therefore 
that which is non-deceptive in the perspective of this reasonin g consciousness is a truth. He 
does not intend that it an ultimate is truly established in the sense of being able to bear 
analysis. This refers to the fa ct that when phenomena are anal yzed by wisdom, they are found 
to not be able to bear analysis in that no ph enomenon is found to exis t truly or from its own 
side or without relying upon other. Thus, Jñanag arbha’s text refutes the true establishment of 
all phenomena.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Therefore, we assert the proposition that “i f an ultimate is not true ultimately [that 
is, for a reasoning consciousness called the ultimate], then a conventionality is not 
a truth conventionally [for a conventi onal valid cognition].” However, to 
propound that “if the ultimate is not esta blished ultimately, then a conventionality 
is not established conventionally,” is to say [absurdly] that if a negative of truth is 
not truly established, then the subjects which are the bases of the negation would 
be truly established. This is because an ul timate truth is posited as just a negative 
of truth in the subject whic h is the basis of negation and because the implication 
that subjects are not established conven tionally is that they are not falsely 
established. Thus, [to propound such] is extremely senseless because the bases of 
negation have to be established as false due to just the non-true establishment of 
the non-true existence of appearances—the subjects. [Only by showing that ultimate 
truths are not truly existent—that is, falsely established—can it be said that all bases 
of negation are falsely established.] 
 If an ultimate is not true ultimately, then a conventionality is not a truth conventionally. 
Ho w ev er, to  pro po und t hat  “If the fo rm er is  n o t established  as the former, the latter is not 
established  as the latter,” is to say that if the ne gation of the true existence is not truly 
established, then the basis of negation, the su bstrata, would be truly established. This is 
because ultimate truth is a mere negation of  true existence on a basis of negation, a 
substratum and because it is implied that if the substratum is not established conventionally it 
is not falsely established. This reason is comp letely incorrect because the bases of negation 
must be established as false by establishing no n-truly existent substrata or appearances as non-
truly established.   
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
914 Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 348) says: 
(Eighth, to posit [something] as existi ng conventionally it is necessary that there be no damage by any valid cognition:) 
Therefore, although to posit something as existing conventionally it is not 
necessary that it be established by a re asoning consciousness of suchness, it is 
necessary that there be no damage by any valid cognition, conventional or 
reasoning. Chandrakirti’s Commentary on (Nagarjuna’s) “Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning”  
explains that since the appropriated aggr egates conventionally abide as the four—
impermanent and so forth—the conception  of those four is non-erroneous in 
relation to that, and since the aggregates do not abide even conventionally as the 
four—permanent and so forth—the concep tion of those four is erroneous in 
relation to that.  
 
In order to posit something as existing conven tionally, it must not be harmed by any valid 
cognizer. Although in order to posit something as  existing conventionally it is not necessary 
that it be established by a reasoning consciou sness of suchness, it must not be harmed by 
either a conventional valid cognizer or a reason ing valid cognizer. Chandrakirti says that since 
the appropriated aggregates abide convention ally as impermanent, suffering, empty, and 
selfless, the conception of these four is not mistaken. For example, to apprehend the body 
aggregate as impermanent, suffering, empty of being permanent, unitary, and independent, 
and empty of being self-sufficient substantial exis tent is not erroneous. On the other hand, to 
apprehend the body aggregate as permanent, as  happiness, as not empty of being permanent, 
unitary, and independent, or as not empty of being self-sufficient substantially existent is 
erroneous.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Also, Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
The selfhood imputed by the Forders 
Affected by the sleep of ignorance 
And those [real horses, elephants, water, and so forth] which are imputed to 
illusions, mirages, and so forth 
Just do not exist from th e viewpoint of the world. 
Since he says that the self, principal, and so forth imputed by the Forders as well as 
the objects conceived as the horses, elephant s, and so forth of illusions do not exist 
even conventionally, the proposition that it is the Prasangika system that what 
merely exist for a mistaken mind are posite d as existing conventionally is pithless 
talk; no great Madhyamika asserts such 
 The Forders who are affected by the sleep of ignorance impute a self and so forth. For 
example, the Samkyas assert a primordial principa l that is the creator of all phenomena, and a 
self, knower, and being that is neither a cause or result but is a permanent phenomenon. The 
Vaisheshikas, on the other hand, assert that al l phenomena are created by Ishvara’s thought, 
such that just by his thinking of pizza, a pizza appears. Also the illusi ons, such as a horse, 
elephant, handsome boy, beautiful girl, fine hous e, and so forth, created by a magician on the 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
915 basis of a stick or stone are conceived to exis t, whereas in actuality there does not exist a 
horse, elephant, and so forth. Such objects of the mode of a pprehension do not exist even 
conventionally, although in the perspective of a mistaken consciousness they appear to exist. 
Thus, to say that the Prasangikas assert that that which exists for a mistaken mind exists 
conventionally is senseless talk in that  no great Madhyamika would assert this. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 In Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s ) “Treatise on the Middle”  object and 
subject are taken to be similarly existent or  non-existent; this is done in reference 
not to mere existence or non-existence in  general but to inherently existent and 
inherently non-existent object and subject. 
 
Chandrakirti says that object and object-posse ssor are similar in existing and not existing, 
however this does not refer to merely existent  and merely non-existent in general, but to 
inherently existent and non-inherently existe nt objects and object-possessors. For example, 
when traveling by car due to an error in the eye it appears that houses, mountains, and so 
forth are moving whereas in reality they ar e not moving. Although there is such an 
appearance to the consciousness, these moving ob jects do not in fact exist. Similarly, objects 
as well as object-possessors do not exist inherent ly. In this sense objects and object-possessors 
are the same in not existing inherently.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Ninth, though [phenomena] are merely posited through the forc e of conventions, this does  not eliminate their being 
established by valid cognition, and so forth:) 
Therefore, although what is posited as exis ting conventionally is posited as existing 
through the force of nominal conventions, all that is posited through the force of 
nominal conventions is not asserted as ex isting conventionally [such as the horns 
of a rabbit]. 
 
Although phenomena are merely posited by the fo rce of conventions, it is not refuted that 
they are established by valid cognizers. Alth ough phenomena that are posited as existing 
conventionally are posited as existing by the force of nominal conventions, not everything 
that is posited through the force of nominal co nventions is asserted to exist conventionally. 
For example, the horns of a rabbit are posited by the force of conven tions or names but do 
not exist conventionally.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Although [phenomena] are asserted as only posited through the force of 
conventions, the term “only” eliminates  anything that is not a subjective 
convention; it does not at all eliminate th at the object posited is established by 
valid cognition. For, in this system it is not that one is not to be satisfied with a 
positing through the force of the imputa tion of a convention and instead posit 
[something] as existing if it is found upon investigating how the object imputed—
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
916 which is not just posited through the forc e of imputation—exists in fact and posit 
[something] as not existing if not found. [T he Prasangikas] assert that if something 
were found upon searching with that mo de of searching, it would be truly 
established. Therefore, they do not assert  even conventionally that anything is 
found as existing upon such analysis.  
 
Although phenomena are asserted to be only po sited by the force of conventions, the term 
“only” eliminates those objects which are not co nventions of an object-possessor; it does not 
at all eliminate that the object is establis hed by a valid cognizer. In the Prasangika 
Madhyamaka system when it is analyzed whethe r something is found or not found, it is not 
found. In other words, this system does not asse rt that if something is found when sought it 
exists, and if it is not found when sought it does not exist. The Svatantrika Madhyamikas, on 
the other hand, say that when analyzed, phenom ena must be found as otherwise they would 
not exist. Therefore, according to them if a house is analyzed it is found to exist there, and if a 
door is analyzed it is found to exist there. If these phenomena were not found they would not 
exist. However, the Prasangika Madhyamaka point of view is that if phenomena are analyzed 
they are not found. This is because they posit th is from the point of vi ew of analyzing for an 
ultimate, whereas when the Svatantrika Madhyamikas  posit this they do so from the point of 
view of not analyzing for an ultimate but analyzing for a conventionality.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Since the boundary of analyzing and not an alyzing with respect to suchness is put 
there, they see that if [something] that was established by way of its own character 
existed, it would have to exist by way of its own entity as an object which was not 
just posited by the force of subjective co nventions, and thus they do not assert 
even conventionally inherent existence, ex istence by way of its [the object’s] own 
character, or existence by way of its own en tityness. I have explained this at length 
elsewhere. 
 
Because the Prasangika Madhyamikas posit th is as the boundary of analyzing and not 
analyzing suchness, they say that if someth ing that is established by way of its own 
characteristics existed, it would exist by way of its own entity without being posited by the 
force of conventions. Therefore, they do no asse rt inherent existence, existence by way of its 
own characteristics, and existence by way of its own entity even conventionally. This has 
already been explained in detail by Lama Tsongkhapa in other texts, for example, in his Great 
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment .  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 349) says: 
DISPELLING OBJECTIONS  
(This has two parts, the first of whic h is: the statement of an objection:) 
Objection:  If the ultimate truth is found by a buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing the 
mode [of being of phenomena], then how do es this not contradict Chandrakirti’s 
Commentary to the “Supplement to (N agarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the Middle’” ? That text 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
917 says: 
Question: Is such a nature not un perceivable? Therefore, how could 
they perceive it? 
Answer:  That indeed is true, but it is sa id that they perceive it in the 
manner of non-perception. 
Thus, he explains that not to perceive an ything is to perceive suchness, and as 
source he quotes an explanation that the ultimate truth is beyond even the objects 
of omniscient wisdom. Furthermore, Chan drakirti explains that on the buddha 
ground the movement of mind and ment al factors has utterly stopped, and 
explains at the point of the ten powers  that when a buddha does not see the 
aggregates and so forth he knows all ph enomena. How are you not contradicting 
these? 
 Someone thinks that if ultimate truth is foun d by a buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing modes, 
it would contradict Chandrakirti’s text. This te xt says “Is such a nature not seen?” to which 
the reply is that it is seen in the manner of not seeing. In other words, when suchness or 
emptiness is seen, it is not seen  in the manner of existing truly or inherently. Because of this, 
the non-seeing of a buddha is the seeing of su chness. The non-seeing of a buddha is the non-
seeing of ultimate or true existence, which is the seeing of suchness, thusness, or emptiness. 
Because of this ultimate truth has gone beyond being the object of exalted wisdom. That minds and mental factors have ceased on th e buddha ground means that in a buddha the 
minds and mental factors that are conceptualizatio ns have ceased, in that only non-conceptual 
yogic direct perceivers exist in the continuum of a buddha.   This person asks: “If the buddh as do not see the aggregates, ho w can they be said to know 
all phenomena? These two are contradictory.” However, that a buddha does not see the 
aggregates means that the does not see truly exis tent aggregates. A buddha  does in fact see all 
phenomena. However, in the perspective of the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise, there 
is no seeing of the aggregates because they do no t exist in its perspective; all that exists in its 
perspective is ultimate truth or emptiness.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
a. (The second, the answer, has fifteen parts, the firs t of which is: that because the passage means that an 
exalted wisdom knowing the mode does not appreh end conventionalities from the viewpoint of its 
perceiving the ultimate, ther e is no contradiction:) 
Answer:  “They perceive it in the manner of non-perception” does not refer to not 
seeing any and all objects. Rather, it indicates that if these which are observed 
through the power of the cata racts of ignorance existed in  reality, they would have 
to be observed by the exalted wisdom of  uncontaminated meditative equipoise of 
Superiors, and thus their perception of su c h  i s  b y  w a y  o f  n o t  p e r c e i v i n g  a n y  o f  
those. For, due to non-observation of the ob ject of negation despite the fact that if 
it did exist, it would be suitable to be observed, realization of the negative of the 
object of negation is posited. The meanin g of “Non-seeing is the excellent seeing” 
is to be understood similarly. 
 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
918 The answer to this objection has fifteen parts.  The exalted wisdom knowing modes does not 
observe conventionalities, it only sees ultimate s. Thus, conventionalities do not exist in the 
perspective of that exalted wisdom,. However, th ere is no contradiction in this. The statement 
“It is seen in the manner of not seeing” does  not mean that nothing whatsoever is seen. 
Rather it indicates that if phenomena observed  by the power of the cataracts of ignorance 
existed truly, they would have to be observed  by the uncontaminated exalted wisdom of the 
meditative equipoise of superiors. However, such phenomena are not seen, rather what is 
seen is suchness. In short, if phenomena were truly existent, they would have to be seen by 
the uncontaminated exalted wisdom of medita tive equipoise, wherea s they are not. The 
seeing of the negation of the object of negati on is the seeing of emptiness. One sutra says 
“Not seeing is holy seeing,” meaning that the non- seeing of true existenc e is correct seeing or 
the best seeing.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, a source for that:) 
The Condensed Perfection  of Wisdom Sutra61 says: 
The Tathagata teaches that on e who does not see forms, 
Does not see feelings, does not see discriminations, 
Does not see intentions, do es not see consciousness, 
Mind, or sentience, sees reality. 
 Analyze how space is seen as in the expression By sentient beings in words, “Space is seen.” The Tathagata teaches that seeing  reality is also like that. 
The seeing cannot be expressed by another example.
62 
The unseen is said to be the aggregates, and the seen, reality,63 which means 
suchness, as in the statement, “Whoever  sees dependent-arising sees reality.”64 
 This sutra says that the Tathagata says that on e who does not see forms, does not see feelings, 
does not see discriminations, do es not see intentions, does not see consciousness, mind, and 
mentality, sees the Dharma or reality. In other words, one who does not see the five 
aggregates, which are conventional  truths, sees the Dharma or reality, that is, emptiness or 
ultimate truth.   Upon seeing space, sentient beings express th at in words saying “Space is seen.” But how 
space is seen must be investigated. Like the s eeing of space, also th e Dharma, emptiness, is 
seen. Just as space is a negation or absence of obstructive contact, so too is emptiness a 
negation of the object of negation, true existenc e. Seeing this was said by the Tathagata to be 
the seeing of the Dharma. This seeing cannot be  expressed by other examples. The unseen is 
the five aggregates – forms, feelings, di scriminations, compositional factors, and 
                                             
 
61 sañcayagathaprajnaparamita . 
62 Quoted in Dzong-ka-ba’s Illumination of the Thought,  110.3. 
63 chos , dharma.  
64 chos , dharma.  
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
919 consciousnesses, whereas the seen is Dharma or re ality, that is, suchness or emptiness. This is 
similar to the statement “Whoever sees dependent- arising sees reality.” If dependent-arising is 
seen, one sees emptiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 351) says: 
(Third, unraveling the meaning of the sutra:) 
It is like, for example, the fact that spac e is a mere eliminatio n of an obstructive 
object of touch, and that seeing or realiz ing it refers to not seeing the preventive 
obstruction that is the object of negati on and that would be suitable to be 
observed if it were present. In that [examp le], the seen is spac e, and the unseen is 
preventive obstructive. 
 
The example or analogy set out here is that of sp ace. In this example wh at is seen is space, 
whereas what is not seen is obscuring obstruction.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The last two lines refute a seeing of such ness while seeing blue [for instance], not 
seeing in accordance with the example [o f seeing space]. The statement that the 
five aggregates are not seen indicates that  the subjects [these phenomena] are not 
seen in the face of perception of suchne ss by uncontaminated meditative equipoise 
in its aspect of perceiving suchness. 
 
The last two lines refute a seeing of suchness wh ile seeing blue. That the five aggregates are 
not seen indicates that the substrata, the five aggregates, are not seen in the perspective of 
seeing suchness by uncontaminated exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise.  Wednesday afternoon, 7 March 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 351) says: 
(Fourth, the Introduction to the  Two Truths Sutra65
 explains that dualis tic appearance has vanished in the face of 
perception of the ultimate by an exalted knower of all aspects; it does not stat e that the ultimate is not realized:) 
The Introduction to th e Two Truths Sutra  says: 
Devaputra, the ultimate truth is passed beyond [the objects of all 
consciousnesses] ranging right through the objects of omniscient 
wisdoms possessing the supreme of all as pects; it is not as is expressed 
in the phrase “ultimate truth”. 
It explains that [the ultimate truth] is not seen in accordance with the individual 
appearance to the mind of the two—subject and object—when one says “ultimate 
truth”. Therefore, it is a so urce for the disappearance of dualistic appearance, not a 
source for a buddha’s not realizing the ultimate. 
 
                                              
65 satydvayavatara . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
920 This sutra explains that dualistic appearance has vanished in the perspective of an exalted 
knower of all aspects seeing the ultimate, but it does not say that the ultimate is not realized. 
It says that the ultimate trut h has passed beyond all through th e objects of the exalted wisdom 
of an omniscient being, which possesses the supreme in all ways, and is not expressed stating 
“ultimate truth.” When one says “ultimate truth,” one states that  one does not see the object 
and object-possessor as though appearing to th e mind separately. In other words, in the 
perspective of the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of an omniscient being, there is no 
separate appearance of object-possessor and object . Therefore this is a scriptural source that 
sets out the vanishing of dualistic appearance and not one that says that a buddha does not 
realize the ultimate. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, a description of the mode of perception in that way by Chandrakirti:) 
Moreover, Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on 
the Middle’” says: 
Through making manifest only the nature without contacting [or being 
obstructed by] produced things, he understands suchness; hence, he is 
called “buddha”. 
Chandrakirti says that in terms of th e perception of suchness by a buddha’s 
exalted wisdom knowing the mode, only the nature of phenomena is cognized, without contacting othe r-powered phenomena. 
 Because he directly perceives the nature, su chness, without contacti ng things that are 
produced, he is called “buddha.” This mean s that functioning things or other-powered 
phenomena do not appear in the perspective of  a buddha’s exalted wisdom realizing suchness. 
Other-powered phenomena are those that are pr oduced by causes and conditions. “Without 
contacting produced things” means without s eeing the other-powered phenomena that range 
from form through the exalted knower of all aspe cts. This is because all that is seen by a 
buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing modes is suchne ss or thusness or emptiness. Thus, there is 
a difference between “seen” and “seen in the pe rspective of”; for example, although eye 
medicine can be seen when it is in the hand, when  it is applied to the eye it can no longer be 
seen.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, the statement in sutra that during meditative equipoise there is no movement of the mind refers to there not being 
any movement of conceptuality:) 
The disappearance of the movement of mi nds and mental factors means that when 
suchness is actualized, the movement of co nceptuality stops; it does not indicate 
that there are no minds and mental fa ctors [at that time]. Chandrakirti’s Clear 
Words  says: 
If conceptuality is the movement of the mind, due to being free from 
that, suchness is non-conceptual. Sutra says, “What is ultimate truth? If there is no movement of the mind there, what need is there to say 
anything about letters?!” 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
921 Thus he explains that the statement that there is no movement of the mind refers 
to the absence of the movement of  conceptuality. Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the 
“Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s ) ‘Treatise on the Middle’”  says that it does not stop forever 
during a learner superior’s meditative eq uipoise but at buddhahood it does stop 
forever. 
 
That there is no movement of the mind during meditative equipoise means that there is no 
movement of conceptuality at that time. Thus, it is not that there do not exist minds and 
mental factors in a buddha’s continuum, but ra ther that during meditative equipoise on 
emptiness there is no movement of conceptual minds and mental factors. Chandrakirti says 
that conceptuality is the movement of the mind, and that since a buddha is free from this, the 
seeing of suchness of a buddha in meditative equipoise is non-conceptual. He cites a sutra that says “What is ultimate truth?” and then gi ves the response that if  there is no movement 
of the mind, that is, no conceptual ity, what need is there to ment ion that at that time there is 
no expression of letters? Chandrakirti explains  that the statement sayi ng that there is no 
movement of the mind means that there is  no movement of conceptuality. While 
conceptuality is not utterly stopped at the ti me of the meditative equipoise of a learner 
superior, upon achieving buddhahood all conceptuality ceases forever.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Seventh, propounding that an ultimate truth is not  an object of knowledge and so forth are only wrong:) 
Furthermore, Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) 
‘Treatise on the Middle’” proves with a source that if the nature were not existent, 
the bodhisattva’s hard work in order to realize it would be senseless: 
Question : What is their nature, [that is, what is the nature realized by 
bodhisattvas]? 
Answer:  It is that which is unfabricat ed and which has no reliance on 
another, the entity realized by a mind free from the darkness of 
ignorance. 
Question: Does it exist or not? 
Answer:  If it did not exist, for what pu rpose would bodhisattvas cultivate 
the paths of the perfection? For, in  order to realize that nature of 
phenomena bodhisattvas underg o hundreds of hardships. 
 
To propound or state that “An ultimate truth is not an object of knowledge” is only incorrect. 
Chandrakirti says that if the na ture, that is, the ultimate nature , did not exist, the effort and 
hardships of bodhisattvas in order to realize it  would be meaningless. The scriptural source 
for this says that the nature, th at is, the ultimate truth, is unfabricated or uncontrived, does 
not rely on other, and is the entity realized by  a knower free from the cataracts of ignorance. 
Thus it has three characteristics or  features: (1) it is unfabricated, (2) it does not rely on other, 
and (3) it is realized by a knower free from th e cataracts of ignorance. In response to the 
question of whether or not ultimate truth exists, this text says that if the final or ultimate 
nature did not exist, the effort of bodhisattvas  to practice the path of perfections would be 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
922 meaningless. On the other hand, because it do es exist, bodhisattvas undergo hundreds of 
difficulties in order to realize reality or suchness. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
As a source he quotes a sutra: 
Child of good lineage, if the ultimate  did not exist, behavior for purity 
would be senseless, and the arising of tathagatas would be senseless. 
Because the ultimate exists, bodhisa ttvas are said to be skilled with 
respect to the ultimate. 
 As proof of this, Chandrakirti cites a sutra that says that if the ultimate did not exist, pure 
conduct – non-abiding nirvana – would be meanin gless and that the coming of a tathagata to 
the world would be meaningless. However, be cause the ultimate exists, bodhisattvas are 
skilled in the ultimate.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, he quotes a sutra proving that the ultimate truth exists because: 
1. if the ultimate truth did not exist, perf orming practice for the sake of the purity 
of the final nirvana would be senseless,  
2. since realization of the ultimate by tr ainees would not occur, a buddha’s coming 
to the world in order that trainees might realize the ultimate would be senseless, 
and  3 .the great conqueror children would not be skilled in ultimate truths. 
Therefore, that the system of this great ma ster propounds that the ultimate truth is 
not an object of knowledge and that there is no exalted wisdom realizing suchness 
in a superior’s meditative equipoise are only wrong propositions. 
 
Chandrakirti cites a sutra that prov es ultimate truth exists saying: 
1. if the ultimate truth did not exist, practicing  the conduct for the sake  of the purity of the 
final nirvana, that is, practicing the six perfections, would be meaningless, 
2. if the ultimate truth were not an object of  knowledge its realization would not exist and a 
buddha’s coming to the world in order for di sciples to realize the ultimate would be 
meaningless, and 3. the bodhisattvas would not be skilled in ultimate truths. Therefore, it is only wrong to say that this ma ster’s system propounds that the ultimate truth 
is not an object of knowledge and that there is no exalted wisdom realizing suchness in a 
superior’s meditative equipoise. In other words, ultimate truth exists. This proof refutes those 
Tibetan scholars of the past who propounded that ultimate truth is not an object of 
knowledge, that is, who said that it does no t exist and that only conventional truths are 
objects of knowledge.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Eighth, object and subject are not posited separately for an uncontam inated meditative equipoise:) 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
923 Furthermore, Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) 
‘Treatise on the Middle’”  says: 
Therefore, that “suchness is realized” is posited from imputation; 
actually there is no knowing of so mething by something because both 
knower and object known are non-produced. 
 Object and object-possessor are not posite d separately in the perspective of an 
uncontaminated meditative equipoise. Chandrak irti says that “suchness is realized” is 
presented through imputation. In reality, ther e is no knowing of something by something 
because both knower and object known are not produced.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
The meaning of the first part is that a posi ting of a realization of suchness with the 
two—the exalted wisdom and suchness—being taken as separate subject and object 
i s  a  p o s i t i n g  i n  t e r m s  o n l y  o f  a  c o n v e n tional consciousness, not for the exalted 
wisdom. That the knower is non-produced means that it has become like water put 
in water with respect to the meaning of  the absence of inherently existent 
production. 
 
The meaning of the first part of this statemen t is that to posit the realization of suchness 
through taking the object (suchness) and the ob ject-possessor (exalted wisdom) to be separate 
is to posit it merely in the perspective of a know er of conventionalities, and not posit it in the 
perspective of that exalted wisdom. That “a kn ower is not produced” means that with respect 
to the meaning of not being produced inherently it has become like water poured into water. 
In other words, the exalted wisdom of meditati ve equipoise realizing emptiness and its object, 
emptiness, are no longer seen to be separate  but are like water poured into water, which 
cannot be differentiated. This analogy is ma de because water poured into water becomes 
undifferentiable, whereas when milk is poured  into water there are certain animals who can 
drink the milk but leave the water. In short,  the object-possessor, the exalted wisdom of 
meditative equipoise realizing emptiness, and it s object, emptiness, have become like water 
poured into water.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Ninth, actualization of suchness in the manner of the stoppage of the movement of conceptuality:) 
Chandrakirti says, “Because minds and mental factors do not operate with respect 
to suchness—the object of exalted wisdom—it is actualized only by the body.” About 
that, the object to be actualized is suchne ss; the subject, the wisdom consciousness, 
is the means of actualization, and the co mplete enjoyment body is the agent of 
actualization, the knower. 
 
Suchness is actualized in the manner of st opping the movement of conceptuality. 
Chandrakirti says that because conceptual mi nds and mental factors do not operate with 
respect to the object of exalted wisdom of the me ditative equipoise of a buddha, it is directly 
perceived by the body, meaning that it is direct ly perceived by the enjoyment body. The object 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
924 to be actualized is suchness; the means of actual ization is the exalted wisd om that is an object-
possessor; and the agent of actualizat ion is the complete enjoyment body. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Its mode of actualizing suchness is in the manner of the stoppage of conceptual 
minds and mental factors as explained before. Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the 
“Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s ) ‘Treatise on the Middle’”  says, “The body through which 
suchness is actualized can be known thro ugh the explanation of it as having a 
nature of peace due to being free from minds and mental factors.” 
 
The mode of actualizing suchness is in the ma nner of stopping conceptual minds and mental 
factors. The body that actualizes suchness is th at body that has the nature of being pacified 
due to being free conceptual minds and mental factors.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 354) says: 
(Tenth, if a buddha did not perceive the aggregates and so fo rth, it would be a deprecation of the exalted knowledge of 
the varieties, and so forth:) 
If a buddha did not perceive the aggregates  and so forth, it would be a deprecation 
of the exalted knowledge of the varieties and of all the various objects because the 
existent and what is not known by  a buddha are mutually exclusive. 
 
If it were said that a buddha does not see th e aggregates and so fo rth, this would be a 
deprecation of the exalted knower of varieties and of all the objects that are the varieties 
because a buddha simultaneously sees all phenom ena, both conventional truths and ultimate 
truths. A buddha has an exalted knower of variet ies, that is, of conventional truths, and an 
exalted knower of modes, that is, of ultimate  truths. Although a buddha sees both truths 
simultaneously, in the perspective of his exalte d wisdom of meditative equipoise on suchness 
only suchness appears, conventionalities do not appear.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Eleventh, because [the various objects] are known by an exalted knower of all aspects through appearing to the exalted 
knower of the varieties, there ar e two types of appearing objects:) 
Consequently, the various objects must appear to an exalted knower of the 
varieties. Since knowledge without the aspe ct [of the object appearing] is not the 
Prasangika system, [objects are known] upon the appearance of their aspect. 
 
Because the objects that are the varieties are known by an exalted knower of all aspects 
through appearing to it, there must be two ty pes of appearing objects. Consequently, the 
objects that are the varieties must appear to an ex alted knower of varieties. It is the Prasangika 
system that there is knowing thro ugh the dawning of an aspect.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Also, with respect to the varieties whic h are the appearing objects, there are two 
[types]—(1) the major and minor marks of  a buddha and so forth which are not 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
925 polluted by the latencies of ignorance and (2) the impure environments and 
inhabitants, and so forth, which are pollu ted by the latencies of ignorance. There 
is no point in the non-appearance of th e first of those on the buddha ground, 
whereas the second have disappeared due to  the stoppage of their causes on that 
ground. 
 
With respect to the varieties which are th e appearing objects, there are two types: 
1. the signs and exemplifications of a buddha which are not polluted by the latencies of ignorance, and 2. the impure environments and impure inhabita nts or sentient beings which are polluted by 
the latencies of ignorance. It would be meaningless for the first to ceas e on the buddha ground, and the second cease 
due to the stopping of their causes on that ground.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Twelfth, the difference between the mode of appearance to an exalted knower of all aspects  cognizing the varieties and 
to other persons:) 
With respect to the mode of appearance , when the major and minor marks of a 
buddha appear to persons who have not abandoned ignorance, they appear to be 
established by way of their own character whereas they are not. This is not by 
reason of the object’s having arisen throug h the force of the latencies of ignorance; 
rather, it is an appearance due to the su bject’s being polluted by the latencies of 
ignorance. For, they do not appear to that subject [that is, a buddha’s 
consciousness] from the viewpoint of me rely appearing in that way to other 
persons but appear thus from their own side. 
 
There is a difference between th e mode of appearance to an exalted knower of all aspects 
realizing varieties and the mode of appearance to other persons. When the signs and exemplifications appear to pers ons who have not abandoned igno rance, they appear to exist 
inherently although they do not exist inherently . In other words, although from the object’s 
side there is no establishment by way of its own characteristics, it appear s to exist in that way 
by the power of ignorance to those who have not abandoned ignorance. This is not because 
the object itself has arisen thro ugh the force of the la tencies of ignorance, but rather it is an 
appearance due to that object-possessor of an ordinary person being polluted by the latencies 
o f  i g n o r a n c e .  T h i s  i s  b e c a u s e  i t  d o e s  n o t  a p p e a r  t o  t h a t  o b j e c t - p o s s e s s o r  f r o m  t h e  s i d e  o f  merely appearing like that to other persons but appears like that from its own side.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Objects such as forms and sounds—which appear to those who have not 
abandoned ignorance to be established by  way of their own nature whereas they 
are not—appear to a buddha’s exalted wi sdom knowing the varieties [but] they 
appear to a buddha only from the viewpo int of their appearing to persons who 
have the pollutions of ignorance. Withou t depending on their appearing that way 
to others, they do not appear from a buddha’s own side. Therefore, a buddha’s 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
926 knowing forms and so forth—which appear as established inherently whereas they 
are not—is from the viewpoint of their appearing that way to those who possess 
ignorance. Without depending on the appe arance of them to persons, a buddha 
from his own viewpoint does not know them in the manner of their appearing 
t h a t  w a y ;  h e n c e ,  t h e r e  i s  n o  s e n s e  o f  [ a  b u d d h a ’ s  c o n s c i o u s n e s s ]  b e c o m i n g  
mistaken through their appearing. This is  because, although they do not appear 
within the context of the exalted wisdom’s having pollution, they appear by way of 
the fact that the exalted wisdom mu st know all objects of knowledge. 
 Forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactile objects appear as though established by way of their 
own characteristics, although they are not, to a buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing varieties 
due to appearing in that way to persons who ar e polluted by ignorance. Because they appear 
to be established by way of their own characte ristics to those polluted by ignorance, they 
appear in that way to a buddha, but they do not appear in that way from the side of the 
buddha himself. In other words, because the form  aggregate appears to be truly existent to 
other persons, although it is not, a buddha sees it in this way. However, without depending 
on them appearing in that way to other person s, a buddha does not know them in that way. 
Therefore, a buddha does not have any mistaken appearances. Therefore, they do not appear 
through a buddha’s exalted wisdom being pollute d, but appear because his exalted wisdom 
necessarily knows all objects of knowledge.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 From the viewpoint of an ex alted knower of the varieties, all things appear in the 
aspect of selflessness and the absence of in herent existence, whereby they appear as 
falsities like illusions; they do not appe ar as truths. When they appear to that 
exalted wisdom by way of appearing to th ose who have ignorance, there is a mere 
appearance of the appearance [of those] as true to other persons. 
 
From the side of a buddha’s exalted knower of va rieties, all things appear in the entity of 
selflessness and non-inherent exis tence. Therefore, all things a ppear to a buddha as falsities 
like illusions and do not appear as truths. When forms and so forth appear to be truly 
existent to that exalted wisdom by way of appe aring to those polluted by ignorance, there is 
the mere appearance of that appearance of true  existence to other persons. In other words, 
because they appear to other beings as truly existent, a buddha sees that in their perspective they appear to be truly existent, but they do not appear to him to be truly existent.   Thursday morning, 8 March 20 07 (Happy Woman’s Day!) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 355) says: 
(Thirteenth, the statement of such by Nagarjuna:) 
Nagarjuna’s Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning  says: 
Those skilled with respect to things 
See things as impermanent, deceptive phenomena, 
Composites, empty, 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
927 Selfless, and void. 
Chandrakirti’s commentary says that one who has completed the deeds [of 
practice—a buddha—] perceives in that way. 
 
Nagarjuna also taught like that. In this text he says that those skilled in functioning things see 
them as impermanent, as deceptive phenomena, as composites, as empty, as selfless, and as 
thoroughly devoid. They see all compounded phenomena to be impermanent in that they 
change momentarily; to be deceptive in that they  do not exist in the w ay that they appear; to 
be composites in that they are a gathering toge ther; to be empty, the third attribute of true 
sufferings, in that they are empty of self-suffi cient substantial existence; to be selfless, the 
fourth attribute of true sufferings, in that th ey are empty of inherent existence; and to be 
thoroughly devoid of true existence. Those wh o have culminated the deeds successfully, that 
is, the buddhas, see all phenomena in this w ay, whereas we ordinary beings do not see 
phenomena as changing momentarily and so forth.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourteenth, although the two truths are one entity, it is not c ontradictory to posit individual exalted knowers in relation to  
the two truths—the object:) 
Jñanagarbha’s Differentiation of the Two Truths  says: 
An omniscient knower directly perceives 
All the dependently produced, 
Just these [phenomena] as they appear 
Devoid of the superimposed entity. 
Thus he explains that it vividly perceives directly all the varieties.  
 Although the two truths are one entity, it is not contradictory to posit two separate exalted 
knowers in relation to them. Jñanagarbha says  t h a t  a n  o m n i s c i e n t  b e i n g  d i r e c t l y  s e e s  
phenomena that appear as though inherently existent while devoid of an imputed entity 
(imputation by thought), that is, all the ph enomena that are dependently produced. Thus, 
omniscient beings directly see or realize all the varieties.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Furthermore: 
Because that which does not see knowers, 
Objects known, and selfhood has a stable abiding Due to the non-arising of signs, They do not rise [from meditative stabilization]. 
 The buddhas do not arise from meditative equip oise into subsequent attainment, but from 
within a state of meditative equipoise are able to perform actions. They can do this because 
their meditative equipoise and subsequent a ttainment are not contra dictory, whereas for 
others they are contradictory. They do not se e knowers, the objects known, and the self. For 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
928 them signs do not arise. Because they abide firmly, they do not rise from meditative 
equipoise.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus he also explains that [buddhas] never rise from the meditative stabilization in 
which dualistic appearance has been pa cified. Although to those who do not 
properly understand the modes of thos e two explanations it seems to be 
contradictory to assert both—rather than just  one of the two—it is not contradictory. 
This is because, although the exalted wi sdom perceiving suchness and the exalted 
wisdom perceiving the varieties are on e entity, there is not the slightest 
contradiction that in relation to the in dividual objects there are two—a reasoning 
consciousness and a conventional consciousness. 
 
The buddhas never arise from the meditative st abilization in which dualistic appearance has 
been pacified. To those who do not understand these two explanations clearly it appears that 
they are contradictory. However, that a buddha has both an exalted knower knowing varieties 
and an exalted knower knowing modes, and that they are one entity but posited as individual 
or separate in dependence on their respective objects, is not at all contradictory. While it is difficult for us to understand that a wisdom realizing emptiness can also understand other 
phenomena, in the case of a buddha there is no contradiction in that they are able to 
simultaneously see both varieties and modes.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifteenth, when the two valid cognitions comprehend objects individually on the occasion of the view of the bases and 
on the occasion of the fruit, it is necessary to know  which of the two valid cognitions something is:) 
This depends on knowing well that there is  not the slightest contradiction in there 
being two different modes of finding [o bjects] by the two valid cognitions—
reasoning and conventional—in terms of on e subject at the time of the view of 
bases, [that is, viewing phenomena as empty of inherent existence]. If you know 
well not only that fact about the time of  the fruit when the two exalted wisdoms 
comprehend objects but also which of th e two valid cognitions  it becomes with 
regard to the objects, you can know that the two subjects [con sciousnesses] do not 
become a common locus [that is, one thing that is both] even though the objects 
are not ascertained separately. Through th is you can also understand the fine 
points of the definitions of the two truths. 
 
Since on the occasion of the view of the bases and on the occasion of the result the two valid 
cognizers comprehend their objects individually , it is necessary to know which of the two 
valid cognizers it is. There is no contradiction th at at the time of the vi ew of the bases, with 
respect to one single phenomena there exist two different ways of finding suchness or 
emptiness, that is, ultimate truth, and finding the conventional truth by the two types of valid 
cognizers. At the time of the result the two exalted wisdoms of the omniscient mind 
respectively see thusness and varieties. Because of  this, it is necessary to know which of the 
two valid cognizers it becomes with respect to its respectively object, as well as to know that 
the two object-possessors do not become a commo n locus. Thereby one will be able to also 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
929 understand the details of the definitions of th e two truths. For example, since the omniscient 
mind knowing suchness also realizes all varietie s, and the omniscient mind knowing varieties 
also realizes suchness, it can be asked wh ether the omniscient mind realizing suchness 
becomes a valid cognizer of varieties, and wh ether the omniscient mind realizing varieties 
becomes a valid cognizers of suchness. This disc ussion occurs in the teachings on Tenets and 
in the Supplement to the Middle Way . 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 356) says: 
Divisions of ultimate truths 
(This section has eleven parts, the fi rst of which is: the different mode s of dividing ultimate truths:) 
When ultimate truths are divided, it is as Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the 
“Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s ) ‘Treatise on the Middle’”  says—an extensive division into 
the sixteen emptiness, a middling division  into the four emptinesses of things, 
non-things, self entity, and other enti ty, and a brief division into the two 
selflessnesses of persons and phenomena. 
 
There are different modes of dividing ultimate truths. Chandrakirti says that when emptiness 
is extensively divided, there are sixteen emptin esses. These are also set out in Haribhadra’s 
Clarifying the Meaning  and include the emptiness of the external, emptiness of the inner, 
emptiness of both, emptiness of the great, emptin ess of emptiness, and so forth. For example, 
the emptiness of the external is the emptiness of inherent existence of external phenomena – 
forms, sounds, odors, tastes, tactile objects, an d phenomena. The emptine ss of the internal is 
the emptiness of the internal sense powers – th e eye sense power, ear sense power, nose sense 
power, tongue sense power, body sense power,  and mental sense power. The emptiness of 
both external and internal is the emptiness of th e loci of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body 
sense powers. They are so-called because th ey are external with respect to inner 
consciousnesses, and internal in the sense of be ing held by feelings. Emptiness of the great is 
the emptiness of the ten directio ns – four cardinal directions, four intermediate directions, 
the zenith, and nadir. The emptiness of empt iness refers to the emptiness of inherent 
existence of emptiness itself.   There is also a middling division of emptin ess into the four: emptiness of functioning 
things, emptiness of non-functioning things, empt iness of self entity, and emptiness of other 
entity. There is also a brief division of emptin ess into the two: the se lflessness of persons and 
the selflessness of phenomena. The emptiness of  inherent existence of the person is the 
selflessness of persons, whereas the emptiness of  inherent existence of the aggregates is the 
selflessness of phenomena.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Other texts speak of two—actual ultimates and concordant ultimates. Kamalashila’s Illumination of the Middle  says: 
Because this absence of production accords with the ultimate, it is 
called an “ultimate” but it is not so in fact because actually the ultimate 
is beyond all elaborations. 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
930  
Other texts mention two types of ultimates: actual ultimates ( don dam pa dngos ) and 
concordant ultimates or ulti mates that are similitudes ( mthun pa’i don dam ). Kamalashila says 
that because the lack of production is concorda nt with the ultimate, it is called “ultimate.” 
However, in reality the ultimate has passed beyond all elaborations, 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, Shantarakshita’s Ornament for the Middle66 says: 
Because of according with the ultimate, 
This is called an “ultimate.” 
Actually [the ultimate] is free from all 
The collections of elaborations. 
 Because of according with the ultimate, it is called “ultimate.” Actually the ultimate is free 
from all collections of elaborations, that is, it  is not a collection of elaborations. In other 
words, an actual ultimate is not a collection of elaborations.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, the same is said in Jñanagarbha’s Differentiation of the Two Truths,  and 
Jñanagarbha’s own commentary on that text as well as Maitreya’s Ornament  speak 
of the negative of ultimately [existent] production and so forth as conventional.
67 
 
These texts say that the negation of ultimate pr oduction is a conventionality. However, since 
this is not asserted from the point of view of  the Prasangika Madhyamikas, perhaps it accords 
with other tenets such as those of the Svatantrika Madhyamikas.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 357) says: 
(Second, earlier Tibetans’ explanation of the entit y of the ultimate described in those texts:) 
With respect to the meaning of those, many earlier [Tibetans] took the two 
ultimate truths—metaphoric and non-metaphoric—and [identified] the emptiness 
which is a negative of the ultimately exis tent production and so forth of forms and 
so forth as the metaphoric ultimate, [saying that] it is an imputed ultimate truth 
and a fully qualified truth for a concealer.  They asserted that  the non-metaphoric 
ultimate truth cannot be taken as an object  of any mind and thus is not an object 
of knowledge. 
 Some Tibetan scholars of the past explained the en tity of the ultimate as  taught in those texts 
through taking into consideration two ultimate  truths – the metaphoric and non-metaphoric 
(or the categorized and uncategorized). They t ook the emptiness that is the negation of 
ultimate production and so forth to be the first type, a metaphoric ultimate, and said that it is 
                                             
 
66 madhyamakalamkara . 
67  This is misinterpreted as meaning that it is a co nventionality, whereas the me aning is that it exists 
conventionally.  
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
931 an imputed ultimate truth and not an actual ultimate truth but instead is a fully-qualified 
conventional truth. They said that the second , a non-metaphoric ultimate truth, cannot be 
realized by any mind and therefore is not an ob j e c t  o f  k n o w l e d g e .  I n  t h i s  w a y ,  s o m e  p a s t  
Tibetan scholars propounded that the emptiness th at is an ultimate truth is not an object of 
knowledge given that only conventional truths ar e objects of knowledge. Because of this, they 
claimed that the ultimate truth cannot be realized by anyone.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the two ultimates explained in thos e texts do not refer just to objects:) 
Since that is not the meaning of those [tex ts], they are to be explained this way: 
T h o u g h  i n d e e d  j u s t  t h e  o b j e c t — t h e  n a t u r e  o f  p h e n o m e n a — i s  t o  b e  t a k e n  a s  t h e  
ultimate, there are many explanations of  the subject—the reasoning consciousness—
as an ultimate. Jñanagarbha’s Differentiation of the Two Truths  says, “Because of 
being undeceiving, a reasoning [consciousness] is an ultimate.” 
 
The two ultimates explained in those texts do no t refer only to objects, but also refer to 
object-possessors. Although the object, reality or emptiness or suchness, is to be taken as the 
ultimate, also the object-possessors, reasoning co nsciousnesses, are explained in many texts to 
be ultimates. For example, Jñanagarbha’s text s ays that because it is undeceiving, a reasoning 
consciousness is ultimate.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Kamalashila’s Illumination of the Middle  says: 
The statements that there is no ulti mately existent production and so 
forth are asserted to mean the fo llowing: All consciousnesses arising 
from correct hearing, thinking, and meditating are non-erroneous 
subjects; hence, they are called “ultimates” because of being the 
ultimate among them, [that is, among consciousnesses]. 
 
Kamalashila says that the meaning of sayi ng that phenomena do not have ultimate 
production is as follows. The wisdom arisen fr om hearing, the wisdom arisen from thinking, 
and the wisdom arisen from meditation are non- erroneous object-possessors. Due to this, they 
are called “ultimates” because among all cons ciousnesses these three consciousnesses of 
hearing, thinking, and meditating are ultimate.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
There are two types of reasoning consciou snesses—(1) a superior’s non-conceptual 
exalted wisdom of non-conceptual medi tative equipoise and (2) a conceptual 
reasoning consciousness comprehending suchness in dependence on a sign, and so 
forth The thought of Bhavaviveka’s Blaze of Reasoning
68 in explaining two—a non-
conceptual exalted wisdom with respect to  the ultimate and a wisdom concordant 
                                              
68 tarkajvala . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
932 with that—and the thou ght of Kamalashila’s Illumination of the Middle  in explaining 
two ultimates are the same. Therefore, it is  not the meaning of those texts that the 
explanation of two ultimates should be take n as only ultimates in terms of objects 
and not subjects. 
 
There are two types of reasoning consciousnesses: 1. a superior’s non-conceptual exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise, and 2. an ordinary being’s conceptual reason ing consciousness comprehending suchness in 
dependence on a sign. 
When Bhavaviveka explains a non-conceptual ex alted wisdom with respect to the ultimate 
and a wisdom concordant with that and when Kamalashila explains two ultimates, their 
intention is the same. Therefore, the explanation of two ultimates in thes e texts should not be 
taken to refer only to objects, but should also be  taken to refer to object-possessors or subjects. 
In other words, there are two ultimates from th e side of objects and two ultimates from the 
side of object-possessors.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 358) says: 
(Fourth, the two reasoning consciousnesses are posit ed separately as actual and concordant ultimates:) 
Concerning that, when the non-conceptual  exalted wisdom understands suchness, 
it is able to eliminate with respect to it s object simultaneously the elaborations of 
[the conception of] true [existence] and dual istic appearance; hence, it is an actual 
ultimate; that is the meaning of being “beyond all elaborations.” Although a 
conceptual reasoning consciousness is ab le to cease the elaborations [of the 
conception] of true [existence] with resp ect to its own object, it cannot eliminate 
the elaboration of dualistic appearance; henc e, it is an ultimate that accords in 
aspect with the supramundane ultimate. 
 The two reasoning consciousnesses, those that kn ow suchness, are posited separately as actual 
ultimates and concordant ultimates. When th e first, a non-conceptual exalted wisdom, 
engages suchness, it is able to simultaneously  eliminate or cut the elaborations of true 
existence and dualistic appearance with respec t to its object and th erefore is an actual 
ultimate. This is the meaning of stating that it “has passed beyond all elaborations.” The 
second, a conceptual reasoning consciousness, is able to cease the elaborations of true 
existence with respect to its object but cannot cut the elaborations of dualistic appearance, 
and therefore is a concordant ultimate that  accords in aspect with the supramundane 
ultimate, nirvana. Here the distinction of actu al and concordant ultimates is made from the 
side of object-possessors.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, it is necessary to explain two modes also with respect to the ultimate  as object in relation to these minds:) 
It is necessary to set forth two modes also with respect to the ultimate in the sense 
of the object which is the negative of th e ultimately [existent] production and so 
forth of forms and so forth. That emptiness of the object is the actual ultimate free 
from both elaborations for a non-concep tual reasoning consciousness and is not 
the actual ultimate free from both el aborations for a conceptual reasoning 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
933 consciousness since [in the latter case] it is free from only one class of elaborations. 
However, this is not to say that in gene ral it is not an actual ultimate truth. 
Therefore, it is not the meaning of those texts that except for being free from all 
elaborations of dualistic appearance for some minds, it does not happen that an 
emptiness of true existence is free from  all elaborations of appearance, whereby 
whatever is an ultimate truth is necessa rily free from all the elaborations of 
dualistic appearance. 
 It is also necessary to explain two modes with re spect to ultimates as objects in the perspective 
of these minds. In other words, it is also necessary to explain two modes with respect to 
ultimates that are objects – the negations of ulti mate production and so forth of forms and so 
forth. The emptiness of the object is the actual  ultimate which is free from both elaborations 
in the perspective of a non-conceptual reasoning consciousness. However, it is not the actual 
ultimate which is free from both elaborations  in the perspective of a conceptual reasoning 
consciousness because in this case it is free from  only one type of elaboration. But this does 
not say that in general it is not an actual ultima te truth. Thus, it is not that an emptiness of 
true existence is free from all elaborations of appearance. For example, in the perspective of a 
conceptual consciousness realizing the emptine ss of inherent existence, other phenomena can 
also appear, for example, the meaning generality  can also appear because it is a conceptual 
mind. This is because if it is a conceptual mind, the actual object and the meaning generality appear as though mixed. Therefore, whatever is  an ultimate truth is not necessarily free from 
all the elaborations of dualistic appearance.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, the ultimate asserted by [those propounding] an estab lishment of illusion by a reasoning [consciousness] is not 
an actual ultimate:) 
[The proponents of] an establishment of illusion by a reasoning [consciousness] 
assert that the composite of the two, a base such as an aggregate and the 
appearance of its emptiness of true ex istence—[this composite] being the mere 
object established by an inferential reasoning consciousness—is an ultimate truth. 
It is a concordant ultimate, not an ultimate truth. 
 An inferential cognizer realizing emptiness aris es due to reasonings. This is not an actual 
ultimate, but is a concordant ultimate or an ulti mate that is a similitude. This is because the 
collection or composite of the aggregates an d the appearance of their emptiness of true 
existence is the mere object established by an inferential reasoning consciousness. In short, a 
conceptual mind understands emptiness by means of reasonings.   There is a story about a person who had clai rvoyance and another person who had studied 
much philosophy. One time when they were talking together, th e clairvoyant said that there 
was a farmer on the other side of the mounta in who had a pregnant cow, whose calf has a 
white patch on its forehead. The scholar said that  this was not the case and that it was the tip 
of the calf’s tail that was white and that it wa s resting on its forehead. After the calf was born, 
they sent a trustworthy monk to  check what had happened. It was found that the tip of the 
calf’s tail was white, and not its forehead!  
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
934 Thursday afternoon, 8 March 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 358) says: 
(Seventh, it is not suitable to prove the appearance of the non-true existence of sprouts and so forth through the 
appearance of the lack of [its being] one or many:) 
With respect to [their] “proving” the a ppearance of the non-true existence of 
sprouts and so forth through the appearance  of the lack of being a true one or 
many, there is no point in proving such  t o  a n  i n t e l l i g e n t  p e r s o n  w h o  h a s  n o t  
eliminated doubt with respect to whether or not the base truly exis ts [in that it will 
not help in realizing the absence of in herent existence]. Also, for one who has 
eliminated such doubt, the si gn is not a correct sign [sin ce he would have no doubt 
that objects appear as non-inherently ex istent and thus would have no need to 
realize the thesis].  
 
It is not suitable to prove th e appearance of non-true existence of sprouts and so forth 
through the appearance of its being free from be ing one or many. That is, it is senseless to 
prove this to someone who has no t eliminated doubt with respect to whether the base exists 
truly or not. Also for one who has eliminated su ch a doubt, that sign is not a correct sign. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Also Kamalashila’s Illumination of the Middle  says that both the sign of lacking being 
one or many and the predicate [of non-t rue existence] are mere eliminations. 
Furthermore, he says that whatever is ta ken as the sign—“is not one or many,” or 
“does not exist as one or many”—it is the same. That he is not referring to 
affirming negatives can be known from the examples given there. Hence, it is not 
at all the assertion of the masters, the fa ther Shantarakshita and his spiritual son 
[Kamalashila], or the master Haribhadra [t hat the appearance of non-true existence 
of sprouts and so forth is proven throug h the appearance of the lack of being a 
true one or many]. 
 
Kamalashila’s text says that both the sign or reason of “being free from being one or many” 
and the predicate are mere eliminations ( rnam bcad tsam ). Whether the sign is “is not one or 
many” or “does not exist as one or many” it is  similar. Neither the reason or the predicate 
refer to an affirming negative. There are two ty pes of negatives, a non-affirming negative and 
an affirming negative. An example of this reasonin g is: a sprout is not truly existent because it 
is free from being a truly existent one or many . It is free from bein g a truly existent one 
because it has parts. That wi th parts and that without part s are directly contradictory. 
Without parts does not exist. The sprout is not a truly existent many because it is not a truly 
existent one. Many – two, thr ee, and so forth – depends on one. Both the reason and the 
predicate are non-affirming negatives.  
 Therefore, that the appearance  of the non-true existence of sprouts and so forth is proved 
through the appearance of the lack of being a tr uly existent one or many is not the assertion 
of either Shantarakshita and Kamalash ila, nor is it that of Haribhadra. 
 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
935 Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 359) says: 
(Eighth, the assertion of the ultimate by the thoroughly non-abiding Madhyamikas is not as it is explained by earlier 
[scholars]:) 
Also, there is no great Madhyamika who asserts that the mere object 
comprehended by an inferential consciousness—the latter of the two, a [mere] 
elimination and an affirmative elimination,  with respect to an elimination of the 
elaborations which are the object of negation in relation to appearances—is an 
ultimate truth.69 Through this mode you can unders tand in detail my explanation 
of their presentation in the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path.  
 
What great Madhyamika would asse rt as an ultimate truth the mere object comprehended by 
an inferential consciousness which is an a ffirmative elimination with respect to an 
elimination of the elaborations which are the object of negation  in relation to appearances? 
No one would. This can be understood from st udying the presentation in Lama Tsongkhapa’s 
Great Exposition of th e Stages of the Path . 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Ninth, although a negative of ultimately [e xistent] production and so forth is not a co nventionality, it is not contradictory 
to indicate that it exists conventionally:) 
In connection with the explanation of the ne gative of production and so forth as a 
concordant ultimate, Jñanagarbha’s Commentary on the “Differentiation of the Two 
Truths”70 says: 
Others [Chittamatrins] hold [that em ptiness is] only real; thus, “also” 
[in the root text] has the meaning of a conjunction. [However] when 
analyzed with reasoning it is only conventional. Why? Since the object 
of negation [a self of phenomena] do es not exist, it is clear that the 
negative does not exist in reality. 
 
Although the negation of ultimate production an d so forth is not a conv entionality, it exists 
conventionally. These two are not contradictory. For example, emptiness exists conventionally 
and exists nominally, that is, it can be expresse d by words, but it is not a conventional truth. 
Likewise, the negation of ultimate production also exists conventionally. The negation of 
production and so forth is a concordant ulti mate or an ultimate that is a similitude. 
Jñanagarbha’s text says that others hold or a pprehend emptiness as only real. Saying “also” 
means to include or condense two or more thin gs. When analyzed with reasoning, emptiness 
is conventional, that is, it exists conventiona lly. Why? Since the object of negation does not 
exist, also its negation or refutati on does not exist in actuality.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
                                              
69 In lhag mchan 170.5: 
The elimination of the elaborations of  the object of negation has two fact ors, the negative exclusion and the 
positive inclusion from among these two, the latter is the mere object comprehended by an inferential cognition, 
and there is no great Madhyamika who a sserts that this was ultimate truth. 
70 satyadvayavibhangavrtti . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
936 Thus, he says that others—Chittamatrins— assert that an emptiness which is a 
negative of the self of phenomena in a ba se of negation is established in [as its 
own] reality, whereas his own system [asse rts] that since the self of phenomena 
which is the object of negation does not ex ist, the negation which is the negative of 
that is not established in reality. Theref ore, the explanation that a negative of 
ultimately existent production and so fort h is conventional means that it exists 
conventionally; it does not indicate  that such is a conventionality. 
 
From the point of view of the Chittamatrins the emptiness that is a negation of a self of 
phenomena on a basis of negation is established as real, that is, emptiness exists truly. The 
Chittamatrins assert three char acteristics: imputational natu res, other-powered phenomena, 
and thoroughly established phenomena. While imputational natures are not truly existent, 
other-powered phenomena and thoroughly es tablished phenomena are both truly or 
inherently established. In this context the obje ct of negation of a self of phenomena is the 
form and the eye consciousness apprehending fo rm being established as different substances. 
This is because they assert form and the ey e consciousness apprehending form to be one 
entity. However, this is not th e object of negation of a self of phenomena according to the 
Prasangika Madhyamikas who asse rt that form and the eye consciousness apprehending form 
are different substances and assert externally exis tent objects. The Chitta matrins, on the other 
hand, assert that form and the eye consciousness apprehending form are not  different 
substances and do not accept ex ternally existent objects.  
 Jñanagarbha’s own system asserts that since th e self of phenomena which is the object of 
negation does not exist, the nega tion which is the negative of th at is not established as real. 
Therefore, the explanation that a negation of ultimately existent production and so forth is 
conventional means that it exists convention ally; it does not indi cate that it is a 
conventionality or a conventional truth. In ot her words, emptiness exists conventionally or 
nominally (in that, it can be talked about and ca n be mentally conceived of), but it is not a 
conventional truth.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Tenth, it is said that when blue appears, its emptiness of  true existence appears to an ey e consciousness; since this 
refers to an affirming negative, it is not contradictory t hat its emptiness of true existence is an ultimate truth:) 
Also, Jñanagarbha’s Commentary on the “Differe ntiation of the Two Truths” says: 
[Objection: ] Because when a thing appears, its really existent production 
and so forth do not appear, such ar e unreal conventionalities. In the 
same way, a negative of re ally existent production and so forth also is an 
unreal conventionality, for when the thing that is the basis of negation 
appears, it does not appear. 
Answer:  It is not that it does not appear because it is non-different from 
the entity of the thing. 
 
To say that when blue appears to  an eye consciousness, the emptiness of true existence of blue 
that appears to an eye consciousness refers to an affirming negative ( ma yin dgag ). Therefore, it 
is not contradictory that its emptiness of true existence is an ultimate truth. An objection is set out in Jñanagarbha’s text that says that be cause real production, real abiding, and real 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
937 disintegration do not appear when a thing appear s, they are unreal conventionalities, like, for 
example, the reflection of a face in a mirror, an echo, a mirage, and so forth. Similarly, the 
negations of real production and so forth are al so unreal conventionalities because when that 
thing that is the basis of negation  appears, they do not appear. The response to this is that it 
is not that they do not appear because they are not different from  the entity of the thing. In 
other words, the negations of truly existent production, truly existent abiding, and truly 
existent disintegration are not differen t entities from the basis of negation. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
With respect to his explanation that when blue, for instance, appears, its 
emptiness of true existence appears, it is  not that the mere el imination which is a 
negative of true existence appears to an eye consciousness and so forth; rather, he 
is referring to an affirming negative. Thus, even though such is a fully qualified 
conventionality, it is not contradictor y that an emptiness which is a mere 
elimination of truth is an ultimate truth. 
 Jñanagarbha’s says that when blue appears, it s emptiness of true existence also appears. 
However, it is not that the mere elimination that  is a negation of true existence appears to an 
eye consciousness, rather he refers to an affirm ing negative. Therefore, although this is a fully 
qualified conventionality, it is not contradictor y that the emptiness that  is a mere elimination 
of true existence is an ultimate truth. For exam ple, the emptiness of inherent existence of this 
table is an ultimate truth, but it is  a fully qualified conventionality.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Eleventh, the positing of the two reasoning consciousnesses—non-conceptual and conceptual—as well their objects as 
actual ultimates and concordant ultimates is as before:) 
Shantarakshita’s Ornament for the Middle  explains that, although a negative of 
ultimately existent production and so forth is included among real 
conventionalities, it is a concordant ulti mate since it accords with the ultimate. 
The ultimate is said to have abandoned all the nets of elaboratio ns such as existent 
thing, non-existent thing, and so fort h; the nets of elaborations are as 
Jñanagarbha’s Commentary on the “Differentiation of the Two Truths”  says: 
Therefore, the Blessed One said 
It is not empty, not non-empty, 
Not existent and non- existent, Not non-produced and not produced. 
 The individual positing of conceptual an d non-conceptual reasoning consciousnesses 
(consciousnesses to which emptiness appears) as well as their objects as actual ultimates and 
concordant ultimates is as before. A non-concep tual reasoning consciousness is a yogic direct 
perceiver realizing emptiness, whereas a conceptu al reasoning consciousness is an inferential 
cognizer realizing emptiness. A non-conceptual reasoning consciousness is an actual ultimate, 
while a conceptual reasoning consciousness is a concordant ultimate.  
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
938  Although a negation of ultimate production and so forth is included among real 
conventionalities, it is a concordant ultimate an d not an actual ultimate, since it accords with 
the ultimate. The ultimate has abandoned all the ne ts of elaborations such as existent thing, 
non-existent thing, and so forth. The nets of elaborations are explained in Jñanagarbha’s text 
saying “It is not empty and it is not non-empty. It  is not existent and it is not non-existent. It 
is not non-produced and it is not produced.”   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also:  
Why? That is without elaborations; suchness is free from all nets of 
conceptuality. 
Thus, he describes the nets of concep tuality as the nets of elaborations. 
Furthermore, because those have vanished in the face of direct realization of 
suchness, it is the actual ultimate, and th e reasoning consciousness as well as its 
object, which are not like that, are concor dant with the former, and so forth, as 
[explained] before. 
 Suchness is without elaborations, that is, it is free from all nets of conceptuality. Thus, the 
nets of conceptuality are the nets of elabor ations. Because those conceptualizations or 
elaborations have vanished in the perspective of a direct realization of suchness, such a direct 
realization of suchness is an actual ultimate . On the other hand, the reasoning consciousness 
which is not a direct perceiver realizing emptin ess but is an inferential cognizer realizing 
emptiness, as well as its obje ct, are concordant ultimates.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Also, with respect to the negative of rea lly existent production and so forth, there 
are two—the reasoning consciousness by which it is negated and its object of 
comprehension. Thus, the mode of inclusio n as a real conventionality should be 
known in terms of those. This way of ex plaining freedom from the nets of all 
whatsoever elaborations with respect to  the two truths is important on many 
occasions. 
 With respect to the negation of really exis tent production, there is (1) the reasoning 
consciousness by which it is negated and (2) its object of comprehension. The mode of 
inclusion as real conventionality should be understood in relation to them. It is important to understand this way of explaining freedom from  the nets of elaborations or conceptuality 
with respect to the two truths.   
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 361) says: 
Definiteness of the number of the truths as two 
(This section has three parts, the firs t of which is: the actual exposition:) 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
939 If a base is positively set off71 as being a false deceptive object, it is necessarily 
eliminated as being a non-deceptive obje ct. Therefore, deceptive object and non-
deceptive object are mutually exclusive co ntradictories. Because they apply to all 
objects of knowledge in the manner of mu tual abandonment, a third category is 
also excluded. Therefore, you should know that with respect to objects of 
knowledge the enumeration is definite as the two truths. 
 I f  a  b a s e  i s  e s t a b l i s h e d  a s  o r  d e t e r m i n e d  t o  be a false deceptive object, it is necessarily 
eliminated as being a non-deceptive object. Therefore, deceptive and non-deceptive are 
mutually exclusive, meaning that there is no  third possibility. Thus when, on one hand, 
something is established and on the other si de something is eliminated, these two are 
mutually contradictory without any third possibi lity existing. For example, a phenomena must 
be either a conventional truth or an ultimate tr uth, it cannot be anything else. However, there 
do exist three possibilities, for example, in the case of functioning things which are definitely 
either one of the three: material form, cons ciousnesses, and non-associated compositional 
factors (which are neither material form nor cons ciousness). In this case there is no fourth 
possibility. In short, objects of knowledge ar e definitely two in number – the two truths. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, sources for that:) 
The Meeting of the Father and Son Sutra72 says: 
It is like this: The Tathagata comp rehends the two truths, conventional 
and ultimate. Furthermore, objects of  knowledge are exhausted in these 
conventional and ultimate truths. 
Thus, [Buddha] said that all objects of knowledge are exhausted in the two truths. 
 
These are the scriptural sources for the fact th at objects of knowledge are definitely two in 
number as the two truths. The Meeting of the Father and Son Sutra  says that the Tathagata, the 
One Gone Thus, comprehends two truths, the ul timate truth and conventional truth, and 
that objects of knowledge are only the two – ulti mate truths and conventional truths. In other 
words, there are no other objects of knowledge in that they are exhausted in the two truths. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 The Meditative Stabilization Definitely Revealing Suchness  says: 
The conventional and likewise the ultimate— 
There is not at all a third truth. 
Thus, it is clearly said that the enum eration is definite as the two truths. 
 
                                              
71 JN: yongs su bcad  has been translated as “an affirmative elimination” and as “positively set off”, rnam par bcad pa  has been 
translated as “elimination,” phen tshun spangs pa  has been translated as “mutua lly exclusive contradictories.” 
72 pitaputrasamagama . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
940 This text also says that there is the convention al truth and the ultimate truth, and that there 
is not a third truth. In this way, the truths are definite in number as two: conventional truths 
and ultimate truths.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, establishing the correctness of the need to become skilled in the two truths:) 
It is said that if the divisi on of the two truths is know n, one is not obscured with 
regard to the Subduer’s word, whereas if the division of the two truths is not 
known, one will not know the essence of the teaching. Furthermore, it must be 
known in accordance with how Nagarjuna settled it.  
 
It is necessary to become skilled in the two truths. This is because if one knows the divisions of the two truths, ultimate truth and conventional truth, one will not be obscured or ignorant 
with respect to the teachings of the Buddha. If, on the other hand, one does not know the 
division of the two truths into the convention al and ultimate, one will not know the essence 
of the Buddha’s teachings. How should the tw o truths be understood? They should be 
understood in accordance with how the protecto r Nagarjuna settled them in his six treatises 
that include Fundamental Wisdom . 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
There is no method of pacification in those outside 
The path of the honorable master Nagarjuna. They fall from the truths of the conventional and suchness. By falling from those liberation is not achieved. One who does not know the division of the two— Conventional truths as the method 
And ultimate truths as arisen from the method— 
Abides on a bad path through wrong conceptions. 
Hence, it is very important for those who wish liberation to become skilled in the 
two truths. 
 Chandrakirti says that for those who wander ou tside the path of Nagarjuna there will be no 
method for achieving peace. They degenerate  from the conventional truth and suchness, 
whereby they cannot achieve liberation. Therefor e, one who does not know the division of 
the two truths, that is, who does not know the conventional truth to be the method and does 
not know that ultimate truth arises from that  method, abides on a bad path through wrong 
conceptions. Hence, for those who wish to attain liberation it is important to become skilled 
in the two truths.  Friday morning, 9 March 2007  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 361) says: 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
941  
PART FOUR: SPECIAL INSIGHT 
9 Divisions of Special Insight 
(The presentation has three parts, the first of which is : [a summary of] the prerequisites for special insight:) 
When from observing the prerequisites of special insight as explained before the 
view realizing the two selflessnesses has been found, you should cultivate special 
insight. 
 
In order to achieve special insight it is necessa ry to collect its causes, which were explained 
before. First one must study special insight in de tail, rely on a teacher, and have wisdom. In 
particular, one must safeguard the three higher trainings of morality, concentration, and 
wisdom. One should also engage in collecting me rit, and find a solitary place for meditation 
where it is easy to obtain necessities such as  food, where there is access to a doctor, and so 
f o r t h .  O n e  m u s t  f i n d  a  p l a c e  s u c h  a s  t h a t  described previously free from danger, with 
attendants or helpers who have a subdued mind. Moreover, in the case of a nun or lay woman 
it would be best if the helper were a woman, and in the case of a monk or layman it would be 
best if the helper were a man.   These are the causes or prerequisites for at taining special insight, in dependence upon 
which one should study the subject of the se lflessness of persons and the selflessness of 
phenomena. Since this is not an easy topic, one should first study it well and then establish it 
by reasons. For example one reason is: the person or being does not exist truly because it does not exist as a truly existent one or many. Anot her reason is: the person does not exist truly 
because it is a dependent-arising. Likewise, an other reason is: the aggregates do not exist 
inherently because they are dependent-arisings. By means of such reasonings, an inferential 
cognizer realizing selflessness will arise in on e’s mind. Having found this view realizing the 
two selflessnesses, one should cultivate special insight. Thus, in this context the object of 
special insight is specifically the selflessness of persons or th e selflessness of phenomena.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the special insight to be cultivate by common beings will mainly be explained:) 
Question : How many [types of] special insight are there? 
Answer:  Here I will mainly indicate not th e special insights of those on high 
grounds but rather those to be cultivated while a common being. 
 
In this context the main expl anation given will be the cultiv ation of special insight by 
ordinary beings, rather than the special insights of superiors. In other words, here the special 
insights of those on the higher grounds, that is , arya beings, is not what is mainly explained, 
rather the special insight that is to be cultiv ated by ordinary beings is what is mainly 
explained.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The third, the actual divisions, has three parts, the first of which is: a brief indication of the divisions:) 
All inclusively, the divisions of the spec ial insights to be cultivated while a 
common being are those of the four natu res, the three appr oaches, and the six 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
942 searches. 
 
Through considering the complete divisions of special insight, from the point of view of 
entity there are four, from the point of view of  approach there are thr ee, and from the point 
of view of searching there are six.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The second, the extensive explanation has three parts, the first of which is: an explanation of the four natures:) 
The four are those described in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought73—thorough 
differentiation and so forth. Concerning th em, thorough differentiation is done in 
observation of the varieties whereas intens e differentiation is done in observation 
of the mode, [emptiness]. The first has two types, thorough investigation and 
thorough analysis; the second also has two types, investigation and analysis—
[respectively] analyses of coarse and subtle  objects. Identifications of those four are 
given in Asanga’s Grounds of Hearers74 and Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential 
Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom.  
 
With respect to the four entities mentioned in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought , a sutra that is 
included in the third wheel of Dharma, there are:  
(1) thorough differentiation ( rnam par ‘byed pa ) – special insight observing varieties, and  
(2) intense differentiation ( rab tu rnam par ‘byed pa ) – special insight obse rving modes, that is, 
emptinesses,  
each of which is further divided into two. The special insight observing varieties has two 
types: thorough investigation an d thorough analysis. The specia l insight observing modes also 
has two types: investigation and analysis, which ar e respectively analysis of coarser and subtler 
objects, for example, the coarse form that is th e form aggregate and the subtle form that is a 
particle or atom. These four entities are identi fied in Asanga’s and Ratnakarashanti’s texts as 
well as in other texts.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the explanation of the three from the viewpoint of approach:) 
The three approaches are those described in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought —
arisen from a sign [an imagistic remembranc e of experience gained earlier], arisen 
from thorough searching, and arisen from individual investigation. To illustrate 
identifications of these with respect, for instance, to the meaning of selflessness, 
the special insight arisen from a sign is a case of observing the selflessness already 
ascertained and taking to mind its sign; one does not perform much [additional] 
settling [of the meaning]. The special insigh t arisen from thorough searching is a 
settling [of the meaning] for the sake of ascertaining what was not ascertained earlier. The special insight arisen from in dividual investigation is a performing of 
analysis on a meaning already ascertai ned in the way [it was done] earlier. 
                                             
 
73 samdhinirmocana . 
74 shravakabhumi . 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
943  
The three doors or three approa ches of special insight are: 
1. special insight arisen from a sign, 2. special insight arisen from  thorough searching, and  
3. special insight arisen from individual investigation. In relation to the meaning of selflessness, the special insight arisen from a sign observes the 
selflessness already ascertained and pays attentio n to its sign, without doing much to settle it. 
In other words, one does not investigate it in de tail in order to settle it. The special insight 
arisen from thorough searching settles the mean ing of selflessness in order to ascertain that 
not previously ascertained. The special insight ar isen from individual investigation analyzes as 
before the meaning of selflessne ss that was already ascertained. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The third, the explanation of the six investigations, has three parts, the first of which is: a brief exposition that 
the six are by way of the object of observation of special insight:) 
The six investigations are a thorough  researching of meanings, things, 
characteristics, class, time, and reasoning, as well as individual investigation after 
searching.  
 
The six searches are: 
1. thorough researching of meanings, 2. thorough researching of things, 
3. thorough researchin g of characteristics, 
4. thorough researching of classes or sides, 
5. thorough researching of time, and 6. thorough researching of reasoning. Also having sought them, one individually investigates them,   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, individual explanations of the six:) 
Concerning those, to research the meaning is to make the search, “The meaning of 
this word is such and such.” To research things is to make the search, “This is an 
internal thing; that is an external thing.” To research characteri stics is to make the 
search, “This is an exclusive characteristic; that is a general characteristic,” or the 
common and the uncommon. To research cla sses is to search from the viewpoint 
of the unwholesome class—faults and disadvantages—and the wholesome class—
good qualities and advantages. To resear ch times is to make  the search, “Such 
occurred in the past; such will occur in the future, such is occurring in the 
present.” 
 
1. The researching of meanings is to, for exampl e, to investigate the meaning of a word such 
as “abhi,” which means higher and so forth. Anothe r example is to ask: “What is the meaning 
of the word “pillar”? A pillar is a support of beams.”   
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
944 2. The researching of things is, for example, to think “This is an  internal thing” with respect 
to, for example, the six consci ousnesses or the six sense powe rs, and to think “This is an 
external thing” with respect to houses, mountains, rivers, trees, and so forth.  
 
3. The researching of characteristics is to think “This is a specific characteristic” or “This is a 
general characteristic.” These terms usually re fer to specifically characterized phenomena 
(which according to the lower tenets are establ ished by way of their own characteristics) and 
generally characterized phenomena (which in th is context refers to imputed phenomena that 
are not established by way of their own characte ristics). There is also the researching of the 
common and the uncommon, for example, common paths and uncommon paths. For 
example, meditating on impermanence, sufferi ng, and so forth are common paths, whereas 
meditating on the mind of enlightenment is an uncommon path of the mahayana. There are 
also common attainments and uncommon a ttainments. Likewise, there are common 
perceptions and uncommon perceptions in th at this room, for example, is a common 
perception in that it is perceived by all of us , whereas there is also an uncommon hall that is 
the specific hall perceived by each one of us . In addition, there is common property which 
can be utilized by everyone, and uncommon proper ty which can only be used by its respective 
owner.  4. The researching of classes or sides refers to  researching the black side, that is, faults and 
disadvantages, and researching the white side, good qualities and benefits. The black side 
refers to the ten non-virtuous actions – killing,  stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisive 
speech, harsh words, idle talk, covetousness, ma lice, and wrong view – which have many faults 
and disadvantages in that they bring the result of suffering. The white side, on the other hand 
is the ten virtuous actions of abandoning kill ing, abandoning stealing, abandoning sexual 
misconduct, abandoning lying, abandoning divisive speech, abandoning harsh words, 
abandoning idle talk, abandoning covetousne ss, abandoning malice, and abandoning wrong 
view. Another way of positing them is that th e white side is nirvana and the black side is 
samsara or cyclic existence, whic h is so-called because having been  born in cyclic existence one 
will always experience suffering. Perhaps today there is a bit of happiness, but tomorrow there 
will be suffering again. It is like the fact that finding oneself in a mire or a swamp, one cannot easily get out   5. The researching of times is to make the sear ch, “Such occurred in the past; such will occur 
in the future, such is occurring in the pres ent.” For example, acco rding to the Buddhist 
teachings a 1,000 buddhas will visit this world in the fortunate eon, among which three have 
already passed, Buddha Shakyamuni has presen tly come, and other 996 buddhas will come in 
the future. Similarly, there were kings of the past who were very  powerful, in the future there 
will be such kings, and in the present there are such kings (although nowadays most kings do not have much power!). Another example is th e twenty-five kings of Shambala, twenty of 
whom have gone, one who is present, and four wh o have yet to come. There are also wars that 
have passed, for example, the First and Second World Wars, there are presently wars in this 
world, and perhaps in the future there will be a third and fourth world war.  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
945  
 The researching of reasoning is of four ty pes. The reasoning of relativity is from 
the viewpoint of the arising of effects in dependence on causes and conditions. It 
is also a researching from the viewpoin t of the conventional, the ultimate, and 
their bases individually. The reasoning of the performance of function is from the 
viewpoint of the performance by phenomena of their own functions, such as fire 
performing the function of burning. One searches out, “This is the phenomenon; 
this is the functioning; this phen omenon performs that function.”  
 
6. The researching of reasoning is of four types: (1) the reasoning of relativity or dependence – this research is from the point of view of 
results arising in dependence on causes and conditions. For example, a baby arises from 
intercourse between its father and mother, a harv est arises from seeds sown by a farmer in a 
field, and so forth. In the latter case the ca use is the seeds, while the conditions are the 
farmer’s work, the field, water, sun, and so fort h. This is also a researching from the point of 
view of the conventional, the ultimate, and their individual bases. All phenomena, that is, all 
bases, have two natures: a conventional trut h and an ultimate truth. For example, smoke 
arises from fire, this smoke is a conventional trut h, but is it established inherently? It is empty 
of inherent establishment, this being its ultimate truth.  (2) the reasoning of the performa nce of function – this is from the point of view of, for 
example, fire performing the function of bu rning wood, fuel, houses , and so forth, water 
performing the function of destruction by flood i n g ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h .  I n  f a c t  a l l  c o m p o u n d e d  
phenomena have their specific functions. For example, what is the function of the five 
fingers? The Tibetans say that the index finger  functions to point, th e middle to show that 
someone is bad, the thumb to show  that something is very good (and it can also be used for 
hitchhiking!). Thus, one searches out, “This is the phenomenon; this is the functioning; this 
phenomenon performs that function.”  
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
The reasoning of proof by means of a co rrectness is to prove a meaning without 
contradicting valid cognitions. It is a se arching out within wondering whether such 
and such has a valid cognition—direct, infe rential, or believable scripture. The 
reasoning of nature is to research from the viewpoint of (1) natures renowned in 
the world, such as heat bein g the nature of fire and moisture being the nature of 
water, (2) inconceivable natures, and (3) su bsisting natures. It is done by way of 
believing in them and not contemplating other “reasons” for their not being like 
that.  
 
(3) the reasoning of proof by means of a co rrectness – this establishes a meaning without 
contradicting valid cognition. This is because if  something is not realized by a valid cognizer, 
it does not exist. For example, that a pen exis t s  i n  f r o n t  o f  o n e  i s  s e e n  b y  a  v a l i d  d i r e c t  
perceiver without any need for reasoning. An in ferential cognizer, on the other hand, is able 
to realize that which is not seen  directly, for example, seeing waterfowl soaring at a distance 
one can infer the existence of water, seeing fire on a mountain side at a distance one can infer 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
946 the existence of fire, and so forth. These phenomena are understood by means of valid 
inferential cognizers. In addition, there are phenomena that are understood based on valid 
scriptures. For example, one scripture says  “From generosity, wealth; from morality, 
happiness” and that this is so is only established by valid texts since it cannot be directly 
realized. In other words, that by practicing  generosity one obtains wealth, and that by 
practicing morality one obtains a good rebirth, can only be understood by citations from valid 
scriptures.  
 
(4) The reasoning of nature or reality ( chos nyid ) – this is to research from the viewpoint of: 
(1) natures renowned in the world, that is, those known to worldly beings, such as that heat is 
the nature of fire, moisture is the nature of water, heaviness is the nature of earth, and 
lightness is the nature of wind, 
(2) inconceivable natures, such as  the qualities of a buddha, and  
(3) subsisting natures, thos e that exist naturally.  
This is done by way of believing in them an d not contemplating other reasons for their being 
like that.  
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 363) says: 
(Third, those six are explained as of three types by way of their object of observation:) 
Through the positing of six types in that w ay, it can be ascertained that the objects 
to be known by a yogi are threefold—meanin gs of terms, the varieties of objects of 
knowledge, and the mode. The first research  is posited in terms of the first. The 
researching of things and of exclusive ch aracteristics is posited in terms of the 
second. The remaining three as well as researching general characteristics are 
posited in terms of the third. 
 
These six searches are of three types by way of their observed object. through positing the six 
searches it can be ascertained that a yogi has three objects of knowledge: 
1. meanings of terms or meanings expressed,  2. the objects of knowledge that are varieties, and  3. the objects of knowledge that are modes. The first research among the six – the researchin g of meanings – is posited in terms of the 
meanings of terms or the meanings expressed. The researching of things and the researching 
of specific characteristics are po sited in terms of the objects of knowledge that are varieties. 
The remaining three – the researching of classes,  the researching of time, and the researching 
of reasoning – as well as the researching of gene ral characteristics are po sited in terms of the 
objects of knowledge that are modes.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The third, condensing the divisions, has two parts, the first of which is: that the three approaches and the six 
researches are included in the four natures:) 
The approaches of the four special insights  explained first are three; the modes of 
searching are said to be six. Thus, the three approaches and six researches are 
included in the former four. 
FPMT Basic Program                        Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim  by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Stages of the Path                            ILTK – 6-9 March 2007 (20) 
947  
The three approaches or three doors of the four special insi ghts and the six researches – 
researching of meanings, researching of things, researching of characteristics the researching 
of classes, researching of time, and researching of  reasoning – are included in the four entities 
of special insight.   
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, special insight involves the four mental activities:) 
Asanga’s Grounds of Hearers  says that the four mental activities explained earlier—
forcible engagement and so forth [i nterrupted engagement, uninterrupted 
engagement, and spontaneous engagement ]—are common to both calm abiding 
and special insight. Thus special insight al so involves the four mental activities. 
 
Special insight has the four ment al attentions of engagement: 
1. forcible engagement, 
2. interrupted engagement,  
3. uninterrupted engagement, and  4. spontaneous engagement: These four were explained in the context of developing calm abiding by way of the nine 
stages, six powers, and four mental attentions. Thus, they are common to both calm abiding 
and special insight. In other words, special insight also has the four mental attentions. 
 
END 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             Monday afternoon, 12 March 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 364) says: 
10 How to Cultivate Special Insight 
The presentation has three pa rts: (1) showing the meanin g of the statements that 
special insight is cultivated in dependence  on calm abiding, (2) from the viewpoint 
of the path of which vehicle—great and smal l—this is the system and (3) the actual 
mode of cultivating special insight in dependence on calm abiding. 
The meaning of the statements that  special insight is cultivated in dependence on calm abiding 
(This section has eight parts, the first of which is: the statement in many texts that they are to be cultivated in that order: ) 
The Sutra Unraveling the Thought says that having first ac hieved calm abiding, one 
should afterward cultivate special insight. In the same fashion many texts such as 
those of Maitreya, Asanga’s Grounds of Bodhisattvas75 and Grounds of Hearers,  as well 
as Bhavaviveka, Shantideva, Ka malashila’s three works on the Stages of Meditation,  
and Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom speak of 
[this procedure]. 
 
That the order is that first calm abiding is de veloped and then special insight is developed is 
taught in many texts. The Sutra Unraveling the Thought , for example, says that first one must 
accomplish calm abiding and after that one shou ld cultivate special in sight. This was also 
taught by Maitreya in his treatises, by Asanga in his treatises such as Grounds of Bodhisattvas  
and Grounds of Hearers,  by Bhavaviveka and Shantideva, by Kamalashila in his three works on 
the Stages of Meditation,  and by Ratnakarashanti in his Quintessential Instructions on the 
Perfection of Wisdom . 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, those texts do not say that first a calm abiding observing one of the varieties is generated and then the mere 
sustaining [of the mind] within observi ng selflessness is special insight:) 
The thought of these texts is not that first, without observing the meaning of 
selflessness, one generates a calm abiding observing any object of observation and 
then the later sustaining [of the mind] within observing selflessness is special 
insight. This is because the two—calm  abiding and special insight—are not 
differentiated by way of object of observation.  
 
These texts do not say that firs t one achieves a calm abiding observing the varieties, that is, 
conventional truths, and then to merely observe selflessness from within it is special insight. 
In other words, special insight is not that having generated a calm abiding observing any observed object whatsoever, one observes selflessness. This is so because calm abiding and 
special insight are not differentiated in terms of their observed objects, rather they are 
differentiated in terms of how they are develo ped. Thus, in the case of calm abiding one 
 
75 bodhisattvabhumi . 
948 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
engages in single-pointed or stabilizing meditation, whereas in the case of special insight one 
engages in analytical meditation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Also, Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  
explains that first one generates a calm abiding within observing suchness—the emptiness of duality between object and su bject—and later generates special insight 
through analytical meditation within observ ing that same object of observation.  
 
Ratnakarashanti says that one generates calm  abiding observing the emptiness of duality 
between object and object-possessor and then generates special insight through analytical meditation observing the same observed object . Therefore, calm abiding and special insight 
are not differentiated in terms of their obse rved objects, but in terms of how they are 
meditated or cultivated. In order to develop calm abiding one meditates single-pointedly 
without doing analysis, whereas in the case of special insight one meditates while doing 
analysis.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Also, the superior Asanga describes a sp ecial insight observing the varieties and 
says that after having first generated calm  abiding, in dependence on it a special 
insight is cultivated having the aspect of [viewing of the lower level as] gross and 
[the upper level as] peaceful. Furthermor e ,  A s a n g a  s p e a k s  o f  t h i s  a s  a  p a t h  
common to both non-Buddhist and Buddhist as well as to common being and 
superior. 
 
Also Asanga says that there is a special insi ght observing varieties. He says that after 
generating calm abiding, in dependence on it on e cultivates a special insight having the aspect 
of coarseness and peacefulness. One analyzes the desire realm as being coarse due to its many 
sufferings, and analyzes the first concentration as being more peaceful, whereby one abandons 
mundane coarse attachment to the five qualities or sense objects of the desire realm – pleasant forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and tactil e objects. Asanga says that the meditation on 
coarseness-peacefulness is common to both Buddhists and non-Buddhists and also common 
to ordinary beings and superiors, meaning that everyone does this type of meditation. Thus, 
because one is a Buddhist one cannot say that it  is not necessary to meditate on coarseness-
peacefulness, and likewise because one is a superi or one cannot say that it is not necessary to 
meditate on it. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 365) says: 
(Third, when calm abiding is initially being achieved, exc ept for setting [the mind] one-pointedly on the object of 
observation it is not suitable to analyze in many ways:) 
Therefore, when one who has not achieved calm abiding before is newly achieving 
it, except for setting [the mind] one- pointedly on whatever the object of 
observation is, it is not achievable within  analyzing the object of observation in 
949 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
many ways. For, if done the former way, calm abiding is achieved whereas if the 
latter, achievement is impossible. 
 
When one is first meditating calm abiding, one sets the mind single-pointedly on the 
observed object without investigating and analyz ing it in many ways. In other words, those 
who have not previously achieved calm abiding an d are striving to achieve it should only set 
their mind single-pointedly on the observed ob ject and should not analyze it in many ways, 
such as in terms of its being impermanent, sufferi ng, empty, and so forth. If one first strives to 
meditate single-pointedly on the observed object without analyzing it, one will achieve calm 
abiding, whereas if one analyzes it in many w ays one will never achieve it. In short, if one 
wishes to achieve calm abiding, one must me ditate single-pointedly and not engage in 
analytical meditation. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, when one who has first achieved calm abiding per forms analytical meditation instead of just stabilizing 
meditation, a powerful one -pointed meditative stabilization is achieved:) 
When one who has first achieved calm  abiding does not just extend the 
conditioning to mere stabilizing meditation as before but performs analytical 
meditation in which the object appropri ate to the occasion—the mode or the 
varieties—is individually analyzed with  wisdom, finally a special one-pointed 
meditative stabilization can be induced. Since through the former [mode of mere 
stabilization] a very powerful one-pointed meditative stabilization such as is achieved through analytical meditation ca nnot [be induced], analytical meditation 
is praised. 
 
If, on the other hand, those who have already ac hieved calm abiding, instead of just doing 
stabilizing meditation, also do analytical medita tion, their meditative stabilization will become 
more powerful. In other words, if one who has achieved calm abiding does not just cultivate 
single-pointed meditation but also does analytic al meditation on the mo des or varieties with 
wisdom, at the end a special single-pointed medita tive stabilization will be induced. Since the 
meditative stabilization that is achieved throug h analytical meditation is more powerful than 
that achieved by stabilizing meditation alone, it is praised as being superior.  
 In short, although initially one should not do  analytical meditation when cultivating calm 
abiding, if upon having achieved calm abidin g one engages in analytical meditation, one’s 
single-pointed meditative stabilization will become stronger. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, this fact of achievement is the reason for there being the two different  modes of procedure in calm abiding and 
special insight even with respec t to one object of observation:) 
Just that mode of achievement is how, in dependence on first having sought calm 
abiding, to cultivate special insight afterwards. Therefore, it is the general reason 
for there being the two different modes of  procedure in calm abiding and special 
insight even though the object of observation—selflessness, for instance—might be 
the same. 
 
950 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
Thus, there are two different modes of procedur e in relation to calm abiding and special 
insight. Because of this, one first achieves calm  abiding, and then, in dependence on it, one 
achieves special insight. Although the observed  object is the same, selflessness, there is a 
different way of cultivating calm abiding and special insight. By meditating on the observed 
object single-pointedly one achieves calm abidin g, whereas by taking the same observed object 
and analyzing it, one achieves special insight. Th erefore, with respect to one object, there are 
two different procedures, one for developing calm abiding and one for developing special 
insight. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, the great power of cultivating the special insight which has the aspect of gross ness/peacefulness and the special 
insight which has the aspect of selflessness:) 
In particular, the cultivation of the special insight having the aspect of 
grossness/peacefulness—individually analyzing the faults of a lower realm and 
advantages of an upper realm—and the cult ivation of the special insight having the 
aspect of selflessness—in which the meaning of selflessness is analyzed and 
sustained through the wisdom of indivi dual investigation—necessarily involve 
generation of strong and steady ascertai nment. Therefore, they have great power 
with respect to abandoning their individual objects of abandonment. 
 
There is special insight that has the aspect of coarseness-peacefulness and special insight that 
has the aspect of selflessness. Th e latter, for example, meditates on the seven-point analysis of 
the self of persons, which is found in the Supplement to the Middle Way . It also meditates on 
the reasonings found in Fundamental Wisdom  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o  t h e  s e l f  o f  p h e n o m e n a :  
phenomena are not produced from self, from other, from both, and without cause, and 
therefore are not generated ultimately. There are five types of reasonings that prove the 
selflessness of phenomena, the main one be ing the reasoning of dependent-arising: 
phenomena are not truly existent because they are dependent-arisings. One does analytical 
meditation on these reasonings in order to de velop special insight, wh ereby one’s meditation 
becomes more and more powerful.  
 One can also meditate on coarseness-peac efulness, whereby one abandons the mundane 
objects of abandonment but without being able to  abandon all afflictions. The special insight 
observing selflessness, on the other hand, can abandon all the objects of abandonment – the 
afflictive obscurations, obscurations to kn owledge, fruitional obscurations, and karmic 
obscurations.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 366) says: 
(Seventh, there are yet other types of special insight observing the varieties:) 
Not only is there cultivation of special in sight observing the varieties which has the 
aspect of grossness/peacefulness for the sake  of abandoning the manifest afflictive 
emotions, but also, as is explained in Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on 
the Perfection of Wisdom,  there is analytical meditation thoroughly differentiating 
the character of the eighteen spheres. Thus, using this as an illustration you should 
understand that there are other specia l insights which involve meditation 
differentiating the objects comprising the varieties. 
951 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
 
There exist other kinds of specia l insight observing the varieties.  Thus, there is not only the 
special insight observing the varieties that ha s the aspect of coarseness-peacefulness which 
abandons the manifest afflictions, but as expl ained by Ratnakarashanti, there is also an 
analytical meditation that thoroughly different iates the characteristics or definitions of the 
eighteen constituents, whereby one develops spec ial insight. The eighteen constituents are: 
the six objects – the form constituent, sound cons tituent, odor constituent, taste constituent, 
tactile object constituent, and phenomena cons tituent; the six sense powers – the eye sense 
power constituent, the ear sense power constitu ent, the nose sense power constituent, the 
tongue sense power constituent, the body sense power constituent, and the mental sense 
power constituent; and the six consciousnesse s – the eye consciousness constituent, ear 
consciousness constituent, nose consciousness co nstituent, tongue consciousness constituent, 
body consciousness constituent, and mental co nsciousness constituent. Each of these has a 
different definition and different characteristic s. Thus, there exists a special insight that 
meditates on these eighteen constituents. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Eighth, unlike the order expl ained in Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom,  the 
order here accords with that asserted by Shantideva and so forth:) 
Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  explains that 
prior to generating calm abiding and special insight observing the mode 
[emptiness], calm abiding and special insigh t on the level of a yoga observing the 
varieties is to be generated. However, ac cording to the assertions of Shantideva, 
Kamalashila, and so forth, first any calm  abiding is generated and then special 
insight is. Just the special insight observing the mode will be taught [here]. 
 
The order mentioned in Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on  the Perfection of Wisdom  
is different from the order mentioned here, which accords with the order explained by 
Shantideva and so forth. Ratnakarashanti explai ns that before developing calm abiding and 
special insight observing modes, one generates a calm abiding and special insight which are 
the level of a yoga observing varieties. Howeve r, according to Shantideva, Kamalashila, and 
others, having first generated calm abiding ob serving any observed object, that is, either 
varieties or modes, one then generates specia l insight. However, here the special insight 
observing modes or thusness is shown in particular.  
 For example, initially one could meditate on the tip of one’s nose. Having achieved calm abiding on the tip of one’s nose, one can go on to examine how the tip of  one’s nose exists by 
asking: Is it permanent or impermanent? Is it  the nature of suffering or the nature of 
happiness? Is it empty or not? Does it exist inherently or not? Is it matter or consciousness or 
a non-associated compositional factor? One should  analyze the tip of one’s  nose in this way. 
By doing so, based on one little object, one can develop both calm abiding and special insight. 
In fact, Atisha, in his Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment , says that one can take any object 
whatsoever as the basis for developing single-p ointed meditation through the nine stages by 
applying the six powers and four mental attentions. After that one can meditate on the same object, examining whether it exists as an inherent ly existent one or as an inherently existent 
many using the reasoning: It is not an inherently  existent one because it has parts. With parts 
952 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
and without parts are contradictory. That withou t parts does not exist. It is also not an 
inherently existent many because it is not an inherently existent one. This is because for it to 
be many there must be one. One should engage  in such analytical meditation whereby one 
will develop special insight. 
 There are people who say that one should medi tate on the nature of the mind. The nature 
of the mind of being clear and knowing is the conventional nature of the mind, whereas the 
ultimate nature of mind is its emptiness of inherent existence.  
 Then, there are people who want to meditate  on mahamudra, the great seal, and others 
who want to meditate on dzog-chen , the great perfection. What is the great perfection? What 
does one meditate on? Some people say that it is  not necessary to do analytical meditation but 
that without taking any object of meditation at  all, one should just remain like a statue 
without thinking, while trying to recognize the nature of the mind (of course, without falling 
asleep!). His Holiness the Dalai Lama often advi ses the study of a text by the Nyingma lama, 
Do Drubchen, whose present incarnation lives in Sikkim and is completely against the Dalai 
Lama and the Gelugpas. Although this lama’s text discusses dzog-chen, it sometimes seems 
that he is describing the primordial princi pal asserted by the Samkyas, which upon being 
discovered disappears, implying a type of nihili sm. The Samkyas say that if the self or being 
examines from where the many results come, it  will find that they are created by the 
primordial principal. The primordial principal, upon seeing that the being has recognized it 
as the cause of all creations, becomes ashamed an d withdraws all its manifestations, that is, all 
results, whereby all that remains is the self or  knower or consciousness, which is permanent 
and neither a result or a cause. At this time th e self achieves nirvana. These are the assertions 
of the Samkyas and if you wish to verify them you can go to Varanasi to study with them. I 
myself have read many of their texts. The text  that His Holiness refers to is a Nyingma text, 
not a Gelugpa text. Therefore, it would be best to follow the texts of the many Indian pandits 
who explain the need to do analysis, rather than  just doing dzog-chen, dzog-chen, dzog-chen. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 366) says: 
From the viewpoint of the pat hs of which vehicles—great and small—this is the system 
(This has three parts, the first of wh ich is: an explanation that this procedure is common to all vehicles—great and 
small—and is similar even for the three lower tantra sets:) 
Question : From the viewpoint of what vehicles—great or small—and sutra or mantra 
is this the mode of generating calm abiding and special insight? 
Answer:  It is common to the two vehicles—that of the hearers and solitary realizers 
and that of the perfections—and is common to the four schools of tenets. In my 
Great Exposition of Secret Mantra  I have explained that  the assertion of the 
individual tantras and their great commentat ors is that it is similar also for the 
three lower tantra sets with in the mantra [vehicle]. 
 
This system is from the point of  view of which vehicle –the grea t or the small? This procedure 
is common to all vehicles and is similar also in the three lower tantra classes or sets – action 
tantra, performance tantra, and yoga tantra.  
 First the question is asked: from the point of view of which vehicles – the great or the small 
vehicles and the sutra or the mantra vehicles – is this the procedure for generating calm 
abiding and special insight? The re sponse is that it is common to  the two vehicles, that of the 
953 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             hearers and solitary realizers, that is, the hin ayana, and that of the pe rfections, the mahayana. 
It is also common to all four tenet systems: the Vaibhashika, Sautrantika, Chittamatra, and 
Madhyamaka. It is also common to the three lowe r tantra sets of the mantra vehicle – action 
tantra, performance tantra, and yoga tantra.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 367) says: 
(Second, [according to Ratnakarashanti ,] highest yoga tantra asserts a mode of  achieving calm abiding and special 
insight through analytical and stabilizing yogas ob serving mind-only, suchness, and so forth:) 
With respect to highest yoga tantra, Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on 
the Perfection of Wisdom  says: 
The Guhyasamaja Tantra76 says: 
When one’s own mind is analyzed, 
All phenomena dwell in one’s mind. 
These phenomena dwell as vajras of space. 
Phenomena and their nature do not exist. 
Also, the Descent into Lanka Sutra says: 
Based on mind-only 
External objects are not imputed. 
 
According to Ratnakarashanti, highest yoga tant ra asserts a way to achieve calm abiding and 
special insight through analytical and stabilizin g yogas observing mind-only, suchness, and so 
forth. Ratnakarashanti’s text cites the Guhy asamaja Tantra as saying that all phenomena 
abide in the nature of the mind. They abide as  space vajras. Phenomena and their realities or 
natures, that is, their emptinesses, do not exis t, meaning that they do not exist inherently. 
The Descent into Lanka Sutra  says that in dependence on mere mind, or mind-only, external 
objects are not imputed. This indicates that th e objects of calm abiding are merely mind and 
not external phenomena. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Through such Ratnakarashanti explains that  three levels of yoga—observing mind-
only, observing suchness, and without appearance—are taught [in highest yoga 
tantra]. It appears that he explains how to achieve calm abiding and special insight 
through stabilizing and analytical meditati on on the first two levels in the manner 
explained above. Therefore, he asserts that the mode of generating in the mental 
continuum the special insight observing th e mode is similar [also in those two 
levels of highest yoga tantra]. 
 
There are three levels of yoga – observing mind-only, observing suchness, and without 
appearance. Ratnakarashanti explains how to achieve calm abiding and special insight through respectively stabilizing meditation and an alytical meditation on the first two levels – 
 
76 guhyasamaja . 
954 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
observing mind-only and observing suchness. Theref ore, he says that the way to generate the 
special insight observing modes is similar in these two.  
 
Tuesday morning, 13 March 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 367) says: 
(Third, even in highest yoga tantra the mode of generating an understanding of the view must be in accordance with the 
Madhyamika texts, and there is the fine point that al though one on the stage of completion must, during meditative 
equipoise, initially set [the mind] within t he view, analytical meditation is not done:) 
Our own system is as follows: Even in highest yoga tantra the mode of generating 
an understanding of the view must be done in accordance with what appears in the Madhyamika texts. With respect to how it is sustained, at some time during 
states subsequent to meditative equipoise on the stages of generation and 
completion, one does take suchness to mind within analyzing it.  
 
Also on the occasion of meditating on highes t yoga tantra, one must do so according to 
generate the correct view of emptiness of the Madhyamaka system. However, during the 
meditative equipoise of the completion stage, one must set the mind within the correct view 
but without actually doing analytical medita tion. In other words, according to our own 
system, the Prasangika Madhyamaka, even in highest yoga tantra one must generate an 
understanding of the correct view in accordan ce with the Madhyamaka texts. This is then 
sustained in the subsequent attainment of the generation stage and completion stage by at 
times doing some analytical meditation on suchness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
However, when those on the stage of comple tion who have attained the capacity to 
concentrate on essential points in the body sustains suchness in meditative 
equipoise, although they  definitely must meditate with in setting [the mind] in the 
context of the view, they do not perfor m the analytical meditation of special 
insight as it appears in other texts. Theref ore, with respect to highest yoga tantra 
do not posit analytical meditation as one-pointed meditation on suchness from 
within the context of the view subsidiary to stabilizing [meditation]. Since to show 
clearly the reasons why doing such is sufficient is not appropriate here, I will explain here the reasons for what is  to be done on the other paths. 
 
Those on the completion stage who have attained  the ability to penetrate the essential points 
of the body, that is, to dissolve the winds into the various chakras (the six or four or eight 
according to the different tantras), should not do  the analytical meditati on of special insight 
as it appears in other texts but should just sustain suchness in meditative equipoise. In other words, on the stages of the completion stage – (1) the isolation of speech, (2) the isolation of 
mind, (3) illusory body, (4) clear light, and (5) union – one does not do analytical meditation. In the context of highest yoga tantra do not posit a single-pointed meditation on suchness 
that concerns the view that is incidentally posited as analytical meditation. There are many reasons for such but it would not be approp riate to mention them here since they are 
mentioned in other texts. 
955 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 337) says: 
The actual mode of cultiv ating special insight in dependence on calm abiding 
(This section has two parts, the first of which is: the need to find the view:) 
If the view of selflessness is not found, no matter what system  of meditation you 
perform, that meditation will not dwell in the meaning of suchness; therefore, it is 
necessary to find the view. 
 
Now the actual way in which to cultivate specia l insight in dependence on having previously 
developed calm abiding is explained. Initially one has to find the correct view of emptiness. 
This is because without finding the correct view  of selflessness, no ma tter what system of 
meditation one uses it will not ab ide in the meaning of suchness. Therefore, it is necessary to 
first understand or find the view – the correct view of the emptiness of inherent existence of 
all phenomena. This is the view that needs to be found or understood and then relied upon.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 368) says: 
(The second, a summary of the essentials of how to sustain [the view], has three parts, the fi rst of which is: the actual 
mode of sustaining, which in tu rn has six parts; the first is: 
The need for both analytical and stabilizing meditation:) 
If although one has the view, one does not become mindful of it during 
meditation on suchness and does not meditate  within being set in its context, such 
will not serve as meditation on suchness.  Therefore, to set [the mind] without 
contemplating anything at the end of first doing a little analysis of the view is not a 
sustaining of suchness. Even to become accustomed to a mere placement within 
the view upon becoming mindful of it is exhausted as just the mode of sustaining 
[a session] in calm abiding explained in th e previous [section]. Thus, such is not 
the meaning of the texts describing a mode of sustaining special insight which is different from that. 
 
The way in which to sustain the view concerns th e actual way to meditate on it, which is in 
addition to the preparatory practices and the concluding activities. When one does 
meditation in general, one first engages in the preparatory practices that include cleaning the 
room, setting out a cushion, arranging offerings on  an altar, and so fort h, as well as that of 
developing a correct motivation. The concluding  activities of a medi tation session include 
those activities that are usually done during a retreat. With resp ect to the activity of eating 
food, for example, one first has to do the prep aration of cutting vegetables, putting them in 
the pot, cooking them, setting the table, and so  forth. After that, one actually engages in 
eating the food – the actual activity. Having eaten, there are the conclu ding activities to do 
such as washing the dishes and pots, rinsing one’s mouth, and so forth.  
 During the actual meditation session, both an alytical meditation and stabilizing meditation 
are needed. Having understood  emptiness correctly, one then  needs to remember or be 
mindful of it during meditation on suchness. If  one does not meditate like this, it will not 
become meditation on suchness. In other words,  if one does not meditate from within the 
correct view of emptiness, it will not become a meditation on suchness. Thus, to first do a 
956 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
little bit of analysis of the co rrect view and then to abide wi thout contemplating anything at 
all, is not meditation on emptin ess or suchness, but is similar to  sleeping. Also to understand 
emptiness a little bit and, having become mindfu l of it, to meditate merely setting the mind 
on it, is nothing more than meditation on ca lm abiding; it is not meditation on special 
insight. This is not the meaning of the scriptures that describe  a mode of sustaining special 
insight that is different from the mode of sustaining calm abiding. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the need for alternating analysis and stabilization:) 
Therefore, within individually analyzing the meaning of selflessness by means of 
wisdom as explained before, you should sustain [the view]. If analytical meditation 
is solely done, the calm abiding generate d earlier will degenerate. Therefore, you 
should sustain analysis having mounted the horse of calm abiding and then in 
between alternate it with stabilizing meditation. 
 
It is necessary to alternate analysis and stabiliz ation. Therefore, through individually analyzing 
the meaning of the selflessness of persons or  the selflessness of phenomena by means of 
wisdom, one should sustain specia l insight. If one does analytic al meditation alone, the calm 
abiding that was developed previously will de generate. Therefore, having mounted the horse 
of calm abiding, one should do analysis, alte rnating analytical meditation with stabilizing 
meditation. Just as a horse is a vehicle by means of which one travels more easily and without becoming tired, so too does calm abiding make  analytical meditation easier and less tiring. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, if through too much analysis the factor of stability lessens, stabilizing meditation is needed, and if too 
much stabilization harms [the ability] to analyze, great analysis is needed:) 
Furthermore, if through too much analytic al meditation the factor of stability 
lessens, you should perform much stabilizin g meditation and reinstate the factor of 
stability. If through too much stabilizing meditation you do not want to analyze or, 
though analyzing, it is unworkable and th e mind entirely goes into the factor of 
stability, you should perform much analytical meditation. 
 
If too much analytical meditation is done, the fa ctor of abiding on the object single-pointedly 
will diminish, whereupon stabilizing meditation will become necessary. If, on the other hand, 
too much stabilizing meditation is done, it will harms analytical meditation, whereupon 
analysis becomes necessary. In other words, if too much analytical meditation of the observed 
object is done, the ability to remain single-p ointed on the object will diminish, whereupon 
one should do more stabilizing meditation, conc entrating on the object, and thereby reinstate 
the factor of abiding, that is, reinstat e the ability to abide on the object.  
 If, on the other hand, one does too much st abilizing meditation whereby the mind does 
not want to analyze or, even though one analyz es, the analysis does not go well and the mind 
tends to want to abide single-pointedly on the object, one should do more analytical 
meditation.  
 
957 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 If the two—calm abiding and special insight—are cultivated in continuous equality, 
it is very powerful; therefore, you should do it that way. The last of Kamalashila’s 
[three works on the] Stages of Meditation  says: 
When, due to having cultivated special insight, wisdom becomes too 
dominant, calm abiding is lessened. Thereby, like a butterlamp set in a 
breeze, the mind wavers, due to which suchness is not seen very clearly. 
Therefore, at that time you should cultivate calm abiding. Also, when 
calm abiding is predominant, you will, like a person asleep, not see 
suchness very clearly. Therefore, at that time you should cultivate wisdom. 
 
Therefore, it is necessary to cultivate calm abiding and special insight in equal parts, for 
example, if one does two hours of meditation, one should do one hour of stabilizing 
meditation and one hour of analytical meditati on, whereby both will become very powerful. 
Kamalashila likewise says that if one cultiv ates special insight whereby wisdom becomes 
predominant, one’s calm abiding will diminish. Like the flame of a butterlamp wavering in 
the wind whereby forms are not clearly seen, similarly the mind will waver and one will not be 
able to clearly see suchness. At that time it is  necessary to cultivate ca lm abiding more. If, on 
the other hand, calm abiding is predominant it wi ll be like a person who has fallen asleep and 
does not see or remember anything , in that suchness will not be s een clearly. At that time one 
should cultivate wisdom or special insight or analytical meditation on emptiness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 369) says: 
(Fourth, it is not correct to hold that all thoughts are conceptions of signs, that is, conceptions of true 
existence, and hence stop analytical meditation:) 
With respect to sustained analysis in that way, it is not correct to hold all 
conceptions whatsoever to be conceptions of signs—that is, conceptions of true 
existence. For earlier it was frequently pr oven that thoughts which are conceptions 
of true existence are just one class of conceptions. 
 
It is not correct to think that all conceptions are conceptions of signs, that is, conceptions of true existence, and therefore not do analytical  meditation. In fact there are people who say 
that conceptions such as the mind of enlightenment or compassion are the same as 
conceptions of true existence or inherent existenc e. They say that the reason for this is that 
conceptions such as the mind of enlightenment also  bind us in cyclic existence, and liken this 
to the fact that whether one is bitten by a wh ite dog or bitten by a black dog, one has been 
bitten. Thus, they say that because all concepti ons are conceptions, they must be abandoned. 
In reality there do exist such st range views or strange ideas.  
 In short, it is not correct to hold that  all conceptions are conceptions of signs or 
conception of true existence, there being many types of conceptions that are good.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
958 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             (Fifth, also to think that when the ultimate is taken as a subject all conceptions by the mind are conceptions of 
signs—even though such is not asserted when a conventionality is taken as the subject—is not correct:) 
To view that whatever conceptuality conceives incurs the damage of reasoning is 
established to be a deprecation in whic h the object of reasoned negation is 
absurdly excessive; it is not the meaning of  the scriptures. If, on account of this, 
one does not assert such with regard to ot her subjects but thinks that whatever the 
mind conceives with respect to the nature  of phenomena is a conception of signs 
which is an adherence to true existence, th is also is a fallacy in which the mode of 
conception is faulty. All conceptions wh atsoever are not [conceptions of true 
existence] because it is said that one l ooking nearby [that is, one whose mind has 
not turned toward emptiness] who is seek ing release must make a determination of 
suchness through multiple approaches of scripture and reasoning. 
 
Also to think that although this  is not asserted with respect to  apprehending a basis that is a 
conventionality, all conceptions apprehending the ultimate are conceptions of signs is not 
correct. To think that whatever conceptuality apprehends is harmed by reasoning is not a 
correct recognition of the object of negation and is a deprecation. This is not the meaning of 
the scriptures and is not right. If one does not assert all conceptions with  respect to a table to 
be conceptions of true existence, but instead asserts that all concep tions with respect to 
suchness or thusness are conceptions of signs whic h are an adherence true existence, this too 
is a fallacy in which the mode of apprehension is faulty. Those who look nearby (that is, those 
who see only this life) and who are seeking liberation must determine suchness through many doors of scriptures and reasonings. In short, the conceptions that establish suchness by reasoning are not conceptions of true existence that are to be abandoned.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, a dispelling of an objection, has two parts, the first of which is: an objection:) 
Objection:  If meditation on suchness is fo r the sake of generating the non-
conceptual, it will not be generated from individual analysis because cause and 
effect must accord. 
 
First an objection is set out and then it is dispelled by means of the response. The objection is 
that if meditation on suchness is for the sake of generating non-conceptuality, it cannot be 
generated by doing analysis because cause and result must be similar. This refers to the fact 
these two are not similar in that the cause is analytical meditation and the result is a non-
conceptuality. However, this answer would imply, for example, that fr om a father who is a 
donkey and a mother who is a horse, a son that is a mule could not arise! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The second, the reply, has ten parts, the first of which is: that the non-conceptual exalted wisdom is generated 
through individual analysis:) 
Answer:  Concerning this, the Supramundane Victor himself gave a clear answer; 
the Kashyapa Chapter77 says: 
 
77 kashyapaparivarta . 
959 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
Kashyapa, it is like this: For exampl e, from the rubbing together of two 
branches by the wind fire arises, and once arisen the two branches are 
burned up. Similarly, Kashyapa, if one has the correct analytical 
intellect, a superior’s faculty of wisdom is generated. Through its 
generation the correct analytical intellect is consumed. 
Thus, Buddha said that a superior’s wisdom  is generated from individual analysis. 
 
The first part of the response is th at the non-conceptual exalted wisdom is generated through 
individual analysis. The Buddha himself said that, for example, just as if one rubs two sticks 
together, a fire will be generated that then burns the two sticks, so to if one has correct 
individual investigation, a superior’s faculty of wisdom will be generated and, having generated it, it will consume the correct indivi dual investigation. In other words, having 
generated a superior’s non-conceptual exalted wisdom, the individual investigation ceases. 
Therefore, a superior’s wisdom is gene rated from individual investigation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 370) says: 
(Second, if you analyze this way, non-conceptual wisdom will be generated; by just abandoning mental 
application it will not:) 
Kamalashila’s second [of three works on the] Stages of Meditation  says: 
They analyze in that way with wisd om. Then, when yogis definitely do 
not apprehend an entityness of anything ultimately, they enter into the 
non-conceptual meditative stabilization. They also realize the non-
entityness of all phenomena. The co nceptuality of those who do not 
cultivate individual analysis on the en tityness of things with wisdom but 
cultivate only just an abandonment of mental application will never be 
reversed. Also, they will never real ize non-entityness due to not having 
the illumination of wisdom. For, the Supramundane Victor himself s a i d  t h a t  w h e n  t h e  f i r e  o f  k n o w i n g  t h e  r e a l  j u s t  a s  i t  i s  a r i s e s  f r o m  c o r r e c t  i n d i v i d u a l  a n a l y s i s  l i k e  t h e  f i r e  o f  s t i c k s  r u b b e d  t o g e t h e r ,  t h e  wood of conceptuality is burned. 
 
If one analyzes in this way, one will generate  a non-conceptual exalted wisdom, whereas one 
will not generate it by abandoning mental a ttention. Kamalashila says that when, through 
thoroughly analyzing with wisdom, yogis definite ly do not apprehend an entitiness of things 
ultimately, they enter into a non-conceptual medita tive stabilization. At that time they realize 
the non-entitiness of all phenomena, that is, they realize that all phenomena do not exist 
inherently or truly. However, for those who do not meditate through individually 
investigating with wisdom the entitiness of th ings, but instead cultivate the abandonment of 
mental attention, their conceptuality will never be eliminated. Also they will never realize the emptiness of inherent or true existence due to not having the illumination of wisdom. This is 
because the Buddha himself said that correct individual investigation brings about the non-conceptual knowing of reality. Just like fire arises from rubbing two sticks together and then burns the same two sticks, so too does the non-conceptual mind of an arya’s meditative equipoise arise from conceptuality and then burn it up.  
960 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
 
Tuesday afternoon, 13 March 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 370) says: 
(Third, it would be very absurd if cause and effect had to be similar in all respects:) 
If such were not the case, then the ar ising of the uncontaminated from the 
contaminated, of the supramundane fr om the mundane, of a buddha from a 
sentient being, or a superior from a common being, and so forth, would not occur 
because cause and effect would be dissimilar. 
 
If cause and result had to be similar in all resp ects it would be very absurd. For example, if 
cause and result had to be similar in all respec ts, then the arising of an uncontaminated path 
from a contaminated path, the arising of a supramundane path from a mundane path, the 
arising of a buddha from a sentient being, the ar ising of a superior from an ordinary being, 
and so forth would be impossible because these causes and their result are dissimilar. In other 
words, the contaminated and th e uncontaminated are dissimilar, as are the supramundane 
and mundane, a buddha and a sentient being, an ordinary being and a superior. Likewise, 
also an infant becoming a youth, becoming an adult, and becoming an old man or woman 
could not happen because they are dissimilar in that , for example, the baby of five of six days 
and the 100 year old man or woman he or  she becomes are completely dissimilar. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, the deriding of adhering to object of analysis, analyzer, and so forth in Nagarjuna’s Essay on the Mind 
of Enlightenment  and so forth indicate a refutation of adherence to true existence; they do not refute the 
wisdom of individual analysis:) 
Nagarjuna’s Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment  says: 
How could emptiness be where 
Conceptuality has appeared? 
The tathagatas do not perceive 
Minds having the aspect of object analyzed and analyzer. 
Enlightenment is not present where 
Object of analysis and analyzer exist. 
 
How can emptiness appear to a mind that has th e appearance of true existence? The object 
analyzed and the mind that has the aspect of an analyzer are not seen by the tathagatas, 
meaning that a truly existent object of analysis  and a truly existent analyzer are not seen by 
them. There is no enlightenment as long as obje ct of analysis and anal yzer are apprehended to 
be truly existent. All phenomena do not exist inherently, therefore the object analyzed and 
the analyzer also do not exist inherently. This la ck of true existence needs to be analyzed with 
wisdom.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
He is indicating that one wh o has the conception of true  existence with respect to 
an object analyzed and an analyzer has no attainment of enlightenment. If he were 
961 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
refuting the wisdom of individual analysis and were refuting mere object analyzed 
and analyzer, it would be contradictory for him to settle suchness in that text 
through many approaches of investigation by way of individual analysis. Also, if 
buddhas did not perceive those tw o, they would be non-existent. 
 
The verse from Nagarjuna’s text indicates that  one who has a conception of true existence 
with respect to an object analyzed and an anal yzer cannot attain enlightenment. He does not 
refute the wisdom of individual investigatio ns nor the mere object analyzed and mere 
analyzer, otherwise it would be contradictory fo r him to settle suchness in that same text by 
many doors of the analysis of individual inve stigation. If buddhas did not see the object 
analyzed and the analyzer, they would be non-ex istent, however buddhas see them so they do 
exist; what they do not see is that they are truly existent. The object analyzed and the analyzer 
are not like the horns of a rabbit which are not seen by anyone. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Also, the same text says: 
One is not to meditate on the emptiness 
Called “non-production,” “emptiness,” 
And “selflessness” which is meditated 
On as having a low nature. 
He is not refuting meditation observin g selflessness—the emptiness which is the 
non-existence of inherently existent produc tion; rather he is refuting meditation 
on a low emptiness having the low nature of being conceived to exist truly.  
 
Nagarjuna is not refuting meditation on th e emptiness that is called “non-production.” 
“emptiness,” or “selflessness,” which is the empt iness that is a lack of inherently existent 
production, but is refuting meditation on an inferior emptin ess that is conceived to be 
inherently existent – that is, on an inherently existent non-production, an inherently existent 
emptiness, and an inherently existent selflessness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
It is as Nagarjuna’s Praise of the Supramundane  says: 
Since in order to remove all conceptuality 
The ambrosia of emptiness was taught, 
One who adheres to it [as truly existent] 
Is greatly derided by you. 
 
As Nagarjuna says, in order to eliminate all co nceptuality, that is, the conception of true 
existence of all phenomena, the Buddha taught the nectar or ambrosia of emptiness. Those 
who adhere to it as truly existent, that is, who think that emptiness is truly existent, are greatly 
derided by him.  
 
962 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Similarly, Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland78 also says: 
In that way self and selflessness 
Are not properly apprehendable as reals. 
Therefore the Great Subduer rejected 
Views of self and selflessness. 
 
Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland  also says that since self and selflessness are not observed to be 
truly or inherently existent, the Great Muni reje cted the views of self and selflessness. Neither 
the self or selflessness exist truly or inherently . For example, just as the table does not exist 
inherently, neither does the emptiness or se lflessness of the table exist inherently. The 
apprehension of such true existenc e must therefore be eliminated.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
This means that since both self and self lessness are not established in reality, 
[Buddha] rejected the views that those two really exist; he did not refute the view 
of selflessness. For, like the passage from Nagarjuna’s Refutation of Objections 
quoted earlier, if [phenomena] were not without inherent existe nce in the sense of 
being inherently established, inherent establishment would exist. 
 
Therefore, both self and selflessness are not esta blished in reality, that is, they do not exist 
inherently. Because of that, the Buddha rejected the views that the self and selflessness really 
exist, but he did not refute the view of selflessness. As is said in Nagarjuna’s text, if 
phenomena were not without inherent existence then inherent existenc e would exist, whereas 
this is not the case. All phenomena have two en tities, a conventional entity and an ultimate 
entity, but these entities are the same in not existing truly. Therefore, also emptiness does not 
exist truly, that is, emptiness is empty of inhe rent existence. This is what is called “the 
emptiness of emptiness” from among the sixt een types of emptiness. If emptiness were 
established inherently or truly, then meditati on on emptiness would not cease ignorance, the 
root of cyclic existence, and would not bring about the achievement of nirvana. Therefore, 
also emptiness does not exist truly or inherently.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, similarly the statement in sutra about acting in signs refers to the signs of true establishment:) 
The Condensed Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  says: 
Even if a bodhisattva conceives, “Thi s aggregate is empty,” he is acting 
in signs and does not have faith in the topic of non-production. 
The great mother [a Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ] says, “If one considers, ‘Form is 
empty and selfless,’ one is acting in signs and is not acting in the perfection of 
wisdom.” The meaning of these statements  refers to holding emptiness and so 
 
78 Stanza 103. 
963 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             forth to exist truly. 
 
The statement in sutra about acting in signs or utilizing signs refers to having signs of true 
establishment. The Condensed Perfection of Wisdom Sutra says that if a bodhisattva conceives 
“This hollow is empty,79” he is acting in signs or utilizing signs and does not have faith in the 
topic of non-production . The Great Mother, the 100,000 Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra , 
says that if one conceives “Form is empty and selfless,” one is acting in or utilizing signs, that 
is, one is apprehending the emptin ess of form to be inherently ex istent. Because of this, one is 
not acting in or utilizing the perfection of wisdom. Thus, these statements refer to apprehending emptiness to exist truly. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 372) says: 
(Sixth, if that were not so, it would contradict the praise in sutras for analyzing emptiness with wisdom:) 
If that were not the case, it would not be right for Buddha to say “does not have 
faith in the topic of non-production,” becaus e to have faith in that would be to act 
in signs. Also, it would contradict many sutras; the same sutra says, “One who 
thoroughly knows all phenomena as without inherent existence is acting in the 
supreme perfection of wisdom,” and: 
When wisdom breaks down caused and uncaused phenomena 
As well as the wholesome and unwholesome,  not even particles are apprehended. 
At that time in the world this is counted as the perfection of wisdom. 
 
If it were not like that, it would not be suitab le for the Buddha to say “Does not have faith in 
the topic of non-production,” that is, does not have faith in the lack of inherent existence, 
because to have faith in that would be to act in signs, that is, signs of inherent existence. The 
same sutras say that that one who thorough ly knows all phenomena as without inherent 
existence is utilizing the supreme perfection of  wisdom. It also says that when analytical 
meditation dissects compounded phenomena and uncompounded phenomena, as well as white phenomena, that is, virtuous actions, and black phenomena, that is, non-virtuous 
actions, not even a particle of true existence is  observed. In the world that is counted as the 
perfection of wisdom.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, the King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra  says: 
If phenomena are individually analyzed as selfless 
And what has been analyzed is meditated upon, 
That is the cause for attaining the fruit, nirvana. 
Through any other cause one does not go to peace. 
 
 
79 JN: The Tibetan text we are following reads phug, meaning hollow or cavern, whereas Hopkins translates 
“aggregates” ( phung ). 
964 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             If a phenomenon is individually investigated  as selfless, and having been individually 
investigated is meditated upon, this becomes the cause for attaining the result that is nirvana. 
By means of other causes, the conception of tr ue existence is not pacified, and nirvana, the 
result, cannot be attained.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, in the Essence of the Perfec tion of Wisdom Sutra80 Shariputra asks, “How does a 
bodhisattva who wants to practice the prof ound perfection of wisdom train?” In 
answer Avalokiteshvara says, “He should th oroughly and correctly view even these 
five aggregates as empty of inherent existence” and so forth. 
 
In the Heart Sutra  Shariputra asks Avalokiteshvara, “H ow should a bodhisattva who wants to 
practice the profound perfection of wisdom train?” To this, Avalokiteshvara replies: “He 
should thoroughly and correctly view even th ese five aggregates as empty of inherent 
existence. Form is empty, emptiness is form. Emptiness is not other than form, and form is 
not other than emptiness.” If, on the other hand, one thinks that to act in or utilize inherent 
existence is the perfection of wisdom, this would contradict such sutras. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Seventh, Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti praise individual investigation and analysis of the meaning of 
selflessness as the cause of release:) 
Therefore, Nagarjuna’s Praise of the Element of Qualities  says: 
The doctrine supremely purifying the mind 
Is the absence of inherent existence. 
 
Nagarjuna and Chandrakirti praise individual investigation and analysis of the meaning of 
emptiness as the cause of liberation. Nagarjuna says that the Dharma that supremely purifies 
or trains the mind is the la ck of inherent existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also: 
As long as “self” and “mine” are conceived 
So long is there [false] imputation of the external. 
When the two types of selflessness are seen, 
The seeds of cyclic existence cease. 
 
Due to apprehending “self” and “mine,” for that long is there imputation of the external. If 
the two types of selflessness – the selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena – 
are seen, the seeds of existence will cease. The main seed of cyclic existence is ignorance 
together with its imprints. A seed is that wh ich acts as a cause connecting a past cyclic 
existence with another cyclic ex istence. To see the selflessness of persons and selflessness of 
 
80 prajñaparamitahrdaya . 
965 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
phenomena is to realize them. In  this context “phenomena” refe rs to the aggregates. To see 
the selflessness of persons is to realize that the being does not exist inherently or truly, and to 
see the selflessness of phenomena is to realize that the aggregates that belong to that being do 
not exist inherently or truly. By seeing or re alizing them, the seeds of cyclic existence are 
ceased and one is freed from cyclic existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Chandrakirti’s Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”  says: 
Therefore, through the view of the emptiness 
Of self and mine a yogi will be released. 
You should understand this in accordance  with those statements and sustain the 
continuum of ascertainment of selflessness and the absence of inherent existence. 
 
Chandrakirti also says that by the view of the emptiness of self and mine, or I and mine, a 
yogi will be liberated. In other words, by seeing that the self and mine, the aggregates, are empty of inherent existence through a meditati on or yoga conjoined with wisdom, one will 
attain liberation. One should understand selfle ssness in accordance with  such statements and 
sustain the continuum of the ascertainment of se lflessness and the lack of inherent existence. 
In other words, one should meditate on them continuously, as if one meditates on them for a 
brief time, then gives it up, and then resumes meditating, one will not be able to become free 
from the conception of true existence. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 373) says: 
(Eighth, also the meaning of the Non-Conceptual Retention Sutra  is not just to abandon mental application; 
rather, its thought is to analyze with wisdom and set [the mind] in that which is free from the target of the 
conception of true existence:) 
The first of Kamalashila’s [three works on the] Stages of Meditation  says: 
The Non-Conceptual Retention Sutra  says, “Through not doing mental 
application the signs of forms an d so forth are abandoned.” This 
statement refers to the fact that if  one analyzes with wisdom, one will 
not apply to mind that which is unob servable [as truly existent] in that 
manner [that is, as truly existent]. It does not mean that there is [to be] 
no mental application. This is not an abandoning through the mere 
abandonment of mental application like that of one in the meditative absorption of non-discrimination who forsakes taking to mind the 
beginningless attachment to  forms and so forth. 
 
Kamalashila cites a sutra that says “By not mentally attending, the signs of forms and so forth 
are abandoned.” This means that if one invest igates with wisdom, one will not mentally 
a t t e n d  t o  t h a t  w h i c h  i s  u n o b s e r v a b l e .  I t  d o e s  n o t  m e a n  t h a t  t h e r e  i s  n o  m e r e  m e n t a l  
attention. It is also not an abandonment by merely abandoning the mentally attention that 
strongly adheres to forms and so forth from be ginningless time, like the meditative absorption 
of without discrimination. 
 
966 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Thus, the descriptions in the scriptures  to abandon the conception of signs 
through cultivating the absence of mental application refer to setting in equipoise 
on the meaning of realizing the non-apprehension of the target of the conception 
of true existence—even a particle—through analysis by way of the proper analytical wisdom. 
 
This means that although the scriptures say to abandon the conception of signs through 
cultivating a lack of mental attention, they re fer to equipoising on the meaning of realizing 
that the observed object of the conception of true existence is unobservable, even a particle, 
through investigating with the wisdom that analyzes properly. 
 
Wednesday morning, 14 March 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 373) says: 
(Ninth, the Stages of Meditation  quotes the Cloud of Jewels Sutra81
 and says that its meaning is not just to 
abandon mental application but to enter into signlessness just through meditation analyzing the meaning of 
emptiness:) 
The second [of Kamalashil a’s three works on the] Stages of Meditation  says: 
[The Cloud of Jewels Sutra  says,] “...When he analyzes what the mind is, 
he realizes it as empty. When he exam ines by what mind that is realized, 
he realizes it as empty. Through realizing such he enters into the yoga of 
signlessness.” This indicates that wh oever does not analyze in this way 
will not enter into signlessness. It very clearly indicates that through 
merely abandoning mental applic ation and without analyzing the 
entityness of things with wisdom, it  is not possible to enter into non-
conceptuality. 
 
Kamalashila says that when one searches for the what the mind is, one realizes it is empty. 
When one searches for the entity of that mind that realizes it is empty, one realizes that it too 
is empty. Thereby, one enters into the yoga  of signlessness. For example, having asked 
whether the mind exists inherently or not, one fi nds that it does not, rather it is empty of 
inherent existence. also having asked whether the mind that realizes that exists inherently or 
not, one finds that it does not exist inherent ly and cannot be found. By means of this, one 
enters the yoga of signlessness. 
 Therefore, this citation clearly shows that th rough thoroughly investigating in this way, one 
enters signlessness and that through merely  abandoning mental attention and without 
analyzing the entity of things with wisdom, it is  not possible to enter non-conceptuality. Thus, 
in short, one must first understand and invest igate emptiness, after which one can enter the 
non-conceptual meditative equipoise of a superior. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
81 ratnamegha . 
967 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             Thus, the statement in the Cloud of Jewels Sutra  explains that if one has not found 
the view of suchness through prior analysis in the proper way, it is impossible to 
understand non-conceptually  the meaning of suchness. 
 
This sutra explains that if one has not foun d the view of suchness by prior and proper 
analysis, it will not be possible to enter non- conceptuality on the meaning of suchness.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 374) says: 
(Tenth, an exhortation about the need to understand the refutation in the Stages of Meditation  of the bad 
propositions of the Chinese Ho-shang82
 with regard to asserting that the non-conceptual is entered through 
abandoning mental application:) 
The last [of Kamalashila’s three works on the] Stages of Meditation  explains that:  
In order to refute claims that the profound meaning [of emptiness] can 
be realized merely through hearing and thinking, [the sutras] speak of the inconceivable, that which is beyond the mind, and so forth, 
indicating that because those are objects known by a superior’s own 
individual [meditative equipoise] they  are inconceivable by others, and 
so forth. Also, these were taught for the sake of refuting improper 
contemplation upon conceiving the meaning of the profound 
[emptiness] to exist truly. They do not refute proper mental application 
by means of the wisdom of individual analysis. It is said that if such were refuted, it would contradict a great many reasonings and scriptures. 
Also, although it is an entity of conceptuality, it is an entity of proper mental application, whereby the non- conceptual exalted wisdom arises, 
and thus since one wants that exalte d wisdom, one should rely on it. 
 
The Chinese Hvashang, who was a mahayanist, says that without any mental attention at all, 
that is, without thinking about anything at a ll, it is possible to enter non-conceptuality. 
However, Kamalashila says that the scriptures  teach the inconceivable, that passed beyond 
mind, and so forth in order to refute those wh o say that it is possible to realize emptiness 
merely through hearing and thinking. Thereby th ese sutras indicate that because they are 
objects known only by a superior’s meditative equipoise, they are inconceivable by others and 
so forth. Thus, they were taught to refute th e improper thought that emptiness exists truly. 
They do not refute proper analysis by means of the wisdom of individual investigation. If such 
were refuted, it would contradict many reason ings and many scriptural citations. Although 
mental attention is the entity of conceptuality, it is the entity  of proper mental attention. 
Therefore, from it arises a non-conceptual exalted wisdom. If one wishes to achieve this non-
conceptual exalted wisdom, one should rely on su ch mental attention. In other words, by first 
doing analytical meditation that investigates the entity of all phenomena, how they abide, and 
so forth, one can develop a non-conceptual exalted wisdom. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
82 hva shang . 
968 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             It is very important to understand th rough Kamalashila’s explanations how to 
refute the Chinese abbot who propounded that although the view ascertaining 
suchness cannot be gained in dependence on scripture and reasoning, suchness 
can be realized through a setting in meditative equipoise in which nothing at all is 
taken to mind. 
 
It is important to understand how to refute the Chinese abbot who prop ounded that in order 
to gain the view ascertaining suchness, that is , the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of 
suchness, it is not necessary to depend on script ures or reasonings, but that it is enough to 
remain without thinking anything at all. This tradition is that of Zen Buddhism, which says 
that it is enough to sit in meditation with out thinking. There is a story regarding this 
assertion that took place in Samye Monastery in  Tibet. Kamalashila was to debate there with 
Hvashang, and they agree beforehand that th e loser would give up his own tenet system 
f o l l o w  t h a t  o f  t h e  w i n n e r .  H o w e v e r ,  H v a s h a n g  having lost the debate, flew the monastery, 
leaving behind one of his shoes. This was taken to be a sign that his view would continue to 
flourish in Tibet and in fact it  still exists nowadays. This sch ool says that by stopping all 
mental attention, realizations will come. This would make the attainment of realizations very 
easy! 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(The second, that these modes of sustaining [the view] are the word of earlier scholars and adepts such as 
Atisha, has two parts, the first of which is: the earlier Ga-dam-bas’ way of explaining the thought of the Elder 
[Atisha]:) 
These ways of meditating have arisen from  earlier precepts on the stages of the 
path. Bo-do-wa’s83 Small Vessel  says: 
Some say at the time of hearing and thinking 
To settle the absence of inherent existence through reasoning 
And when meditating to cultiv ate only the non-conceptual. 
Thus, because a separate unrelated emptiness 
Is meditated, it will not serve as an antidote. 
Therefore, even at th e time of meditation 
Analyze individually with whatever you are familiar— 
The lack of being one or many, dependent-arising, and so forth 
And stay a little also in the non-conceptual. 
 
Theses ways of meditating have come from ea rlier instructions on the stages of the path. 
Geshe Potowa, for example, says that some people say that at the time of hearing and 
thinking, one should settle the lack of inherent existence by reasoning. Then, at the time of 
meditation, one should only medi tate without thinking, abiding as though one were a statue. 
If it were like this, the emptiness that is unde rstood by analysis and the emptiness that is a 
lack of thought at the time of  meditation would be completely unrelated. Instead one would 
meditate on something other than emptiness an d it would not become an antidote to the 
afflictions or to the root of cyclic existence, th e conception of true existence. Therefore, also 
 
83 po to ba . 
969 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
at the time of meditation one should individually investigate phenomena by means of 
whatever reasoning one is most familiar with, such as the reasoning of being free from being 
one or many, the reasoning of dependent-arisin g, and so forth. Thus, if one takes, for 
example, the conventional nature of the mind of being clear and knowing as one’s object of 
meditation , one should analyze its lack of true or  inherent existence by thinking that it is not 
inherently existent because it is not an inherent ly existent one and because it is also not an 
inherently existent many. The conventional nature  of the mind is not an inherently existent 
one because it has parts. That with parts and that without parts are mutually contradictory. 
That without parts does not exist. By applying such reasons, one should  understand that the 
c l e a r  a n d  k n o w i n g  n a t u r e  o f  t h e  m i n d  i s  n o t  a n  i n h e r e n t l y  e x i s t e n t  o n e .  I t  i s  a l s o  n o t  a n  
inherently existent many because it is not an in herently existent one. This is because in order 
for there to be many, there must  be one. Therefore, the conclu sion is that the conventional 
nature of the mind of being clear and knowing do es not exist inherently because it is not an 
inherently existent one or an inherently existe nt many. One should medi tate in this way on 
the emptiness of the conventional nature of th e mind. This is an example of one type of 
reasoning but if it is easier to understand, on e can apply the reasoning that the mind does not 
exist inherently or truly because it is a depend ent-arising. By such reasonings one can cut the 
extremes of permanence and annihilation. Ha ving become familiar with one of these 
reasonings, one should abid e in non-conceptuality.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Those following the sole deity [A tisha] assert that meditation 
In this way serves as the antidote to the afflictive emotions. 
This is the system of cultivating wisdom 
By those wishing to practice th e system of the perfections. 
Further, one familiarizing with the selflessness of persons 
Should then enter into su ch [non-conceptuality]. 
 
If one meditates in this way, one’s meditation wi ll become an antidote to the afflictions. This 
is the Prasangika Madhyamaka system of cultivat ing wisdom by those who wish to practice the 
perfection system. Those who have familiariz ed with the selflessness of persons through 
reasonings – such as that the person is not inhe rently existent because it is not an inherently 
existent one and not an inherent ly existent many, that it is not self-sufficient substantially 
existent because it is not a self-sufficient su bstantially existent one or a self-sufficient 
substantially existent many, that it is not inherently existent because it is a dependent-arising, 
and so forth – should enter into non-conceptuality.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 375) says: 
(Second, between the two, Madhyamika and Chittamatra, the Elder praised the father Nagarjuna and his 
spiritual sons and the Elder’s style of quintessential instructions accords with the master Kamalashila:) 
Furthermore, the Elder [Atisha] said: 
Through whom should emptiness be realized?  
Through Chandrakirti, the student of Nagarjuna 
970 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
Who was prophesied by the Tathagata  
And saw reality, the truth. 
Through the quintessential instructions transmitted 
From them, reality, the truth, will be realized. 
Atisha set forth their mode of instructions as Madhyamika precepts, and [I] have 
explained those and the thought of the ma ster Kamalashila which appear to be 
similar. 
 
There are two schools of mahayana tenets, the Chittamatra and Madhyamaka, but Atisha followed Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons, that  is, the Madhyamaka. Th e Chittamatra tenets, 
on the other hand, come through Asanga, Vasubandhu, and others. Kamalashila’s thought 
resembles that of Atisha.  
 Atisha’s text poses the question: through wh om is emptiness realized? It then responds 
saying that it is through th e instructions transmitted from  Chandrakirti, as student of 
Nagarjuna was prophesied by the Tathagata and who saw reality, the truth. In other words, 
through realizing their instructions, one will re alize reality. Atisha set forth their way of 
explaining as Madhyamaka instructions. Their thoughts and Kamalashila’s thought appear to 
be similar. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, the features of the preparation, end, and so forth of how to sustain [the view]:) 
For sustaining special insight you should  know the mode of observing the six 
preparatory practices, how to sustain the actual session and its conclusion, how to 
act between sessions, and especially how to sustain the session free from laxity and 
excitement as explained before [in the section on calm abiding]. 
 
First there are the preparatory practices for medi tation, then the actual meditation, and then 
the concluding activities. For example, one who wi shes to cultivate special insight should first 
rely on the six preparatory practices, as well as perform the practice that combines the Offering 
to the Spiritual Master (Lama Chopa ) with the Preparatory Practice ( Jor Cho ) as suggested by 
Kyabje Thubten Zopa Rinpoche. Then, during the actual meditation session one should 
meditation on the various points of the stages of the path (lam-rim). At the end, one should 
do some concluding prayers and dedications. In between sessions, one should relax but 
without allowing oneself to be overcome by laxity and excitement. In other words, one should keep the mind quiet and relaxed without letti ng it wander to too many objects due to 
thinking “This is nice. This is beautiful. I wa nt it” or “Today the food is no good. I want 
better food.” Nor should one think “It would be  nice to go into town, to watch a movie…” 
One should also not allow oneself to come unde r the power of sinking or laxity, a lack of 
clarity. Between sessions one should do on e’s other daily commitments, including the 
recitation of mantras and sadhanas.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 375) says: 
971 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
11 Harmony 
The measure of having established sp ecial insight through cultivation 
(This has five parts, the first of whic h is: that special insight has been achieved when analytical meditation generates 
pliancy:) 
When you have meditated in that way analyzing by way of the wisdom of 
individual analysis, there are similitudes of  special insight [which arise] prior to 
generating the pliancy described earlier [in the section on calm abiding]. Then 
when pliancy is generated, there is a full y qualified special insight. The entity and 
mode of generating pliancy are as explained earlier. 
 
When one meditates through analyz ing with the wisdom of individu al investigation, there is a 
similitude of special insight that occurs prior to generating pliancy of body and mind. Having 
generated that pliancy, there is a fully-qualified  special insight. The en tity of pliancy and how 
to generate it were explained earlier in the text . Pliancy is a lightness of mind that produces a 
lightness of body such that it no  longer feels heavy. This produces a bliss or happiness of body 
that then induces mental bliss. When the pliancy that induces bliss is held by wisdom, it is an 
actual special insight or a full y-qualified special insight.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the mere pliancy of calm abiding is not sufficient:) 
Because one also has the pliancy induced by the calm abiding—already achieved 
and not deteriorated—[the achievement of sp ecial insight] is not the mere presence 
of pliancy. 
 
The mere pliancy of calm abiding is not en ough. Although one has achieved the pliancy 
induced by achieving calm abiding and its not ha ving deteriorated, special insight is not just 
the presence of this pliancy. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Question : Then, what is it? 
Answer:  When the power of having performed anal ytical meditation itself is able to 
induce pliancy, there is special insight. It  is the same for both  the special insight 
observing the varieties and the special insight observing the mode. 
 
When analytical meditation is able to induce  pliancy by its own power, one has achieved 
special insight. It is the same  for both the special insight ob serving varieties and the special 
insight observing modes. In other words, in bo th cases pliancy is induced by the power of 
analytical meditation.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 376) says: 
(Third, a source for the measure of havi ng achieved special insi ght as being thus:) 
In that way the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  says: 
“Supramundane Victor, until a bodhisattva has attained physical and 
972 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
mental pliancy what is the name fo r a mental contemplation which is 
an internal taking to mind of an image—an object of meditative 
stabilization—of those phenomena which have been contemplated 
well?” 
“Maitreya, it is not special insight; it  should be said that it accompanies 
an imitation which is a similitude of special insight.” 
 
The scriptural source for the measure of having achieved special insight is the Sutra Unraveling 
the Thought . This sutra sets out a question pose d by Maitreya to the Buddha, “Until a 
bodhisattva has attained physical and mental pliancy, what is the meditative stabilization of 
emptiness or suchness that is not an actual specia l insight but is like a reflection of it?” The 
Buddha answers Maitreya, one of the eight close bo dhisattvas, saying, “It is not actual special 
insight. It is concomitant with the aspiration  that is a similitude of special insight.”  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Also, Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  says: 
He abides in just that attainment of mental and physical pliancy. He 
individually analyzes the meaning of just what was contemplated 
through intense interest in the object which is an internal image of 
meditative stabilization. As long as  mental and physical pliancy are not 
generated, it is a mental contemplation which is a similitude of special 
insight. When those are generated, it is special insight. 
 
Also Ratnakarashanti says that one abides in th e attainment of mental and physical pliancy. 
As long as the mental and physical pliancy is not induced by analytical meditation on 
suchness, it is only a similitude of special insight,  like a reflection of it. In other words, as long 
as one has not generated mental and physical pliancy by means of analysis, one has not yet 
attained an actual special insight but has attain ed only a similitude of it. When mental and 
physical pliancy are generated by the power of an alysis, it becomes an actual special insight.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
Fourth, when pliancy is induced by analysis, st eady meditative stabilization is induced:) 
When the power of [analysis] itself is able  to induce pliancy, it is also able to 
induce a one-pointedness of mind. Thus, this inducing of calm abiding through 
the power of the analytical meditation of individual analysis is a quality [arising 
from] having established calm abiding previously. 
 
When pliancy is induced by analysis, at this ti me a steady meditative stabilization is also 
induced. In other words, when analysis is able to induce pliancy by its own power, one is also able to induce a single-pointed mind. The calm abiding induced by the power of an analytical 
meditation of individual investigation is a quality that comes from the previously 
accomplished calm abiding. In other words, due to the pliancy induced by analysis, one’s calm 
abiding becomes more stable.  
973 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, therefore wrong ideas are unsuitable:) 
Since in that way calm abiding becomes far more developed through the analytical 
meditation performed by one who has achieved calm abiding well, you should not hold that if the analytical meditation of individual analysis is done, the factors of 
stability will be lessened. 
 
Having perfectly attained calm abiding, one th en engages in analytical meditation, whereby 
one’s calm abiding becomes even stronger. Therefore, although some people think that by 
doing analytical meditation the factor of abiding of the mind on its object will diminish, this 
is incorrect. 
 In short, having attained the pliancy of ca lm abiding, one should engage in analytical 
meditation whereby the pliancy of body and mind induced by analysis make the pliancy and 
single-pointedness of calm abiding even stronger. 
 
Wednesday afternoon, 14 March 2007 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 376) says: 
The mode of union of calm abiding and special insight 
(This section has two parts, the first of which is: the actual explanation, which itself has six parts. The first is: 
The need to attain calm abiding and specia l insight in order to have their union:) 
If calm abiding and special insight are not attained as explained at the point of the 
measure of their establishment, there will  be nothing to be unified. Therefore, 
those two must definitely be attained for [there to be] a union. 
 
If the two, calm abiding and special insight, are not attained as was explained on the occasion 
of explaining the measure of their achievement, then as long as neither of them or one of 
them is not attained there canno t be their union. Therefore, for there to be union, both 
definitely need to be attained. When talking ab out the union of two things, as long as only 
one of a pair is present there cannot be a discussion of union.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the attainment of special insight and the attainment of a union are simultaneous:) 
Furthermore, from the beginning of attaining special insight a union is attained. With regard to how this is done: when , through the force of  having performed 
analytical meditation in dependence on the earlier calm abiding, one attains the 
mental activity of natural engagement without the activity [of applying the 
antidotes to laxity and excitement] as ex plained earlier in the section on calm 
abiding, it becomes a union. 
 
When special insight is first attained, a union of calm abiding and special insight is also 
simultaneously attained. Therefore, right from the beginning when special insight is attained, 
a union is also attained. How this is done is th at when, by the force of analytical meditation 
974 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
in dependence on the previously attained calm abiding, one attains the mental attention that 
engages naturally without the need fo r exertion, they become unified.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, a scripture on the need for harmonizing calm  abiding and special insight in equal strength:) 
Asanga’s Grounds of Hearers says: 
Question : At what point are calm abiding and special insight mixed and 
equalized and through what is it called the path of unification? 
Answer:  It is through the nine mental abidings. It is like this: One 
attains the ninth, that of equipoise and, in dependence on that 
thorough establishment of meditative stabilization, makes intense effort 
at the differentiation of phenom ena—the higher wisdom. Then, the 
path of the differentiation of phenomena will operate naturally and 
without exertion; also, like the path of calm abiding there will be no 
activity [of applying the antidotes to laxity and excitement]. Thereby, 
[one’s mind] will be conjoined with  thoroughly pure special insight, 
thorough purity, subsequence to calm  abiding, and a sense of bliss. 
Thereby, one’s calm abiding and special insight become mixed and 
equalized. This is called the path of unification of calm abiding and special insight. 
 
With respect to the union of calm abiding an d special insight, they must be similar in 
strength. Asanga’s text sets out the question: At what point when calm abiding and special 
insight are mixed and equalized, that is, when both are engaging the same object equally, and 
through what, is it called “the path of unific ation”? There are nine mental abidings including 
setting through equipoise. Having attained the ninth, equipoise, in dependence on 
thoroughly accomplishing meditative stabilization, one makes intense effort in special wisdom differentiating phenomena. At th is time, the path of the differe ntiation of phenomena, like 
calm abiding, is without effort, that is, one meditates single-pointedly without effort. Thereby one’s mind becomes thoroughly conjoined with a special insight that is thoroughly pure, 
thoroughly trained, a follower of calm abidin g, and a blissful experience. Because of that, 
one’s calm abiding and special insight are mixed, meaning that they engage simultaneously, and engage equally. This is called “the path  of unification of calm abiding and special 
insight.”  
 Therefore, first it is necessary to meditate on the nine stages successively, whereby pliancy 
of mind is produced. This in turn produces a special physical pliancy, which when held with 
single-pointed mind becomes calm abiding. Wi th one part of the mind engaging in calm 
abiding, the other part engages in the analytic al meditation of individual investigation, 
whereby the pliancy of body and mind increase  in strength, producing an even stronger 
physical and mental bliss conjoined with wisdom; this is called special insight and a union of 
calm abiding and special insight . 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fourth, a source for the time of achieving a union:) 
975 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
The last [of Kamalashila’s three works on the] Stages of Meditation  says: 
When due to being devoid of laxity and excitement [your mind] is set in 
equipoise and is naturally operating, whereby a very clear mind with 
respect to suchness arises, you should abide equanimously through 
loosening the exertion [involved in applying the antidotes to laxity and excitement]. You should know that at  that time you have achieved the 
path of a union of calm abiding and special insight. 
Thus, [the point of attaining a union of calm abiding and special insight] is from 
the point of attaining a fully  qualified special insight. 
 
The time at which a union is achieved is set out in Kamalashila’s text. When due to being 
devoid of laxity and excitement, the mind is equipoised and engages naturally, whereby a very 
clear mind with respect to suchness arises, on e should loosen one’s effort and abide in 
equanimity (this being the equanimity that is a compositional factor). At this time one has 
achieved the path of the union of calm abiding and special insight. This  is the boundary of 
achieving a fully-qualified special insight. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Fifth, a source for the union of simultaneous and mutual harmony of calm abiding and special insight when analysis 
induces calm abiding:) 
Ratnakarashanti’s Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  says: 
After that, observe just the image which is being analyzed. When 
through the continuum of continuous and uninterrupted mental 
engagement both are experienced in th e mind, that is called a path of a 
union [or joining of the pair] of calm abiding and special insight. 
Concerning that, calm abiding and special insight are the pair; joining means mutual embracement. 
 
When analysis induces calm abiding, there is a union of simultaneous and mutually 
concomitant calm abiding and special insight.  
 One observes that very reflection that is together with conceptualization When, by the 
continuum of continuous and uninterrupted me ntal attention, one experiences both calm 
abiding and special insight in that mind, it said to be “the path of unification of calm abiding 
and special insight.” Calm abiding and special in sight are unified as a pair, that is, possessed 
as a pair, meaning that they engage through being bound to each other.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
In that, “uninterrupted” means that within leaving the run of just that analytical 
meditation—it not being necessary to set in non-conceptuality—analytical 
meditation itself induces non-conceptuality. 
 
“Uninterrupted” means that without the need to set the mind in non-conceptuality to 
through halting analytical meditation, that analytical meditation itself induces non-
conceptuality. In other words, first one sets the mind in calm abiding, which is non-
976 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
conceptual, then one does a conceptual analys is of the object, which then produces a non-
conceptual mind, a yogic direct perceiver. Th us, a conceptual mind can induce a direct 
perceiver, in which case they have the relationship  of cause and result.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Sixth, though formerly analysis and stabilization were not si multaneous, they operate in harmony in the union of calm 
abiding and special insight:) 
“Both are experienced” means that both the calm abiding observing the 
unanalyzed image and the special insight observing the image with analysis are 
experienced. 
 “Through the continuum” is said in term s of the non-arising at one time of the 
analytical special insight and the calm ab iding which is a placement at the end of 
analysis. Then at the time of the calm abiding which is the actual one induced 
through the power of analysis, special insight—the intense differentiation of 
phenomena observing the mode—and calm abiding—the meditative stabilization 
which is a steady one-pointed placement on the mode—operate in harmony. At 
such a time, calm abiding and special insi ght are mixed; they operate in equality. 
 
Although the two, analytical me ditation and stabilizing meditati on, do not occur at the same 
time, there being first one and then the other, they engage mutually in the union of calm 
abiding and special insight. “Both are experienced” means that both the calm abiding which 
observes the reflection without conception and th e special insight that observes the reflection 
together with conceptuality are experienced.  “Through the continuum” means that special 
insight, which is analytical, and calm abiding, which is an abiding at the end of analysis, do 
not occur simultaneously, that is, first one occurs and then the other. Then, at the time of an 
actual calm abiding induced by the power of analysis, special insight (a wisdom observing 
modes) and calm abiding (a single-pointed medi tation on modes) engage concomitantly. At 
that time, calm abiding and special insigh t are mixed, meaning that they engage 
simultaneously. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 With this, realization whic h is a state arisen from meditation must be attained. 
Therefore, a composite of the two—the suit ability of (1) individually analyzing the 
meaning of selflessness within the non-de struction of the influence of (2) non-
conceptuality which is a steady factor of st ability, these being like the small fish [of 
analysis] moving about while staying in the unmoving water [mental stability]—is 
posited as a similitude of calm abiding an d special insight. Except for that, nothing 
has the meaning of a union of actual calm abiding and special insight. 
 
Therefore, it is necessary to at tain the realization which is a wisdom arisen from meditation. 
Like a small fish moving about in unmoving water without making waves, while the mind 
abides steadily there is the individual analysis  of selflessness. If this were posited as a 
similitude of calm abiding and special insight,  there would be nothing that is a union of 
actual calm abiding and special insight.  
977 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, advice on the need to abandon error and understand [the t opics] according to reliable texts as well as on the 
need to know the extensive explanation of the stages of the path from the Great Exposition of the Stages of the 
Path:) 
You should understand the mode of the un ion of calm abiding and special insight 
in that way according to what appears in reliable texts and should not put 
confidence in explanations that fabricate it  in other ways. Reasoned final decisions, 
scriptural sources, and the mode of cult ivation of the stages of the path to 
enlightenment can be known in extensive form from the Great Exposition of the 
Stages of the Path. 
 
It is necessary to understand the extensive ex planation of the stages of the path from the Great 
Exposition of the Stages of the Path , meaning that one should study this text. One should 
understand the way in which calm abiding and special insight are unified in dependence on 
reliable sources and one should not place one’s  trust in fabricated explanations. Reasoned 
final decisions, scriptural sources, and the way to meditate of the stages of the path are to be 
understood from the extensive ex planation of them found in the Great Exposition of the Stages 
of the Path . 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 379) says: 
12 Summary of the Stages of Path 
(The summation of the general path has three parts, the first of which is: the mode of procedure of the general path:) 
Now I will set forth a brief summation of the general path. The root of the path 
meets back to the mode of relying on a spiritual guide; hence, it should be 
carefully taken to heart. Then, if a non-ar tificial wish to extract the essence with 
respect to leisure is generated, it will urge you on to practice from within. Hence, 
in order to generate it you should medita te on the topics concerning leisure and 
fortune. 
 
Since the root of the path is relying on a guru, you should emphasize meditation on guru 
devotion, as taught in various texts, by develo ping faith in him and so forth. Then, if you 
generate a non-artificial wish to take the essenc e of this human rebirth with its eight leisures 
and ten endowments, it will urge you from the inside to practice. Therefore, in order to 
generate this wish, you should meditate on  the eight leisures and ten endowments, the 
eighteen qualities of a precious human rebirth, as well as th e difficulty of finding them, the 
fact that when found they are ve ry useful, and so forth. You should meditate on the difficulty 
of finding a precious human rebirth in terms of the difficulty of creating its causes, the rarity 
of finding it in terms of numbers, and so forth. For example, the many beings who go to the bad migrations of hell beings, hungry ghosts, and animals are like the number of grains of 
sand in the Ganges River, whereas the number of beings who are reborn as human beings and gods are like the number of grains of sa nd that can sit on a fingernail. The cause of 
attaining such a good rebirth is the practice of morality of abandoning killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisive speech, harsh word s, idle talk, covetousness, malice, and wrong 
978 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
view. However, morality is difficult to practice as our mind tends to engage in non-virtue and 
not in virtue. You should think about this fact. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Then, since if you do not tu rn around the attitude of seeking [the affairs of] this 
lifetime, a strong seeking of [the purposes ] of future lives [as well as deeper aims] 
will not arise, you should strive at medi tating on impermanence —the fact that the 
b o d y  g a i n e d  w i l l  n o t  l a s t  l o n g — a n d  o n  t h e  m o d e  o f  w a n d e r i n g  i n  b a d  
transmigrations upon dying. Since at that time a natural attitude mindful of fright 
will be generated, you should, from th e depths, generate ascertainment with 
respect to the qualities of the Three Refuge s as well as dwell in the vow of common 
refuge and train in its points of training. 
 
If you do not turn away from interest in this li fe, a strong wish for a good future rebirth will 
not arise. Therefore, it is necessary to meditate on impermanence, the fact that the body with 
the eighteen qualities that we presently have do es not last long. You should meditate on the 
nine-round meditation on death-impermanence, th inking that death is ce rtain, that the time 
of death is uncertain, and so forth. You should  also think that if you were to die now, you 
cannot be sure that you will not be reborn in the bad migrations. If you take rebirth in a hot 
hell, cold hell, neighboring hell, or occasional hell , if you take rebirth as a hungry ghost, or if 
you are reborn as an animal (you can see the su fferings of animals directly), what would it be 
like? Think about this. By doing so, a strong fe ar will be developed, whereupon you should 
ascertain from your heart the qualities of the three objects of refuge  – the Buddha, Dharma, 
and Sangha. Each of their eight qualities are taught in the Sublime Continuum , therefore you 
should study them. All that can protect us is pu tting into practice the Dharma taught by the 
Buddha. Therefore, having taken refuge, you should keep the refuge precepts and train in the 
respective trainings. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Then, you should generate from many viewpoints the faith of conviction in 
actions and their effects—this being the ba sis for all wholesome practices. Having 
made that faith firm, you should strive at  engaging in virtues and disengaging from 
non-virtues, abiding continuously in the path of the four powers. 
 
Then you should generate faith or confidence in  the law of cause and effect – the basis of all 
white or virtuous actions. You should then strive  to do virtuous actions and give up engaging 
in non-virtuous actions. However, if you do commit a non-virtuous action, you should purify 
it by means of applying the four opponent powers. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 When in that way the topics of practice by a being of small capacity have been internalized, you should contemplate frequently the faults of cyclic existence in 
979 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
general and in particular, thereby turning your mind away from cyclic existence in 
general as much as possible. Then, identi fying contaminated actions and afflictive 
emotions as the causes from which cyclic existence arises, generate a non-artificial 
wish to abandon them. Work hard at the three trainings in general—the paths of 
release from cyclic existence—and in pa rticular at the [vow of] individual 
emancipation which you have taken. 
 
In this way you should meditate on and understand the topics of a small being. After that, 
you should contemplate the general and specific fa ults of cyclic existence, thereby generating 
the wish to be free from cyclic existence in general. Then you should identify the causes of 
taking rebirth in cyclic existe nce – contaminated actions and a fflictions – and generate a non-
artificial wish to abandon them. You should strive hard in the path of liberation from cyclic 
existence, the three higher trainings of morality , concentration, and wisd om. In particular you 
should guard the vows of individual liberation that you have taken – the five vows of laymen 
or laywomen plus the vow of chastity (brahmacharya), the vows of novice monks and nuns, and the vows of fully-ordained monks and fully-ordained nuns.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 When in that way the topics of practice by a being of middling capacity have been 
internalized, you should take to mind ma ny who have fallen into the ocean of 
cyclic existence just as you have and trai n in the altruistic mind of enlightenment 
which has love and compassion as its root. I t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  s t r i v e  t o  g e n e r a t e  
whatever you can, for without it the six perfections, the two stages, and so forth are 
like a roof without a foundation. When some  form of experience is generated with 
respect to it, assume it through the rite, striving at its points of training and 
making the aspirational mind as steady as you can. 
 
In this way you should try to understand clea rly the topics of practice of a middle being. 
 
Thursday morning, 15 March 2007 
 
Then, you should think that just as you have fa llen into the ocean of cyclic existence, so too 
have all other sentient beings and therefore trai n in the mind of enlightenment that has as its 
root love and compassion. Love has the aspect thinking “How wonderful it would be if all 
sentient beings were to have happiness and the causes of happiness.” Then one takes the 
responsibility to accomplish this upon onesel f. Compassion has the aspect thinking “How 
wonderful it would be all sentient beings were free from suffering and the causes of 
suffering.” On this basis, you should generate as much as you can the mind of enlightenment 
wishing to benefit all sentient beings. If this bo dhichitta does not exist,  then the practice of 
the six perfections and the two stages – the ge neration stage and completion stage – will be 
without a foundation. It will be like a building  that lacks a foundation but, having built the 
walls and roof, one day will collapse. When you have generated some experience of the mind 
of enlightenment, you should take the mind of enlightenment by means of the rite or ritual. 
You first take the wishing or aspirational mind of enlightenment in a ri te with the wish to 
980 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
attain enlightenment. Having done so, you should give up the four black dharmas and 
practice the four white dharmas. In this way you should train in the trainings and make the 
mind of enlightenment as stable as you can. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Then, hear about the great waves of  [bodhisattva] deeds and generate 
understanding of the boundaries of enga gement and disengagement as well as a 
wish to train in them. When  that is generated, take the vow of practice through 
the rite. Train in the six perfections wh ich ripen your own continuum and in the 
four means of gathering [trainees] and so forth which ripen others’ continuums. In 
particular risk even your life [to keep] from  the root infractions. Strive at not being 
polluted by the lesser and middling contamin ations and faults; even if polluted by 
such, work at restoration. 
 
After that, you should hear teachings on and study the extensive deeds of the bodhisattvas 
and generate an understanding of what should be practiced and what should be discarded with respect to them, as well as generate the wish to train in them. When this wish has been 
developed, you should take the vows of engagi ng bodhichitta. Then yo u should train in the 
six perfections in order to ripen your own co ntinuum and in the four means of gathering 
disciples in order to ripen others’ continua. Th e six perfections, as you know, are generosity, 
morality, patience, joyous effort, concentratio n, and wisdom. The four means of gathering 
disciples are to give material things, to talk ni cely, to teach what should be practiced, and to 
act in accordance with what you teach. The last one means that it is not enough to tell others 
what to do, you should also do that yourself otherwise your advice will be useless.  
 In particular, even at the risk of your life you should not commit the eighteen root 
downfalls of the bodhisattva vows, which are relate d to the practice of the six perfections. You 
should also strive not to be polluted by the small and middling contaminations as well as by 
faults. If you commit a downfall and so forth, you should confess it by means of the General 
Confession composed by Ashvagosha. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 Then, since you must train in particular  in the latter two perfections, become 
skilled in the mode of sustaining concentration and achieve meditative 
stabilization. As much as you can, generate  in your continuum the pure view of the 
two selflessnesses. Having understood how to gain the view and how to sustain it 
within setting [the mind] in the context of  the view, sustain [its continuum]. Such 
concentration and wisdom are designated with the names of calm abiding and 
special insight, which since they are not se parate from those two, come within the 
points of training of the bodhisa ttva vow once it has been taken. 
 
You should train, in particular, in the last two perfections – concentration and wisdom. 
Because of this, these two are extensively explaine d in all the texts on the stages of the path. 
Among the six perfections, the prac tice of morality is the basis. If your morality is good, you 
981 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
can take rebirth as a human being. If you have  practiced generosity, you will obtain all the 
necessities of life. Patience, in addition, is also very important because if you lack patience, 
and instead easily become angry, this anger, which is the worst of negativities, will destroy 
your virtue. In order to practice the first th ree perfections, the fourth, joyous effort, is 
necessary. This is because it is necessary to put e ffort into virtue with a joyful mind. It should 
not be like putting effort into something wi th an unhappy mind because you have been 
ordered by someone else to do so; this is not th e practice of joyous effort. Also making effort 
to make money and the like, even if it is done  for eighteen or sixteen hours a day, is not 
considered to be effort but to be a type of laziness. This is explained in the Ornament for Clear 
Realizations .  
 As much as possible you should generate th e correct view of the two selflessnesses – the 
selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena. Havi ng understood this view, you 
should set your mind on the view of selflessne ss and strive to concentrate on it. Having taken 
selflessness as the observed object, you should at  times engage in stabilizing meditation with 
respect to it and at other times engage in anal ytical meditation. If you always do analytical 
meditation without doing any stabilizing medi tation, your meditative stabilization will 
degenerate. The basis of your me ditation should be single-point ed meditative stabilization, 
upon which another part of your mind engages in analysis. By meditating in this way, both 
calm abiding and special insight will become stable. 
 The perfections of concentration and wi sdom are given the names “calm abiding” 
(samatha) and “special insight” (vipassana). Ther efore, since calm abiding and special insight 
are not other than concentration and wisdom, having taken the bodhisattva vow you should 
train in its trainings whereby these two minds will arise.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Second, the difference between successful and unsuccessful  meditation and how to bring out special emphasis 
through fine thought:) 
It should be such that when cultivatin g the lower paths the wish to attain the 
higher paths increases and when hearing ab out the higher, the wish to achieve the 
lower increases. Also, when those are cultivated in meditation, you need an 
equalized mind training in those thoughts. 
 
This outline discusses the feature of whether yo ur meditation goes to the essential point or 
not and how to penetrate the essential point by fine conception. Your meditation should be 
such that when you meditate on the lower paths,  you generate an increasingly stronger wish 
to attain the higher paths. Likewise, when you hear teachings on and read books about the 
higher paths, your wish to achieve the lower pa th should become increasingly stronger. Then, 
at the time of meditation you should have a mind that trains in eq ual parts in these two 
thoughts.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 If it appears that you have little respec t for the spiritual guide leading you on the 
path, since the root of the co llections of goodness is severed, you should strive at 
the mode of reliance [on a spiritual guide].  
982 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
 
If you have little respect for your teacher, you should strive in meditating on and practicing 
reliance on your guru, as otherwise the root of the path will be cut and it will be difficult to 
generate realizations. In order to cultivate this  devotion, you should think about how to rely 
on the your guru in thought and action. For example, there are nine attitudes that need to be 
generated in relation to the guru. You should always remember that all your knowledge arises from the guru. There is a story about a tulk u who had an old teacher who, when he was 
young, taught him to read and write. This te acher had not studied much philosophy, but the 
tulku often requested him for teachings. However, the teacher only gave him the 
transmissions of texts and so forth. Once so meone asked the tulku why he went to receive 
teachings from the old teacher, since he was more intelligent th an his teacher. The tulku said 
that, although he was able to quickly learn things he also quickly forgot them, but by taking teachings from his old teacher he received bl essings from him and was able to keep the 
teachings in his mind and without ever forgetti ng them. The other person asked him, rather 
skeptically, how he received blessings from such a teacher, to which the tulku replied that his 
receiving blessings came about because of his fa ith, and that therefore those who did not have 
faith in the teacher would not receive blessings from him.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
Similarly, if you have little force of enthusiasm for practice, work at the topics of 
leisure and fortune.  
 
Similarly, if your joy or enthusiasm for practice  is little or decreases, you should meditate on 
the eight leisures and ten endowments, the difficu lty of finding them, their usefulness, and so 
on. You should generate the th ought that you are very lucky to have obtained a precious 
human rebirth and to not have been born as a he ll being, a hungry ghost, an animal or as 
hungry ghost. You should also consider yourself lucky to have been born as a human being in 
a central land, to not be stupid, and so forth. Thinking in this way, you should rejoice in your good fortune. Then you should meditate on the ten endowments, the five from a personal 
point of view and the five from a circumstanti al point of view. Again you should think that 
you are very lucky and determine to practice the Dharma so as to not lo se this opportunity in 
the future. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
If you come to have great attachment to this life, mainly work at meditating on 
impermanence and the faults of bad transmigrations.  
 
If at the time of practice you come to have a lo t of clinging to this life, you should think about 
death-impermanence and the sufferings of the lower realms. Thinking that this precious 
human rebirth that you have now is impermanent, you should do the nine-round meditation 
on death-impermanence. You should also think about the beings in the eight hot hells, eight 
cold hells, neighboring hells, and occasional he lls, as well as the hungry ghosts who have 
internal, external, and internal and external obscurations, asking yourself whether you could 
983 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
bear to be reborn like them. You should also think about how it would be to be reborn as a 
handicapped human being. Presently you have not taken such rebirths, but it is also necessary 
to ensure that in the future you will also  be able to enjoy the practice of Dharma. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
If it appears that you are deviating from  the [ethical] formulation that you have 
accepted, mainly work at meditating on actions and their effects.  
 
If you have taken the lay vows, the novice vows,  the vows of full ordination, the bodhisattva 
vows, or the tantra vows but are not taking care of them, you should take the law of cause and 
effect as your main object of meditation. Ther e are many points regarding this subject which 
we will not go into now. However, having created a particular type of action it will definitely 
bring a particular type of result. You should  study this subject and meditate on it.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
If you have little discouragement with resp ect to cyclic existence, then since your 
seeking of liberation has become merely verbal, contemplate the faults of cyclic 
existence.  
 
If you have little discouragement or weariness of cyclic existence, you should think about the 
faults of cyclic existence in general as otherwis e your seeking of liberation will only be words. 
You should think about true sufferings – the suffering of suffering, the suffering of change, 
pervasive suffering, and so forth. In other word s, you should contemplat e the three, six, and 
eight kinds of suffering. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
If it appears that you do not have a strong  force of mind turning everything you do 
for the sake of sentient beings, then since the root of the Mahayana has been 
severed, train in the aspirational mind of enlightenment as well as its causes. 
 
If your attitude wishing to enact the welfare of other sentient beings is weak, since the root of 
the mahayana has been severed, you should tr ain in the wishing or aspirational mind of 
enlightenment and its causes. The causes of this mind are love and compassion. It is said that 
f i r s t  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  r e c o g n i z e  a l l  s e n t i e n t  b e i n g s  a s  h a v i n g  b e e n  o u r  m o t h e r s ,  t h e n  t o  
recognize their kindness, then to generate the wi sh to repay it, then to develop love followed 
by compassion, and then to generate the extrao rdinary attitude. These are the causes of the 
mind of enlightenment. Alternatively, you can think about the fact th at the self-cherishing 
mind is the root of all problems and diffic ulties, whereas all good qualities come from 
cherishing others. Then you should engage in th e practice of exchanging yourself and others, 
that is, exchanging your present attitude of cherishing yourself for the attitude of cherishing 
others. These too are causes for generating the mind of enlightenment. In short, you should 
train in its causes.  
984 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
 If upon taking the bodhisattva vow you train in the [bodhisattva] deeds and it 
appears that you have the fetters of the co nceptions of signs [inherent existence] in 
strong force, break down the target of th e conception of signs through a reasoning 
consciousness and train in the emptin ess like space and like illusion.  
 
If, having taken the bodhisattva vow, you train in the bodhisattva deeds but it seems that the 
fetters or bondage of the conceptions of signs, that is, the conceptions of true existence, are 
strong, you should destroy the observed object of the conceptions of signs with a reasoning 
consciousness. In other words, you should th ink about the fact that phenomena not exist 
inherently or truly by applying various types of  reasonings. You should also train in the space-
like emptiness and illusion-like emptiness. For example, in a session you should do single-
pointed meditation on space-like emptiness, th inking that just as space is the absence of 
obstructive contact, so too is emptiness an absence of inherent ex istence. When, during 
subsequent attainment, things appear to you to exist truly or inherently, you should think 
that they are like illusions. Just as an elepha nt appears due to the power of a magician, so too 
do phenomena appear to exist inherently due to the imprints of th e conception of true 
existence.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
If it appears that your mind is not stayi ng on its object of observation and has 
become a servant of distraction, mainly train in the factor of one-pointed stability. 
This is what the earlier [great masters] said. 
 
If your mind wanders or is distracted from the observed object and does not abide on the 
object, you should not do analytical meditation but instead should train in abiding on the object single-pointedly. This is what the earlier scholars taught. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
(Third, advice not to let your practice become partial:) 
Using those as illustrations you should also understand [what to do in] other [situations] which have not been explaine d. In brief, without becoming partial, 
your continuum should be serviceable in all virtuous directions. 
 
You should not allow your practice to become on e-sided or partial. Base d on this explanation, 
you should understand how to act and train in other situations. In brief, you should not practice one thing while giving up another, for example, practicing calm abiding alone 
without cultivating special insight. You should make your continuum serviceable in 
everything virtuous. 
 
 
 
985 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                              
Thursday morning, 15 March 2007 (cont’d) 
 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (translated by Philip Quarcoo, Tibetan text page 381) says: 
Explanation of how to train in the uncommon vehicle, the vajrayana 
2B4B-2B3B-3C2 Explanation of how to train in the uncommon vehicle, the vajrayana 
A The advice to make sure and engage in mantra 
Second: In particular how to  train in the Vajrayana:  
Having thus trained in what sutra and mantra have in common, {382}  you should 
doubtlessly engage in mantra84, for that path is extremely rare compared with other 
Dharma teachings and lets you comple te the two accumulations quickly.  
 
Next come some brief instructions on how to  train in the vajrayana. The path common to 
sutra and tantra includes the paths of small, middling, and great beings. Having trained in 
these paths, one should definitely engage in  the path of tantra. Among the teachings of 
Buddha this path is very rare and enables one to quickly complete the two collections. In 
short, it is important to first train in the co mmon path to sutra and tantra and then enter the 
tantra path.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 382) says: 
B How essential it is to rely on a spiritual teacher when you engage in it 
If you engage in it, you should first of all make your teacher happy in excess of 
what has been explained above, according to the statements in Lamp on the Path, 
and this should be someone who has at least all the characteristics discussed.  
 
When engaging in the path of tantra, it is nece ssary to rely on a teacher, a virtuous spiritual 
friend. As is taught in the Lamp on the Path , the lam-rim text by Atisha, you should rely on a 
teacher and delight him even more than when prac ticing sutra. The guru or teacher should be 
one who is qualified in the sense of possessing al l ten qualities, or a minimum of five of the 
ten, or even just three – having a good heart, possessing the lineage, and taking care of his 
disciples. This is the type of guru upon whom one should rely. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C The entryway, receiving an empowerment, and the importance of keeping one’s commitments and 
vows intact 
Then you should first have your ment al continuum ripene d by means of an 
empowerment explained in authentic tantra  texts. Then you should hear and get 
to know the vows and commitments taken on  that occasion and keep them. If a 
root infraction occurs, even if the vow is  taken again the development of positive 
qualities of the path will be greatly delaye d in one’s mind, so try hard to not be 
 
84 cf. chap. I, note 1***. 
986 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             tainted by that. Also try not to be tainte d by serious contraventions and also apply 
the means of restoring the 100 [lesser] ones if you become tainted [by them] 
because they are the root for cultivating th e paths. Without them, it would be like 
a house with rotten foundations collapsing. 
 
The door or entryway to tantra is an empowerm ent. During an empowerment it is necessary 
to assume certain vows and pledges which must then be safeguarded. Therefore, your mind 
should be ripened by receiving an empowerment from an authentic scriptural source. This is 
important because there are tantras that were ta ught by the Buddha and others that occur in 
other Indian traditions. Having taken an em powerment, you should study the vows and 
pledges that you have received by, for example, studying texts such as the Fifty Verses of Guru 
Devotion . If a root downfall occurs, you should take  the vows again. However, it would be best 
not to commit such root downfalls at all beca use even if you take the vows again it the 
achievement of the results of the tantra path will still be delayed. Therefore, it is better not to 
commit them at all. You should also try not to  be stained by serious contraventions because 
they are the basis for cultivating the path. Withou t them, it would be like the collapsing of a 
house with a rotten foundations. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
 
In the Manjushri Root Tantra  it says: 
 
The Capable One never talked about yogis 
with discipline lost accomplishing mantra. 
 
Statements such as this indicate th at [in that case] there will be no 
accomplishments at all, neither great, medium, nor small. In the highest yoga 
tantras it also says that practitioners who do not keep thei r sacred commitments, 
who had inferior empowerments,85 or who do not unders tand suchness will not 
attain any accomplishments despite their practice. Therefore someone claiming to 
meditate on the path without keeping his sacred commitments and vows is 
straying far from the established way of mantra. 
 
Those whose morality is corrupt or unclean will not be able to achieve the results of mantra, 
that is, they will not be able to attain the real izations of the yogas with and without sign of 
action tantra, performance tantra, and yoga tantra, and the realizations of the generation and 
completion stages of highest yoga tantra. This indicates that they will not be able to attain the 
great, middling, and small attainments.  
 In highest yoga tantra it is also said that if  one does not keep one’s pledges, if one receives 
an inferior empowerment, or if one does not understand the meaning of tantra, one will not 
attain the attainments no matte r how much one practices. Ther efore, someone who claims to 
 
85 An inferior empowerment is one where either the one gi ving it or the one receiving it does not meet all the 
necessary requirements. (Explana tion by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
987 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
practice tantra but at the same time does not k eep his or her vows and pledges, has strayed far 
from tantra.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
D How to train in the paths of ripening and freeing 
Those who keep their sacred vows and commitments should thus {383}  train in 
the two levels of yoga with and without signs according to the three lower tantras 
and in the two levels of yoga according to  the highest one in order to cultivate the 
paths of mantra. 
 Here only the aspect of how you get invo lved in mantra is presented nominally, 
so you must get to know them more in detail from the Stages of Mantra .  
 
It is necessary to train in the paths that ripen and the paths that liberate. Those who 
safeguard their vows and pledges should train in  the yoga with signs and yoga without signs 
according to the three lower tantras, and in the generation and completion stages in the case 
of highest yoga tantra. Here these stages are only presented in name, so you should 
understand them from the Great Exposition of the Stages of Mantra .  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
E How to make your leisures and endowments meaningful in that manner
If you train in such a way, you will completely perfect the [entire] body of the path 
comprising all the key points of sutra an d tantra, and make the leisures you have 
achieved meaningful through [sustained] practice. You will be able to make the 
jewel of the Conqueror’s teachings develop in your own mind and that of others.  
 
Having obtained the leisures and endowments you must make them meaningful. If you train 
in this way, you will complete the paths of su tra and tantra, thereby making this precious 
human rebirth that you presently have very meaningful. Thus, you will be able to make the Conqueror’s teachings flourish in your own and others’ continua.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  (Tibetan text page 383) says: 
3 Conclusion of the explanations 
A How the treatise was composed 
B Dedicating the virtue of its composition 
C The author who composed the text and how he did it 
3A How the treatise was composed 
1 Explaining the greatness of the instructions 
2 The purpose of a writing a composition that has such great qualities 
3 Indication of the sources: the instructions from which the subject matter of this treatise was handed 
down 
3A1 Explaining the greatness of the instructions  
A Generally speaking: The greatness that all the excellent sutra teachings come to be seen as [practical] instructions 
The Conqueror has set out the sutra and tantra approaches – 
two aspects of the path. The excellent texts 
on paths of all sutra teachings and commentaries, 
988 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
easily come to be seen as direct instructions 
through the fearless confidence one is given. 
 
This is the first greatness of the instructions : the greatness that all the teachings of sutra 
appear as personal instructions. Buddha Sh akyamuni taught both sutra and tantra. The 
excellent texts come to be seen as personal inst ructions due to fearless confidence in the paths 
of all the scriptures and treatises of the sutra class. 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
B In particular: The greatness that all key points of the path shared by sutra and mantra are [made] clear 
The shared great vehicle path s explained in the tantras 
are all made clear, which supremely cleanses the mind. 
 
Then there is the second greatnes s that all the essential points of  sutra and tantra are clarified. 
The paths of the common great vehicle, that  is, those common to bo th sutra and tantra, 
which are explained in tantras are clar ified and the continuum is purified.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
C The greatness of correcting errors about the concentration of yogis through a clear explanation of how the 
concentration common to non-Buddhists and Buddhists is achieved
Moreover you properly realize errors of paths  
sought by yogis and correctly explained  
according to very clear texts by many scholars 
on concentration common to Buddhists, non-Buddhists, 
Hinayana, both kinds of Mahayana, 
higher and lower tantras and both stages. 
 
Then there is the greatness of correcting errors regarding the meditative stabilizations 
common to Buddhists and non-Buddhists.  
 By means of the excellent explanations according to the very clear texts by many scholars on the meditative stabilizations common to Bu ddhists and non-Buddhists, hinayana and both 
types of mahayana, the higher tantra (highest yo ga tantra) and the lower tantras (action tantra, 
performance tantra, and yoga tantra) and the two stages, one realizes well the errors of paths 
sought be yogis.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3A2 The purpose of a writing a composition that has such great qualities 
This summary of the path to enlightenment 
I rearranged for those who want liberation 
 
This is a summary of the path to enlightenm ent that Lama Tsongkha pa composed for the 
purpose of those who wish to attain liberation. 
 
989 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3A3 Indication of the sources: the instructions from which the subject matter of this treatise was handed 
down 
The path of subtle view and extensive behavior 
passed from the regent, Maitreya, and noble Manjushri 
to the protector Nagarjuna, Asanga, 
and Shantideva – three rivers that were merged  
in the supreme instructions of Shri Atisha. 
 
The profound view and the path of vast cond uct were passed down from Maitreya to Asanga 
and from Manjushri to the protector Nagarjuna. In addition, there is a third lineage held by 
Shantideva. These three lineages were merged in  the supreme instructions of Shri Atisha.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3B Dedicating the virtue of composing the treatise as a cause for the propagation of the teachings 
Through the merit gained here by my effort 
may the Conqueror’s teachings, root of all welfare  
prosper, uncorrupted, for a long time. 
 
At the end, Lama Tsongkhapa dedicates the virt ue of having composed this text. He says 
“Through the virtues due to my effort may the Conqueror’s teachings flourish, uncorrupted, for a long time for the benefit of all sentient beings.” 
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
3C The author who composed the text and how he did it 
This summary of all the excellent teachings of the Buddha condenses, yet again, the tradition of the great trail-blazers Nagarjuna and Asanga, the supreme Dharma 
system of beings progressing towards th e level of omniscience, the lam-rim of 
enlightenment teaching in full all the stag es to be practiced by the three types of 
beings, the meaning of instructions passed from Gönpawa to Neuzurpa as well as 
down from Jenngawa and those passed from  Potowa to Sharawa as well as from 
Potowa to Tölpa. It was arranged in the glorious mountain monastery of Geden by 
the learned and renounced monk Tsongkhapa Losang Dragpa based on his 
extensive Lam-rim.  
 
This summary, which includes all the teachings of the Buddha, as well as the tradition of 
Nagarjuna and Asanga, for all those wishing to progress to enlightenment, a complete 
teaching on the stages of the path to enligh tenment to be practiced by the three types of 
beings, came down as instru ctions from Gönpawa to Neuz urpa, as well as down from 
Jenngawa, and passed from Potowa to Sharawa as well as from Potowa to Tölpa. These names 
are based on the names of small monasteries th at existed in the past, many of which have 
become nunneries with good practitioners, this being said to be due to the Kadampas having 
tended to denigrate women. Potowa is a well -known Kadam lama whose present incarnation 
990 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
                                             lives in India. This particular text was co mposed by the meditator or renounced monk 
Tsongkhapa Losang Dragpa based on his Extensive Exposition of the Stages of the Path  in Gaden 
Monastery (also called Geden).  
 
Here I have finished a short explanation of this text as I was unable to go into much detail.  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  says: 
This Middling Exposition of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment  composed by the Lord of 
the teachings of the three realms, the gr eat Tsongkhapa, is also known as the Lesser Lam-
rim. Its outlines are not restricted to the ones found in the original text. Since I had never 
seen nor heard about a thorough explanatory division, I thought ‘If only there were a 
thorough division along the lines of the Four Annotations86 on the Great Exposition of the 
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment’ . With that intention I started off from the points that 
clearly match in the outlines of Four Annotations  as my basis. Where the sequence is 
different and where the divisions are more cond ensed or more detailed I left things out 
and made insertions as appropriate in a give n context. The outlines  of new divisions that 
have become necessary, for instance in the se ctions on calm abiding and the two truths, 
were put in wherever the argument could be  broken up. I have received profound and 
extensive explanations on this Middling Exposition of the Stages of the Path  from both the 
exalted master possessed of inconceivable great compassion, Büldü Dorje Chang Losang 
Yeshe Tenpe Pel Sangpo of Dre[pung] Gomang  and the sovereign holding the essence of 
kindness that comprises all the refuge object s of the three times till the end of samsara, 
Dorje Chang Pabongka, in that order. It wa s written down by the indolent lazy bone, 
lying around and lacking practice, in the guise of a teacher, the tutor named Ganden 
Trijang in this life [and known as] Lobsang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso, in the Tibetan year of 2903 and the Western year of 1966 in Dharamsa la, in the state of Himachal Pradesh, 
India. I kindly request impartia l scholars to correct any distortions – additions, omissions, 
and errors – that I have made.  
 
Through this virtuous effort may all lives 
be undivorced from this full, unmistaken, 
ultimate path. Having grasped the Conqueror’s teachings, 
may the power to guide all beings be gained.   
Prayer for the purity of publications: 
Meant for anything good, either present or fu ture, such as the complete propagation of 
the Buddha’s long-standing tradition which po ints out the path of non-harm and peace 
all over the world, the following lines were composed as a dedication prayer that may be 
appended to any publication or reproduction of Buddhist scriptures associated with non-
partisan schools of thought by the Shakya’s  monk, the exponent of Dharma, the Lord of 
speech Lobsang Tenzin Gyatso. 
 
Of the same taste as that oc ean-like peace – liberation: 
the slow-moving river of limitless Dharma one strives at 
whose every word component removes some stains 
 
86 Well-known text book by scholars of Sera Monastery. It contains a deta iled outline and annotations to Je 
Tsongkhapa’s Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path . 
991 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy          Commentary to Middle Lam-Rim by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
ILTK – 12-16 March 2007 (21) 
 
of the three poisons – this ne ctar of good explanations 
 
Through the massive virtue of its publication 
may hundreds of thousands of doors of pure Dharma open. 
May all five kinds of beings without exception 
command the jewel treasure of definite goodness. 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim  translated by Philip Quarcoo, 
except for the Special Insight Section wh ich was translated by Jeffrey Hopkins. 
Geshe Jampa Gyatso gave these teachings in what he calls “h is broken” English. 
They were transcribed by Joan Nicell who take s complete responsibility for any mistakes. 
May any merit that has been accumulated by the BP staff and students,  
both residential and correspondence, through hearing, studying, thinking, and meditating 
on these precious and profound teachings be dedicated entirely for the long and healthy life  
of Geshe Jampa Gyatso and the success of all his Dharma activities. 
 
© Geshe Jampa Gyatso and Isti tuto Lama Tzong Khapa, 2007 
 
992 