Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Reference Material/MLR_Quizzes_AnswerKeys_ILTK07.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:47.051398
================================================================================

 
 
 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM  
Stages of the Path 
 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
by 
Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
Homework Quizzes 
with Answer Keys 
 
 
Based on the Oral Commentary by Geshe Jampa Gyatso 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa 
2005 & 2007 
 
  
 
Produced by Teaching  Assistants Ven. Olivier Ross i and Ven. Birgit Schweiberer 
Lightly edited for use in FPMT Basic Progra ms by Olga Planken, Education Department 
 
© FPMT, Inc., December 2007 
 
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 1 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 1 
Introduction 
1. What is the name of the text  that we are actually studying? 
 
 
2. Who is its author? 
  3.  What are the origins/roots of this text? 
 
 4.  According to the tradition of Vikramalashila Monastery, what are the three preliminary 
explanations by which an actual teaching should be preceded? 
 
 5. With respect to Atisha’s scriptural learning, do you think he had studied 
• only Buddhist literature? 
• both Buddhist and non-Buddhist sciences? 
• only sutra? 
• only tantra? 
• both sutra and tantra? 
• medicine? 
• dance and arts? 
• grammar, poetry, and composition? 
• logic and debate? 
• how to cook? 
  6. With respect to why Jowo Atisha is considered a great author 
• he was born in a stable 
• he was born in a pure land 
• he was born in a royal caste 
• he was born as a single child 
• he was born as a great scholar 
 
 
7. With respect to his realizations, what ar e the three categories, in which all his inner 
realizations can be summarized, called? 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 2  
8. What are the three excellent factors th at make someone capable of composing a 
commentary that exactly expresses the Buddha’s intention? 
 
 9. With respect to Atisha’s Lamp on  the Path why is it said to be:  
complete  
easy to put into practice 
and noble   10. Specifically, what are the fo ur greatnesses of the teaching? 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 3 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 2 
Introduction-2 
1. With respect to the way of listening to and ex plaining a teaching that is itself great and has 
a great author, what are the three faults of  a vessel to be avoided when listening? 
 
 
2. What do they mean?   
3. What are the six attitudes or notions or discriminations that one should have when 
listening to a Dharma teaching? 
  
4. Which of the below mentioned are proper mo tivations to generate before beginning to 
listen to teachings? 
• Wishing to learn how to run one’s business better with Buddhist ethics 
• Wishing to increase the level of happiness of this life 
• Wishing for happiness in future lives 
• Wishing for the bliss of liberation from samsara 
• Whishing to gain intellectual knowledge about Buddhism 
• Wishing for enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings 
 
 5. Which one of them is the best?   6. After teachings what should we do? 
• Dedicate the merit we accumulated for enlightenment 
• Forget the teachings as quickly as possible in order to make space for new teachings 
• Try to put the teachings into practice 
• Talk as much as possible about the teaching s even with people who are not interested 
• Discuss unclear points of the te achings with our Dharma friends 
 
 7. Do you know the name of the prayer for th e dedication of merits recommended in our 
text?   
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 4 The stages by which a student should be guided  
8. Why is it said that we need a teac her if we want to progress on the path? 
 
 
9. How many qualities should an excellentl y qualified teacher of the Mahayana have 
according to Mahayanasutraalamkara ? List them.  
 
 
10. Why does a teacher need the last four? 
  11. Some of the ten are more important than ot hers and constitute the qualities of a teacher 
with middling qualification. What are they?   
12. What are the minimum qualities th at a Mahayana teacher should have? 
 
 13. What are the characteristics of a qualified student?   14. With respect to properly relying on the teac her, there are two main ways of relying. What 
are the two?   15. Briefly explain how these two attitudes ar e generated in the mind of the disciple 
  
16. With respect to the first, what mind should we ideally generate in relation to our teacher 
and what is its purpose? 
  
17. What are the disadvantages of reflecting on his faults? 
  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 5 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 3 
Relying on the Spiritual Teacher 
1. What is the method for restraining the conc epts of faults in one’s spiritual teacher? 
 
 
2. Since this requires some training, what is  the minimum attitude we should be able to 
maintain in relation to someone we regard as our spiritual teacher? 
• we should feel guilty 
• a neutral mind 
• a mind that at least does not criticize or disparage the teacher 
 
 3. What can we do, if we have criticiz ed or disparaged our spiritual teacher? 
  4. What are the three ways of relying on a spir itual teacher in action? Which one is the best?  
  5. What are the eight benefits listed by Tsongkha pa of properly relying on a qualified spiritual 
teacher?   
6. What are the four disadvantages listed by Ts ongkhapa of improper reliance on a spiritual 
teacher? 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 6 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 4 
The Meditation Session 
1. Can you list the six preparatory practices that  are to be done before actually engaging in 
meditation? 
 
 
2. What are examples of recommended attitudes while cleaning your room? 
  
3. What are the causes of going for refuge?  
  4. What are the two types of offerings mentio ned in the text and can you give one example 
for each?   
5. What is the best sitting posture for medi tation and what are its essential features? 
 
 6. What are the two attitudes th at should be generated in the beginning of a meditation and 
what is their purpose?   7. Who is traditionally depicted in the center of the merit field, who on the right side, and 
who on the left?    8. Why it is indispensable to accumulate merit and purify negativities?   9. What are the 7 practices (the seven limbs or  branches) for the accumulation of merit and 
the purification of negativities, which ar e done with respect to the merit field? 
  10. In terms of the seven limbs, which cons titute accumulation, which purification, and 
which multiplication ?  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 7 11. Describe the mode of sustaining correct me ditation. What are the inconveniences of an 
improper meditation? 
 
 
12. How is the meditation of this context (relianc e on the spiritual teacher) to be carried out?  
First one meditates on the benefits of ______________________ _______________ ____,  
after that on the disadvantages of  _____________ __________________ _____________. 
From thinking about _____ __________________ ________________, fait h is generated; 
from thinking about ______________ ______________, _____ ___________________. 
  13. What are the general practices that are to be done between meditation sessions, and what 
is their purpose?  
 
 
14. What are the causes of calm abiding th at are to be relied on between sessions  
 
 15. What are the five practices that are to be relied on when lying down to sleep?  
  16. What are the two modes of sustaining meditation?    17. In which of the two modes of sustaining  meditation does one mainly engage while 
developing the three wisdoms: 1. the wisdom ar isen from hearing (“study”), 2. the wisdom 
arisen from thinking (“proper mental activity”)   and 3. the wisdom arisen from meditating 
(realizing “the meaning of reality”) respectively?    18. With respect to the assertion that only one type of meditation is necessary, please 
identify the  correct statements  
 
o Only placement meditation is able to over come afflictions, since one needs a stable 
mind to overcome them  
o Scholars should practice only analytical me ditation, because they need to understand 
many topics 
o Saddhus (yogis) should only practice placem ent meditation, since they want to realize 
the meaning of reality 
o Before the development of placement meditation, analyzing a lot creates obstacles to the stability of the mind 
o While trying to develop placement meditation, analyzing a lot can diminish the stability of the mind 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 8 o Not all conceptual meditations are meditati ons to be abandoned, since “conception” 
does not necessarily mean “conception of tr ue existence”  and th erefore they are not 
necessarily an obstacle to enlightenment 
o Analytical meditation can assist in the de velopment of placement meditation, making 
one’s mind malleable like gold that has been  purified in fire and washed with water 
o Analytical meditation can help overcome  the two main obstacles to placement 
meditation 
 
 19. Why is analytical meditation the best means for achieving concentration free from 
conceptuality?    20. What are the two adverse conditions to meditation, and what are their respective 
antidotes?  
 
.
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 9 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 5 
Precious Human Rebirth / The Three Scopes 
1. What are the eight leisures of a precious human rebirth (four that are freedoms from non-
human states and four that are freedoms fr om adverse conditions as a human being)   
 
 
2. What are the ten endowments of a precio us human rebirth (five that are personal 
endowments and five that are related to others)? 
  3. Why it is called “precious”?  
  
4. How should we meditate on the precious hu man rebirth when the meditation is subsumed 
in three points? 
  5. It is said to be difficult to create the caus es for a human rebirth with all eighteen qualities 
complete. What are those causes?   6. What are the three scopes, what are the differ ent motivations of each of the beings of the 
three scopes, and what are their main trainings?   7. What is the purpose of guiding the trai nees by means of the three beings’ paths 
  8. What is the measure of having entered the Mahayana?   9. Explain how the lesser and intermediate scop es are necessary for the generation of the 
mind of enlightenment?    10. Why it is necessary to enter the tantric path?  
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 10 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 6 
Mindfulness of Death – Lower realms 
1. What are the disadvantages of not bein g mindful of death? (2B4B-2B1A-1A1B-E)  
 
 
2. What are the advantages of bein g mindful of death? (2B4B-2B1A-1A2) 
 
 3. With respect to how one should meditate on  mindfulness of death, please give the three 
root thoughts, the three reasons that support ea ch of them, and the three determinations that 
one should reach.  (2B4B-2B1A-1A4)
 
 
 
4. Why is it important to think about the sufferi ngs of the lower realms after having reflected 
on the mindfulness of de ath? (2B4B-2B1A-1B2B) 
 
 
5. In the context of the actual considerations concerning the suffering of the bad migrations, 
list the three main categories of bad migratio ns and the general sufferings experienced there? 
(2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1) 
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 11 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 7 
Going for Refuge to the Three Jewels 
1. What are the two causes that properly going for refuge depends on? (2B4B-2B1A-2) 
 
2. What are the objects of refuge? (2B4B-2B1A-2A2A) 
 
 3. Why is the Buddha worthy to be an object of refuge? (2B4B-2B1A-2A2B)  
 
4. What are the positive qualities of the Buddh a? Give an example of each one. (2B4B-2B1A-
2A3A-1A) 
 
 
 
5. What are the positive qualitie s of the Dharma? (2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-2)  
 
 
6. What are the positive qualitie s of the Sangha? (2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-3)  
 
 7. List the specific precepts in  the context of training after taking refuge (2B4B-2B1A-2A4-1) 
 
 8. Give the list of the common precepts in the context of training after taking refuge (2B4B-
2B1A-2A4-2) 
 
 9. What are the eight benefits of going for re fuge to the Three Jewe ls (2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2E) 
   
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 12 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 8 
The Law of Cause and Effect 
1. What is the entity of karma? (2B4B-2B1A-2B1A)  
 
 2. What are the three kinds of action?
 
  3. Identify the non-virtuous and the te n virtuous actions (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1)
 
 
 4. What are the four factors that make an acti on complete? Using the example of killing, give 
an example of each of them. (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1)
 
 
 
5. What are the six factors according to Asanga’s Actual Basis of the Levels  that make virtuous 
and non-virtuous actions heavy? (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2)  
 
 
6. What are the four gates of strong karma?  Give examples using only key words. (2B4B-
2B1A-2B1B-2A2B)  
  
7. List and briefly explain the different types of  results of karma. Give one example for each 
of the ten paths of acti on. (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A3)
 
  8. What is the difference between throwing karma and completing ka rma? (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-
2C1) 
 
 
9. What is the difference between definite and indefinite karma? Give one example of each 
(2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C2)   
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 13 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 9 
The Law of Cause and Effect / Atta ining Liberation / True Sufferings 
1. List and briefly describe the four opponent  powers that are applied in order to purify 
negative karma (2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3) 
 
 
2. What are the six practices particularly re commended as antidotes to negative karma? 
(2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B)  
 
3. Why is it not inappropriate for followers of the Mahayana to develop an aspiration for high 
status in future lives (2B4B-2B1C-1/2)  
 
 4. What is liberation? What are you liberated from? (2B4B-2B2B-1A) 
 
 
5. What is the mind striving for liberation an d how in general is it developed? (2B4B-2B2B-
1B1/2)   6. What are the four noble truths? (2B4B-2B2B-1B2 etc.) 
  7. Why are the four noble truths taught in that specific order? (2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B2) 
  8. List the eight types of suffering. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D)    9. List the six types of suffe ring. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2A)   
  10. List and explain briefly the three types of suffering. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-8 – 2A2C)    
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 14 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 10 
True Origins / The Nature of the Path 
1. List and give the definition of the six root afflictions (without specifying the five afflicted 
views). (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1)  
 
 
2. Explain the stages in which the a fflictions arise. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B2A) 
  
3. Explain how the other afflictions arise in dependence of the view of the transitory 
collection. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B2C) 
  
4. What is the entity of the bardo being? (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3D2)  
  
5. What is the life span of the bardo being? (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3D8)  
 
 6. Briefly explain how we transfer into an in termediate state existence and how we connect. 
(2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3E1 & 2)    7. Define the three higher trainings.   8. In the context of ethical discipline, what are the four causes for the arisal of downfalls and 
what are their respective an tidotes? (2B4B- 2B2B-4B2C-4A) 
    
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 15 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 11 
The Great Scope – Developing Bodhichitta 
1. Why is it not sufficient to merely attain li beration from suffering for oneself alone? (2B4B-
2B3A) 
 
 
2. Briefly explain the importance of compassion  at the beginning, in the middle, and at the 
end (2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A)   
 
3. What are the two principal methods for the generation of bodhichitta and what are the 
main lineage lamas that passed th em down to us? (2B4B-2B3B-2A) 
 
 
4. List and briefly describe how bodhichitta is  generated by way of the sevenfold cause and 
effect instruction. (2B4B-2B3B-2A1)  
 
 5. Explain the method to develo p equanimity in relation to th e three types of beings. (2B4B-
2B3B-2A1B-2A1A-2C, D, E)   6. How would you prove that all sentient bein gs have been your mother? (2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-
2A1B)  
  
7. Present the method for remembering the ki ndness of all sentient beings. (2B4B-2B3B-
2A1B-2A1B-2) 
  
8. Explain how to develop the wish to repay th e kindness of all sentient beings. (2B4B-2B3B-
2A1B-2A1B-3)    9. What is the main point of the gradual medita tion on equanimity and so forth with respect 
to the different categories of beings? (2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2B-4) 
 
 
10.  Give a definition of bodhichitta and ex plain its two aspirations. (2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2C) 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 16 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 12 
Generating Bodhichitta 2 
1. Explain how one trains in bodhichitta by  way of the instruction on equalizing and 
exchanging self and others. (2B4B-2B3B-2A2) 
 
 
2. What are the disadvantages of the mind ch erishing only oneself? (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2A) 
  
3. What are the advantages of the mind that  cherishes others? How should that mind be 
considered? (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2C) 
  
4. Explain the way in which to put an end to  the self-cherishing mind. How should it be 
regarded? (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2B)  
  5. Explain the way in which to generate the mind cherishing others. (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2C)   6. What are the two obstacles to the generation  of the mind of exchanging self and others? 
Briefly present their respective refutati ons. (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1A & B)     
      
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 17 MIDDLE LAM-RIM  
Homework Quiz 13 
Taking the Aspiring Mind of Enlightenment Through Ritual 
Precepts that Ensure that the As piring Mind of Enlightenment is 
Safeguarded 
 
1. In the ceremony for taking the aspiring mind  of enlightenment through ritual there are is a 
section about how the guru and the disciple must proceed step by step. Can you briefly 
describe these steps? (2B4B-2B3B-2C1Cß1A2A)  
 
 
2. During the ceremony for taking the aspirati onal mind of enlightenment through ritual one 
takes uncommon Mahayana refuge. What is it th at makes this refuge uncommon and what is 
the special thought associated with it  in this case? (2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2) 
  
3. What are the ritual words that are spoken  during the ceremony while one takes refuge? 
(2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2B-2) 
 
 
4. What are the ritual words spoken when  one actually assumes the aspiration for 
enlightenment? (2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-2F) 
 
 
5. Explain the commitments of the aspiring mind  of enlightenment taken by way of ritual 
that ensure that the aspiration for enlightenm ent does not degenerate in this life. (2B4B-
2B3B-2C2) 
 
 6. Explain the trainings that ensure that the mind of enlightenment does not degenerate in 
future lives. (2B4B-2B3B-2C2) 
 
 
 
7. List the ten benefits of having generated bodhichitta in one’s mental continuum. (2B4B-
2B3B-2C2A-1A2B) 
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 18 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 14 
How to train in the conduct of bodh isattvas after having generated the 
engaging mind of enlightenment (the actual bodhisattva vow)-1 
1. Why is it necessary to engage in the trai nings of bodhisattvas especially after having 
adopted the mind of enlightenment? (2B4B-2B3B)  
 
 
2. List the trainings of bodhisattvas, the six pe rfections, and briefly describe their entity or 
nature. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A)  
  3. Describe the absurd consequence that would ensue if the practice of the six perfections 
were to be completed by meditating on  nothing at all. (2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-2) 
  
4. Briefly describe how to practice the six pe rfections within the perfection of generosity. 
(2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-3A1A-1C3D)  
 
 
5. Explain how non-abiding nirvana has to be accomplished by a path of both method and 
wisdom. (2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-3A) 
  6. Explain the following quotation:  
Wisdom not conjoined wi th method is bondage. 
Wisdom conjoined with method is liberation. Method not conjoined with  wisdom is bondage. 
Method conjoined with wisdom is liberation.   (2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-3C) 
 
 
7. Briefly explain how method and wisdom infl uence each other. Give an example. (2B4B-
2B3B-3B3B-2C) 
 
 
8. What are the two truths? By what types of valid cognition are they posited? How do they 
assist one another? (2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4C2) 
  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path    Homework Quizzes  
 
 
 19 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 15 
How to train in the conduct of bodh isattvas after having generated the 
engaging mind of enlightenment (the actual bodhisattva vow)-2 
1. Explain how the six perfections are definite in number from the point of view of their 
comprising the entire Maha yana. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2D) 
 
 
2. Give the subdivisions of each  of the first five perfections. 
 
 
3. What are the invisible and visible disadv antages of patience. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-
3C1B) 
 
 
4. Briefly explain how to cultivate patience with respect to harm. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-
3C2A) 
 
 
5. Briefly explain how to cultivate patience  with respect to suffering. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-
3A1A-3C2B) 
 
 
6. What is the entity of the perfection of  wisdom and its subdiv isions? (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-
3A1A-6) 
 
 
7. Explain how wisdom comes to possess the si x perfections. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2C) 
 
 
8. What are the four means of gathering disciples? (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1B) 
 
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path   Homework Quizzes 
    
 20 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 16 
Calm Abiding 
1. Explain – by way of an illustration and applyi ng the illustration to the meaning – why it is 
necessary to develop calm abiding and special insight. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2D)  
 
 2. List the necessary prerequisites for the a ttainment of calm abiding. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-
3B2F-1A)
 
  3. List the hindrances to calm abiding and th e antidotes by way of which they are overcome. 
(2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B 2F-1B2B-2A3B-4/5) 
 
 4. Explain the process of how to attain calm ab iding by way of the nine stages, the six powers, 
and the four applications.  
FPMT Basic Program Homestudy   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path   Homework Quizzes 
 
 
 21 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 17 
Special Insight 
1. Identify ignorance in this sp ecific context. (…-2A2A-2/3/4) 
 
 
2. Identify the root of cyclic existence accord ing to Chandrakirti and according to Nagarjuna. 
Why are these two assertions not contradi ctory? (…-2A2A-5B1/2/ 3; …-2A2B-1/2/3/4) 
 
 
3. Establish that when the conception of true existence is overcome, cyclic existence is also 
overcome. (…2A2C-1D2C) 
 
 4. What are the stages of generating the tw o views of selflessness? Explain why. (…2A2C-
2A1/2)  
 
5. Explain briefly how to generate the view real izing the selflessness of persons by way of the 
four essentials. (…2B1B-1A)   6. Explain how to generate appearances as being like illusions. (…2B1B-3B1/2) 
  7. List the instructions with regard to seekin g the ascertainment of the illusory-like. (…2B1B-
3B5A/B/)   8. Present the uncommon mode of positing dependent-arising by the Madhyamikas. How 
does it refute truly existent on eness and difference? (…2B2B-2A6) 
   
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 22 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 1 - Answer key 
Introduction 
1. What is the name of the text  that we are actually studying? 
Middle Length Lam-Rim (lam rim ‘bring ba) 
 
2. Who is its author? 
Lama Tsongkhapa  3. What are the origins/roots of this text? 
The Middle Length Lam-Rim  is based on Lama Atisha’s Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment  
(Bodhipathapradipam) , which has as its source the Ornament for Clear Realizations 
(Abhisamayalamkara)  by Buddha Maitreya, which is the main commentary to the Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutras (Prajnaparamita)  by Buddha Shakyamuni.  
 
4. According to the tradition of Vikramalashila Monastery, what are the three preliminary 
explanations by which an actual teaching should be preceded? 
1. Explanation of the greatness of the author for the sake of showing the 
authenticity/validity of the teachings 
2. Explanation of the greatness of the teachings themselves in order to generate respect for 
the instructions 
3. Explanation of how the teachings which are ch aracterized by those two greatnesses are to 
be listened to and explained 
 
5. With respect to Atisha’s scriptural learning, do you think he had studied 
• only Buddhist literature? NO 
• both Buddhist and non-Buddhist sciences? YES 
• only sutra? NO 
• only tantra? NO 
• both sutra and tantra? YES 
• medicine? YES 
• dance and arts? YES 
• grammar, poetry, and composition? YES 
• logic and debate? YES 
• how to cook? Can’t tell! 
 
6. With respect to why Jowo Atisha is considered a great author 
• he was born in a stable? NO (that was Jesus Christ) 
• he was born in a pure land? NO (he had a human rebirth like ourselves) 
• he was born in a royal caste? YES  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 23 • he was born as a single chil d? NO (he had two brothers) 
• he was born as a great scholar? NO (he had to make efforts just like us) 
 
7. With respect to his realizations, what ar e the three categories, in which all his inner 
realizations can be summarized, called?  
• The higher training in ethical discipline 
• The higher training in concentration 
• The higher training in wisdom 
 8. What are the three excellent factors th at make someone capable of composing a 
commentary that exactly expresses the Buddha’s intention? 1. He has received permission from his meditati onal deity (in the text expressed as ‘protector 
deity’) to compose the text 2. His lineage of instruction is uninterrupted 3 .  H e  i s  l e a r n e d  i n  t h e  f i v e  s c i e n c e s  ( ‘ a r eas of knowledge’): Four sciences common to 
Buddhists and non-Buddhists, su ch as 1. Grammar (language) , 2. Logic, 3. Crafts, 4. 
Medicine, and 5. Inner (Buddhist) sciences.  
9. With respect to Atisha’s Lamp on  the Path why is it said to be:  
complete, easy to put into practice and noble? 
• complete, from the point of view of its conten t – because it contains both sutra and tantra 
in a summary fashion 
• easy to put into practice – because its main  topic is a gradual training of the mind 
• noble – because it is adorned with the inst ructions from two masters (Vidyakokila and 
Serlingpa), who were extraordinarily skilled in  the systems of the two great trail-blazers 
(Arya Nagarjuna and Arya Asanga) 
 
10. Specifically, what are the fo ur greatnesses of the teaching? 
1. The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory 
2.The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teaching s coming into view as useful instructions 
3. The greatness of allowing one to easily  find the meaning intended by the Buddha 
4. The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 24 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 2 - Answer key 
Introduction-2 
1. With respect to the way of listening to and ex plaining a teaching that is itself great and has 
a great author, what are the three faults of  a vessel to be avoided when listening? 
• A vessel that is turned upside down 
• A dirty vessel 
• A leaky vessel 
 
2. What do they mean? 
• A lack of attention  
• A tendency to find fault in the teachings or the teacher  
• Forgetfulness 
 
3. What are the six attitudes or notions or discriminations that one should have when 
listening to a Dharma teaching? 
• The discrimination of oneself as the patient 
• The discrimination of the teacher as a doctor 
• The discrimination of th e teaching as medicine 
• The discrimination of persistent pr actice of the teachings as a cure 
• The discrimination of the tathag atas as holy/exalted beings 
• The wish that the Dharma tradition may last long 
 
4. Which of the below mentioned are proper mo tivations to generate before beginning to 
listen to teachings? 
• Wishing to learn how to run one’s business better with Buddhist ethics – NO, unless it is 
conjoined with one of the three scopes 
• Wishing to increase the level of one’s happine ss in this life – NO, unless it is conjoined 
with one of the three scopes 
• Wishing for happiness in future lives – YES, this is the motivation of the small scope 
• Wishing for the bliss of liberation from samsara - YES, this is the middling scope 
• Wishing to gain intellectual knowledge abou t Buddhism - NO, unless it is conjoined with 
one of the three scopes 
• Wishing for enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings – YES, this is the 
motivation of the great scope 
 
5. Which one of them is the best? The motivation wishing to attain enlightenm ent for the benefit of all sentient beings. 
 6. After teachings what should we do? 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 25 1. Dedicate the merit we accumulated for enlightenment - YES 
2. Forget the teachings as quickly as possible in  order to make space for new teachings – NO! 
3. Try to put the teachings into practice - YES 
4. Talk as much as possible about the teachings even with people who are not interested -NO 
5. Discuss unclear points of the teachi ngs with our Dharma friends - YES 
 
7. Do you know the name of the prayer for th e dedication of merits recommended in our 
text? 
The Prayer of Good Conduct , also known as Samantabhadra’s Prayer  or the King of Prayers . 
 
 
The stages by which a student should be guided  
8. Why is it said that we need a teac her if we want to progress on the path? 
Because all goodness, from the generation of a si ngle quality and the decrease of a single fault 
in the mind of the disciple, has its root in the sublime virtuous spiritual friend. 
 9. How many qualities should an excellentl y qualified teacher of the Mahayana have 
according to Mahayanasutraalamkara ? List them.  
1- with discipline (higher training in ethical discipline)  2- calm (higher training in concentration) 3- great peace (higher training in wisdom) 4- rich in transmissions 5- has thoroughly realized suchness 6- more accomplished 7- is eloquent 8- loving  
9- with energy  
10- never disheartened 
 10. Why does a teacher need the last four? The last four qualities of being eloquent, loving, energetic, and of having abandoned disenchantment are qualities for taking care of others.  11. Some of the ten are more important than ot hers and constitute the qualities of a teacher 
with middling qualification. What are they? 1. Higher training in ethical discipline 2. Higher training in concentration 3. Higher training in wisdom 4. Realization of suchness 
5. Loving heart 
 12. What are the minimum qualities th at a Mahayana teacher should have? 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 26 It is explicitly mentioned in the text that on e should not rely on anyone whose faults are 
greater or whose faults and positives qualities are equal.  
But according to Venerable Geshe Jampa Gyatso two other qualities must also be present: 
- the teacher must have more qualities than the disciple, and 
- he must have the motivation of benefiting.   13. What are the characteristics of a qualified student? 
1- Impartial (unbiased) 
2- Intelligent (correct discrimination between good explanations and faulty ones) 3- Great endeavor in the Dharma 4- Good direction of the mind while listening 5- Great respect in the Dharma and the expounder 
 14. With respect to properly relying on the teac her, there are two main ways of relying. What 
are the two? - Relying in thought, - Relying through actions  15. Briefly explain how these two attitudes ar e generated in the mind of the disciple 
Purposely abandoning any concept of faults in  every respect while training the mind in 
reflecting on his positive qualities again and again, faith/confidence
 is generated in the 
spiritual master.   
By remembering again and again his infinite kindness, great respect  is generated in the mind 
of the disciple. 
 
16. With respect to the first, what mind should we ideally generate in relation to our teacher 
and what is its purpose? 
Ideally the disciple should see the master just like he would see the Buddha Bhagavan. 
If you know that someone is like a Buddha, a mi nd reflecting on faults in him will not arise, 
but rather a mind thinking about his positive qualities.  17. What are the disadvantages of reflecting on his faults? Even if positive qualities predominate in a sp iritual master, but you think about him in terms 
of the few faults he has, this will become  an obstacle to your own accomplishments. 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 27 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 3 - Answer key 
Relying on the Spiritual Teacher 
1. What is the method for restraining the conc epts of faults in one’s spiritual teacher? 
You should apply yourself to restraint throug h confession. Contemplate the disadvantage on 
conceiving faults in the teacher; reflect ag ain and again on his qualities and his great 
kindness, and try to see the spiritual teacher as  a Buddha. If you accustom yourself in this 
manner, you may see that there are a few faults, but since your mind holds on to the side of 
positive qualities, it will not become an obstacle to your confidence/faith. 
 
2. Since this requires some training, what is  the minimum attitude we should be able to 
maintain in relation to someone we regard as our spiritual teacher? 
• we should feel guilty – NO 
• a neutral mind – YES 
• a mind that does at least not criticize or disparage the teacher – YES 
 
3. What can we do, if we have criticiz ed or disparaged our spiritual teacher? 
We need to do confession and make a vow not to allow this to happen again in the future. 
We need to remember the benefits and the qualit ies of relying on the guru and the faults of 
not relying on him correctly. Then if we do not rely on him correctly, we should confess this 
from our heart and promise not to it again. To  confess our negativities thoroughly, we need 
to apply the four opponent powers: 
• The opponent force of the base 
• The opponent force of regret 
• The opponent force of determination 
• The opponent force of the antidote. 
 
4. What are the three ways of relying on a spir itual teacher in action? Which one is the best?  
• Offering material things 
• Serving and paying respect with body, speech, and mind 
• Practice progressing in accordance with his words 
 5. What are the eight benefits listed by Tsongkha pa of properly relying on a qualified spiritual 
teacher? 1. You will approach the state of a Buddha 
2. The Conquerors will rejoice 
3. You will not be deprived of virtuous spiritual friends 
4. You will no fall to the lower realms 
5. You will not easily succumb to bad karma and afflictions 
6. Due to being mindful of the bodhisattva conduct and of not transgressing it, your 
collection of good qualities will increase more and more  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 28 7. All your temporary and ultimate goals will be accomplished 
8. Negative karma of experiencing the lower real ms is exhausted in this lifetime through 
slight harm and the benefit exceeds that of making offerings to numerous Buddhas 
 
6. What are the four disadvantages listed by Ts ongkhapa of improper reliance on a spiritual 
teacher? 1. A lot of illnesses and negatives forces will cause harm in this life
 
2. You will have to experience the suffering of the lower realms in future lives  
3. Positive qualities that have not arisen  do not arise  
4. Positive qualities, that have already arisen  will deteriorate and vanish. 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 29 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 4 - Answer key 
The Meditation Session 
1. Can you list the six preparatory practices that  are to be done before actually engaging in 
meditation? 
1. Cleaning one’s room / setting out representa tions of the exalted body, speech, and mind  
2. Arranging offerings 
3. Sitting posture / mental attitude of refuge and bodhichitta 4. Visualization of the merit field 5. Accumulation of merit / purification of negativities  
6. Mandala offering / request for blessings 
 2. What are examples of recommended attitudes while cleaning your room? 
In general, while externally cleaning one’s room , one can imagine that internally one is using 
the broom of wisdom in order to clean one’s  mind of the dirt of  the afflictions and 
obscurations. In particular, one can generate the motivation of the beings of the 
three scopes :  
- With the motivation of a being of small scope , one can think that one is removing the 
negative actions that would result in rebi rth in the lower realms in order to take 
rebirth in the higher realms of samsara. 
- With the motivation of a being of medium scope , one can think that one is removing 
the afflictions that cause rebirth in samsara in general in order to attain liberation 
from samsara. 
- With the motivation of a being of great scope , one can think that one is eliminating 
all the afflictive and knowledge obscurations, in particular the self-cherishing attitude 
from one’s own mind and from the minds of other sentient beings in order to attain 
highest enlightenment. 
- Within the great scope, if one practices tantra , one can think that one is eliminating 
all appearances of and adherence to ordina riness in order to attain the state of 
enlightenment of Vajradhara.  
 3. What are the causes of going for refuge?  In general there are two causes of going for refuge: fear and faith. With respect to fear, it can be of three types th at depend on the scope of the one who goes for 
refuge: 
- A being of small scope goes for refuge out of fear of the sufferings of the lower realms, 
- A being of medium scope goes for refuge ou t of fear of the sufferings of samsara in 
general, 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 30 -  A being of great scope goes for refuge out of fear of the sufferings of all sentient 
beings, and especially out of the fear of on e’s own self-cherishing mind that prevents 
oneself from actually benefiting oneself and others. 
In all three cases we go for refuge with the fa ith that the Three Jewels are actually able to 
protect us from such fears.  
 4. What are the two types of offerings mentio ned in the text and can you give one example 
for each? - Surpassable offerings / flowers, incense, light,  perfume, food, music, parasols, and so forth 
- Unsurpassable offerings / the offerings emanated  by powerful beings such as bodhisattvas 
 5. What is the best sitting posture for medi tation and what are its essential features? 
The posture of Buddha Vairochana with seven features: 
1. feet – cross legged in lotus or half-lotus position 
2. spine – straight 
3. shoulders – level 
4. head – slightly bent forward 
5. eyes – half open, gazing in fr ont along the tip of the nose 
6. teeth – loose with one’s tongue slightly to uching the palate behind the front teeth 
7. hands – resting in the lap, one’s right hand  supported on the left, thumbs forming a 
triangle 
  6. What are the two attitudes th at should be generated in the beginning of a meditation and 
what is their purpose? Refuge and bodhichitta  7. Who is traditionally depicted in the center of the merit field, who on the right side, and 
who on the left?  In this context, Buddha Shakyamuni is depicted as seated in the center, to his right are the 
lineage lamas of the vast deeds, and to his le ft are the lineage lamas of the profound view. 
 8. Why it is indispensable to accumulate merit and purify negativities? Because it is exceedingly difficult for virtuous paths to arise if the favorable conditions for 
their arisal, the collections, have not been a ccumulated, and their adverse conditions, the 
obscurations, have not been abandoned.  9. What are the 7 practices (the seven limbs or  branches) for the accumulation of merit and 
the purification of negativities, which ar e done with respect to the merit field? 
Prostrations, offering, confessing, rejoicing, requesting the wheel of Dharma to be turned, supplication not to pass into nirvana,  dedication towards enlightenment 
  
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 31 10. In terms of the seven limbs, which cons titute accumulation, which purification, and 
which multiplication ? 
The five limbs of prostrations, offerings, reques ting, supplicating, and rejoicing constitute the 
collection of accumulations; 
Confessing purifies the obscurations; Confessing and rejoicing multiply the merit; Through dedicating the merit of collecting, purifying, and multiplying, the virtues are 
multiplied manifold and made inexhaustible.  11. Describe the mode of sustaining correct me ditation. What are the inconveniences of an 
improper meditation? You should develop certainty concerning the number and the order of the objects to be 
sustained, then you should unleash a strong dr iving force that does not allow thoughts to 
arise other than in accordance with what has been ascertained. 
If you attend to this and that object of prac tice, taking to mind objects according to your 
wishes, nothing will come of it, and your  practice will continuously be faulty. 
 
12. How is the meditation of this context (relianc e on the spiritual teacher) to be carried out?  
First one meditates on the benefits of pr operly relying on a spiritual teacher,  
after that on the disadvantages of not relying on him properly. 
From thinking about his excellent qualities, faith is generated; from thinking about his kindness, respect is generated  13. What are the general practices that are to be done between meditation sessions, and what 
is their purpose?  
• Relying on mindfulness and introspection, try to remember the observed object of 
meditation and its aspects, 
• accumulate conditions that are favorable for the arisal of positive qualities or merit, and 
purify the adverse conditions, the obscurations, 
• keep the basis of discipline, one’s vows. 
 14. What are the causes of calm abiding th at are to be relied on between sessions  
• To control the sense doors in order to protec t oneself from the arisal of afflictions, 
• to rely an vigilant behaviour, understanding which actions to adopt and which to discard, 
• to know the right measure of food, 
• to exert oneself in the yoga of not sleeping, an d to know what to do at the time of lying 
down. 
 15. What are the five practices that are to be relied on when lying down to sleep?  
Not to sleep during the first and th ird (the last) parts of the night, 
to sleep in the lion posture, to rely on mindfulness of the virtuous actions cultivated and to pursue them, 
to rely on introspection in or der to abandon afflictions, and 
to cultivate the discrimination of getting up. 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 32  
16. What are the two modes of sustaining meditation?  
• Analytical meditation sustained through anal ysis by means of discriminating wisdom 
• placement meditation, placing the mind non-analytically and single pointedly 
 
17. In which of the two modes of sustaining  meditation does one mainly engage while 
developing the three wisdoms: 1. the wisdom ar isen from hearing (“study”), 2. the wisdom 
arisen from thinking (“proper mental activity”)   and 3. the wisdom arisen from meditating 
(realizing “the meaning of reality”) respectively?  
1. analytical meditation  
2. analytical meditation  
3. placement meditation 
 
18. With respect to the assertion that only one type of meditation is necessary, please 
identify the  correct statements  
o Only placement meditation is able to overcome afflictions, since one needs a stable mind to 
overcome them NO 
The opposite is true, since the generation of minds that are strong enough to counteract 
afflictions depends on analysis.  o Scholars should practice only analytical medi tation, because they need to understand many 
topics NO 
o Saddhus (yogis) should only practice placemen t meditation, since they want to realize the 
meaning of reality NO 
Both scholars and saddhus need  both types of meditation. 
o Before the development of placement meditation, analyzing a lot creates obstacles to the 
stability of the mind NO 
o While trying to develop placement meditation, analyzing a lot can diminish the stability of 
the mind YES 
While before developing calm abiding repeated analysis can make the mind more flexible and positive, during the actual process of develo ping calm abiding much analysis can indeed 
create obstacles to its development. o Not all conceptual meditations are meditations to be abandoned, since “conception” does 
not necessarily mean “conception of true exis tence” and therefore they are not necessarily 
an obstacle to enlightenment YES 
There are powerful conceptual minds such as the conventional mind of bodhichitta or the 
conceptual realization of emptiness that actual ly assist the attainment of enlightenment and 
are therefore not objects of abandonment as  is the conception of true existence. 
o Analytical meditation can assi st in the development of plac ement meditation, making one’s 
mind malleable like gold that has been pu rified in fire and washed with water YES 
o Analytical meditation can help overcome the two main obstacles to placement meditation, 
laxity and excitement YES 
  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 33 19. Why is analytical meditation the best means for achieving concentration free from 
conceptuality?  
By meditating again and again with discrimina tive wisdom on the mental afflictions, the 
results of black karma, and the inconveniences of cyclic existe nce, one become disenchanted, 
turns away from negativities, and purifies defilements. 
Similarly, by means of the refl ection on the qualities of the spiritual teacher, the precious 
human rebirth, the Three Jewels, positive karm a, bodhichitta, through the activity of the 
mind becoming pure it moves toward the side  of virtue and wholesome dharmas moisten the 
mind. If it has been transformed in that way, whatever  you wish to achieve, if you fix upon it, you 
will achieve it without difficulty.  20. What are the two adverse conditions to meditation, and what are their respective 
antidotes?  
1. Laxity (a loosening of the mode of apprehension) – to reflect upon the positive qualities of 
the Three Jewels, guru devotion, precious human rebirth, that is, subjects that uplift the 
mind. 
2. Excitement (a scattering toward objects of a ttachment) – to reflect on  the disadvantages of 
impermanence and suffering. 
 
.
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 34 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 5 - Answer key 
Precious Human Rebirth / The Three Scopes 
1. What are the eight leisures of a precious human rebirth (four that are freedoms from non-
human states and four that are freedoms fr om adverse conditions as a human being)   
The four leisures that pertai n to non-human states are: 
1- Freedom from birth in the hell realms 
2- Freedom from birth in the hungry ghost realm 
3- Freedom from birth in the animal realm 
4- Freedom from birth as a long-life god 
The four leisures that pertain to human states are: 
5- Freedom from being born at a time when no buddha has appeared in the world 
6- Freedom from being born in a remote country 
7- Freedom from being born with impaired mental or physical faculties 
8- Freedom from holding wrong views 
 
2. What are the ten endowments of a precio us human rebirth (five that are personal 
endowments and five that are related to others)? 
The five personal endowments are:  
5. Being born as a human being 
6. Being born in a central region 
7. Being born with complete faculties 
8. Having no extremely heavy negative karma (having removable karma) 
9. Having faith in the foundation (the three baskets) 
The five endowments that depend on others are: 
10. Being born at a time in which a buddha has appeared 
11. That buddha has taught 
12. His teachings remain in the world 
13. There are practitioners who follow the teachings 
14. People have loving kindness for others 
 3. Why it is called “precious”?  
It is like a precious  gem of great value in that with this fully qualified life we can attain both 
temporary and ultimate happiness. 
 
4. How should we meditate on the precious hu man rebirth when the meditation is subsumed 
in three points? 
• Identifying the entity of the leisures and endowments 
• Contemplating their great meaning 
• Contemplating how difficult they are to obtain 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 35 5. It is said to be difficult to create the caus es for a human rebirth with all eighteen qualities 
complete. What are those causes? 
• Pure ethical discipline (the actual cause for the basis of a human birth) 
• Genorosity and patience (in order to  supplement or reinforce the former) 
• Stainless prayers (in order to make a connection with the desired aim) 
 
6. What are the three scopes, what are the differ ent motivations of each of the beings of the 
three scopes, and what are their main trainings? 1. The scope of beings of small capacity  Their motivation is the wish to achieve high  status within samsara in their next life. 
Their main training is a basic ethical discipline, which means to avoid the ten non-virtuous actions. 
2. The scope of beings of medium capacity Their motivation is renunciation, the wish to  achieve freedom from cyclic existence for 
themselves. Their main trainings are the three higher trai nings in ethics, concen tration, and wisdom. 
3. The scope of beings of great capacity Their motivation is bodhichitta, the wish to  attain highest enlightenment in order to 
liberate all sentient beings from suffering. Their principal trainings are the six perfection s of generosity, ethical discipline, patience, 
joyous effort, concentration, and wisdom and th e two stages of tantra, the generation stage 
and the completion stage 
 7. What is the purpose of guiding the trai nees by means of the three beings’ paths 
Since the path of the great beings  contains the path of the two other ones within it, they are 
said to be branches of the Mahayana path. Consequently, they are not guidance for lesser 
beings who take only the happiness of cyclic ex istence as their object of attainment, nor are 
they guidance for intermediate beings who take  only the liberation from samsara for their 
own benefit as their object of attainment. Ra ther, having perceived some paths common to 
those two to be preparatory practices leading to the path of the great beings, they are seen to 
be branches for training in the path of great beings.  8. What is the measure of having entered the Mahayana? The entry gate or door to the Mahayana is the [uncontrived] mind of enlightenment or 
bodhichitta. When we generate this in our mi nd, we become a bodhisattva and a Mahayana 
being or Mahayanist. If we lack the mind of en lightenment, the aspiration to attain highest 
enlightenment, we are not Mahayanists.  
 9. Explain how the lesser and intermediate scop es are necessary for the generation of the 
mind of enlightenment?  Having thought about how, in the context of le sser beings, the harm of the sufferings of bad 
migrations falls upon you and how, in the contex t of intermediate beings, even in rebirths of 
high status there is suffering and no peace or  happiness, meditating – in accord with your 
own experience – on the sentient beings who ha ve become dear to you, becomes the causes 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 36 for love and compassion to arise. As the mind of enlightenment is born from them, training 
in the thoughts shared with le sser and intermediate beings is  the means of generating an 
uncontrived mind of enlightenment. 
 
10. Why it is necessary to enter the tantric path? Having trained one’s mental continuum by mean s of the common paths, it is necessary to 
enter the mantrayana to complete quickly the two collections of merit and wisdom. 
  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 37 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 6 - Answer key 
Mindfulness of Death – Lower realms 
1. What are the disadvantages of not bein g mindful of death? (2B4B-2B1A-1A1B-E)  
• You keep thinking about ways of achieving ha ppiness and eliminating suffering in this life 
only, and only wishes for this life arise and therefore no allowances are made for engaging 
in the Dharma. 
• Even if you engage in listening, thinking, and meditation, whatever virtuous actions you 
do have little power since they only come under the goals of this life. 
• As they are also linked with faulty behavior, non-virtuous actions, and transgressions, it is 
rare for them not to be linked with  the causes of the bad migrations. 
• Even if you aim at goals for the future exis tence and allow for their attainment, you cannot 
overcome the laziness of postponement.  
• Through sincere involvement in the excellence s of this life, the mental afflictions and 
faulty behavior that arise from them increase. 
• You turn your back on the nectar of the Dharma. 
 
2. What are the advantages of bein g mindful of death? (2B4B-2B1A-1A2) 
• You will avert attachment to friends and relatives. 
• The wish to take the essence of this life by means of giving things away and the like, ethical 
behavior, and so forth will arise as though by themselves. 
• Realizing that all effort for the sake of worldl y goals such as fame and gain are futile, you 
turn away from faulty behavior and accumulate good karma. 
• The mental afflictions are destroyed. 
• The door to the instant achievement of everything is opened. 
• The door to all manner of degeneration – the me ntal grasping at the position of not dying 
– will be closed. 
 
3. With respect to how one should meditate on  mindfulness of death, please give the three 
root thoughts, the three reasons that support ea ch of them, and the three determinations that 
one should reach.  (2B4B-2B1A-1A4)  
It is certain that we will die 
1. The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no conditions that ward him off. 
2. One’s life span cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly. 
3. You die without having had time to practice the Dharma while alive. 
The decision to practice the Dharma. 
 The time of one’s death is uncertain 
1. There is no certainty with regard to the lifesp an in Jambudvipa, which is  why the time of 
death is uncertain. 
2. There are many conditions that lead to death and few that sustain life. 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 38 3. The body is extremely vulnerable and th e time of death therefore uncertain. 
The decision that is necessary to practice Dharma from now on. 
 
At the time of death nothing except  the Dharma will be of benefit 
4. You cannot take your friends along.  
5. You cannot take your possessions along. 
6. You cannot take your body along. 
The decision to practice nothing but the Dharma. 
 4. Why is it important to think about the sufferi ngs of the lower realms after having reflected 
on the mindfulness of de ath? (2B4B-2B1A-1B2B) 
• Considering how you yourself have fallen in to the ocean of suffering, despair will repel 
pride and arrogance. 
• Having realized that suffering is the result of non-virtuous actions, you will be very careful 
to avoid negativities and downfalls. 
• As you do not want suffering but want happine ss, you will also rejoice in accomplishing 
that which is virtuous. 
• In proportion to your own experience compa ssion for others arises, and out of aversion 
for cyclic existence you strive for liberation. 
• For fear of suffering, you take refuge forcefully. 
 
5. In the context of the actual considerations concerning the suffering of the bad migrations, 
list the three main categories of bad migratio ns and the general sufferings experienced there? 
(2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1) 
- Hot hell realms 
There is mainly the suffering from extreme he at, many forms of injuries, etc. and fear. 
- Cold hell realms There is mainly the suffering from extreme cold. 
- Animal realm 
There are many sufferings such as hunger, thir st, being killed for one’s meat, skin, teeth, 
pearls, etc., being beaten and hunted, being ea ten alive, being exploited for one’s milk or 
wool, having to carry heavy loads, being stup id, having no freedom, being under the control 
of others, being born in darkness, etc. and experiencing fear. - Hungry ghosts realms There are the sufferings of hunger and thir st, heat and cold, exhaustion and fear. 
 
(Note: The general sufferings were not explicitly stated in the Middle Lam-Rim , whereas they are in the Great Lam-Rim .) 
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 39 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 7 - Answer key 
Going for Refuge to the Three Jewels 
1. What are the two causes that properly going for refuge depends on? (2B4B-2B1A-2) 
Fear of the bad migrations and the conviction th at there is something rare and precious that 
can protect us from them. 
 
2. What are the objects of refuge? (2B4B-2B1A-2A2A) They are the Buddha Jewel, Dhar ma Jewel, and Sangha Jewel. 
 
3. Why is the Buddha worthy to be an object of refuge? (2B4B-2B1A-2A2B) It is because:  
• he is free from fear, 
• he is skilled in the means of liberating others from fear, 
• he is moistened by the great compassion th at is free from closeness and distance, and 
• he works for the welfare of all, both thos e who help and those who do not help him. 
 
4. What are the positive qualities of the Buddh a? Give an example of each one. (2B4B-2B1A-
2A3A-1A) 
 
- Positive qualities of his body: 
The Buddha’s body is adorned with the 32  marks and the 80 minor characteristics. 
- Positive qualities of his speech: 
With one utterance, the Buddha is able to  simultaneously answer all the different 
questions that have been asked and is al so understood in the beings’ respective 
languages. 
- Positive qualities of his mind: 
(1) Positive quality of knowledge: all the objects of knowledge are pervaded by the 
Muni’s unobstructed knowledge, like a dhatri  berry in the palm of his hand. 
(2) Positive quality of love: the Muni is bound by great compassion without control, 
and therefore great compassion continuously arises in him as he perceives suffering 
beings. 
- Positives qualities of his exalted activities:  
by means of the spontaneous and uninterrupted  exalted activities of his body, speech, 
and mind he benefits all sentient beings by certainly performing all the appropriate actions. 
 5. What are the positive qualitie s of the Dharma? (2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-2)  
The Buddha possesses limitless good qualities, all of which arose from meditating on and 
realizing both the Dharma of scriptures and the Dharma of realization. That is, he actualized 
true cessations, thereby eliminating faults, and me ditated on true paths, thereby giving rise to 
good qualities  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 40  
6. What are the positive qualitie s of the Sangha? (2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-3)  
This refers mainly to aryas. They should be th ought of by being mindful of the good qualities 
of the Dharma and their proper practice of it.  
7. List the specific precepts in  the context of training after taking refuge (2B4B-2B1A-2A4-1) 
Precepts of what is to be discarded: 
- Not to go for refuge to other gods, - To give up causing harm or di fficulty to sentient beings, and 
- Not to associate with non-Buddhists. Precepts of what is to be adopted: - Whatever representation of the Buddha it is , do not disparage it, do not put it on the 
ground, do not pawn it, etc., and do not be disres pectful toward it, but regard it as if it were 
the Teacher himself. - Abandon irreverence to as little as four wo rds of the Dharma. Do not pawn volumes of 
scripture, do not trade them, do not put them on the bare floor or in an inconvenient place, 
do not carry them together with shoes, do not st ep over them, etc. but treat them with respect 
as if they were the Dharma Jewel. - Do not abuse or despise the sangha, do not look  at them as opponents in any way, but treat 
them as if they were the Sangha Jewel.  8. Give the list of the common precepts in the context of training after taking refuge (2B4B-
2B1A-2A4-2) 1. Remembering the differences between them an d the positive qualities of the Three Jewels, 
go for refuge to them again and again. 2. Remembering their great kindness, exert yourself  at all times to make offerings to them and 
offer them the first portion of your food and drink. 3. Remembering their great compassion, set ot her migration beings in such a mode of 
behavior. 4. Whatever you do and whatever you need, having worshipped the Three Jewels, supplicate 
them and abandon other worldly methods. 5. Aware of the benefits, go for refuge three times a day and three times at night. 6. Do not give up the Three Jewels even for the sake of one’s life or for laugh but guard yourself against this.  9. What are the eight benefits of going for re fuge to the Three Jewe ls (2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2E) 
1. It is the measure of being a Buddhist. 2. It is the basis of all vows. 3. The karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and exhausted. 
4. You will accumulate vast merit. 5. You will not fall into the bad migrations. 6. You will not be harmed by human and non-human obstacles. 
7. You will attain everything you wished for. 
8. You will swiftly attain buddhahood.  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 41 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 8 - Answer key 
The Law of Cause and Effect 
1. What is the entity of karma? (2B4B-2B1A-2B1A)  
Karma is: action that is intention and intended actions.  
• Action that is intention – the mental factor  that makes its concomitant mind move and 
urges it toward an object; it is action of mind. 
• Intended actions are the actions of body and speech that are motivated by that intention; 
they are divided into the re velatory and non-revelatory. 
 
2. What are the three kinds of action?  
• Non-meritorious actions – non-virtuous actions 
• Meritorious actions – virtuous actions included in the level of the desire realm. 
• Immovable actions – contaminated virtuous acti ons included in the levels of the form and 
formless realms. 
 3. Identify the non-virtuous and the te n virtuous actions (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1)
 
1. Killing / refraining from it  
2. Stealing / refraining from it  3. Sexual misconduct / refraining from it  
4. Lying / refraining from it  
5. Divisive speech / refraining from it  6. Harsh speech / refraining from it  7. Idle talk / refraining from it 
8. Covetousness / refraining from it  
9. Malice / refraining from it  10. Wrong view / refraining from it 
 
 
4. What are the four factors that make an acti on complete? Using the example of killing, give 
an example of each of them. (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1)  
1. Basis: a sentient being other than oneself 2. Attitude (divided into three) a. Discrimination: unmistakenly identifying the sentient being as a sentient being in general 
or as a particular sentient being 
b. Affliction: any of the three mental po isons – attachment, hatred, or ignorance 
c. Motivation: the wish to kill 
3. Performance: doing it onesel f or ordering it to be done 
4. Culmination: the being dies due to one’s action
 
 
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 42 5. What are the six factors according to Asanga’s Actual Basis of the Levels  that make virtuous 
and non-virtuous actions heavy? (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2)  
• Intensive action (motivated by the strong pres ence or absence of the three mental poisons 
• Habituation (having familiarized with a particul ar action for a long time again and again)  
• Entity (killing is heavier than stealing and th at is heavier than sexual misconduct; lying is 
heavier than divisive speech, that is heavier th an harsh words, and that is heavier than idle 
talk; wrong view is heavier than malice and that is heavier than covetousness) 
• Basis (a field of merit such as  the Buddha, Dhar ma, and Sangha) 
• One-sided fixation on the discordant side (one does only non-virtue and no virtue in one’s 
life) 
• Elimination of the discordant side (one elim inate non-virtue and attachment, and always 
engages in training in virtue) 
 
 
6. What are the four gates of strong karma?  Give examples using only key words. (2B4B-
2B1A-2B1B-2A2B)  
• The field: the field of the Three Jewels, one’s gurus, those who are like the guru, the field 
of one’s parents  
• The support: if the person who does an acti on holds any of the different levels of 
pratimoksha vows, such as the vows of a fully ordained monk or nun, the action becomes 
much stronger. The higher the ordination, th e stronger the action, both positive and 
negative! 
• The thing: the substance of the action: Givi ng Dharma is more powerful than giving 
material things to sentient beings; offering on e’s practice to the buddhas is more powerful 
than offering material things. 
• The attitude: the most powerful positive attitu de is intense bodhichitta for a long period 
of time. The most powerful negative attitude is  intense afflictions and in particular intense 
anger for a long time.  
 
7. List and briefly explain the different types of  results of karma. Give one example for each 
of the ten paths of acti on. (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A3)  
The fully ripened effect or fruitional result refe rs to the type of rebirth one takes due to a 
particular action. An action has also a result similar to the cause or in conformity with the 
cause. The empowering or enviro nmental result refers to the type of place in which one is 
born or in which one lives. 
Each of the ten non-virtuous paths of action has these th ree results. The result is 
correspondingly small, middling, or great in dependence on the basis, the three mental 
poisons, and the strength of the action. 
 
Thus, if the ten non-virtuous path s of action are great or strong, the fully ripened result will 
be to take rebirth in one of the hell realms. If  they are of middling strength, the fully ripened 
result will be to take rebirth in the hungry ghos t realm. If they are small in strength, the fully 
ripened result will be to take rebirth in the animal realm.  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 43 The result similar to the cause is  that, after having been reborn  in the lower realms when one 
once again retakes rebirth as a human being: 
• due to killing, one will have a short life, 
• due to stealing, one will be poor, 
• due to sexual misconduct, one’s pa rtner will not remain with one, 
• due to lying, one will be criticized, 
• due to divisive speech, one will be separated from dear ones, 
• due to harsh words, one will hear unpleasant sound, 
• due to idle talk, others will not listen to one’s words, 
• due to covetousness, one will have strong attachment, 
• due to malice, one will have strong hatred, and 
• due to wrong view, one will have confusion.  
Each of the ten non-virtuous pa ths of actions has its respective empowering or environmental 
result: 
• due to killing, medicine will have little power, 
• due to stealing, there will be droughts, 
• due to sexual misconduct, the place will be very filthy, 
• due to lying, one will not be successful, 
• due to divisive speech, the place will be uneven, 
• due to harsh words, the place will have many thorn bushes, 
• due to idle talk, trees will not bear fruit, 
• due to covetousness, one’s ex cellence will deteriorate, 
• due to malice, there will be many conflicts, and 
• due to wrong view, jewels and minerals in the country will decline. 
 
8. What is the difference between throwing karma and completing ka rma? (2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-
2C1) Throwing actions for rebirth in the happy migr ations are virtuous actions, and throwing 
actions for rebirth in the bad migr ations are non-virtuous actions. 
Completing actions are uncertain, however, ev en in the happy migrations poverty and so 
forth are caused by non-virtue. Also for anim als and hungry ghosts, perfect prosperity is 
caused by virtue.  9. What is the difference between definite and indefinite karma? Give one example of each 
(2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C2) What will definitely be experienced is what has been done intentionally and accumulated. 
What will not definitely be experienced is wh at has not been done intentionally and has not 
been accumulated.   
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 44 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 9 - Answer key 
The Law of Cause and Effect / Atta ining Liberation / True Sufferings 
1. List and briefly describe the four opponent powers that are applied in order to purify 
negative karma (2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3) 
• The power of regret – thinking about the diffe rent types of negative karmic results one 
regrets one’s actions and confesses them 
• The power of thorough application of an an tidote – a virtuous action done with the 
intention to purify negative karma  
• The power of restraining oneself from faults in  the future – one sincerely restrains oneself 
from doing the ten non-virtuous actions in the future 
• The power of the basis – going for refuge and generating bodhichitta  
 
2. What are the six practices particularly recommended as antidotes to negative karma? (2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B) 
1. Absorb, remember, and read the profound sets of  sutras like the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras 
2. Aspiration for emptiness 
3. Recitation of special mantras like the 100-syllable mantra of Vajrasattva 
4. Creating images of the buddhas with faith 
5. Making offerings to the Buddha or his representations such as stupas 6. Listening to or retaining the name s of buddhas and great bodhisattvas 
 
3. Why is it not inappropriate for followers of the Mahayana to develop an aspiration for 
high status in future lives (2B4B-2B1C-1/2) 
Even those who strive for liberation from the excellences of a body and so forth of cyclic 
existence need to temporarily stri ve for them since definite good ness is to be gained in the 
end from a continuous succe ssion of such supports. 
 4.  What is liberation? What are you liberated from? (2B4B-2B2B-1A) 
“Liberation” is freedom from bondage. Specifica lly, there are two things binding one in cyclic 
existence – karma and the afflictions. Through th e power of these two, from the point of view 
of realms, there are three, the desire realm, etc.; when divided by way of migrating beings, there are five or six, such as gods, etc.; and in terms of birth-sources, there are four, such as a 
womb. This joining with such aggregates is the en tity of bondage, therefore freedom from it is 
liberation.   5. What is the mind striving for liberation an d how in general is it developed? (2B4B-2B2B-
1B1/2) The mind striving for liberation is the desire to attain liberation from cy clic existence. It is 
called 
renunciation  or the mind of definite emergence .  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 45 It is developed by reflecting again and agai n on the shortcomings of cyclic existence, true 
sufferings , and the causes of entering cyclic existence, true origins . 
 
6. What are the four noble truths? (2B4B-2B2B-1B2 etc.) 
True sufferings, true origins, true cessations, true paths 
 7. Why are the four noble truths taught in that specific order? (2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B2) 
The four noble truths are taught in the order of their 
realization , they are not taught in the 
order of cause and effect:  
In order to generate the initial wish to become free from cyclic existence one must realize that 
the nature of cyclic existence is the contaminated aggregates, true sufferings . 
After that, one will question wh at their cause is and whether it can be eliminated. One will 
come to the conclusion that the cause is karma and afflictions, true origins , and that it is 
possible to eliminate them. Then, one will understand that a state of 
true cessation  of all suffering is possible and one 
will want to attain it. After that, one will be interested in prac ticing the means to attain such cessation, 
true paths . 
 8. List the eight types of suffering. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D)  
1. the suffering of birth 
2. the suffering of aging 3. the suffering of illness 4. the suffering of death 
5. the suffering of meeting with the unpleasant 
6. the suffering of separating from the pleasant 
7. the suffering of seeking what you desire but not getting it 
8. the suffering of the five appropriated aggregates  9. List the six types of suffe ring. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2A)   
1. lack of certainty 
2. dissatisfaction 
3. discarding one’s body again and again 4. joining again and again 5. changing from high to low states again and again 
6. lacking companions  10. List and explain briefly the three types of suffering. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-8 – 2A2C)  1. The suffering of suffering All painful feelings, when they ar ise the body and mind are torment, as in the case of kidney 
pain. 2. The suffering of change (1) happy feelings that are impermanent and therefore do not last; 
(2) happy feelings that increase ou r attachment and arise with respect to a relief of suffering; 
(3) not being a cause of happiness by way of its entity 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 46 3. The pervasive compounding suffering 
• due to being under the power of contaminated actions and afflictions, the aggregates are 
in the nature of compounding suffering – they are under the control of others; 
• it is the basis for the other two types of suff ering due to being associated with negative 
tendencies; 
• from the crown of our head to the soles of th e feet, the body is pervaded by suffering;  
• everywhere, from the Peak of Existence down  to the hell of Unrelenting torment, is 
pervaded by suffering 
 
   
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 47 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 10 - Answer key 
True Origins / The Nature of the Path 
1. List and give the definition of the six root afflictions (without specifying the five afflicted 
views). (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1) 
1. Attachment – a mind that observes a contamin ated object, and thinking that it is pleasant 
or attractive, wishes to have it. 
2. Anger – a hostile mind that in  response to a basis of suffering such as sentient beings or 
thorns etc. wishes to inflict harm. 3. Pride – a puffed up mind based on the view of the transitory collection, an attitude of 
superiority regarding one’s own internal or external qualities.  4. Ignorance – afflicted non-knowing, due to an  unclear mind, with regard to the nature of 
the four truths, actions and their results, and the Three Jewels.  5. Doubt – a two-pointed mind that wavers with  regard to whether the four truths, actions 
and their results, and the Three Jewels exist or not. 6. Afflicted views – afflicted wisdoms that are of  five types and mainly hinder the attainment 
of liberation. 
 
2. Explain the stages in which the a fflictions arise. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B2A) 
When the view of the transitory collection appreh ends a self, an arbitrary distinction is made 
between self and other. Once that is made, attachment toward one’s own side and hatred 
toward the other side arise. Also conceit (pride ) arises through observing that self; that very 
self is held to be permanent or annihilated (the  view holding to an extreme) and is viewed as 
the self, etc., and the bad activities connected with  it are held to be supreme (the view holding 
an ethical discipline and ascetic practice to be  supreme). Likewise, the wrong views that think 
“The Teacher who taught selflessness, actions and their results, the four truths, the Three 
Jewels, etc. do not exist” are generated, or, alte rnatively, the doubt that thinks “Do they exist 
or not? Are they or are they not real?” is generated.  
 3. Explain how the other afflictions arise in dependence of the view of the transitory 
collection. (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B2C) (1) The view of the transitory co llection apprehends a self and an  arbitrary distinction is made 
between self and other. (2) Once that is made, attachment toward one’ s own side and hatred toward the other side 
arise. (3) Also conceit arises through observing that  self which is held to be permanent or 
annihilated and is viewed as a self. (4) Bad activities connected with  it are held to be supreme. 
(5) Then wrong views are generated, negating:  
the Teacher of selflessness,  actions and their results,  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 48 the four truths, and 
the Three Jewels. 
(6) Or doubt is generated thinking, “Do they ex ist or not? Are they or are they not real?” 
 
4. What is the entity of the bardo being? (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3D2)  The intermediate state being has complete sense powers. Its body is similar in shape to the 
migrating being it will be reborn as. As long as it does not take rebirth, the intermediate state 
being has the clairvoyance of divine eye. Its bo dy, similar to a mental body, can quickly arrive 
wherever it wants, as though it had miraculous  powers. It is also unobstructed and can pass 
through walls and so forth. It is a specific colo r that accords with the type of migration (e.g., 
that of the desire realm gods and humans is like gold).  5. What is the life span of the bardo being? (2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3D8)  
If it does not find the conditions  for rebirth, it abides for as many as seven days. If it finds 
them, its life span is uncertain. Also if it do es not find them, it exch anges bodies and abides 
up to seven times seven days. However, it does  not abide any longer than that since it will 
definitely find the conditions for rebirth before then.  6. Briefly explain how we transfer into an in termediate state existence and how we connect. 
(2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3E1 & 2) In the context of birth in a womb: - A mistaken perception arises with regard to the semen of the father and blood of the 
mother: in that moment, like an illusion we s ee our future parents to be having intercourse, 
even though they are not, and we develop atta chment to one of them and desire union with 
him or her. - Once this kind of attachment has arisen, the closer we approach them, the other bodily parts 
of that man and woman no longer appear an d we only see the male and female signs. 
- Becoming angry at that, we, the intermedia te being, die and transfer and are reborn. 
 - When there is a situation of intense attachme nt between the father and mother, at the end, 
thick fluid emerges and then two drops of  semen and blood emerge from the two. 
- Through the mixing of the two in the womb of the mother, some thing like boiled milk that 
has cooled down and congealed is formed. - At the same time that the inte rmediate existence terminates, the consciousness joins. At that 
very time it is said “to have joined with its next rebirth.” 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 49 7. Define the three higher trainings. 
The three higher trainings in ethical discipline , concentration, and wisdom are posited only 
in the Buddhist context and are respectively practices of morality and development of 
concentration and wisdom, all motivated by definite emergence 
 8. In the context of ethical discipline, what are the four causes for the arisal of downfalls and 
what are their respective an tidotes? (2B4B- 2B2B-4B2C-4A) 
(1) Not knowing, the antidote is to unders tand the trainings through studying them. 
(2) Non-conscientiousness, the antidote is to train in: 
- mindfulness that does not forget the observed object and aspect of what 
to adopt and what to abandon, 
- introspection that individually investigates the three doors, 
- shame that shuns the faulty from the perspective of oneself or the 
Dharma, 
- embarrassment that shuns the faulty from the perspective of others, 
- intimidation that fears the fully ri pened effects of faulty conduct. 
(3) Lack of respect, the antidote is to be resp ectful towards the Teacher, his formulated rules, 
and those who perfectly observe the rules. (4) Many mental afflictions, the antidote is to examine your mental continuum and endeavor 
to apply the antidote to whatever  mental affliction predominates. 
  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 50 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 11 - Answer key 
The Great Scope – Developing Bodhichitta 
1. Why is it not sufficient to merely attain liberation from suffering for oneself alone? 
(2B4B-2B3A) 
Because one has neither fully accomplished one’s own nor others’ welfare. 
 
2. Briefly explain the importance of compassion at the beginning, in the middle, and at the 
end (2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A)  
Compassion is important at the beginning becaus e the responsibility for liberating migrating 
beings without exception depends upon it, and if  you do not take this responsibility upon 
yourself you will not enter the Great Vehicle. Also, great compassion is the preliminary for 
perfectly accomplishing the Mahayana, and the beginning of the conduct of bodhisattvas. 
Compassion is important in the middle because if one does not cultivate compassion again 
and again, one will fall into the Hinayana. Also , due to compassion one does not despair with 
respect to others’ welfare and easily completes the collections. 
Compassion is important at the end because du e to the power of their compassion, buddhas, 
having achieved their result, do not abide in peace like Hinayanists but enact the welfare of 
however many sentient beings there are throughout space.  
3. What are the two principal methods for the ge neration of bodhichitta and what are the 
main lineage lamas that passed th em down to us? (2B4B-2B3B-2A) 
1. The six cause and one effect instruction that has been passed down from Buddha 
Shakyamuni to Maitreya, Asanga, Atisha, and Lama Tsongkhapa. 
2. The instruction in equalizing and exchanging self with others that has been transmitted 
from Buddha Shakyamuni to Manjushri, Nagarjuna, Shantideva, Atisha, and Lama 
Tsongkhapa. 
 
4. List and briefly describe how bodhichitta is generated by way of the sevenfold cause and 
effect instruction. (2B4B-2B3B-2A1)  
1. Recognizing all sentient beings as our mothers – since our past lives are limitless, our mothers have been limitless, and there is no  sentient being who has not been our mother 
at least hundreds of times in the past. 
2. Remembering their kindness – they have given bi rth to us and taken care of us countless 
times. 
3. Wishing to repay their kindness – liberating ourselves alone would be irresponsible, giving small benefit in return for much kindness received would be inadequate, and our mothers in their suffering really have nobody else to count on if not for their own child. 
4. Generating love – observe sentient beings who are deprived of happiness and think “How wonderful it would be if they were to have  happiness. May they me et with happiness. I 
will make them meet with happiness.” 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 51 5. Generating compassion – observe sentient beings who are afflicted by sufferings and 
think “How wonderful it would be if they we re free from suffering. May they be free. I 
will free them from suffering.” 
6. Generating the special attitude – think “I will take the responsibility upon myself to free 
sentient beings from suffering and endow them with happiness.” 
7. Generating bodhichitta – having seen that enlightenment is necessary for this to be 
accomplished, generate the wish to attain en lightenment for the welfare of all sentient 
beings. 
 
5. Explain the method to develo p equanimity in relation to th e three types of beings. (2B4B-
2B3B-2A1B-2A1A-2C, D, E) The order of meditation Initially you should take a person who has neithe r done you harm or benefit as your object of 
meditation and, through eliminating attachment  and anger, accomplish an equanimous mind 
toward him or her. When you have accomplish ed an equanimous mind toward that person, 
you then need to accomplish an equanimous mind  with respect to a friend or relative. When 
you are equanimous toward that person, you shou ld cultivate an equani mous mind toward an 
enemy. Having become equanimous toward him or her, you should cultivate an equanimous 
mind toward all sentient beings. 
 
The contemplations that st ops attachment and hatred 
As suggested by Kamalashila in his Middling Stages of Meditation : (1) consider that from their 
own side all sentient beings are equal in desi ring happiness and not wanting suffering; and (2) 
consider from your own side that all sentient beings have been your relatives hundreds of 
times. Thereby, see the inappropriateness of holding some close and others distant.  
To stop attachment to your relative s you should think as taught in the Sutra Requested by the 
Noble Daughter Chandrottama  that they also have been your  enemies and murderers in former 
times. 
Also, think about the fault of uncertainty and how friends and enemies quickly change. 
 6. How would you prove that all sentient bein gs have been your mother? (2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-
2A1B)  Because we have been taking rebirth in cycl ic existence since beginningless time, even our 
rebirths as human beings alone are infinite. Having died and taken birth again and again, we cannot say that we have not been born with a ce rtain body, that we have not been born in a 
certain place, and that we have not had such a being as our mother. Because we have taken so 
many bodies, all sentient beings have been our mothers. Because we have taken rebirth in all 
ten directions, all sentient beings have been  our mothers and relatives in these rebirths. 
Therefore, all sentient beings have been our mother. There does not exist one sentient being 
who has not been our mother. No such  sentient being can be found.  
   
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 52 7. Present the method for remembering the ki ndness of all sentient beings. (2B4B-2B3B-
2A1B-2A1B-2) 
Imagining your mother of this life in a clear aspe ct in front of you, repeatedly reflect that she 
has been your mother, not only now, but ti mes past counting since beginningless cyclic 
existence. When she was your mother, she protected you from harm and accomplished all you 
happiness and benefit. 
Then reflect in detail about th e way in which she also protecte d you in this life before and 
after your birth. Then reflect on how a mother cheris hes her child more than herself. 
Then, when a mind remembering her kindness arises, meditate on recognizing other friends and relatives, your father and so forth, as also having been your mother. Then, when you generate a similar mind, meditate on recognizing neutral persons as having been your mothers. Then meditate on recognizing your enemies as also having been your mothers. 
And then proceed to recognize all sentient  beings as having been your mother. 
 
8. Explain how to develop the wish to repay th e kindness of all sentient beings. (2B4B-2B3B-
2A1B-2A1B-3)  
You should think that even though, due to birt h and death-transference, you do not recognize 
them, there is nothing less shamef ul than carelessly neglecting your suffering, protectorless, 
kind mothers. Reflect also that to neglect those who have  been kind does not accord with the well-
mannered. Then reflect on how it is inappropriate to re pay their benefit with something contaminated, 
and that you should liberate them from ignorance.  9. What is the main point of the gradual medita tion on equanimity and so forth with respect 
to the different categories of beings? (2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2B-4) 
Because if from the start you train in observin g sentient beings in general without dividing 
them into specific categories, although it will appear as though you have generated these 
attitudes, when you then think about them individually it will be seen that is has not been generated for any of them. 
 
10.  Give a definition of bodhichitta and ex plain its two aspirations. (2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2C) 
From the Ornament for Clear Realizations (Abhisamayalamkara) : “The mind generation is the 
desire for perfectly complete enlightenment for the welfare of others.” It depends on the presence of two aspirations: 
• the causal aspiration – the wish to enact the welfare all sentient beings 
• the accompanying aspiration – the wish to attain enlightenment for the welfare of all 
sentient beings. 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 53 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 12 - Answer key 
Generating Bodhichitta 2 
1. Explain how one trains in bodhichitta by  way of the instruction on equalizing and 
exchanging self and others. (2B4B-2B3B-2A2) 
1. Reflect on the disadvantages and the advantag es of exchanging and not exchanging oneself 
with others. 
2. Reflect on the ability to generate this mind if you familiarize with it. 
3. The actual stages on how to exchange self and others: 
(a) think about the disadvantages of cherishing oneself and the advantages of cherishing 
others, 
(b) think about the need to put an end to self-c herishing by regarding it as an enemy, and 
(c) think about the advantages of generating the mind cherishing others. 
 2. What are the disadvantages of the mind ch erishing only oneself? (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2A) 
• One will create suffering for oneself 
• One will create suffering for others  
• One will not accomplish temporary or ultima te benefit for oneself (one’s own welfare) 
• One will not accomplish temporary or ulti mate benefit for others (others’ welfare)  
 
One should think of cherishing oneself is the door to all problems.  
 
3. What are the advantages of the mind that  cherishes others? How should that mind be 
considered? (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2C) 
• One will protect oneself from all suffering 
• One will protect others from all suffering  
• One will accomplish temporary and ultimate  benefit for oneself (one’s own welfare) 
• One will accomplish temporary and ultima te benefit for others (others’ welfare)  
 
One should think of cherishing others  as the basis of all excellences. 
 
4. Explain the way in which to put an end to  the self-cherishing mind. How should it be 
regarded? (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2B)  Seeing that the self-cherishing atti tude is our real enemy, we need to strive to put an end to it. 
In fact our worst and most powerful enemy is our self-cherishing mind. Therefore, by relying 
on mindfulness and introspection, we need to  put effort into ceasing it. Whatever self-
cherishing mind has not been generated we should  strive not to generate it, and if we have 
generated it we should try to stop it.    
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 54 5. Explain the way in which to generate the mind cherishing others. (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-2C) 
Thinking about the advantages of  cherishing others again and ag ain, you will generate strong 
enthusiasm to do so from the bottom of your he art. Then the mind that  neglects others that 
has not arisen will not arise, and that whic h has arisen will not la st long. By means of 
generating the thought that others are dear, a ttractive, and pleasant, you should generate the 
mind that cherishes others, just as you previously cherished yourself. 
 
6. What are the two obstacles to the generation  of the mind of exchanging self and others? 
Briefly present their respective refutati ons. (2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1A & B)     
The two obstacles are: 
(a) considering oneself and others  as distinct individuals 
(b) thinking : “As the suffering of others does  not harm me, I need not make an effort 
to remove it” 
Antidote to (a): 
Think that self and other are not separate by nature or inherently. Why? Because self and 
other exist in relation to each other, that is, they  exist in dependence on each other. Just as we 
think of ourselves as “I,” so too do others think of themselves as “I.” Therefore, “I” exists in 
dependence on “other.” For example, we call a mountain in the distance  “the mountain over 
there,” and call a mountain near us “the moun tain over here,” but when we go to “the 
mountain over there” it becomes the “the mountain over here.” 
Antidote to (b): 
(i) Think that if this were the case, there woul d be no need to accumulate wealth when 
you are young out of concern for the suffering of your old age, as the suffering of the 
elderly person does not harm the youth. 
(ii) Think that likewise the hand would not remo ve the suffering of the foot because they 
are other. 
(iii) If you think: “The two, self and other, ar e not the same as the elderly person and the 
youth since they are the same continuum, wh ile the hand and the foot are the same 
collection.” “Continuum and “collection” are designated on many instants and a 
combination of many parts; they lack an autonomous entity. Since your own self and 
others’ self must be posited on a continuum or collection, they are not established by 
way of their own entity, that is, self and other are not merely posited in relation. 
    
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 55 MIDDLE LAM-RIM  
Homework Quiz 13 - Answer key 
Taking the Aspiring Mind of Enlightenment Through Ritual 
Precepts that Ensure that the As piring Mind of Enlightenment is 
Safeguarded 
 
1. In the ceremony for taking the aspiring mind  of enlightenment through ritual there are is a 
section about how the guru and the disciple must proceed step by step. Can you briefly 
describe these steps? (2B4B-2B3B-2C1Cß1A2A)  
After having done the preparatory practices (such as cleaning the place, setting out 
representations of the Three Jewels, arranging o fferings, setting up a throne for the master, 
etc.): 
• The assembly of aryas (the merit field) is invoked. 
• The student, washed and well dressed with his palms joined, is encouraged by the lama to 
generate clear faith in the good qualities of the merit field from the bottom of his heart.  
• The student should then slowly do the seven-limb prayer, imagining himself to be in front 
of the buddhas and bodhisattvas.  
• Then [the student ], having generated the discriminati on of his lama as the Teacher, 
prostrates to him,makes offerings to him, and offers a mandala to him.  
• With his right knee on the floor, palms joined , he makes a request for the purpose of the 
mind of enlightenment 
 
 
2. During the ceremony for taking the aspirati onal mind of enlightenment through ritual one 
takes uncommon Mahayana refuge. What is it th at makes this refuge uncommon and what is 
the special thought associated with it  in this case? (2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2) 
Uncommon objects: The Buddha Jewel in whom we  take refuge is the enjoyment body (GJG, 
Trancript 05,3rd March), the Dharma Jewel is the true paths and true cessations related to the 
abandonments of the obstructions to knowledge,  and the Sangha Jewel is the irreversible arya 
bodhisattvas 
Uncommon attitude: Great compassion wish ing to protect all sentient beings. 
Uncommon duration: Until the attainment of enlightenment. 
The special thought: The aspiration “I will never turn away from this attitude at any time.” 
 
3. What are the ritual words that are spoken  during the ceremony while one takes refuge? 
(2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2B-2) 
“Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now until I reach the 
essence of enlightenment, go for refuge to th e best of men, the Buddha Bhagavans. Master, 
please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now until I reach the essence of 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 56 enlightenment, go for refuge to the best of Dharma, the Dharma that is peace, free from 
attachment. Master, please grant me your attent ion. I, whose name is (…), from now until I 
reach the essence of enlightenment, go for refu ge to the best of assemblies, the Sangha of 
irreversible arya bodhisattvas.”  
 
4. What are the ritual words spoken when  one actually assumes the aspiration for 
enlightenment? (2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-2F) 
“All buddhas and bodhisattvas residing in the te n directions, please grant me your attention. 
Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), by means of the roots of virtue 
of the nature of generosity, the nature of mora lity, and the nature of meditation that I have 
created, caused to be created, and rejoiced in the creation of in this life and in previous lives, 
just as the previous tathagata, foe-destro yer, perfectly complete buddhas and great 
bodhisattvas thoroughly abiding on the great grounds, generated the mind of unsurpassed, 
perfectly complete enlightenment,  in the same way also I, whose name is (…), from now until 
I reach the essence of enlightenment, will ge nerate the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly 
complete, great enlightenment, I will liberate the sentient beings who are not liberated, free 
those who are not free, give brea th to those unable to breathe,  and cause those who have not 
completely passed beyond sorrow to completely pass beyond sorrow.”  
 
5. Explain the commitments of the aspiring mind  of enlightenment taken by way of ritual 
that ensure that the aspiration for enlightenm ent does not degenerate in this life. (2B4B-
2B3B-2C2) 
• To train in remembering its advantages so that  the strength of one’s delight in the mind 
generation increases. 
• To train in generating it six times so th at the actual mind generation increases.  
• To train in not mentally abandoning any se ntient being for whose welfare the mind has 
been generated.  
• To train in accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom.  
 
 6. Explain the trainings that ensure that the mind of enlightenment does not degenerate in 
future lives. (2B4B-2B3B-2C2) 
 
The four black dharmas to be avoided: 
• Deceiving one’s abbot, master, guru , or those worthy of offerings 
• Causing others to regret the virtuous deeds they do not regret 
• Saying that which is not praise and so forth to a sentient being who has entered the Great 
Vehicle 
• Activities done out of deceit and dissimula tion and without the extraordinary attitude 
 
The four white dharmas to be adopted 
• Abandoning lying knowingly 
• Abiding with the extraordinary attitude without deceit or dissimulation 
• Generating the discrimination that bodhisattvas are like the Teacher and praising them 
• Ripening sentient beings 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 57  
7. List the ten benefits of having generated bodhichitta in one’s mental continuum. (2B4B-
2B3B-2C2A-1A2B) 
1. one becomes an object of veneration 
2. one becomes an exalted being 
3. one becomes a field of merit 
4. one becomes a support for the world 
5. one is guarded by protectors 
6. mantras and the like will succeed more easily 
7. famines and the like will not occur 
8. one is without anger and is patient 
9. it is difficult for one to be reborn in ba d migrations and one will quickly be freed 
10. the advantages are immeasurable 
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 58 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 14 - Answer key 
How to train in the conduct of bodh isattvas after having generated the 
engaging mind of enlightenment (the actual bodhisattva vow)-1 
1. Why is it necessary to engage in the trai nings of bodhisattvas especially after having 
adopted the mind of enlightenment? (2B4B-2B3B)  
• If you do not make the bodhisattva trainings your essential practice, it will be impossible 
to become a buddha. 
• Without subduing or taming your own mi nd, you cannot subdue others’ minds. 
 
2. List the trainings of bodhisattvas, the six pe rfections, and briefly describe their entity or 
nature. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A)  
1. The perfection of generosity  Its entity: The intention to give and the phys ical and verbal actions motivated by that. 
2. The perfection of ethical discipline Its entity: The mind of abandonment that is a mind turned away from harming others (by 
body and speech) together with its base (the mind that motivates the former). 
3. The perfection of patience 
Its entity: The mind that abides undisturbed in the face of harm or wh en suffering occurs and 
thoroughly abides aspiring for the Dharma. 
4. The perfection of joyous effort Its entity: A mind that delights in virtue. 5. The perfection of concentration Its entity: A mind that abides single-pointedly  on any suitable virtuous observed object. 
6. The perfection of wisdom Its entity: In general that which very thoroughly distinguishes the qualities in the thing that is 
being investigated. Here it is the wisdom that is skilled in the five sciences and so forth. 
 3. Describe the absurd consequence that would ensue if the practice of the six perfections 
were to be completed by meditating on  nothing at all. (2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-2) 
If all the perfections were complete simply thro ugh this (not adhering to the giver, the gift, 
and the act of giving while meditating on nothing at all),  
1. they (the six perfections) would be comple te for the calm abiding that is a single-
pointed mind of a Tirthika (a non-Buddhist) at the time of meditative equipoise since 
he does not adhere to them.  
2. In particular, as it says in the Sutra of the Ten Grounds , hearers and solitary realizers who 
have a non-conceptual exalted wisdom with  respect to reality, when meditatively 
equipoised on it, would become Mahayanists since the entire bodhisattva conduct (the 
six perfections) is complete.  
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 59 4. Briefly describe how to practice the six pe rfections within the perfection of generosity. 
(2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-3A1A-1C3D)  
1. The generosity of generosity is establishi ng others in the practice of generosity. 
2. Having a mind wishing to abandon non-virtue while giving is the ethical discipline of 
generosity. 
3. Having the aspiration for omniscience and pati ence with respect to its qualities and also 
patience when abused by others while giving is the patience of generosity. 
4. The joyous effort that generates the aspiration  for the sake of increasing generosity more 
and more is the joyous effort of generosity. 
5. The concentration that is a single-pointed mind not mixed with the Lesser Vehicle that 
dedicates that virtue to complete enlighte nment is the concentration of generosity. 
6. The wisdom that understands the object given,  the giving, and the recipient to be like 
illusions is the wisdom of generosity. 
 
5. Explain how non-abiding nirvana has to be accomplished by a path of both method and 
wisdom. (2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-3A) 
Non-abiding in cyclic existence is achieved by  that called “the wisdom realizing suchness,” 
“the stages of the path relying on the ultimate ,” “the profound path,” “the collection of 
exalted wisdom,” and “the factor of wisdom.” Non-abiding in nirvana or peace, on the other 
hand, is necessarily achieved by the path called  “the wisdom cognizing varieties”, “the stages 
of the path relying on conventional truth,” “the  vast path,” “the coll ection of method,” and 
the “factor of merit.”   6. Explain the following quotation: 
Wisdom not conjoined wi th method is bondage. 
Wisdom conjoined with method is liberation. Method not conjoined with  wisdom is bondage. 
Method conjoined with wisdom is liberation.   (2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-3C) 
Wisdom not conjoined with method is bo ndage, that is, bondage to self-peace. 
Wisdom conjoined with method is liberati on, that is, liberation from self-peace. 
Method not conjoined with wisdom is bondage, that is, bondage to cyclic existence, since 
without wisdom one cannot become  free from cyclic existence. 
Method conjoined with wisdom is liberation, that is, liberation from cyclic existence. 
It is necessary to understand that without the wi sdom realizing emptiness it is not possible to 
achieve nirvana or liberation. On the other ha nd, without method, although one can achieve 
self-peace, one cannot achieve buddhahood. Ther efore, we need both method and wisdom. 
(Geshe-la p.10)  7. Briefly explain how method and wisdom infl uence each other. Give an example. (2B4B-
2B3B-3B3B-2C) Just like in the analogy of the mother torm ented by sorrow after the death of her child, 
although whatever other minds are produced, it  is not given up due to the power of her 
sorrow, still all her minds are not minds of sorrow. Similarly, if the wisdom realizing 
emptiness is very powerful, although when giving  gifts, prostrating, circumambulating, and so 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 60 forth, the minds that observe them do not real ize emptiness, there is no contradiction that 
they are performed possessing its strength. If you start off with the intense power of the mind 
of enlightenment, as you do at the begi nning of a cession, although the mind of 
enlightenment is not manifest when placed in th e meditative stabilization of emptiness, there 
is no contradiction in it being influenced by it. 
 8. What are the two truths? By what types of valid cognition are they posited? How do they 
assist one another? (2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-4C2) The two truths are the conventional truth and the ultimate truth. They are respectively realized by a valid cognizer  of conventional truths and a valid cognizer of 
ultimate truths. By means of valid scriptural authority and reas onings, cyclic existence and nirvana are shown 
not to be established by their own side and not to be inherently existent. On the other hand, causes and results are infallible: from virtuous actions come happiness 
and not suffering, and from non-virtuous action s come suffering and not happiness. Similarly, 
smoke arises from fire, that is, smoke is the result  of its respective cause, fire. Such causes and 
results are established by a valid cognizer of varieties or conventionalities. 
A valid cognizer realizing conventional truths an d a valid cognizer realizing ultimate truths do 
not harm each other, instea d they assist each other. 
  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 61 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 15 - Answer key 
How to train in the conduct of bodh isattvas after having generated the 
engaging mind of enlightenment (the actual bodhisattva vow)-2 
1. Explain how the six perfections are definite in number from the point of view of their 
comprising the entire Maha yana. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-2A2D) 
You will not be attached to resources that have been acquired and will not view resources that 
you have not acquired with interest. When this  i s  p r e s e n t  y o u  w i l l  b e  a b l e  t o  g u a r d  t h e  
trainings, whereby you will take up ethical disc ipline and respect it. Due to patience towards 
sufferings that arise in dependence on sentient  beings and non-sentient beings, you will not 
be discouraged. Due to applying yourself to and delighting in any kind of virtuous activities, 
you will not be discouraged by them. You will meditate the non-conceptual yoga of calm 
abiding and special insight. 
 2. Give the subdivisions of each  of the first five perfections. 
Generosity: 
• of the Dharma 
• of fearlessness 
• of material things 
 
Ethical discipline: • of restraint 
• of accumulating virtuous qualities 
• of enacting the welfare of sentient beings 
 
Patience: • of not paying heed to harm by others 
• of accepting the suffering that arises in one’s own continuum 
• of a mind certain with respect to the Dharma 
•  
Joyous effort: 
• armor-like 
• of gathering virtuous dharmas 
• of enacting the welfare of sentient beings 
 
Concentration: 
by way of entity: 
• mundane 
• supramundane 
by way of class: 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 62 • calm abiding 
• special insight 
• union of calm abiding and special insight 
by way of function 
• that causes one to abide in physical  and mental happiness in this life 
• that manifestly accomplishes good qualities 
• that enacts the welfare of sentient beings 
 
Wisdom: 
• realizing the ultimate 
• realizing the conventionalities 
• realizing the welfare of sentient beings 
 
3. What are the invisible and visible disadv antages of patience. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-
3C1B) The invisible disadvantages: 
• the virtue accumulated by the generosity of gi ving material things over a thousand eons 
and that of making offerings to the Sugatas, prostrating to them , and so forth is destroyed 
by one instant of anger. 
The visible disadvantages: • one does not experience mental peace and certainty 
• previously existing joy and happiness are ruined and later on are not achieved 
• sleep does not come and the mind does not abide at ease 
• if the hatred is strong, even those who prev iously nurtured you out of kindness, having 
forgotten their kindness, may kill you 
• friends and relatives abandon you out of irritation 
• even those you gather with gi fts do not stay, and so forth 
 
4. Briefly explain how to cultivate patience with respect to harm. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-
3C2A) 
• Reflect on the offender’s lack of freedom 
• Reflect on the inappropriateness of anger given that the offender has no freedom 
• Reflect on how anger is inappropriate if you thinks of your own karma 
• Reflect on the appropriateness of being patient as if it were a medical examination 
 
5. Briefly explain how to cultivate patience  with respect to suffering. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-
3A1A-3C2B) 
• Counter the categorical aversion for suffering that arises 
• Consider the good qualities of suffering itself 
• Consider how it is not difficult if you familiarize in small steps 
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 63 6. What is the entity of the perfection of  wisdom and its subdiv isions? (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-
3A1A-6) 
Wisdom is that which very thoroughly disting uishes the qualities in th e thing that is being 
investigated. There are three subdivisions: 
• wisdom realizing the ultimate 
• wisdom realizing the conventionalities 
• wisdom realizing the welfare of sentient beings 
 
7. Explain how wisdom comes to possess the si x perfections. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1A-6C2C) 
1. If, while we ourselves abide in wisdom, we set others in wisdom, this is the generosity of 
wisdom. 
2. While abiding in wisdom, if we strive to abandon distorted wisdom, this is the morality of wisdom. 
3. If we are patient with respect to cultivating wisdom, this is the patience of wisdom. 
4. If we have a mind that delights in meditating  on emptiness, this is the joyous effort of 
wisdom. 
5. If we concentrate on wisdom, this  is the concentration of wisdom. 
6. The wisdom realizing the emptiness of the three spheres is the wisdom of wisdom.  
 8. What are the four means of gathering disciples? (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3A1B) 1. Generosity is the same as explained in th e context of the perfection of generosity. 
2. Pleasant speech is to teach the perfections to disciples. 
3. Meaningful conduct is to make the disciple enga ge in the meanings that were taught or to 
make him engage in assuming them correctly. 
4. To act in accordance with the meaning is, th rough abiding in accordance with whatever 
meaning you have taught to others, to train in accordance with it. 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 64 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 16 - Answer key 
Calm Abiding 
1. Explain – by way of an illustration and applyi ng the illustration to the meaning – why it is 
necessary to develop calm abiding and special insight. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B2D) 
To illustrate: if you light a butter lamp at night in order to look at murals, if the butter lamp 
is both very bright and not caused to flicker by the wind, you will see the painted figures very 
clearly. However, if the butter lamp is not very br ight or if – even though bright – it is blown 
by the wind, you will not see the forms clearly.  
Likewise, if you have both the wisdom correctly determining the profound meaning of 
suchness and a mind staying on an object immovabl y at will, you will see suchness clearly, but 
if you do not have the wisdom realizing the mode  of being, even though you have a mind that 
stays on an object without diffusing to other ob jects, you will not be able to realize the mode 
of being, however much you train in concentratio n. And if you have the view of internalized 
selflessness but do not have the firm concentration where the mind abides one-pointedly, you 
will not be able to realize clearly the meanin g of the mode of being. Therefore both calm 
abiding and special insight are necessary. 
 
2. List the necessary prerequisites for the a ttainment of calm abiding. (2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-
3B2F-1A)
 
1. The place in which one trains in calm abid ing should be conducive through possessing five 
qualities: 
1. the necessities for life such as food and clothing are easily found, 
2. it is free from wild animals as well as enemies such as bandits and so forth, 
3. it has good earth that does not cause sickness in the body, 
4. there are companions with similar morali ty and views who are good friends that do 
not cause problems, and 
5. there are not many people during the day and little noise at night such as that of 
strongly flowing rivers, strongly blowing wi nd, the howling of animals, and so forth. 
2. Few desires: no special attachment  to good or numerous robes etc. 
3. Contentment: always to be satisfied with any [old] robes etc. that serve their purpose. 
4. Complete abstention from many activities: to completely give up unwholesome activities like trading, as well as excessive association with householders and the ordained, and practicing medicine and astrology. 
5. Pure ethical discipline: with regard to one’s pratimoksha and bodhisattva vows, not to 
breach the basis of the trainings, and if one ca relessly does so, to restore it quickly through 
regret in accordance with the teachings. 
6. Complete abstention from thoughts of desi re etc.: you should give up all thoughts of 
desire.
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK  Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Stages of the Path     ANSWER KEY 
 
 
 65 3. List the hindrances to calm abiding and th e antidotes by way of which they are overcome. 
(2B4B-2B3B-3C1C-3B 2F-1B2B-2A3B-4/5) 
By abandoning the five faults and relying on the eight antidotes, calm abiding is achieved. 
The five faults are (1) laziness, (2) forgetting th e observed object or the instructions, (3) laxity 
and excitement, (4) the non-application of the anti dote when either laxity or excitement have 
arisen, and (5) the application of the antidote wh en neither laxity or excitement have arisen. 
The antidotes to laziness are (1) faith, (2) aspi ration, (3) effort, and (4) suppleness/pliancy.  
 
The antidotes to the other four faults are respec tively: (5) mindfulness, (6) introspection, (7) 
the intention to apply the antidote , and (8) equanimity/non-application 
 4. Explain the process of how to attain calm ab iding by way of the nine stages, the six powers, 
and the four applications. The nine stages are (1) placing the mind, (2) placing the mind continuously, (3) patch-like 
placement, (4) close placement, (5) taming, (6 ) pacification, (7) complete pacification, (8) 
making single-pointed, and (9) even placement.  The first stage is attained through (a) the powe r of hearing, and the second through (b) the 
power of thinking. In both of them there is (i ) forceful engagement. The third and fourth are 
attained through (c) the power of mindfulness, the fifth and sixth through (d) the power of 
introspection, and the seventh and eighth thro ugh (d) the power of effort. There is (ii) 
interrupted engagement from the third throug h the seventh stage, and (iii) uninterrupted 
engagement on the eighth stage. The ninth stage is attained through (f) the power of 
familiarity and (iv) spontaneous engagement.
 
ILTK - Basic Program  Middle  Lam-Rim – Homework Quizzes 
  ANSWER KEYS 
 66 MIDDLE LAM-RIM 
Homework Quiz 17 - Answer key 
Special Insight 
1. Identify ignorance in this sp ecific context. (…-2A2A-2/3/4) 
Ignorance is the opposite of knowledge, but knowledge should not be taken as just any 
knowledge; rather, it is the wisdom knowing such ness—selflessness. Its oppo site is not suitable 
to be just the non-existence of it or just other than it; hence, its opposite is its contradictory 
equivalent. 
Such ignorance is a superimposition of a self; fu rthermore it is the two superimpositions of a 
self of phenomena and a self of persons. Th erefore both the conception of a self of 
phenomena and the conception of th e self of persons are ignorance. 
The manner of superimposition by  ignorance is to conceive that phenomena exist by way of 
their own entity, by way of their own na ture, or by way of their own being. 
 2. Identify the root of cyclic existence accord ing to Chandrakirti and according to Nagarjuna. 
Why are these two assertions not contradi ctory? (…-2A2A-5B1/2/ 3; …-2A2B-1/2/3/4) 
According to Chandrakirti the innate view of th e transitory collection is the root of cyclic 
existence. He refutes that the aggregates ar e the observed object, and he says that a 
dependently imputed self is the observed object. In other words, the mere I which is the 
observed object in generating the mere though t “I”, or the mere person, is the observed 
object. The subjective aspect [of such an innate  conception] is that within observing the I and 
mine, it conceives the I and mine to be established by way of their own nature. 
 On the other hand, Nagarjuna in his Precious  Garland explains that the conception of 
a self of phenomena – the conception of the aggreg ates as truly existent – is the root of cyclic 
existence. 
 However, there is no contradiction be tween those two assertions because the 
Prasangika-Madhyamika system diff erentiates the two conceptions of self [only] by way of their 
observed objects. Hence, the two do not have di fferent aspects in their mode of apprehension 
because both have the aspect of conceiving their objects as being established by way of their own nature.  When it is taught that the conception of a self of phenomena is the cause of the view 
of the transitory collection, it is being show n that the two inner divisions of ignorance are 
cause and effect – the conception of the in herent existence of phenomena causing the 
conception of such with respect to persons.  3. Establish that when the conception of true existence is overcome, cyclic existence is also 
overcome. (…2A2C-1D2C) The ignorance that conceives the elaboration of  persons and phenomena to be truly existent 
is overcome by finding the view realizing empt iness or selflessness, and cultivating it in 
meditation. When that ignorance is overcome, one overcomes the conceptuality which is the 
improper mental application superimposing si gns of beauty, ugliness, and so forth upon 
observing the objects of the conception of true  existence. When that is overcome, the other 
ILTK - Basic Program  Middle  Lam-Rim – Homework Quizzes 
  ANSWER KEYS 
 67 afflictive emotions – attachment and so forth – which have the view of the transitory as their 
root are overcome. When they are overcome, po werless birth in cyclic existence impelled by 
actions is overcome, whereby liberation is attained. 
 
4. What are the stages of generating the tw o views of selflessness? Explain why. (…2A2C-
2A1/2) With respect to generating the two conceptions of  self, the conception of a self of phenomena 
generates the conception of a self of persons.  However, when entering into the suchness of 
selflessness, you should first generate the view  realizing the selflessness of persons and then 
generate the view realizing the selflessness of phenomena.  Because of this, we speak first of the absenc e of inherent existence of persons and then 
of the constituents – earth and so forth – wh ich are the bases of designation of a person. 
 The reason why it must be done in that w ay is that, although there is no difference in 
subtlety with regard to the selflessness to be ascertained in terms of the persons and 
phenomena that are its base, selflessness is easier  to ascertain in relation to a person due to 
the essentials of the substratum, whereas it is mo re difficult to ascertain selflessness in relation 
to other phenomena.  5. Explain briefly how to generate the view real izing the selflessness of persons by way of the 
four essentials. (…2B1B-1A) 
A. Ascertaining the object of negation 
First one should identify the mode of conceiving a self of persons through analyzing one’s 
own continuum. B. Ascertaining the pervasion 
This is the decision that if the person is inherent ly established, it must be established as either 
one entity or as a different entity from th e aggregates, and that there is no mode of 
establishment other than these two. C. Seeing the damage to the posi tion that the person and the aggregates are one inherently 
existent entity  If the two – the self and th e aggregates – are one inherently established entity, the 
assertion of a self would be senseless. 
 If the self and the aggregates are one, then the self would me many, or, just as there is 
no more than one self, so too would the aggregates be one. 
 The self would have production and disintegration. 
• In that way a sameness of continuum wo uld not be feasible, and memory of a 
former life would not be possible. 
• Actions done would be wasted. 
• There would be meeting with actions not done. 
D. Refuting inherently different self and aggregates 
 If the self were inherently different fr om the aggregates, it would not posses the 
characteristics that characterize the aggregates as compounded phenomena – 
production, abiding, and disintegration. 
 This so-called self would not be feasible as the object which is the bas of designating the 
verbal convention “self” by innate concep tion because it would be uncaused, like a 
flower in the sky. 
ILTK - Basic Program  Middle  Lam-Rim – Homework Quizzes 
  ANSWER KEYS 
 68  Moreover if [the self] existed as inherently  different from the characteristics of the 
aggregates, it would have to be apprehended in that way, but since there is no such 
apprehension, the self does not exist as a factually other thing than the aggregates. 
 
6. Explain how to generate appearances as being like illusions. (…2B1B-3B1/2) 
For example, while the eye consciousness sees illusory horses and elephants, the mental 
consciousness ascertains the non-existence of th ose horses and elephants in accordance with 
how they appear. In dependence on them, asce rtainment that the appearance of horses and 
elephants is an illusory or false appearance is generated.  Similarly, although there is the undeniable  appearance of persons and so forth to a 
conventional consciousness, a reasoning cons ciousness ascertains them to be empty of 
inherent existence, that is, establishment by way of their own entities. In dependence on 
them, ascertainment of persons as illuso ry or false appearances is generated. 
 
7. List the instructions with regard to seekin g the ascertainment of the illusory-like. (…2B1B-
3B5A/B/) 
A. Make the generality of the obje ct of negation appear well by reasoning, contemplate well 
inherent existence as it is superimposed by the ignorance in your own continuum, and 
identify it. B. With particular emphasis contemplate the fact that if such inherent establishment existed, 
it would not pass beyond oneness and difference,  and contemplate the mode of the presence 
of damage to the assertions of the self  and the aggregates as both of those. 
C. Induce ascertainment that sees the damage, an d finally make it firm thinking “A person 
does not in the least have  inherent establishment.” 
D. Then, allow the undeniable appearances of th e conventions of the person to appear as 
objects of one’s awareness. Take to mind th e dependently arising factors of positing the 
person as the accumulator of actions and the experiencer of effects, finding ascertainment 
with respect to how dependent-arisings are feasib le within the absence of inherent existence. 
 8. Present the uncommon mode of positing dependent-arising by the Madhyamikas. How 
does it refute truly existent on eness and difference? (…2B2B-2A6) 
Persons, pots, and so forth are without inhere nt establishment because of being imputed in 
dependence on their own collection of parts. What is dependently produced or dependently imputed is not inherently existent one with that  upon which it depends; for if it were, all 
agents and objects would be one. Those two are al so not inherently existent others because if 
they were, a relationship between them would be  refuted, whereby dependence on causes or a 
basis of imputation would be contradictory.  