Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Reference Material/MLR_Exam_AnswerKey_ILTK07.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:54.585757
================================================================================

   
 
  
FPMT Basic Program 
 
 
Stages of the Path 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
 
 
  
Exam & Answer Keys 
   
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa 
2005 & 2007 
   
 
   
 
  
Produced by Teaching  Assistants Ven. Olivier Ross i and Ven. Birgit Schweiberer 
Lightly edited for use in FPMT Basic Progra ms by Olga Planken, Education Department 
 
  
   
 
    
 
  
© FPMT Inc. and Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa 
December 2007 
 
All rights reserved 
 
No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means,  
electronic or mechanical, including photocopyi ng, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system or technologies  now know n or later developed, without permission in 
writing from FPMT Inc. and Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa. 
 
With permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path  EXAM 
 
 
3 STAGES OF THE PATH 
Middle Length Lam-Rim  
 
Exam 
 
1. What are the three ways of relying prop erly on a spiritual teacher in action?  
 
 
  2. What are the 7 practices for the accumulation of merit and the purification of negativities 
that are done with respect to the merit field (also known as the 7-limb prayer) ?         3. What are the eight leisures of a precious human rebirth?           4. What are the ten endowments of a precio us human rebirth (five that are personal 
endowments and five that are related to others)?    
 
     
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path  EXAM 
 
 
4  
  
 
5. Describe the so-called nine point meditation  on mindfullness of death (give the three root 
thoughts, the three reasons that support each of them, and the three determinations that one 
should reach). 
 
      
 
        
6. What are the two causes for properly going for refuge? 
   
7. Why is the Buddha worthy to be an object of refuge? (give three reasons)  
    8. What are the ten non-virtuous  and the ten virtuous actions
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path  EXAM 
 
 
5 9. What are the four factors that make an acti on complete? Using the example of killing, give 
an example of each of them.  
 
  
 
   
 
  10. Briefly describe the four opponent powers that are applied to purify negative karma. 
 
 
 
 
    11. What is liberation? What are you liberated from?        12. Please list the four noble truths in the or der in which they are taught,  and explain why 
they are taught in this specific order?        
 
     
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path  EXAM 
 
 
6 13. List the three types of suffering.  
  
 
 14. List the six sufferings.  
 
     15. List the six root afflictions 
 
      16. What are the three higher trainings?  Give a definition or description. 
      
17. What is the seven-fold caus e and effect instruction? List  these seven causes and their 
effect.  
        
 
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path  EXAM 
 
 
7 18. What would be the proof that  all se ntient beings have been your mother?  
Is this proof effective for you, are you convinced?  
If not, which element of the proof is problema tic for you? How do you work with that in 
meditation? 
   
 
      
 
    19.  Give a definition of bodhici tta and explain its two aspirations. 
      20. List the trainings of bodhisattvas, the six perfections        21. How can you cultivate patien ce with respect to suffering? 
   
 
FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path  EXAM 
 
 
8 22. List the five hindrances to calm abiding an d the eight  antidotes by way of which they are 
overcome.  
 
 
   
 
    23. What are the four steps of the ‘four point analysis’, the meditation for  generating the 
realization of the selflessness of persons by way of four essential points?  
 
    24. What does dependent-arising mean accordin g to the Madhyamikas? How does it refute 
truly existent oneness and difference?        
 FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path   ANSWER KEY for the EXAM 
   
9 STAGES OF THE PATH: Middle Length Lam-Rim  
Answer Key for the Exam 
 
1. What are the three ways of relying prop erly on a spiritual teacher in action?  
1. Offering material things. 
2. Serving and paying respect with body, speech, and mind. 
3. Practicing in accordance with his instructions. 
 
2. What are the 7 practices for the accumulation of merit and the purification of negativities 
that are done with respect to the merit field (also known as the 7-limb prayer) ? 1. Prostrations 2. Offering 3. Confessing  4. Rejoicing 5. Requesting the wheel of Dharma to be turned 6. Supplication to not pass into nirvana 
7. Dedication to enlightenment  
 3. What are the eight leisures of a precious human rebirth?  1. Freedom from birth in the hell realm 
2. Freedom from birth in the hungry ghost realm 
3. Freedom from birth in the animal realm 
4. Freedom from birth as a long-life god 
5. Freedom from being born at a time when no buddha has appeared in the world 
6. Freedom from being born in a remote country 
7. Freedom from being born with impaired mental or physical faculties 
8. Freedom from holding wrong views 
 4. What are the ten endowments of a precio us human rebirth (five that are personal 
endowments and five that are related to others)?  1. Being born as a human being 
2. Being born in a central region 
3. Being born with complete faculties 
4. Having no extremely heavy negative karma (having removable karma) 
5. Having faith in the foundation (the three baskets) 
6. Being born at a time in which a buddha has appeared 
7. Being born at a time in which that buddha has taught 
8. Being born at a time in which his teachings remain in the world 
9. Being born at a time in which there ar e practitioners who follow the teachings 
10. Being born at a time in wh ich there are people who have loving kindness for others 
  
 FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path   ANSWER KEY for the EXAM 
   
10 5. Describe the so-called nine point meditation  on mindfullness of death (give the three root 
thoughts, the three reasons that support each of them, and the three determinations that one 
should reach). 
It is certain that we will die 
1. the Lord of Death will certainly come and th ere are no conditions for warding him off 
2. one’s life span cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly 
3. you die without having had time to pr actice the Dharma while still alive 
The decision to practice the Dharma. 
 The time of one’s death is uncertain 
1. there is no certainty with regard to the of human beings life span in Jambudvipa, 
which is why the time of death is uncertain 
2. there are many conditions that lead to death and few that promote life 
3. the body is extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore uncertain 
The decision that it is necessary to  practice the Dharma from now on. 
 At the time of death nothing exce pt the Dharma will be of benefit 
1. you cannot take along friends 
2. you cannot take along possessions 
3. you cannot take along your body 
The decision to practice nothing but the Dharma.  
6. What are the two causes for properly going for refuge? Fear of the bad migrations and the conviction th at there is something rare and precious that 
can protect us from them. 
 
7. Why is the Buddha worthy to be an object of refuge?  a Buddha is free from fear, a Buddha is skilled in the means of liberating others from fear, a Buddha has  great compassion that is free from closeness and distance, 
a Buddha works for the welfare of all, both th ose who help and those who do not help him. 
 8. What are the ten non-virtuous  and the ten virtuous actions
 
1. Killing / refraining from it  
2. Stealing / refraining from it  3. Sexual misconduct / refraining from it  
4. Lying / refraining from it  
5. Divisive speech / refraining from it  
6. Harsh speech / refraining from it  
7. Idle talk / refraining from it 
8. Covetousness / refraining from it  
9. Malice / refraining from it  10. Wrong view / refraining from it 
 
 
 FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path   ANSWER KEY for the EXAM 
   
11 9. What are the four factors that make an acti on complete? Using the example of killing, give 
an example of each of them.  
1. Basis: a sentient being other than oneself 
2. Attitude: a. Discrimination: unmistakenly identifying the sentient being as a sentient being in general 
or as a particular sentient being 
b. Affliction: any of the three mental po isons – attachment, hatred, or ignorance 
c. Motivation: the wish to kill 
3. Performance: doing it onesel f or ordering it to be done 
4. Culmination: the being dies due to one’s action
 
 
10. Briefly describe the four opponent powers that are applied to purify negative karma. 
The power of regret – thinking about the different  types of negative karmic results one regrets 
one’s actions and confesses them 
The power of thorough application of an antidote  – a virtuous action done with the intention 
to purify negative karma  
The power of restraining oneself from faults in  the future – one sincerely restrains oneself 
from doing the ten non-virtuous actions in the future The power of the basis – going for refuge and generating bodhichitta   11. What is liberation? What are you liberated from? “Liberation” is freedom from bondage. Specifica lly, there are two things binding one in cyclic 
existence – karma and the afflictions. Through th e power of these two, from the point of view 
of realms, there are three, the desire realm, etc.; when divided by way of migrating beings, 
there are five or six, such as gods, etc.; and in terms of birth-sources, there are four, such as a 
womb. This joining with such aggregates is the en tity of bondage, therefore freedom from it is 
liberation.  
 12. Please list the four noble truths in the or der in which they are taught,  and explain why 
they are taught in this specific order? True sufferings, true origins, true cessations, true paths  The four noble truths are taught in the order of their 
realization , they are not taught in the 
order of cause and effect. 
  
In order to generate the initial wish to become free from cyclic existence one must realize that 
the nature of cyclic existence is the contaminated aggregates, true sufferings . 
After that, one will question wh at their cause is and whether it can be eliminated. One will 
come to the conclusion that the cause is karma and afflictions, true origins , and that it is 
possible to eliminate them. 
Then, one will understand that a state of true cessation  of all suffering is possible and one 
will want to attain it. After that, one will be interested in prac ticing the means to attain such cessation, 
true paths . 
  
 FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path   ANSWER KEY for the EXAM 
   
12 13. List the three types of suffering.  
1. The suffering of suffering 2. The suffering of change 
3. Pervasive suffering 
 14. List the six sufferings. 1. lack of certainty 
2. instability 
3. discarding one’s body again and again 4. joining (with a body) again and again 5. changing from high to low states again and again 
6. lacking companions  15. List the six root afflictions 
1. Attachment 
2. Anger 3. Pride  4. Ignorance  5. Doubt 6. Afflicted views  16. What are the three higher trainings? Give a definition or description of each of them. 
The three higher trainings are the training in ethical discipline, in concentration, and in 
wisdom; they are posited only in the Buddhist context and they are the practices of morality 
and the development of concentration and of wi sdom, all motivated by definite emergence. 
 
17. What is the seven-fold caus e and effect instruction? List  these seven causes and their 
effect.  
This is an instruction consisting of seven part s (six causes and one effect) for a meditation 
that leads one to the generation of th e mind of enlightenment, bodhicitta. 
1. Recognizing all sentient beings as our mothers 
2. Remembering their kindness 
3. Wishing to repay their kindness 
4. Generating love 
5. Generating compassion 
6. Generating the special attitude 
7. Generating bodhichitta 
 
18. What would be the proof that  all sentient beings have been your mother? Is this proof 
effective for you, are you convinced? If not, which element of the proof is problematic for 
you? How do you work with that in meditation? Because we have been taking rebirth in cycl ic existence since beginningless time, even our 
rebirths as human beings alone are infinite. Having died and taken birth again and again, we cannot say that we have not been born with a ce rtain body, that we have not been born in a 
certain place, and that we have not had such a being as our mother. Because we have taken so 
 FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path   ANSWER KEY for the EXAM 
   
13 many bodies, all sentient beings have been our mothers. Because we have taken rebirth in all 
ten directions, all sentient beings have been  our mothers and relatives in these rebirths. 
Therefore, all sentient beings have been our mother. There does not exist one sentient being 
who has not been our mother. No such  sentient being can be found.  
 
19.  Give a definition of bodhici tta and explain its two aspirations. 
The desire for complete enlighte nment for the welfare of others. 
It depends on two aspirations: 1. the causal aspiration – the wish to enact the welfare all sentient beings 
2. the accompanying aspiration – the wish to attain enlightenment for the welfare of all 
sentient beings. 
 20. List the trainings of bodhisattvas, the six perfections 1. The perfection of generosity  
2. The perfection of ethical discipline 
3. The perfection of patience 4. The perfection of joyous effort 5. The perfection of concentration 6. The perfection of wisdom 
 
21. How can you cultivate patien ce with respect to suffering? 
Counter the aversion for suffering Consider the good qualities of suffering Consider how it is not difficult if yo u familiarize yourself in small steps 
 22. List the five hindrances to calm abiding an d the eight  antidotes by way of which they are 
overcome.  The five faults are  (1) laziness,  (2) forgetting the observed object or the instructions,  (3) laxity and excitement,  (4) the non-application of the antidote when either laxity or excitement have arisen,  
(5) the application of the antidote when ne ither laxity or excitement have arisen. 
The antidotes to laziness are (1) faith, (2) aspi ration, (3) effort, and (4) suppleness/pliancy.  
The antidotes to the other four faults are respec tively: (5) mindfulness, (6) introspection, (7) 
the intention to apply the antidote , and (8) equanimity/non-application 
 23. What are the four steps of the ‘four point analysis’, the meditation for  generating the 
realization of the selflessness of persons by way of four essential points?  Ascertaining the object of negation Ascertaining the pervasion (‘if the person is inhere ntly existent, it must be  either one entity or 
a different entity from the aggregates; ther e is no possibility other than these two’) 
Ascertaining that the person and the aggregat es are not one inherently existent entity  
Ascertaining that the self and the aggregates are not inherently different  
 FPMT Basic Program at ILTK   Middle  Length Lam-Rim 
Stages of the Path   ANSWER KEY for the EXAM 
   
14 24. What does dependent-arising mean accordin g to the Madhyamikas? How does it refute 
truly existent oneness and difference? 
Persons, cars, and so forth are without inhere nt establishment because of being imputed in 
dependence on their own collection of parts. What is dependently produced or dependently 
imputed is not inherently existent one with that  upon which it depends; for if it were, all 
agents and objects would be one. Those two are al so not inherently existent others because if 
they were, a relationship between them would be  refuted, whereby dependence on causes or a 
basis of imputation would be contradictory.    
 