Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Reference Material/MLR_Charts1_14_ILTKBP_Nov08.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:54.489969
================================================================================

 
 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM   
Stages of the Path 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa 
 
 
CHARTS  
 
  Composed by Teachings Assistants Ven. Olivier Rossi and Ven. Birgit Schweiberer 
 
 
© FPMT, Inc., November 2008 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 1 
 
Benefits and shortcomings  
of properly and improperly re lying on the spiritual teacher 
according to different Lam-rim presentations  
 
Middle Lam-Rim  
Lama Tsongkhapa Great Lam-Rim  
Lama Tsongkhapa  Quick Path  
Panchen Lama Losang Yeshe 
(in Liberation in Your Hands  
by Pabongka Rinpoche)  
 
Benefits of properly relying 
 
1. We will come closer to 
buddhahood 1. We will come closer to 
buddhahood 1. We will come closer to 
buddhahood 
2. We will please the conquerors 2. We will please the 
conquerors 2. We will please the conquerors 
3. We will not be deprived of a 
teacher in future lives 3. We will not be deprived of a 
teacher in future lives 3. Demons and evil companions 
will not be able to harm us* 
4. We will not fall into lower 
realms 4. We will not fall into lower 
realms 4.  Negative karma and afflictions 
automatically come to an end 
5. We will not easily be overcome 
by negative karma and afflictions 5. We will not easily be 
overcome by negative karma 
and afflictions 5. All our realizations of the path 
develop further* 
6. Our accumulation of good 
qualities will increase 6. Our accumulation of good 
qualities will increase 6. We will not be deprived of a 
teacher in future lives 
7. We will accomplish all 
temporary and ultimate goals 7. We will accomplish all 
temporary and ultimate goals 7. We will not fall into lower 
realms 
8. Negative karma to be 
experienced in lower realms is 
exhausted in this lifetime and our 
virtuous roots outshine those of 
making offerings to all the 
conquerors* 8. We will complete the two 
collections and accomplish the 
two welfares* 8. We will accomplish all 
temporary and ultimate goals 
 
Shortcomings of improperly relying 
 
1. We will experience sufferings 
like illnesses and spirit harm in 
this life 1. We will experience 
sufferings like illnesses and 
spirit harm in this life 1. In scorning the guru, we scorn 
all the conquerors* 
2. We will experience the 
sufferings of the lower realms in 
future lives 2. We will experience the 
sufferings of the lower realms 
in future lives 2. Anger with the guru destroys 
immense amounts of virtue* 
3. We will not develop new 
qualities  3. We will not develop new 
qualities  3. Though we practice tantra, we 
will not accomplish our goal* 
4. Qualities, which we had already 
developed, degenerate 4. Qualities, which we had 
already developed, degenerate 4. Even if we practice tantra it is 
as if striving to be born in hell* 
  5. We will not develop new 
qualities and qualities, which we 
had already developed, 
degenerate 
  6. We will experience sufferings 
like illnesses and spirit harm in 
this life 
  7. We will experience the 
sufferings of the lower realms in 
future lives 
  8. We will be without a spiritual 
teacher in future lives* 
* Indicates that the particular benefit or sh ortcoming is only mentioned in this text  
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 2 
 
How to Perform  
Mandala Offerings 
of 37, 25, 23 and 7 heaps 
 
(According to Liberation in Your Hands  by Pabongka Rinpoche) 
 
Object offered 
 37 heaps 25 heaps 23 heaps 7 heaps 
Golden ground 
(mandala base) 
 (not counted) 1   
Iron fence 
(first ring) 
 (not counted) 1   
Mount Meru 1 
in the center 1 1 1 
Main continents 4 
east, south, 
 west, north 4 4 4 
      Subcontinents 8 
(one to each side of the 
main continent, 
beginning from the left 
side of the eastern 
continent, then the right, 
then the left side of the 
southern continent, then 
the right, etc.) 8 8  
Treasures 4 
east – jewel mountain,  
south – wish-fulfilling 
tree, west – wish-
fulfilling cow, north – 
uncultivated crops  
(on the continents) (not counted, 
visualized as 
included in the main 
continents) (not counted, 
visualized as included 
in the main 
continents)  
Signs of royalty 
(second ring) 7 
east - golden wheel or 
chariot, 
 south – jewel, west – 
queen, north – minister, 
SE – elephant, 
 SW – horse,  
NW - general  7 7  
Treasure vase 1 
in the NE 1 1  
Offering goddesses 8 
1. beauty 
 2. garlands  
3. song  
4. dance 
5.  flowers  
6. incense 
 7. light  
8. perfume 
(following the same 
pattern of directions and 
sub-directions) (not counted, 
visualized as 
included in Mount 
Meru and placed on 
its terraces) (not counted, 
visualized as included 
in Mount Meru and 
placed on its terraces)  
Sun and moon  
(third ring) 2 
 north and south 2 
north and south  2 
north and south  2 
north and south  
Parasol and victory 
banner 2 
west and east      
 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 3 
The World and it s Inhabitants 
(According to Chapter III of Abhidharmakosha  by Master Vasubandhu) 
Realm Divisions 
4th Formless Absorption (1) Without Discrimination-Not Without Discrimination (Peak of Cyclic Existence) 
3rd Formless Absorption (1) Nothingness 
2nd Formless Absorption (1) Infinite Consciousness  Form 
less 
Realm 
(4) 1st Formless Absorption (1) Infinite Space 
    Arya Pure Lands (5) 
5. Not Low (Akanishta) 
4. Auspicious Appearance (Sudarsana) 
3. Great Perception (Sudrsa)  
2. Without Pain (Atapas)  
1. Not Great (Abrha) 
    Ordinary beings’ abodes 
3. Great Result (therein: Without Discrimination) 
2. Born from Merit 4th Concentration (8) 
 
 
1. Cloudless 
3. Vast Virtue 
2. Limitless Virtue 3rd Concentration (3) 
1. Little Virtue 
3. Clear Light 
2. Limitless light 2nd Concentration (3) 
1. Little Light 
3. Great Brahma 
2. In Front of Brahma Form 
Realm 
(17) 
1st Concentration (3) 
1. Brahma Class 
6. Controlling Others’ Emanations (Paranirmitavashavartin) 
5. Enjoying Emanation (Nirmanarati) 
4. Joyous Land (Tushita) 
3. Without Combat 
2. The Heaven of the Thirty-Three Gods Desire realm gods (Suras) 
(6) 
 
 
 
 
1. The Four Great Royal Lineages 
4. Unmoving 
3. Good Land  
2. Moonlight Demi gods (Asuras) (4) 
1. Having Light  
1. Eastern Continent +2 Subcontinent s  (Videha, Land of Tall Bodied) 
2. Southern Continent +2  Subcontinents (Jambudvipa, Rose Apple Land) 
3. Western Continent +2 Subcontinents  (Godaniya, Land of Using Oxen) Human Beings (12) 
 
 
 4. Northern Continent +2 Subcontinents (Uttarakuru, Unpleasant Sound)) 
1. Living in the depths of the ocean Animals (2) 
2. Living in the places  of gods and humans 
1. With external obstruct ions to food and drink 
2. With internal obstruct ions to food and drink Hungry ghosts (36) 
3. With obstructions within food and drink 
1. Reviving  
2. Black Line  
3. Crushing  
4. Crying  
5. Great Crying  
6. Hot  
7. Very Hot  Hot Hells 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Unrelenting Torment (Avici) 
1. Blistering  
2. Bursting Blisters  
3. Chattering Teeth  
4. Groaning (A-chu) 
5. Moaning (Kyi-hu) 
6. Splitting Like an Utpala  
7. Splitting Like a Lotus  Cold Hells 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 8. Splitting Like a Great Lotus  
1. Pit of Burning Embers 
2. Swamp of Decomposed Corpses 
3. - Razor-filled Plain  
    - Grove of Sword Leaves 
    - Forest of Shalmali Trees Neighboring Hells 
4. River Without a Ford Desire 
Realm 
(6) 
 
Hells (21) 
Occasional Hells  
 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim – Chart 4 
Three Refuges: Buddha, Dharma, Sangha 
 Sublime Continuum 
of the Great Vehicle 
(Uttaratantra ) Definitions Characteristics of the qualities 
BUDDHA Unproduced, 
spontaneously 
accomplishing, not 
realized by others’ conceptions, endowed with wisdom, compassion, 
and power; only a buddha 
has the two scopes. The ultimate object of refuge 
that has the eight qualities of 
“unproduced” and so forth.  Uncompounded , a buddha is free from gene ration and disintegration.  
Spontaneous , a buddha performs actions without effort. 
Not realized by means of terms and conception , the qualities of a 
buddha are so great that they are inexpressible and inconceivable.  
Knowledge , a buddha possesses the knowledge the perceives the 
conventional and ultimate truths.  
Mercy , a buddha possesses great compassion. 
Ability , a buddha has the ability to liberate sentient beings from suffering. 
The fulfillment of their own welfare .  
The fulfillment of others’ welfare . 
DHARMA Unimaginable, free from both, non-conceptual, 
pure, clear, antidote to 
the opposite, freedom from attachment and the 
means to attain it; being 
defined by the two truths 
it is the Dharma. A completely pure truth in the 
continuum of an arya being 
that possesses [at least] one of 
the eight qualities such as 
being “inconceivable” and so forth.  Unimaginable , the rare supreme Dharma cannot be reached by anyone by 
means of intellectual arguments that use the four points of comparison.  
Free from both , the rare supreme Dharma is free from karma and 
afflictions. 
Without conceptuality , the rare supreme Dharma is not superimposed by 
means of concepts and is without improper mental attention. 
The rare supreme Dharma is pure in the sense of not being mixed with the 
obscurations.  
Clear , the rare supreme Dharma knows both truths. 
Antidote , the rare supreme Dharma is the antidote to all the afflictions. 
Free from attachment,  this refers to true cessations. 
The means to attain it , this refers to true paths. 
The rare supreme Dharma is defined by  the last two of the four noble 
truths. 
SANGHA Due to purity, perceiving 
as it is, all that is, and the inner realization of all, the 
assembly of “irreversible 
sages” adorned with unsurpassable qualities.  An arya being who possesses 
[at least] one of the eight 
qualities of knowledge and 
freedom. As it is , this refers to the direct perception  of the ultimate truth by an arya. 
All that is , this refers to the perception of the conventional truth by an 
arya. 
Inner realization , the realization in the continuum of an arya who knows 
both the conventional and ultimate truths. 
Purity , freedom from the obscurations to knowledge. 
Knowledge , freedom from the affliction obscurations.  
Freedom , freedom from obscurations of the inferior.  
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 5  
1 Complete Enjoyment Body (Chapter 8, Topic 3) 
The 32 Signs of a Buddha’s Complete Enjoyment Bodyi
Definition of sign: an extremely positive quality depend ing upon an actual concentration which is its empowering condition, that 
signifies a tathagata as a holy being. ( Ocean of Sport ) 
Sign Causes practiced in previous lives 
1. PALMS OF HANDS AN D SOLES OF FEET ARE 
MARKED WITH THE SIGN OF WHEELS Seeing off and receiving the guru, offeri ng oneself to the guru as a servant, 
and so on  
2. FEET ARE AS LEVEL AS TORTOISE’S ABDOMEN Perfectly maintaining whichever of the three vows 
3. FINGERS OF HANDS AND TOES OF FEET ARE 
JOINED WITH WEBS Practicing the four means of gathering disciples such as generosity, speaking 
pleasantly, and so forth 
4. BOTH HANDS AND FEET ARE SMOOTH AND TENDER Offering abundant, fine food and drink to others  
5. SEVEN PARTS OF THE BODY ARE ELEVAT ED Offering an abundance of food th at can be licked (e.g. yogurt, honey) 
6. FINGERS AND TOES ARE LONG Freeing others from bondage and rescuing them from being killed 
7. HEELS ARE BROAD Protecting the lives of  others and benefiting their livelihood 
8. BODY IS LARGE AND STRAIGHT Completely abandoning killing 
9. KNEES AND ANKLES ARE NOT PROM INENT Correctly adopting virtuous dharmas such as generosity  
10. SEPARATE BODY HAIRS ARCH UPWARDS Increa sing the adoption of virtues by others 
11. CALVES ARE ROUNDED AND WELL-DEVELOPED LIKE AN ANTELOPE’S Being skilled in the knowledge of healing, science, arts, and so forth and teaching them to others 
12. ARMS ARE LONG AND BEAUTIFUL Not rejecting be ggars but rather responding with generosity 
13. SEXUAL ORGAN IS MODESTLY RETRACTED INSIDE Safeguarding secret words without divulging them to others 
14. SKIN IS PURE, CLEAR, AND GOLDEN-HUED Offering fine cushions, mattresses, and so forth to others 
15. SKIN IS DELICATE AND SMOOTH Offering fine ho uses, mansions, palaces and so forth to others 
16. HAIRS GROW SEPARATELY AND CURL  CLOCKWISE Abandoning multiple activities or distractions from Dharma practice  
17. FACE (AT THE FOREHEAD) IS ADORNED WITH A HAIR TREASURE Respecting and revering abbots, achary as, gurus, one’s parents and all those 
in a superior position 
18. UPPER BODY IS LIKE A LION’S Not slightin g others with haughty or denigrating words 
19. SHOULDER POINTS ARE ROUNDED Training in accord ance with the good and sound advice of others 
20. CHEST IS WELL DEVELOPED Providing medi cine, doctors, and so forth to others 
21. HAS KNOWLEDGE AND APPEARANCE OF ONLY GOOD TASTES Serving and helping sick beings 
22. BODY IS SYMMETRICAL LIKE A BANYAN TREE Constructing grov es, parks, gardens, shelters, and so forth for others’ use 
23. HEAD HAS CROWN PROTRUSION ( USHNISHA) Providing temples, monks’ quarters, and so forth 
24. TONGUE IS BEAUTIFUL AND LONG Speaking soft, plea sant, compassionate words to  others for three countless 
eons 
25. VOICE IS PLEASING AND MELODIOUS Giving Dharma to a ll sentient beings of the mundane realms with one speech 
that is understood by all in their own respective languages  
26. CHEEKS ARE ROUND AND FULL LIKE A LION’S Abandoning idle gossip 
27. TEETH ARE VERY WHITE Respecting and prai sing all beings and not denigrating them  
28. TEETH ARE EVEN Abandoning  the five wrong livelihoods 
29. TEETH ARE WELL SET Speaking only tr uthful words for three countless eons 
30. TEETH ARE COMPLETE BEING 40 IN NUMBER Abandoning divisive speech for three countless eons 
31. EYES ARE SAPPHIRE COLORED AND CLEAR Viewing all sentient beings equally and without bias as if one’s only child  
32. EYELASHES ARE LIKE A MAGNIFICENT CO W’S  Treating others without anger, attachment, ignorance, and so forth 
 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 5  
2 Complete Enjoyment Body (Chapter 8, Topic 3) 
The 80 Marks of a Buddha’s Complete Enjoyment Body 
Definition of mark: an extremely positive quality dependin g upon an actual concentration which is its empowering condition, enabling 
other trainees to comprehend the excellent qu alities in the continuum of a tathagata. ( Ocean of Sport ) 
Mark Inner qualities that are signified 
1. NAILS ARE COPPER COLORED Having perfect freedom from desirous attachment to compounded phenomena  
2. NAILS ARE GLOSSY Possessing a perfect supe rior intention to benefit sentient beings 
3. NAILS ARE RAISED Being born into an excellent family or superior lineage, such as that of a 
universal king 
4. FINGERS ARE ROUNDED Having perfect manner of conduct, free of misdeeds and negativities 
5. FINGERS ARE WELL-DEVELOPED Having completed the collections of roots of virtue 
6. FINGERS ARE TAPERED Having gradually perfected the types of realizations of the three vehicles 
7. VEINS ARE NOT VISIBLE Having avoided the ten non-virtues and wrong livelihood 
8. VEINS ARE NOT KNOTTED Having freedom from the knots of afflictions 
9. ANKLES DO NOT PROTRUDE Having kn owledge of extremely hidden phenomena 
10. LEGS ARE EVEN IN LENGTH Liberating sentient beings from samsara and trav ersing difficult places 
11. STRIDE IS LIKE A LION’S Having perfect skill in outshining human beings  
12. STRIDE IS LIKE AN ELEPHANT’S Having perfect  skill in outshining ferocious nagas and so forth 
13. STRIDE IS LIKE A SWAN’S Having perfect skill in traveling through space like a bird 
14. STRIDE IS LIKE A SUPREME LEADER’S  Having perfect skill in leading sent ient beings to their destination 
15. GAIT IS TO THE RIGHT Having walked in a ccordance with the path of circumambulation 
16. GAIT IS  PLEASING Having perfect skill in elegance and beautifying 
17. GAIT IS UPRIGHT  Having completely abandoned crooked minds 
18. BODY IS WELL-BUILT AND ATTR ACTIVE Having perfectly proclaimed the qualities of others 
19. COMPLEXION IS CLEAN AND PURE, AS THOUGH 
CLEANSED Not having tainted the three doors of body, speech and mind by negativities 
20. BODY IS WELL PROPORTIONED Having taught Dharma in accordance with the minds of trainees 
21. BODY IS CLEAN Possessing pure behavior of body, speech and mind 
22. BODY IS SOFT AND SMOOTH Perfect ly possessing a compassionate mind 
23. BODY IS PURE  Having a mind completely purified of all stains 
24. SIGNS ARE COMPLETE Having completed the su bduing Dharmas that destroy the afflictions and 
conceptual elaborations 
25. BODY IS LARGE AND BEAUTIFUL, WITH LIMBS THAT ARE PERFECTLY PROPORTIONED Having praised the good qualities of ot hers as vast, extensive and beautiful 
26. STEPS ARE EVENLY SPACED Possessing even -mindedness towards all sentient beings  
27. TWO EYES ARE CLEAR Having ta ught the extremely pure Dharma 
28. APPEARANCE IS YOUTHFUL Having taught the Dh arma with examples that are easy to understand 
29. BODY IS NOT WEAK Having a mind that is not discouraged from under taking difficult tasks 
30. BODY IS WELL-DEVELOPED Possessing roots of vi rtue that are superior to the entire world 
31. BODY IS VERY FIRM Having exhausted the karma to take rebirth in cyclic existence 
32. LIMBS ARE APPROPRIATELY DISTINCT  Having given clear and distinct  teachings on dependent-arising 
33. VISION IS UNOBSCURED AND CLEAR Having taught the clear and perfect meanings of the words for accomplishing 
high status and definite goodness  
34. WAIST IS ROUND Having made disciples keep perfect morality 
35. WAIST IS MODERATELY SIZED Not being tainted by the faults of cyclic existence 
36. WAIST IS NOT TOO LONG Having destroyed the inflatedness of pride 
37. BELLY IS FLAT Having taught the inexhaustible Dharma 
38. NAVEL IS DEEP Having realized the profound Dharma 
39. NAVEL CURLS TO THE RIGHT Having caused disciples to realize teachi ngs in accordance with their own 
mindset and inclination 
40. BEHAVIOR IS PERFECT Having caused one’s retinue  to behave beautifully in body, speech and mind 
41. BEHAVIOR IS PURE Having a mind that is pure, without contamination 
42. BODY IS FREE FROM MOLES AND DARK SPOTS Being free from givi ng teachings that are unsuitabl e or are given at the wrong 
times 
43. HANDS ARE SOFT LIKE COTTON Having given teachings which deeply  move the body, speech and mind 
44. HANDS HAVE LINES THAT ARE CLEAR Having attained the status of a great virtuous being, because of having 
practiced equanimity 
45. HANDS HAVE LINES THAT ARE DEEP Abiding in the culminated realization of the holy Dharma 
46. HANDS HAVE LINES THAT ARE LONG Having constantly given pure, clear teachi ngs that benefit both temporally and 
ultimately 
47. FACE IS NOT TOO LONG Having taught many pr ecepts in accordance with the disciples’ levels 
48. LIPS ARE AS RED AS THE BIMBA FRUIT Having realized the worlds and the beings therein to be like reflections  
49. TONGUE IS SUPPLE Having subdued disciples with soft, gentle words 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 5  
3 Mark Inner qualities that are signified 
50. TONGUE IS SLENDER Having taught disciples  with limitless forms of correct reasonings 
51. TONGUE IS RED Having taught the Dharma that  overcomes the afflictions and is difficult to 
fathom by the immature 
52. VOICE IS THUNDEROUS Not possessing any fear, doubt and so forth 
53. VOICE IS PLEASANT, GENTLE AND SMOOTH Having spok en pleasant words to the ears of one’s trainees 
54. CANINES ARE ROUND Having exhaustively eradicat ed the nine thorough entanglements that bind 
one to cyclic existence 
55. CANINES ARE SHARP Having subdu ed beings who possess strong a fflictions and are difficult to 
subdue 
56. CANINES ARE WHITE Having destroyed the aff lictions with the subduing pure, white Dharma 
57. CANINES ARE EVEN Having abided in a stat e that realizes samsara and nirvana as equal 
58. CANINES ARE TAPERED Having led disciples progressively and perfectly through the realizations of the 
three vehicles 
59. NOSE IS PROMINENT Having abided in the stat e of supreme wisdom realizing emptiness endowed 
with method 
60. NOSE IS CLEAN Having had disci ples with perfect sincere trust 
61. EYES ARE WIDE Having given co untless extensive Mahayana teachings 
62. EYELASHES ARE THICK Having liberated countle ss beings from the bondage of cyclic existence 
63. EYES ARE WELL DEFINED, LIKE A LOTUS PETAL Having satisfie d even all the youthful beings  who are difficult to please, 
causing them to offer praise 
64. EYEBROWS ARE LONG Having constantly watc hed the future situation of sentient beings 
65. EYEBROWS ARE SOFT Being skilled in subduing trainees with soft gentle Dharma, not Dharma that is 
harsh, such as the five fires and so forth 
66. EYEBROWS ARE LUSTROUS Having made on e’s mental continuum moist with virtues 
67. EYEBROWS HAVE HAIRS OF EVEN LENGTH Always seeing all the faults of the afflictions 
68. ARMS ARE LONG AND WELL DEVELOPED Having turned away fro m the causes of cyclic existence and lower rebirths, i.e. 
contaminated actions and afflictions 
69. EARS ARE EQUAL IN SIZE Having become victorious in battle with the afflictions, such as attachment, 
which are difficult to overcome 
70. FACULTY OF HEARING IS  UNIMPAIRED Having placed se ntient beings in a state of  non-degenerating happiness 
  
71. FOREHEAD IS WELL DEFINED Possessing a mind that cannot be changed by the si xty-two bad views, views 
holding to an extreme, and so forth  
72. FOREHEAD IS BROAD Having defeat ed all exponents of false doctrines 
73. HEAD IS WELL FORMED Having thoroughly comp leted the supreme prayer to become a buddha for 
others’ purpose 
74. HAIR IS AS BLACK AS A BEE Having overcoming all craving for the delight of the five sensory objects 
75. HAIR IS THICK Having completely abandoned all latencies that are to be abandoned by the 
path of seeing and the path of meditation 
76. HAIR IS SMOOTH Having understood the doctrine with a gentle mind, free from non-
conscientiousness and roughness grasping at extremes 
77. HAIR IS UNTANGLED Possessing a mind that is undisturbed by attachment and so forth 
78. HAIR IS NOT ROUGH Having comp letely abandoned using harsh words 
79. HAIR IS FRAGRANT Having scattered flowers of  the branches that will become the causes of 
enlightenment in front of the Three Jewels 
80. HANDS AND FEET ADORNED WITH THE 
ENDLESS KNOT AND THE AUSPICIOUS SIGNS Possessing a body that is beautiful in all ways 
 
                                                           
i Masters Program: Ornament  Review Class - October 1999 
 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 6 
1 21 Sets of Exalted Wisdom 
Chapter 8, Wisdom truth bodyi
 
  
1. 37 Harmonies with enlightenment  
 4 Close placements of mindfulness ; on: 
1. bodies, 2. feelings, 3. minds, 4. [other] phenomena 
4 Thorough abandonings ; which is:  
5. the non-generation of non-virtues not yet generated, 
6. the abandoning of (the no n-virtues already) generated, 
7. the generation of virtues not yet generated, and 
8. the increasing (of virtues already) generated. 
4 legs of magical manifestation ; of: 
9. aspiration, 10. effort, 11. intention, 12. analysis 
5 powers 
13. faith, 14. effort, 15. mindfulness, 16. meditative stabilization, 17. wisdom  
5 forces 
18. faith, 19. effort, 20. mindfulness, 21. meditative stabilization, 22. wisdom  
7 branches of enlightenment 
23. correct mindfulness, 24. correct di scrimination of phenomena, 25. correct 
effort, 26. correct joy, 27. correct  pliancy, 28. correct meditative 
stabilization, 29. correct equanimity 
8-fold path of superiors 
30. correct view, 31. correct realization,  32. correct speech, 33. correct aims 
of actions, 34. correct livelihood, 35. co rrect effort, 36. correct mindfulness, 
37. correct meditative stabilization 
2. Four immeasurables  1. immeasurable love, 2. immeasurable compassion, 3. immeasurable joy, 4. 
immeasurable equanimity 
3. Eight complete liberations  1. the liberation of the embodied looking at a form,  
2. the liberation of the formless looking at a form, 
3. the liberation of the beautiful which eliminates obstacles 
4-7. four formless absorptions being paths that abide in happiness in this life 
8. liberation of cessation 
4. Nine serial absorptions 1-4. 4 absorptions of concentrations in the continuums of superiors,  
5-8. 4 formless absorptions,  
9. absorption of cessation 
5. Ten spheres of totality 1. earth, 2. water, 3. fire, 4. wind, 5. blue, 6. yellow, 7. red, 8. white, 9. 
space, 10. consciousness 
6. Eight spheres of overpowering 4 overpowerings of shape 
1.  having form, viewing small forms; 2. having form, viewing large forms;  
3. without form, viewing small forms; 4. without form, viewing large forms 
4 overpowerings of color 
5. blue, 6. yellow, 7. red, 8. white 
7. Meditative stabilization without 
affliction (meditative stabilization that does not cause afflictions in others)  
8. Exalted knower of aims of wishes  
9. Six clairvoyances  Clairvoyance of: 
1. magical emanations, 2. divine ear, 3. knowing others’ minds, 4. 
remembering former lives, 5. divine eye, 6. extinction of contaminations 
10. Four individual correct 
knowledges Individual correct knowledge of:  
1. doctrines, 2. meanings, 3. definitive words, 4. self-assurance 
11. Four complete purities Attainment of mastery over:  
1. purity of body - discarding and taking a body (support);  
2. purity of object - emanating that which does not exist and transforming 
that which exists (observed object),  
3. purity of mind - entering countless meditative stabilizations in each 
moment (mind),  
4. purity of knowledge - immeasurable  doors of retention (exalted wisdom) 
 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 6 
2 21 Sets of Exalted Wisdom   
 
12. Ten controls Control over: 
1. life span, 2. mind, 3. articles, 4. actions, 5. rebirth, 6. aspiration, 7. 
wishes, 8. magical manifestations, 9. exalted wisdom, 10. dharma 
13. Ten powers The power of exalted knowledge of: 
1. of sources and non-sources, 2. of the fruition of actions, 3. of the varieties 
of dispositions, 4. of the varieties of in terests, 5. of who are of superior and 
inferior faculties, 6. of paths that proceed everywhere, 7. of the thoroughly 
afflicted and the completely pure, 8.  mindful of former states, 9. of 
transmigration and rebirth, 10. the extinction of contaminations 
14. Four fearlessnesses Fearlessness with respect to the assertion: 
1. that (oneself has) abandoned ones’ own objects (of abandonment), 
2. that oneself has realizations, 
3. of (what are) other’s objects to be abandoned, 
4. of (what are) antidotes 
15. Three behaviors without 
concealment Behavior of:  
1. body, 2. speech, and 3. mind 
16. Threefold close placements of 
mindfulness Equanimity when teaching the Dharma, to: 
1. those desiring to listen, 2. not desiring to listen, 3. at times both 
17. Without negligence (not forgetting the welfare of sentient beings) 
18. Latencies perfectly destroyed (exhaustively abandoned the latencies of knowledge obstructions and 
afflictive obstructions) 
19. Great compassion for beings (possesses the great compassion that is the thought of providing benefit and 
happiness to all sentient beings) 
20.  Eighteen unshared qualities of a 
Buddha 6 unshared behaviors :  
1. unmistaken bodily behavior, 2. without senseless chatter, 3. without 
decrease in mindfulness, 4. without non-equipoise of mind, 5. without 
discrimination of difference, 6. without the indifference of not investigating 
individually 
6 unshared realizations :  
7. non-decrease in aspiration, 8. non-decrease in effort, 9. non-decrease in 
mindfulness, 10. non-decrease in meditative stabilization, 11. non-decrease in 
wisdom, 12. non-degeneration of liberation 
3 unshared enlightened activities :  
13. physical enlightened activities are preceded by exalted wisdom and 
followed by exalted wisdom, 14. verbal enlightened activities are preceded by 
exalted wisdom and followed by exalted wisdom, 15. mental enlightened 
activities are preceded by exalted wisdom and followed by exalted wisdom 
3 unshared exalted wisdoms :  
16. unimpeded unobstructed exalted wisdom regarding the past, 
17. unimpeded unobstructed exalted wisdom regarding the future, and 
18. unimpeded unobstructed exalted wisdom regarding the present. 
21. Three exalted knowers 1. Exalted knower of all aspects 
2. Knower of paths 
3. Knower of bases 
 
                                                           
i Masters Program: Ornament  Review Class - Oct. 1999 
 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 7 
 
27 Enlightened Activities of a Buddha (Chapter 8) 
According to Arya Vimuktisena1
Enlightened activities of the exalted wisdom truth body:  pure quality arising from the empowering 
condition of an exalted wisdom truth body which is its cause. (Seventy Topics)  
Setting on the path  
 Setting on the path of accumulation  
(1) • Setting in the fulfillment of intention 
(2) • Setting in the application which matures others’ continua 
(3) • Setting in the view which realizes the four truths 
 Setting on the path of preparation  
(4) • Setting in the pure intention 
 • Setting in the application which matures one’s own continuum 
(5)  ♦ Setting in the actual 
(6)  ♦ Setting in the activities of the two welfares 
(7) • Setting in the pure view 
(8) Setting on the path of seeing  
 Setting on the path of meditation  
(9) • Setting on the two: the ‘stainless’ (second ground) and so forth (third ground) 
(10) • Setting on three: the fourth ground and so forth (fifth and sixth grounds) 
(11) • Setting on the seventh ground 
 • Setting on the eighth ground 
(12)  ♦ Setting in the knower of paths knowing the three paths 
(13)  ♦ Setting in the pacification of the conception of true existence 
(14)  ♦ Setting in attainment of the imputed rare supreme Buddha 
(15)  ♦ Setting in the application of a pure realm 
 • Setting on the ninth ground 
(16)  ♦ Setting oneself in the certainty of buddhahood 
(17)  ♦ Setting in the maturing of others 
 • Setting on the tenth ground 
(18)  ♦ Setting in “devoting oneself to the spiritual friend” included in the tenth ground 
  ♦ Setting in increasing higher realizations 
(19)   ⇒ Setting in the attainment of the branches of enlightenment 
(20)   ⇒ Setting in not wasting the results of actions 
(21)   ⇒ Setting in knowing the truths 
(22)   ⇒ Setting in the extinction of distortions 
(23)   ⇒ Setting in the baseless 
(24)   ⇒ Setting in the completion of complete purity 
(25)   ⇒ Setting in the completion of the collections 
(26)   ⇒ Setting in the realization of existence and peace as equal 
Setting on the result of the path  
(27) • Setting in non-abiding nirvana 
 
 
                                                           
1 Masters Program: Ornament  Review Class - December 1999 
 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 7 
 
27 Enlightened Activities of a Buddha (Chapter 8) 
According to Acharya Haribhadra 
 
Setting on the path  
 Setting on the path of accumulation  
(1) • Setting in the striving for liberation: the intention of middling beings 
(2) • Setting in the four means of assembly 
(3) • Setting in the knowledge of the four truths 
(4) • Setting in the intention of other’s welfare 
(5) • Setting in the activities 
(6) • Setting in the basis of accomplishing the two welfares 
(7) Setting on the path of preparation  
(8) Setting on the path of seeing  
 Setting on the path of meditation  
(9) • Setting on the second through fifth grounds 
(10) • Setting on the sixth ground 
(11) • Setting on the seventh ground 
 • Setting on the eighth ground 
(12)  ♦ Setting in the special activities 
(13)  ♦ Setting in the extinction of the manifest conception of true existence 
(14) • Setting on the ninth ground 
 • Setting on the tenth ground 
(15)  ♦ Setting on the just about to be attained tenth ground 
  ♦ Setting in that impeded by one rebirth 
(16)   ⇒ Setting in the certainty of buddha in the next rebirth 
(17)   ⇒ Setting in the spontaneous welfare of others 
(18)   ⇒ Setting in the completion of the remaining buddha qualities 
  ♦ Setting in the final existence 
   ⇒ Setting in the distinctive abilities 
(19)    - Setting in the ability of inducing enlightenment 
(20)    - Setting in the ability of not wasting actions 
   ⇒ Setting in the distinctive realizations 
(21)    - Setting in the realization of the varieties (conventional) 
(22)    - Setting in the realization of the modes (ultimate) 
   ⇒ Setting in the distinctive abandonments 
(23)    - Setting in the extinction of distortions 
(24)    - Setting in the extinction of their bases 
   ⇒ Setting in the distinctive collections, the cause of purity  
(25)    - Setting in the causal collection of the naturally pure truth body 
(26)    - Setting in the causal collection of freedom from adventitious 
stains 
Setting on the result of the path  
(27) Setting in non-abiding nirvana on the tathagata ground 
 
 
ILTK Basic Program                                           Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                          Karma Chart 1 
 
 1of 2  The Consequences of the Ten Non-Virtuous Actions 
 A complete action brings about three types of results: 
 1 A fruitional result (the fully ripened effect)  2 A result similar to the cause (the effect in conformity  with the cause):   A habit that corresponds to the cause 
       An experience that corresponds to the cause 
 3 An environmental result (the conditioning effect)  In the case of non-virtuous actions the fruitional result is a rebirth in one of the three lower realms, the result similar to the cause as a habit is a 
natural inclination to perform the same type  of action again, whereas the result simi lar to the cause as an experience and the environmental 
result are as follows: 
 
Action Result similar to the cause  
as an experience Environmental result 
Killing When one is again reborn in the 
human realm, one will experience a short life and many illnesses. One will have many problems and lack success in one’s activities. One will be reborn in a violent place with many problems such as wars; the environment and the things that surround one will be ho stile, dangerous, and uncomfortable. Food, 
drink, medicine, and other necessities will be difficult to find and once found they will have little beneficial effect in sustaining the body. Food will be difficult to digest and will 
induce illnesses.  
Stealing One will lack wealth and resources. What one earns will be stolen, borrowed, or lost.  One will be reborn in barren places, where cr ops and fruit don’t grow or where they are 
destroyed, and where all one’s endeavors fail.  
Sexual misconduct Inability to sustain a relationship. One will quickly be separated from one’s partners, friends, family, and workers. One will experience loneliness.  One will live in a dirty place that causes dise ases, where there is urine, excrement, filth, 
unpleasant odors, and misery.  
Lying Others won’t believe what one says whether or not one speaks the truth, people won’t listen to one’s advice.  One will live among cheaters and thieves where one finds no one to rely on. One’s 
endeavors will bear fruit and there will be di sharmony among workers. One will be fearful 
and there will be many causes for fear.  
ILTK Basic Program                                           Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                          Karma Chart 1 
 
 2 of 2  Action Result similar to the cause  
as an experience Environmental result 
 Slander One will be lonely and have few 
friends, retinue, or workers. One will have difficulties in establishing harmonious relationships.  One will live in a barren, inhospitable plac e with uneven areas that are difficult to 
traverse, where communication is difficult, and where there are few means of transportation so that one must carr y heavy loads for long distances.  
Harsh Words  Others will be offensive and speak negatively about one. Even if one tries to be kind to others, one will be interpreted negatively.  One will live in unappealing environments, full  of broken bricks, sharp rocks, and thorns 
that cut one’s flesh when one moves. There are no waterfalls, lakes, or ponds, the place is 
rough, drab, arid, salty, barren, and vile, an d inhabited by dangerous animals. One will 
have many causes to be afraid.  
Idle Talk Others will not take one’s words seriously and will not listen to what we say. One will be considered ridiculous. 
 One will live in a place where trees do not bear  fruit, or bear their fruit at the wrong time 
and do not bear fruit at the proper time. Rain  will not come at the proper time and one’s 
activities will not successful. There will not be  comforts such as parks, groves, and lakes 
and one will have many causes to be fearful.  
Covetousness One will not realize one’s aims and will not have what one desires.  One will be reborn in a place where the harves ts are poor and material resources are easily 
destroyed or lost. One’s physical strength and beauty will easily degenerate.  
Malice One will have unreasoned fear and will easily panic. One will be reborn in a place devastated by war and terrifying epidemics, where there are continuous conflicts and disput es, as well as tigers, lions, poisonous snakes, scorpions, 
harmful spirits, and thieves.  
Wrong view One will be stubbornly ignorant and will have difficulties obtaining realizations and developing knowledge. One will experience great confusion.  One will be reborn in a place where, for example, the water will dry up when one goes to a well, when one plants seed the crops will fail, where the unclean appears to be utterly 
clean and suffering appears to be happiness, where one will not have a house, protection, 
or refuge, where nothing precious exists, where there is no artwork, scriptures, or spiritual 
guides  
   
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 2 
 
 Sources: Middle Lam Rim & Great Lam Rim and Commen taries by Pabongka Rinpoche & Geshe Tashi Tsering 1 of 4  How the Ten Non-Virtuous Path s of Actions are Completed 
 
 BASIS ATTITUDE PERFORMANCE COMPLETION KILLING A sentient being other than oneself. Discrimination 
1. Discriminating a sentient being to be a 
sentient being (unmistaken). 2. Discriminating a sentient being not to be a 
sentient being (mistaken). 
3. Discriminating what is not a sentient being not to be a sentient being 
(unmistaken). 
4. Discriminating what is not a sentient 
being to be a sentient being (mistaken). 
¾ Discrimination of the basis needs to be 
unmistaken and the motivation can be either 
specific or general. 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to kill. Performer 
It is the same whether you do it yourself or 
cause someone else to do it. 
Entity of the performance 
To do it by means of a weapon, poison, 
mantra, etc. ¾ The death of the other being, 
before your own death in dependence upon the condition of your performance. 
 
(Brought to completion by hatred.) STEALING Anything that someone else owns. Discrimination 
To have an unmistaken discrimination of 
something as belonging to someone else. 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to take something from another 
person without it having been given. 
 
  
 Performer 
It is the same whether you do it yourself or 
cause someone else to do it. 
Entity of the performance 
1. It is the same whether you take 
something by force or by stealth. 
2. Also applies to being deceitful with 
respect to a debt or trust as well as any 
fraudulent means of stealing. 
3. And whether done for your own or another’s purpose. ¾ The arisal of the thought that one 
has obtained it, or the arisal of that 
thought in someone you made steal. 
 (Brought to completion by 
attachment.) 
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 2 
 
 Sources: Middle Lam Rim & Great Lam Rim and Commen taries by Pabongka Rinpoche & Geshe Tashi Tsering 2 of 4   
 BASIS ATTITUDE PERFORMANCE COMPLETION SEXUAL MISCONDUCT Inappropriate persons  (5) 
1. Your mother & close female relatives,  
2. women under the care of their mothers,  
3. all men, 4. eunuchs, & 5. ordained 
women. 
Inappropriate body parts 
All those other than the vagina. 
Inappropriate places 
In the vicinity of gurus, stupas, etc. 
Inappropriate times 
Pregnancy, one-day vows, etc. Discrimination 
1. Unmistaken discrimination is necessary 
(Compendium ). 
2. Discrimination can be either unmistaken 
or mistaken for a defeat of impure conduct 
(Vinaya). 
3. Excludes discriminating someone else’s 
wife as your own; discriminating another’s wife as someone else’s wife may or may not 
be sexual misconduct ( Commentary on the 
Treasury ) 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish for intercourse. Consists in endeavoring for this purpose. ¾ The union of the two body parts. 
 
(Brought to completion by attachment.) LYING Basis of expression  (8) 
That which one has: 1. seen, 2. heard, 3. discerned by the nose, tongue, or body, 4. become fully aware of (cognised); 
as well as their four opposites (e.g., the not 
seen and so forth). 
Object that comprehends 
The other person who understands the 
meaning. Discrimination 
Making something that has been seen, into 
something that has not been seen, etc. 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to say something through changing 
the discrimination. The actual performance  (3) 
Indicating something by: 1. saying it, 
2. intentionally not saying anything, and 3. through body language. 
Clearing up doubts 
¾ It is the same whether you say it for 
your own or someone else’s purposes. 
¾ It can also be done by making others do 
it (Treatise on the Grounds & Treasury ). 
¾ You yourself must speak (Vinaya). The actual completion  
The other person understands what 
has been said. 
Clearing up doubts 
If it is not understood, it becomes 
merely idle talk ( Treasury ). 
 
(Brought to completion by any of 
the mental poisons.) DIVISIVE SPEECH Sentient beings who are in agreement or 
disagreement with each other. Discrimination 
Should be unmistaken (knowing what will 
divide them or keep them apart). 
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
1. The wish to divide those who are in 
agreement; or 
2. for those in disagreement not to be reconciled. ¾ The expression of subject matter that 
may be either pleasant or unpleasant and may be either true or false. ¾ It can also be done by making others do 
it (Treatise on the Grounds & Treasury ). 
¾ You yourself must speak (Vinaya). The actual completion  
The other person understands what 
has been said. 
Clearing up doubts 
If it is not understood, it becomes 
merely idle talk ( Treasury ). 
 
(Brought to completion by any of 
the mental poisons.) 
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 2 
 
 Sources: Middle Lam Rim & Great Lam Rim and Commen taries by Pabongka Rinpoche & Geshe Tashi Tsering 3 of 4   
 BASIS ATTITUDE PERFORMANCE COMPLETION HARSH WORDS A sentient being who has become the basis 
for the arisal of a hostile attitude. Discrimination 
Should be unmistaken (knowing what will 
harm the being). 
Mental Affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to speak with harsh speech. ¾ Saying whatever unp leasant truths or 
untruths about a person’s: 
     1) lineage,       2) body, 
     3) morality, 
     4) behavior. 
¾ It can also be done by making others do 
it (Treatise on the Grounds & Treasury ). 
¾ You yourself must speak (Vinaya). The actual completion  
The other person understands what 
has been said. 
Clearing up doubts 
If it is not understood, it becomes 
merely idle talk ( Treasury ). 
 
(Brought to completion by hatred.) IDLE TALK A meaningless topic. Discrimination 
¾ Discriminating the topic that one wishes 
do express. 
¾ There is no need for someone to 
understand. 
Mental Affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to talk disconnectedly and 
randomly. ¾ Uttering idle talk. 
¾ It can also be done by making others do 
it (Treasury ). 
¾ You yourself must speak (Vinaya). 
   ¾ To finish uttering the idle talk. 
 (Brought to completion by any of the mental poisons.) COVETOUSNESS An object owned by someone else. Discrimination 
Discriminating that basis as that.  
Mental affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to make it one’s own. 
 
 
 
 Mentally making an effort to obtain the object. ¾ The thought “May that object 
become mine.” (When our thoughts 
become even stronger and we resolve to take some action that will 
enable us to acquire the object.) 
 (Brought to completion by 
attachment.) HARMFUL 
INTENT A sentient being who has become the basis 
for the arisal of a hostile attitude. Discrimination 
Should be unmistaken (knowing what will 
harm the being). 
Mental Affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to harm someone, etc., to see them 
harmed etc., for their resources to decline, etc. Application to this thought. ¾ The decision to carry out the 
harm that one contemplated. 
 
(Brought to completion by hatred.)
 
     1. Speaking of disputes, divisions, faultfinding; 
2. Speaking about news of nations, thieves, etc; 
3. Speaking of laughter, play, entertainment; 
4. Speaking like a drunkard or lunatic; 
5. Expressions of helplessness such as wailing; 
6. The talk of one who maintains a wrong livelihood.  
7. Reciting the texts of non-Buddhists while 
delighting in them;      
LRCM p224  
Attitudes required for completion  LRCMp224  
1. Grasping at one’s own things. 
2. Attached – wanting more things. 
3. Longing for others’ possessions. 4. Envy for others’ possessions. 
5. Not wanting to let go of this kind of mind. 
Attitudes Required for Completion    LRCM p225 
1. An attitude of hostility; 
2. An impatient attitude; 
3. A resentful attitude; 
4. An envious attitude thinking “how nice it 
would be if my enemies were harmed.”; 5. An attitude dominated by a lack of shame.  
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 2 
 
 Sources: Middle Lam Rim & Great Lam Rim and Commen taries by Pabongka Rinpoche & Geshe Tashi Tsering 4 of 4   BASIS ATTITUDE PERFORMANCE COMPLETION WRONG VIEWS An object that exists. Discrimination 
Discriminating the denial of an object that 
exists as true. 
Mental Affliction 
Any of the three mental poisons. 
Motivation 
The wish to deny the existence of an object 
that exists.  The actual performance 
Applying oneself to such a thought. 
Divisions 
1. Denying causes (“Excellent conduct and 
faulty conduct do not exist”) 
2. Denying results (“Fully ripened effects 
of the two do not exist.”) 
3. Denying activities 
   a) the mistaken denial of the activities of planting and retaining seeds (“There is no 
planting of a seed by the father and no 
retaining of a seed by the mother)    b) the mistaken denial of the activities of 
going and coming (“There is no coming 
from a former existence to this one and no 
going from this to a future one.”) 
   c) the mistaken denial of the activity of 
being born (“There is no intermediate state miraculously born sentient beings.”) 
4. Denying existent things (“Arhats and so 
forth do not exist.”) ¾ Certainty with respect to one’s 
denial. 
 
(Brought to completion by ignorance.) 
 
  
 
Characteristics Applying to all Ten Non-Virtuous Actions 
D Discrimination of the basis needs to be unmistaken and the motiva tion can be either specific or general (presented in the conte xt of Killing). 
D Five qualities that are required to make an action, word, or though t complete (presented in the context of Covetousness LRCM p2 24): 
1) Having a mind that is exceedingly attached to your own resources; 
2) Having a mind of attachment that  wants to accumulate resources; 
3) Having a mind of longing due to comprehending or experiencing the good things of others – their wealth and so forth; 
4) Having an envious mind, thinking that whatever is another’s should be your own; 
5) Having a mind that is overcome, due to covetousness, by shamelessness and an obliviousness about the determination to be free f rom the faults of covetousness. Attitudes required for completion    LRCM p226 
1. An attitude of confusion due to not 
knowing the objects of knowledge correctly; 
2. A violent attitude due to delighting in non-
virtue; 
3. An attitude that continuously operates in the wrong way because of pondering 
improper teachings; 
4. An attitude that is impaired because of a mistaken deni al that thinks that  things such as 
gifts, offerings, and right conduct do not 
exist; 
5. An attitude that is dominated by shamelessness and obliviousness about the 
determination to be free of its fau lts.
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 3 
 
“These are methods, which if practised skilfully, will enable us  to collect extensive merit with little effort and to lessen th e number of non-virtues that we collect. Therefore we must learn them well.” Kyabje Pabongka Rinpoche 
 Distinctions of Weight/Gravity 
 
Weighty due to: Weighty due to: Karma that is heavy because of its: Strength in terms of: 
1. Intensive Action / Conditioning          c 
Acts motivated by the presence or absence of 
intense forms of the three mental poisons. 1. Attitude                                                c 
Acts motivated by intense forms of the three mental poisons.  1. Essential Nature                                  e 
Of the seven actions of body & speech, each preceding misdeed is heavie r than the ones following 
them. And of the three mental actions, the latter are 
heavier than the former.  1. Field / Recipient  
Acts directed towards the guru, Buddha, 
Dharma, Sangha, bodhisattvas & parents.  
2. Habituation                                          d 
Frequently doing or familiarity with a type of action.  2. Performance  
a) Taking pleasure in the activity; b)  Engaging in the activity yourself or causing others 
to engage in it, and praising it; 
c) Doing it after prolonged premeditation; 
d) Being constant and diligent; e) Performing preceding ac tivities like torture; 
f) First inducing your vict im to perform inappropriate 
actions; g) Taking advantage of another’s weakness, 
suffering, impoverishment, etc.
 2. Mental Component                              c 
When an act is carried out with a very intense mental 
affliction.  2. Support / Agent  
The strength of acts is greatly increased / 
decreased by: A – Skillful: Those who apply the four 
opponent powers; 
A – Unskillful: Deliberately fail to purify; B – Strength of keeping vows; 
C – Strength of breaking vows, but still 
receiving offerings intended for the sangha.  
3. Entity                                                      e 
Of the seven actions of body & speech, each 
preceding misdeed is weightier than the ones 
following them. And of the three mental actions, the 
latter are weightier than the former.  3. Absence of an Antidote  
a) Not taking precepts on a daily basis; 
b) Not performing virt uous activities, even only 
occasionally; 
c) Not even occasionally being ashamed, 
embarrassed, or having a predisposition towards 
contrition; d) Having reached neither a state free of worldly 
attachment or clear knowledge of the teaching.
 3. Preliminary Action  
e.g. Torturing someone before killing them.  3. Objects  
Superior to the offering of material objects: 
– Offering of Dharma to sentient beings. 
– Offering of realizations to the buddhas.  
4. Basis                                                    f 
Acts relating to the guru, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, 
etc. 
 
 4. Clinging to the Perverse  
Done in reliance on a wrong view – e.g. animal 
sacrifice.  4. Basis                                                    f 
Acts performed in relation to the guru, a Bodhisattva, 
the Sangha, our parents, etc.  
 
  
 4. Attitude / Mental Disposition  
– Attitude (e.g. focussing on superior or 
inferior goals, or for your own benefit or for others, etc.). 
– Intensity & Duration. 
– Anger towards monks/nuns is particularly strong and towards bodhisattvas is even 
stronger.  
5. Fixation on the discordant side           g 
This applies to someone who never performs 
virtuous acts.  5. Basis                                                    f 
Acts relating to the guru, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, your family, etc. Also killing a human, or killing a 
large animal as opposed to a small animal.
 5. Always Being Performed                    d 
e.g. Idle speech that is continually uttered.   
6. Elimination of the discordant side       h 
Having eliminated non-virtue, you become free from attachment and train only in virtuous actions.
  6. Absence of Any Antidote                    g 
This applies to someone who never performs virtuous acts.
  
Middle Lam-Rim (MLR) p79 & LRCM p230 LRCM p227 Pabongka 2 p254 MLR p79 & LRCM p231 &  
Pabongka 2 p260 
 
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 4 
 
 MIDDLE LAM RIM P82 &  GREAT LAM RIM P236 & PABONGKA 2 P256 1 of 2  Results of Non-Virtuous Karma 
 
  Completing Karma 
 Throwing/Projecting Karma Result Similar to the Cause Habitual Tendencies Environmental Results 
Killing Our life will be short and we will suffer from 
many illnesses. We will take pleasure in killing and delight in others killing. Food, drink, medicine, harvests, and the like will have little power to maintain life, and will cause illness. 
Stealing We will be devoid of property and what we have will be owned in common with others. We will steal and delight in the devious activities of others. We will live in a place where the harvest of crops and fruit will be poor; where frost, 
hail, floods, droughts, etc. occur often; and 
where the yield is small. 
Sexual 
Misconduct We will be unable to keep a wife, servants, or a following. We will commit sexual misconduct and delight in similar activities by others. We will live in misery and discomfort and in a place with putrid sw amps, mud, and other 
filth. 
Lying Others will not consider us to be truthful and there will be much slander and deceit. We will lie and delight in similar words by others. We will live where deceitful people abound and have many reasons to be afraid. Field work and work to do with boats will not 
succeed. 
Divisive Speech We will have few friends and will lose our retinue and servants. Our helpers will be disharmonious etc. We will utter divisive speech and delight in similar words by others. We will live where deceitful people abound and have many reasons to be afraid, and in places where the ground is bumpy and uneven, etc. 
Harsh Words Others will speak to us in an unpleasant manner. We will utter harsh words and delight in similar words by others. We will live where deceitful people abound and have many reasons to be afraid, in places full of logs, brambles, rocks, pebbles, 
dangerous animals, etc. 
Idle Talk  
Asanga’s Levels of Yogic Deeds : A great 
non-virtuous deed causes us to be born in the hells, a moderate on e as a hungry ghost, 
and a small one causes us to be born as an 
animal. 
  
 
 Sutra on the Ten Levels : A great non-
virtuous deed causes us to be born in the 
hells, a moderate one as an animal, and a 
small one causes us to be born as a hungry 
ghost. 
 
Our words will carry no authority and others 
will place no value on them and our 
confidence will be weak. We will engage in idle talk and delight in such talk by others. We will live where deceitful people abound and have many reasons to be afraid, and where the ground is uneven or filled with broken trees and thorny bushes, and without fruit. 
 
ILTK Basic Program                                          Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                         Karma Chart 4 
 
 MIDDLE LAM RIM P82 &  GREAT LAM RIM P236 & PABONGKA 2 P256 2 of 2   
 
  Completing Karma 
 Throwing/Projecting Karma Result Similar to the Cause Habitual Tendencies Environmental Results 
Covetousness We will not attain our goals and will have 
great attachment and no contentment. Desire will increase. We will live in a place where bountiful things 
are scarce, where war, disputes, robbers and contagious diseas es are widespread, 
where the sources of water and precious 
gems disappear, and where everything 
excellent deteriorates. 
Harmful Intent We will be easily frightened. We will seek the unbeneficial or not seek the beneficial. We will harm others, or they will harm us. Hatred will increase. We will live in a place where bountiful things 
are scarce, where wars and disputes, contagious diseases  and injuries, are 
widespread, and where the sources of water 
and precious gems disappear. 
Wrong Views Asanga’s Levels of Yogic Deeds : A great 
non-virtuous deed causes us to be born in 
the hells, a moderate on e as a hungry ghost, 
and a small one causes us to be born as an 
animal. 
  
 Sutra on the Ten Levels : A great non-
virtuous deed causes us to be born in the 
hells, a moderate one as an animal, and a 
small one causes us to be born as a hungry 
ghost. We will remain ignorant of the correct view 
and be deceitful. Ignorance will increase. We will live in a place where bountiful things 
are scarce, where war and contagious diseases are widespread, where the sources 
of water and precious gems disappear, 
where the best resources decline, where unclean things appear to  be pure and misery 
appears to be bliss. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
ILTK Basic Program       Middle Length Lam-Rim 
        K a r m a  C h a r t  5  
 
Reflecting on Karma and its Effects in Detail 
Middle Lam-Rim p84 & LRCM p243  
The Attributes of the Fruitions The Effects of the Fruitions The Causes of the Fruitions 
1. Excellent Life Span 
From a previous throwing/projecting karma, a long life span is 
attained and one is lives long. 1. Excellent Life Span 
You accumulate much virtuous  karma for a long time in 
terms of working for both your own and others’ welfare. 1. Excellent Life Span 
a) Not harming any being, b) Cu ltivating an attitude of non-
harming, 
c) Animal liberation, d) Providing others with food, e) Freeing people from prison, f) Giving medi cine to the sick, g) Nursing the 
sick. 
2. Excellent Color 
a) Having an excellent color in terms of the body’s good color and shape, b) Being pleasant to  look at because of having 
complete sensory powers and being of balanced proportions. 2. Excellent Color 
Merely by seeing you, disciples are pleased and gather around you. They then listen to your words and carry out your commands. 2. Excellent Color 
a) Practice of patience, b) Offeri ng light, c) Offering ornaments 
and clothing, d) Commissionin g and restoring images of a 
buddha’s body, speech, and mind. 
3. Excellent Lineage 
Having been born with a good lineage that is esteemed and famed in the world. 3. Excellent Lineage 
People carry out your co mmands without regard. 3. Excellent Lineage 
a) Overcoming pride and then making obeisance to gurus, etc. 
b) Respecting others as if  you were their servant. 
4. Excellent Power 
Having great resources, an abundance of close associates (such as relatives and frien ds), and many helpers. 4. Excellent Power 
Through giving, you gather beings and then ripen them. 4. Excellent Power 
a) Giving food, clothing, etc. whether requested or not, 
b) Giving to those who suffer, 
c) Giving to those who have good  qualities but no possessions. 
5. Trustworthy Words 
Words that are accepted because you are deemed suitable to trust and to not deceive others physically or verbally. 5. Trustworthy Words 
By practicing the four means of gathering disciples, you 
gather sentient beings and then ripen them. 5. Trustworthy Words 
Habituation to giving up the four non-virtues of speech. 
6. Renown as being Very Powerful 
Being honored by many beings because of your fame due to 
your confident generosity and possession of good qualities 
(such as diligence). 6. Renown as being Very Powerful 
Because you have helped and assisted others in all activities, they repay your kindness and listen immediately to your instructions. 6. Renown as being Very Powerful 
a) Making aspirational prayers to acquire good qualities, b) 
Making offerings to gurus, the Three Jewels, parents, solitary, 
realizer’s, hearers, and abbots. 
7. Being Male 
To have a male organ. 7. Being Male 
a) Capacity for skilled actions by way of aspiration and endeavor, b) A capacity for broad wisdom, c) The discrimination of objects of knowledge, d) Unafraid in assemblies, e) Will have no obstacles whether accompanying living beings, speaking to them, enjoying resources with them, or dwelling in isolation. 7. Being Male 
a) Delighting in the attributes of  a male, b) Lack of delight in 
female qualities and seeing their disadvantages, c) Stopping the yearning of those who want to be reborn with a woman’s body, d) Rescuing those who are about to  be castrated, e) Reciting the 
names of bodhisattvas, 
f) Avoiding speaking badly about holy beings. 
8. Having Strength 
Naturally experiencing little injury, no illness, and great 
enthusiasm arises from the conditions of this life. 8. Having Strength 
Because you do not get discour aged by whatever goals you 
or others may have, you obtain the power of discernment and then quickly develop the clairvoyances. 8. Having Strength 
a) Accomplishing what cannot be done by others, 
b) Assisting in what can be do ne with your collaboration, 
c) Giving food and drink, d) Refraining from beating others. 
If these eight causes are conjoined with three more ca uses, their fully ripened effe cts will be outstanding. 
Perfectly Pure Mind Pure Performance Pure Field 
Aspects Related to Oneself Aspects Related to Others Aspects Related to Oneself Aspects Related to Others 
1. Not hoping for the fruition of virtue to benefit oneself alone, but dedicating the merit to enlightenment; 
2. Intensity in accomplishing these causes. 1. Abandoning jealousy for better practitioners, 2. Abandoning competitiveness for peers,  3. Abandoning contempt for lesser practitioners, 4. And admiring them. Apply yourself to cultivating virtue: 
  1. For a long duration 
  2. With continuity 
  3. With intensity 1. Causing those who have not correctly adopted ethical discipline to do so, 
2. Praising those who have, 
3. Encouraging them to continue and never abandon ethical discipline.  Since this attitude and performance produce plenty of good fruit, they resemble a field. 
Basic Program: Middle Lam-Rim  – Chart 13 
 
How the Afflictions Arise 
 
 
Discrimination of “other” 
 Attachment 
 Anger 
 Pride Extreme View 
• of Permanence 
• of Annihilation  
Doubt  
regarding the existence of: 
• cause & effect 
• past & future lives 
• Three Jewels, etc. Wrong View  
denying: 
• cause & effect 
• past & future lives 
• Three Jewels, etc. View holding a bad 
view as supreme View holding bad 
ethics & modes of 
conduct as supreme Ignorance = 
The View of the Transitory 
Collection 
thinking “I” & “mine”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
          
  
FPMT Basic Program                        Middle Length Lam-Rim
           Calm Abiding Chart 1  
 
Masters Program Review, May 98  Source: J. Hopkins, Meditation on Emptiness Achieving Calm Abiding: the 5 faults and 8 applications 
 
5 Faults 8 Applications 
Pliancy 
Exertion 
Aspiration  
 
Laziness 
Faith 
Forgetting the advice Mindfulness 
(non-identification of) 
Laxity and excitement Introspection 
Non-application Application 
(Over-) Application Equanimity 
 
Achieving Calm Abiding: 
the 6 powers, 9 mental abidings   and 9 mental attentions 
 
Six Powers Nine Mental 
Abidings Four Mental Attentions  
Familiarity 9. Setting in equipoise Spontaneous engaging 
8.  Making one-pointed Uninterrupted engaging Effort 
7. Thoroughly Pacifying 
6. Pacifying  Introspection 
5. Disciplining 
4. Closely setting Mindfulness 
3. Resetting  
 
Interrupted engaging 
Thinking 2. Continuous setting 
Hearing 1. Setting the mind Forceful engaging 
 
F P M T  B a s i c  P r o g r a m                                   Middle Length Lam-Rim 
                      C a l m  A b i d i n g  C h a r t  2  
 [Table created] by Puntsog Wang-gyel the 30/3/1996 in order to purify his ow n forgetfulness.       FPMT Basic Program ILTK, 2005-2007 The Procedure for Calm Abiding 
 
Applied antidotes (8) faith aspiration effort plia ncy mindfulness introspection intention equanimity 
Faults (5) laziness forg etfulness laxity and 
excitemen t non-application [over] application 
 
Enumeration of the 
mental abidings 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Names of the mental 
abidings setting the 
mind  continuous 
setting  resetting closely setting discip lining pacifying thoroughly 
pacifying  making single-
pointed  setting in 
equipoise 
Experiences of the 
mental abidings many concep-
tions arise the 
conceptions 
ease off the 
conceptions are 
weakened 
when adverse 
conditions are 
encountered having 
gathered [the 
concep-tions ] 
inward from 
the vast, they 
are made subtle  the excellent 
qualities of 
meditative 
stabilization are 
enjoyed through 
knowing the 
disadvan-tages 
of distractions, 
they are 
stopped the afflictions, 
an attached 
mind and so 
forth, are 
abandoned 
with effort meditative 
stabilization is 
continuously 
achieved spontaneous 
engagement 
without effort 
Powers (6)  hearing thinking mindfuln ess introspection effort familiarity 
Mental attentions (4) forceful engagi ng interrupted engaging uninterrupted 
engaging  spontaneous 
engaging 
 
 
FPMT Basic Program                Middle Length Lam-Rim 
           C a l m  A b i d i n g  C h a r t  3  
         FPMT Basic Program ILTK, 2005-2007 Calm Abiding Retreat: the five faults and eight antidotes 
 
 
Laziness: bad activities and, 
Through strongly adhering to sleep and so forth,  A non-delight in virtuous actions. 
 
Forgetfulness: through remembering afflicted objects To forget the virtuous observed object.   Laxity: to be enveloped in darkness or, 
Although the factor of clarity is present, the factor of intensity  
Of the mode of apprehension lacks tightness.   Excitement: a scattered mind  Through observing the sign of attractiveness.  
[Over] application: the generation of effort. 
 
Non-application: the opposite to that.  Faith: a lucid mind wishing to definitely obtain  The excellent qualities of meditative stabilization.  Aspiration: to strive for  A thing that is desired.   Effort: to delight in virtue.  Pliancy: having purified the bad tendencies of body and mind, 
The body and mind are light and ready With regard to all virtuous practices.   Mindfulness: a lack of mental forgetfulness Regarding a thing that is familiar.   Introspection: to examine the situation of  The body and mind again and again.  Intention: that which moves and incites A main mind powerlessly toward an object.   Equanimity: to posit in equilibrium.  
  
Translated by Joan Nicell at the request of and wi th the help of the precious spiritual friend  
Geshe Jampa Gyatso for a Calm Abiding Retreat at Isti tuto Lama Tzong Khapa, Pomaia, Italy, December 2003 
Revised on the basis of Geshe-la’s commentary. 
 
May all sentient beings quickly subdue the a fflictions and gain happiness and peace of mind 