Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Questions.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:30.317275
================================================================================


LRCM V1 page 73: Bo-do-wa said: These five qualities -loving concern,
knowledge of reality, and the three trainings
What is the difference between knowledge of reality and the last of the
three trainings which is wisdom understanding emptiness?

The three trainings: training in ethics, training in concentration and
training in wisdom give rise to the first three qualities of a perfect
Mahayana guru:
   1. training in ethics  ( Discipline – The Mahayana teacher must have
      disciplined themselves through the practice of ethics.
   2.       training in concentration ( Serene - The Mahayana teacher must
      have pacified his own mental distraction through the practice of
      concentration; therefore making his mind serene
   3.       training in wisdom ( Thoroughly pacified indicates a quality
      that comes from the training in wisdom
 
Knowledge of reality is also translated as realization of suchness- the
wisdom perceiving emptiness. Realization of suchness (knowledge of reality)
is through the special training in wisdom.
Note that this realization of suchness is different from the third quality
- thoroughly pacified- which is only through the training in wisdom whereas
realization of suchness is through the special training in wisdom.
That is reason why Geshela keep on repeating the difference between these
two.
As in lesson 10:
There is a difference between the quality of being thoroughly pacified and
the quality of thorough knowledge of knowing reality.
The quality of being thoroughly pacified means having the realization of
the selflessness of persons.
The quality of thorough knowledge of knowing reality means having the
realization of the selflessness of phenomena.
 
Selflessness of persons and the selflessness of phenomena will be taught in
the next module Tenets; it is a challenging and very interesting module.
The difference between selflessness of persons and the selflessness of
phenomena is the subtlety in realizing emptiness.
Realizing the selflessness of phenomena is more subtle than selflessness of
persons.
Different schools such as Consequence Middles Way, Mind Only School, Sutra
School, Great Exposition School asserts selflessness of persons
differently.
Sutra School, Great Exposition School do not asserts selflessness of
phenomena.
Consequence Middles Way, Mind Only School assert selflessness of phenomena
differently!!!
 
It is quite complicated. That is why I say it is a challenging module. You
shouldn’t miss this Tenets module.
 
For simplicity, I extract the below from the Tenets transcript:
So how is the distinction made between a holder of Hinayana tenets and a
holder of Mahayana tenets? The distinction is made on the basis of whether
or not the person asserts the selflessness of phenomena. Thus, a holder of
Buddhist
tenets who accepts the selflessness of phenomena is a propounder of
Mahayana tenets, whereas a holder of Buddhist tenets who does not accept
the selflessness of phenomena is a propounder of Hinayana tenets.
 
Based on Consequence Middle Way school,
when you meditate on the emptiness of self, ‘I’, you are meditating on the
selflessness of persons
when you meditate on the emptiness of phenomena such a aggregates, form,
your body, you are meditating on the selflessness of phenomenon
 
Based on our discussion yesterday, you are right that Bodhisattvas should
have achieved direct realization of emptiness on the path of seeing and
above when they take reincarnation into cyclic existence as at this time,
they do not take rebirth under the influences of karma and delusions.
 
Below is extracted from Yangsi Rinpoche’s text: Practising the Path
page268:
 
Being averse to taking rebirth in cyclic existence means being averse to
taking rebirth under the control of karma and delusions. Ordinary beings
take rebirth in cyclic existence under the control of karma and delusions
and become ensnared in the cycle of 12 links and experience suffering.
However, bodhisattvas on the Path of Seeing and above do not take rebirth
under the influence of karma and delusions. Their reincarnation into cyclic
existence comes as the result of the power of prayer and compassion for
sentient beings. Therefore bodhisattvas do not cultivate aversion for
samsara, as they take rebirth into the worlds for the purpose of benefiting
others.
 

Hi Sharon

Here it talked about collections of teaching that deal with Sutra, Vinaya
and Abhidharma.
For example, the Sutra basket which are the collections of discourses given
by the Buddha.  Of the 84,000 teachings gave by the Buddha, he also gave
the teachings in the Vinaya and Abhidharma baskets. 

Basically these 3 baskets of teaching are related to the three higher
trainings:
The vinaya collections deal mainly with higher training in ethics.
The sutra collections deal mainly with higher training in concentration.
The Abidharma collections deal mainly with higher training in wisdom 

If you pick up a Dharma text, you can relate that particular text to the
certain scriptural collection. If the text begin with:
-I prostrate to the buddhas and bodhisattvas – that would indicate the text
belong to the sutra collection.
-I prostrate to the youthful Manjughosha – that would indicate the text
belong to the Abidharma collection.
-I prostrate to the Omniscient One– that would indicate the text belong to
the vinaya collection.

 If you read the Heart Sutra, what is the salutation at the beginning?

 Lam Rim Chen Mo generally do cover the subject related to three baskets.
But there are texts that deal in-depth, for example, Abhidharmakosa or
Treatise on the Abhidharma by Vasubandhu is a teaching related to Abidharma
collections.

Lam Rim cover all these three teachings that show the paths that trains the
small, middling and great capacities beings

Hope the above help.

Regards

Phuah


 
Emptiness
Generally there are different  stages of realization of emptiness
   1. Intellectually realization of emptiness
   2. Inferential realization of emptiness
   3. Direct perception of emptiness

Intellectually realization of emptiness is through the understanding of
dependent arising and things do not exist inherently.
Inferential realization of emptiness is attained through the meditation of
emptiness through reasoning but still conceptual through meaning-generality
i.e. still depends on mental image.
Direct perception of emptiness is attained through the force of
familiarization when the object of emptiness is realized directly (without
depending on mental image) during meditative equipoise. When yogi arises
from meditative equipoise, i.e. during post-meditative equipoise, there is
no direct perception of emptiness.

In fact emptiness is a big subject. Comes to tenets module, you can see how
different schools define emptiness differently and why we need to adopt
Prasangika’s view of emptiness. During the recent special insight class,
the process of the realization of emptiness was taught. So keep on
attending the coming BP modules. Because of my curiosity of emptiness and
realizations, I preserved myself for the past 7 years to attend the
classes. So may you (
The subject of emptiness must be learned from qualified teacher like Khen
Rinpoche. If not learn in a proper manner, one can fall into extremes which
Buddha himself mentioned in many sutras. Even yogi can make the mistake of
taking emptiness as phenomenon that does not exist.

Regarding the Question 9: Of the ten qualities of the qualified Mahayana
teacher, we are supposed to check the potential teacher before accepting
that person as one’s teacher. So how can we tell if the person have these
qualities such as realization on Emptiness?

Of course with our mind which is full of ignorance, we will not be able to
tell whether the particular teacher has the direct perception of emptiness.
During 2008 Dharamsala teaching, one question was raised to HHDL about his
realization. HHDL said he got zero realization. Even Lama Zopa Rinpoche,
during his teaching, mentioned that he has no realization.  One of the
great lama whom I had attended his teaching mentioned that generally no
realized master will make a public statement about his own achievement and
realization as it may affect those students whose mind are superstitious.
They only reveal their realization to those disciples whose mind has
ripened.
Anyway as in Lamrim and Khen Rinpoche’s teaching, if we cannot get a
teacher who has the direct perception of emptiness but understand emptiness
through scriptural authorities and logic and reasoning, it would be
sufficient. However based on how Khen Rinpoche has taught Special Insight,
I felt, minimum, he has the experiential understanding of emptiness.

Small, middling and great capacities
To check which group the practitioner belong to, we need to check their
ultimate wish:
-if the wish is to have a good rebirth - persons of Small Capacity   
-if the wish is to be liberated from the cyclic existence -persons of
Middling Capacity   
-if the wish is to achieve enlightenment to work for the benefit of
sentient beings - Persons of Great Capacity    
Sravaka (Hearers) and Pratyekabuddha (Solitary Realizers) wish is to be
liberated from the cyclic existence therefore they are the persons of
Middling Capacity   
 
Hearers and Solitary Realizers
On bodhisattva’s wish to work for the purpose to care for all three types
of disciples ( hearers disciples, solitary realiser disciples and
bodhisattva disciples)
The small capacity is not mentioned here. My opinion, the word “train the
three types of disciples” would be more appropriate. These groups of
disciples are Buddhist practitioner and taking refuge vows and seeking the
path to liberation.
Remember that there are two kinds of liberations: liberation from cyclic
existence and full enlightenment
Small capacity person practice on ethics to seek for good future rebirth
and may not necessary taking vows and practicing the Buddhist path. You can
read this in Practicing the path by Yangsi Rinpoche or any Lamrim text with
commnetaries.
 
Regarding Hearers and Solitary Realizers, when they are liberated from
cyclic existence, they are called Arahats or Foe-destroyers; which will be
covered in much details in the next module – the Medium Scope.
 
Below are the extraction from one of the course notes:
”- solitary realizers are called “solitary realizers” because previously
they listened, reflected, and meditated on the profound view of emptiness,
and they come at a time when there are no buddhas or hearers. Without
relying in that very life on listening, but based on the force of having
previous listened, reflected, and meditated, then they manifest the
ripening of that karma, arising “completely without support.”
 
- Hearers are so-called since they cause others to hear about attaining the
results of the perfect oral instructions they listened to from others.
-A hearer-proclaimer [sravaka] is able to perfectly listen to the teachings
of the profound view based on dependent-arising of the buddha and
understands them. However, they do not necessarily put the teachings into
practice and do not necessarily transform or train their mind, but they are
able to repeat the words they understood to others. Although there is no
great direct benefit for themselves, because they do not reap the effect of
the practice, there is slight benefit to others by proclaiming the
teachings to them. These hearer-proclaimers need not necessarily attain the
result in that very life through listening, reflecting, and meditating on
the profound meaning of emptiness. As that will ripen as a karma, as a
result of that action in a future life, it does not necessarily need to be
realized in that life. So they proclaim it to others in a life where they
do not necessarily attain it.
- Both hearers and solitary realizers are able to generate the same thought
and have the same potential -they understand that they can achieve
pacification of cyclic existence, and wish to eliminate completely
delusions from their mind. But they are not able to go further and generate
the mind of altruism, the thought for others
- From the point of view of the intention to achieve liberation they are
the same, but solitary realizers are superior to hearers. The process of
achieving liberation possible, the accumulation of merit and wisdom,
solitary realizers are superior to hearers.
- Then there are bodhisattvas, who do not wish to achieve liberation for
themselves, but to attain enlightenment to benefit all sentient beings.
Therefore bodhisattvas are supreme, and solitary realizers are superior to
hearers.
 1. Four ways of gathering disciples – this is taught in more details when
you study Ornament of Clear Realizations text by Maitreya Buddha.
It is one of the causes for the sign for achieving the Complete Enjoyment
Body
Four way of gathering disciples
- generosity ( giving whatever the trainees need)
-speaking pleasantly (not using harsh speech)
-enacting the welfare (behaving in accordance with the world means that
even though one may have high realizations, one behaves in accordance with
the needs of the disciples)
- behaving accordingly with what one has taught.
 
 
2.  Sentient beings include every realm beings excluding Buddha because
they have yet to abandon the imprints of the knowledge obscurations
completely.
i.e.when the 10th ground bodhisattva has eliminated the afflictions in his
continuum and eliminates the last of the knowledge obscurations by means of
the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum, he will achieves the
state of Buddhahood.
So arahat is still a sentient beings.
 
The gods realms

      The gods of the desire realm have great worldly pleasures, but life in
      the god realms is not entirely a bed of roses. They also experience
      conflict, and have to fight off the demigods. When an otherwise
      magnificent god encounters another of greater magnificence, he becomes
      completely depressed.
      Gods become so involved in their pleasures that they continually
      increase their propensities for attachment and experience a subtle
      underlying agitation. Their great happiness is a result of previously
      accumulated positive karma, but as their pleasures are so refined and
      extensive, they use up great amounts of positive karma. At the same
      time it is very difficult for them to develop either renunciation or
      compassion, because from their perspective the world is so pleasant.
      Gods therefore are not motivated to engage in virtue and so are unable
      to sustain their high status indefinitely.
      Although the gods live for hundreds of thousands of years in
      situations full of enjoyment, they eventually use up all their
      positive karma and then die. Before their death they can see with a
      type of clairvoyant when they will die and which lower realm they will
      be born in. The prospect of death and what lies beyond, compared with
      what they are accustomed to, fills them with fear and suffering beyond
      the imagination of humans. Seven god days before their impending death
      they experience five signs. At the time of their death, they
      experience a further five signs in the way humans experience signs of
      their approaching death.
      When these signs appear the other gods desert the dying god. They want
      nothing to do with him and feel most uncomfortable at the reminder of
      their own fate. Even his friends avoid him and, because of his bad
      smell, hold their noses and point. Whereas gods usually greet each
      other by placing flower garlands around each others' necks, no-one
      will offer a garland to the god about to die, causing him to feel
      totally rejected. His clairvoyance shows him the lower existence that
      he is about to experience and misery utterly consumes him.
      The gods of the form and formless realms live very long lives filled
      with bliss. They encounter nothing that we humans would consider
      suffering, but their suffering is the  subtle pervasive suffering of
      having the contaminated aggregates conditioned by ignorance and karma.
      Because of this they do not have the power to retain their high status
      forever and eventually fall back to lower realms.

 KARMA
I would say that karma belong to the mental factor of intention. This is
cover in the Mind & Cognition module.
For your Q: what are the other mental factors that are not karma?...Mental
factor of intention is the only one which qualifies as karma
It should be karma is one of the mental factor of intention. I don’t think
we can consider which mental factors are classified as karma.

All karma is created in dependence on afflictions as either:
Karma of intention or
Intended karma
Karma of intention is the mental factor conceiving an action i.e. the
motivation prior to the action itself
Intended karma is the mental factor generated at the time of actually
performing an action of body and speech.
All karma is created and accumulated by mind, whether or not it involves
body and speech.

Affliction is the mental factors that, when generated, causes the mental
continuum to be very unpeaceful.
The three non-virtuous mental actions (covetousness, malice and wrong view)
are the afflictions that motivate the action.

the three mental non-virtuous actions are encouraging the physical act or
the act of speech; so in this way you could say there is an action for
which the impulse is one of the three non-virtues of mind.
These three are actually not called karma, or action because an action
would be physical or verbal. Rather, they are seen as the impulses, which
are motivating the actual action of body and speech. Therefore, within the
ten non-virtues the three physical and four verbal would be actions, but
the three of mind are just motivating an action.
In the MLLR root text: page 88
2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1B Distinction between actions and paths of action
Among them, the intentions in the mind are actions, but no paths of action.
The seven actions of body and speech are actions, yet they are also paths
of action, since they are also the basis for the intentions proceeding. The
three, covetousness and so on are paths of actions, but they are no actions
If something is a path of action, then it is a cause. Therefore, the three
of mind are causing physical actions, and therefore they are paths of
actions, but not actions themselves.
Intention is a mental action. Therefore, there are mental actions, but the
three non-virtues of mind are not mental actions.
While the three of mind are themselves not mental actions, they are the
impulse for an action following from them. As a result, they are a path of
action.

