Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L13 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:38.245608
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 13                        31 March 2015  
 
 
Explaining the verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra (cont’d): “An illusion.” Chapter One: The 
Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verses 30 —33. Clear light nature of the mind: The ten aspects 
(cont’d) Reviewing Verse 30 a,b—31: The entity. Verse 32 & 33 : Extensive presentation of 
the causes.   
 
 
EXPLAINING THE VERSE FROM THE VAJRA CUTTER SUTRA (CONT’D)  
 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud – 
See conditioned things as such!  
 
“An illusion”  
Through the act of m agic, a n illusionist can cause a n object  to appear in a variety of 
ways. When he conjures up an illusion , he transform s the object into something 
beautiful  and attractive . People who see that illusion is then attracted to and develop  
an attachment to it. Likewise, i f the illusionist transform s the object into something 
frightening  or unpleasant, those who see that illusion may develop a n aversion or 
even fear towards th e object.  
 
Although in reality , it is just an illusion —there is nothing there from th e side of the 
object  that has been m ade to look beautiful or unpleasant  and that is able to give 
happiness or cause harm to the viewer —nevertheless, when the illusion i s conjured  
up, it is able to induce th ese reactions  of either attachment or aversion from t he 
viewers .   
 
It is also like that with regard to the suffering of cyclic existence . From our side, t here 
is an apprehension clinging on  to th is suffering as if it existed or was  established 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 2 of 11 right there from its own side. This induces in us aversion  towar ds and dislike for 
such suffering. In certain situations,  it may induce attachment.  Although the suffering 
does not exist in and of itself from its own side,  yet it appear s to us as if it existed in 
that way. This is the basis upon which we develop attachm ent or aversion , which in 
turn brings us pain and suffering.   
 
The analogy of “an illusion ” is used here to illustrate th is fact. When an illusionist 
conjures up an illusion , transform ing an object into something it is not , when viewers 
see that illusion, although it is just an illusion, the y are induced into reacting with  
either a ttachment or aversion. Likewise, the suffering of cyclic existence has never 
existed right there from its own side . It has n ever existed in and of itself but it 
appears to us to e xist that way. Furthermore, w e assent to that appearance  and 
believe in it, which in turn induces us to react  with either aversion or attachment.   
 
It is similar to what is stated in the following verse:  
 
All the phenomena of samsara and nirvana are mere  fabrication s of 
the mind.  
However , we are mistaken in holding on  to them as real, as truly 
existent .  
As such , do not cling but look at them as empty . 
 
This verse is saying that the reality of all phenomena, everything that exists , is a mere 
fabrication  of the mind  or is merely imputed by the mind . They do not exist in and of 
themselves . Although that is the reality, they appear to us to exist right there from 
their own side. That appearance is the work of the mistaken mind due to its 
apprehension of tru e existen ce. It is a creation , a projection  of ignorance . As such , do 
not believe in that projection  and do not follow after it, because you do not want 
suffering . If you do not want suffering, then do not follow that false projection . 
Instead, look at everyt hing that exists as empty .  
  
This is what we can think about when we come across th is analogy  of “an illusion ” in 
this verse from the Vajra Cutter  Sutra , taking as our basis our own experience of the 
various sufferings in cyclic existence .  
 
I have a ques tion  for you : If one really sees everything to be in the nature of 
emptiness, does that mean that  henceforth one will never have any fear  and never be 
afraid again ? Does it mean that you will never clin g on to things again ?  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
CLEAR LIGHT NATURE  OF THE MIND: THE TEN ASPECTS (CONT’D)  
 
We have started looking at the clear light nature of the mind , which is explained by 
the presentation of the ten aspects. Among the ten, the first relates to the entity of th e 
clear light nature of the mind. This pre sentation was preceded by V erse 28  that 
states three reasons as proof of the existence of the tathagata essence in all sentient 
beings.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 3 of 11 1. The entity: Reviewing Verses 30 & 31  
Verse 30 a, b 
Like the [natural] purity of a jewel, space, and water,  
The nature [ of the basic constituent] is always unafflicted . 
 
In explaining the entity of th e tathagata  essence  (or the buddha lineage) ,  
 The dharmakaya, the truth body  of a buddha , is likened to a wish -fulfilling jewel . 
 Suchness is likened to space . 
 The t athagata ess ence  itself is likened to pure water.  
 
A more extensive explanation of the entity of the tathagata essence can be found in 
Verse 31. 
 
Verse 31  
Because of [having] the power [of fulfilling hopes], of not changing 
to anything  other [in nature],  
And of being  a nature whose entity is moist [with compassion],  
[The basic constituent] is qualitatively similar to the features  
Of a precious [wish -granting] jewel, space, and water.  
 
It was mentioned e arlier in Verse 27  that “a perfect Buddha ’s body is pervasive .” This 
means that the enlightened activit ies of the dharmakaya ha ve the quality of being 
able to fulfil and actuali se all worldly and transcendent al qualities.  This dharmakaya 
has the power to fulfil the hopes of sentient beings. Sentient beings from their si de 
have the ability to receive the beneficial effects of the enlightened activities of the 
dharmakaya.  That is because the dharmakaya has the power of fulfil ling  the hopes  of 
sentient beings . 
 
“Of not changing to anything other  [in nature]” refer s to the reality of suchness. 
Suchness here is likened to space  whose nature is nothing more than the mere 
absence of obstructiveness . Likewise , the nature of suchness is the absence of 
inherent existence.  
 
Verse 27 state s that “S uchness is without differentiation .” This means that the nature 
of the suchness of sentient beings’ mind s and the nature of suchness of a buddha’s 
mind are the same; there is no differe nce in the ir nature. As such , it is said that 
sentient beings possess the tathagata essence.  
 
“And of bein g a nature whose entity is moist [with compassion]” is related to the 
third line of Verse 27  that states, “And because a [Buddha] lineage exists ” and 
therefore, it is said that all sentient beings possess the buddha lineage.  
 
 There is a phenomenon that is  suitable to be transform ed into the dharmakaya  
called the naturally abiding lineage . 
 There is also a phenomenon that sentient beings possess that is suitable to be 
transform ed into the form bod ies called the developmental lineage.  
Line 2 of V erse 31 —“And  of being a nature whose entity is moist [with 
compassion]” —refer s to the developmental lineage.  There is a potential that is 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 4 of 11 suitable to be transform ed into a buddha’s body that exists on the minds of sentient 
beings ’ that are empty of inherent existence,  empty of existing from their  own side.  
 
The point the text is making here is that there is something in every sentient being 
that allows them to develop compassion . We can say they all have the seed of 
compassion . We have discussed this in the last lesson .  
 
There isn’t a sentient being for whom we have not developed compassion before.  You 
can relate this to how there isn’t a ny sentient being that  has never been our love d 
one in the past . There isn’t any sentient being who has never been our mother . As 
such, we must have had compassion for every sentient being , individually , sometime  
in the past. If nothing obstruct s the arising of compassion, then we cannot say that 
we are not able to develop compassion towards all sentient beings.  
 
If we are free of the o bstructi ons such as anger and attachment , and if all the 
favo urable conditions are gathered, we can develop the compassion focus sing on all 
sentient beings. This means that it is possible to develop bodhicitta. And if you can 
develop bodhicitta, you can in fer that it is possible then to achieve enlightenment.  If 
you say that you can achieve enlightenment and since all sentient beings can develop 
such compassion , by extension , we can  say then  that all sentient beings possess the 
buddha lineage , i.e., t here is something within every sentient being that will allow 
them to be enlightened.  
 
2. The causes  
Verse 30 c,  d 
It arises from (1) devotion to the [Great Vehicle] doctrine, (2) the 
higher wisdom [realizing selflessness],  
(3) [The immeasurable] meditative stabil ization [endowed with 
bliss], and (4) compassion [for sentient beings].  
 
Verse 30  (c, d) is a brief explanation of the meaning of the second aspect , the cause s.  
A further explanation of those four points can be found , starting from Verse 32.  
 
Verse 32  
(1) Hatred for the [Gr eat Vehicle] doctrine, (2) view of self,  
(3) Fear of the sufferings of cyclic existence [and thus seeking one’s 
own peace  and happiness],  
And (4) not having concern for the welfare of sentient beings  
Are the four forms of obstructions [ preventing manifestation of the 
Buddha  nature respectively]  
Of (1) those of great desire [who do not at all abandon cyclic 
existence], (2) Forders, (3) Hearers, and (4) the Self -Arisen.  
The causes of purifying [those] are the four aspects  
Of the practices of special devotion [to the Great Vehicle] and so 
forth.  
 
~ The four obstructions  
 The first obstruction is : “(1) H atred for the [Great Vehicle] doctrine ,” the 
“doctrine ” here referring to the Mahayana doctrine.  
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 5 of 11  The second obstruction is : the“(2) view of s elf.”  
 The third obstruction is : the “(3) Fear of the sufferings of cyclic existence [and 
thus seeking one’s own peace and happiness] .” It is not simply seeking one’s own 
welfare  alone . You may be afraid of the suffering of cyclic existence but your fear 
is also tied up with a personal obsession with your own welfare only . This comes 
at the expense of others , meaning that y ou give up on sentient beings .  
 The fourth obstruction  is: “(4) not having concern for the welfare of sentient 
beings .” What this means is that you do not take the personal responsibility to 
free sentient beings from suffering , saying “I will do this myself.”  You don’t have  
such a wish  so this becomes a n obstruction.  
 
~ The four types of persons who possess these obstructions  
As for the p eople who possess these obstructions , they are “(1) those of great desire 
[who do not at all abandon cyclic existence], (2) Forders, (3) Hearers and (4) the Self -
Arisen.”   The self -arisen are the solitary realisers. 
 
~ The antidotes to the obstructions  
The antidotes to these obstructions  are mentioned in Verse 32, "The causes for 
purifying [those] are the four aspects of the practices of special devotion  [to the 
Great Vehicle]  and so forth .” 
 
 The antidote to the first obstruction —the hatred for the Mahayana  doctrine —is 
devotion  to the Mahayana doctrine.  
 The antidote to the second obstruction —the v iew of self —is the wisdom reali sing 
selflessness.  
 The antidote to the third  obstruction —the fear of the sufferings of cyclic 
existence — is the uncommon Mahayana me ditative stabili sation  called the 
meditative stabili sation of the sky treasure.  
 The antidote to the fourth obstruc tion —not having concern for the welfare of 
sentient beings —is great compassion.  
 
Sentient beings can be broadly classified into three types :- 
1. The first type of sentient beings is those who are in love  with  samsara . They are 
said to have fallen into the extreme  of samsara.  
2. The s econd type of sentient beings is sentient beings that  desire liberation . They 
are also called  those who have fallen into  the extreme of peace  or nirvana.  
3. The t hird type of sentient beings is those who are not in accord with those who 
desire samsara , nor are th ey in accord with those who desire nirvana . They are 
person s who have not fallen into either extremes.  
 
~ Sentient b eings who have fallen into the extreme of samsara  
The first type of sentient beings  who have fall en into the extreme of samsara  are said 
to consist of two groups : 
1. Those who completely reject the existence of nirvana , saying that there is no such 
thing  as nirvana , completely den ying the existence of liberation . 
2. Those who believe that liberation  exists ; yet, they do  not engage in virtue but only 
engage in non -virtue , so much so that in some texts , they are labe lled as those 
whose lineage is broken . It may see m that they are the hopeless  ones but that is 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 6 of 11 not the reality . It may be the case that in a particular rebirth , they are unable t o 
develop any renunciation  or the wish for liberation  to free themselves from the 
suffering s of that rebirth . But this is not  a permanent situation for them.  
 
There are those  who  do not accept the Mahayana doctrine , i.e., they only accept the 
Hinayana doctrine , but they are interested in liberation . Such people are only 
suitable vessel s for the practice of the higher training of ethics . They are not suitable 
recipients for the teachings on even coarse selflessness.  For instance, among the 
various sub -sects of the proponents of the Hinayana, there is a sect called the 
Vatsiputriyan s who are not  suitable receptacle s for the teaching s on coarse 
selflessness. They accept only the Hinayana doctrine and do not accept the Mahayana 
doctrine at all.  So there i s such a group of people who have that hatred for the 
Mahayana doctrine. They are considered to be among those seeking samsara.  
 
~ Sentient beings who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana  
For the second type of sentient beings who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana  
and desire liberation , this group of people can  also be divided into two:  
1. Those who are abiding in the non -method (or the incorrect method)  
2. Those who are abiding in the method  (or the correct method) .  
 
Let us consider those who desire liberation  and are said to have fallen into the 
extreme of nirvana but are abiding in the non -method. For example, the 
Vatsiputriyan s assert a self . Although they desire liberation , they are holding on to 
this view of a self  and therefore, are abiding in something which is not the method.  
 
From this , you can see that the re are also different types of Vatsiputriyan s: 
 Earl ier on, we saw h ow there were some Vatsiputriyan s who do not desire 
liberation and critici se the Mahayana.  
 Here, we have some Vatsiputriyan s who desire liberation ; yet are  abiding in an 
incorrect method. This group of Vatsiputriyans do not critici se the Mahayana.   
 
Here , it is saying that  there  are Buddhists who are in love with samsara,  do not like 
nirvana and critici se the Mahayana at  the same time.  
 
Then there are also Bu ddhists who desire liberation but they are using an incorrect 
method to achieve their goal. Howev er, th ey do  not critici se the Mahayana.  
  
Then t here are those who desire liberation but who have not yet reali sed the final 
mode of abiding of all phenomena , the ultimate nature of phenomena , but they think 
that they have reali sed it. The y also belong to the category of those who desire 
liberation but are abiding in an incorrect method. In fact , these practitioners cling on  
to emptiness as being truly existent. The proponents of the Mind Only School  (MOS)  
and the Autonomy Middle Way School  (AMWS)  fall into  this category because they 
assert true existence. As such, even the proponents of the MOS and the AMWS who 
desire liberation are nevertheless abiding in something that is not the method.  
 
The relationship between the four types of persons, the four obstr uctions and the three 
types of sentient beings   
There are four types of persons who possess the four obstructions.  
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 7 of 11 The first of the four obstructions is the hatred for the Mahayana doctrine. The 
persons who have hatred for the Mahayana doctrine falls und er the first category of 
sentient beings , those who love samsara and do not want nirvana , i.e., “those of great 
desire [who do not at all abandon cyclic existence] .”  
 
For the second obstruction, the view of the self , this relates to the category of people  
who desire liberation but are abiding in something that is not the method , i.e., the 
“forders.”    
 
The “hearers ” and the solitary realisers (or the “self -arisen”)  are those who desire 
liberation and are also abiding in the correct method  in that they dire ctly perceive 
selflessness. T hey belong to the category of sentient beings that  desire liberation and 
have fallen into the extreme of nirvana but are abiding in the correct method.  
 
The main difference between those who are abiding in the non -method and t hose 
who are abiding in the method is determined by whether they have reali sed that 
persons and phenomena are empty of true existence : 
 Those who reali se that persons and phenomena are empty of true existence are 
those who are abiding in the method.   
 Those  who have not reali sed that the persons and phenomena are empty of true 
existence —in particular , those who cling on to emptiness to be truly existent —
are those who are abiding in the non -method  (or the incorrect method) .  
In th e context  here , ‘method ’ refe rs to the wisdom directly perceiving the emptiness 
of true existence. Also, ‘ method ’ here is related to wisdom, not to the mind 
generation  (or the method aspect of the path) . If you were to understand ‘ method ’ 
here to mean the mind generation , then even th e hearers and solitary realisers will 
not be considered to be abiding in the method . 
 
The third type of sentient beings is those who do not abide in the extreme of samsara 
or the extreme of nirvana. We are now talking about the mind  of enlightenment or 
bodhicitta.  Such people  are train ed in the path that brings an end to the extreme of 
samsara and the extreme of nirvana. This  type of sentient beings is the Mahayanists , 
as Mahayanists neither abide in the extreme of samsara nor the extreme of nirvana .  
 
~~~~ ~~~~~~  
 
Question:  For persons hold ing the view of the MOS  as well as persons holding the 
view of the AMWS , since they would be grasping at inherent existence even though 
they have the mind generation in the ir mind  continu a, would they not be categorised 
with the second obstruction, the view of the self?  
 
Answer : There could be such bodhisattvas.  
 
Question:  This would mean  that the third category of sentient beings —those who are 
neither abiding in the extreme of samsara or nirvana and who have mind 
generat ion—can also be categorised with the obstruction of t he view of self?  
 
Answer:  There could be bodhisattvas who are abiding in the non -method. 
Bodhisattvas do not abide in both extremes  of samsara and nirvana . This is different 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 8 of 11 from saying that bodhisattvas  are necessarily  those who are not abiding in the two 
extremes .  
 
The bodhisattvas who are in the third category (of sentient beings who are neither 
abiding in the extreme of samsara or nirvana) are only bodhisattvas who h old the 
Prasangika view.  
 
Student:  The view of self was related to the category  of those holding the tenets of the 
MOS  or the AMWS . But in this text, such person s are called forder s?  
 
Answer:  The Buddha  said that those who hold on  to the view of a self are similar to 
forders. In one sutra , the Buddha said, “I am not the teacher of those who hold on to a 
view of self. Those who hold on to a view of self are those who go from darkness to 
darkness. ”  
 
Forders cover every one—with the exception of the Prasangikas —who does  not have 
the correct v iew of emptiness.  This will include  the proponents of the MOS  and the 
AMWS. E ven though they desire liberation from cyclic existence , nevertheless , they 
are called forders.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
The way to c ultivate the antidote s is this: You need a very strong be lief in and 
devotion towards  the Mahayana doctrine . Once you have that, there is the chance to 
develop great compassion  and bodhicitta  with which you enter the Mahayana path . 
Later on , you develop the uncommon meditative stabili sation of the Mahayana , i.e. , 
the uncommon calm abiding . Then you develop special insight  followed by the 
concentration that is a union of calm abiding and special insight . With this special 
concentration, you are fully equipped to engage in the path that can destroy the four 
obstruc tions  by cultivating the antidotes. Then gradually you progress and it is 
possible to actualise the dharmakaya.  
  
Verse 33  
Those who have the seed which is devotion to the Supreme Vehicle,  
The mother which is the wisdom giving birth to the Buddha 
qualitie s, 
The womb which is the bliss of concentration, and the nurse which 
is compassion  
Are the [Bodhisattva] children born from [the mind of] the 
Subduer.  
 
“Those who have the seed which is devotion to the Supreme Vehicle” : In order to  be 
born as the son of a wheel -turning king,  there must be  the seed of the father . 
Likewise, one must have devotion to the Mahayana  that is the seed for enlightenment. 
That devotion is likened to a seed.  
 
“The mother which is the wisdom giving birth to the Buddha qualities ”: “The mother ” 
here refers to the wisdom realising emptiness that is conjoined with the method 
aspect of the path. In the teaching s, you will find such an expression, the mother.  
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 9 of 11  
The wisdom reali sing emptiness is the common cause for achieving the hearers ’ 
enlightenment, the s olitary realisers’ enlightenment and the full enlightenment of 
buddhahood. As such, the wisdom reali sing emptiness is like the mother  that is the 
common cause. The father , called method, is the uncommon cause for actuali sing the 
dharmakaya .  
 
“The womb which is the bliss of concentration ”: Returning to the analogy of being 
born as the son of a wheel -turning king, we need something from the father and 
something from the mother. But in order to grow, we need a safe place, which is the 
womb. This is an analogy of what happens on the path. “The womb ” here is “the bliss 
of concentration. ”  
 
“And the nurse which is compassion” : In order for the young prince  to grow up and 
become the wheel -turning king , i.e., some one who has the ability to take ove r the 
rein s from his father, the wheel -turning king, he must be well taken care of by a 
nanny  or a caretaker. Likewise, here on the path, in order to move towards 
enlightenment , the nanny or the caretaker is compassion. It is mentioned in the 
teachings tha t compassion is important in the beginning, it is important in the middle 
and it is important at the end.  
  
MEANING OF VERSE 33 
“Those who have the seed which 
is devotion to the Supreme 
Vehicle.”   Devotion to the Mahayana is likened to the seed that give s birth 
to the son of a wheel -turning king.  
“The mother which is the wisdom 
giving birth to the Buddha 
qualities.”  The wisdom realising emptiness that is conjoined with the 
method aspect of the path is l ikened to a mother that is the 
common cause for the  attainment of the hearers’ 
enlightenment, the solitary realisers’ enlightenment and the full 
enlightenment of buddhahood.  
“The womb which is the bliss of 
concentration .” The bliss of concentration is likened to the safety of dwelling 
within a womb .  
“The nurse which is compassion.”  On the path to enlightenment, compassion is said to be 
important in the beginning, the middle and the end. Here it is 
likened to a  nanny or a caretaker .  
 
Here we are talking about the bodhisattvas. By abandoning all obscurat ions, there 
will come a time when the bodhisattvas will actuali se the dharmakaya.  
 
Devotion to the Mahayana doctrine  is faith. There are different kinds of faith. The 
faith referred to here is the faith of conviction. You will recall that faith is the 
forerunner of all virtue. Without it, nothing positive or virtuous can be accomplished.  
 
Aspiration is preceded by faith. Once you have faith, the next thing that come s is 
aspiration. As such, with the faith of conviction in the Mahayana , that can help you t o 
aspire to enlightenment. With that faith in the Mahayana, you can develop great 
compassion followed by th e mind of enlightenment, bodhicitta , which is essentially 
an aspiration for full enlightenment.  
 
Once you have the aspiration for and seek enlighten ment,  naturally you will 
investigate  and wonder , “What do I need to do in order to achieve enlightenment ? 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 10 of 11 What are the causes for my enlightenment ?” You would then seek out those causes.  
 
When you seek  out the causes for enlightenment, there will come a t ime when you 
will seek to achieve the union of calm abiding and special insight. Through that effort, 
you are able to train to actuali se the union of calm abiding and special insight. Once 
you achieve the union of calm abiding and special sight, you posses s the antidote that 
is able to destroy those four obstructions  that were mentioned earlier.  
 
In short, through your devotion to the Mahayana, you develop great compassion  and 
bodhicitta. Then you enter the path  and o nce you develop the union of calm abidi ng 
and special insight, that concentration and wisdom , you have in your hand the 
antidote that can completely wipe out the four obstructions. Gradually  you will 
achieve the dharmakaya.  
 
Since the dharmakaya  is achievable , this goes back to proving that the mind is in the 
nature of clear light.  
 
The person s who fall into the third category —those who do not abide in either the 
extremes of samsara or nirvana —are those who truly and sincerely aspire for full 
enlightenment , the non -abiding nirvana. Such great beings do not take rebirth in 
cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions , but rather through the power of their 
prayers , motivated by their great compassion wanting to free others from their 
suffering.  
 
The very thing  that make s all of th is possible is  great compassion  from  which comes 
the wholehearted resolve  and the t aking on of personal responsibility. From that, one 
is able to develop the mind of enlightenment or bodhicitta. This makes everything 
else possible.  
 
3.—4.  The effect and the function  
Verse 34 a,  b 
The perfection of the qualities of purity, self, bliss,  
And permanence [of the Truth Body which is the fruit of  purifying 
the obstructions through their antidotes] is the fruit.  
 
This is the topic of the effect . 
 
Verse 34 c,  d 
[The lineage] ha s the function of [bringing about] aversion for the 
suffering [of  cyclic existence]   
And the aspiration as well as the wish to attain the peace [of 
nirvana].  
 
This is the topic of the function .  
 
 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 13  
Page 11 of 11 THE FOUR 
OBSTRUCTIONS  PERSON S WITH 
SUCH 
OBSTRUCTIONS  THE ANTIDOTE  TYPES OF  
SENTIENT BEINGS  
Hatred for the 
Mahayana doctrine . Those of great desire . Devotion to the 
Mahayana doctrine . Those  who have fallen into 
the extreme of samsara.  
View of self  The forders . The wisdom 
reali sing emptiness.  Those  who have fallen into 
the extreme of nirvana and 
is abiding in the non -
method . 
Fear of the sufferings 
of cyclic existence . The hearers . An uncommon 
Mahayana 
meditative 
stabili sation called 
the meditative 
stabili sation of the 
sky treasure . Those  who have fallen into  
the extreme of nirvana and 
is abiding in the correct 
method , i.e., they directly 
realise selflessness.  
Not having concern 
for the welfare of 
sentient beings . The self-arisen or 
solitary realisers. Great compassion . Those  who have fallen into 
the extreme  of nirvana and 
is abiding in the correct 
method , i.e., they directly 
realise selflessness.  
 
  
THE THREE TYPES OF SENTIENT BEINGS  
First type  Sentient beings who have fallen into the extreme of samsara.  Two divisions : 
1. Those who completely reject the exis tence of nirvana and den y the existence 
of liberation.  
2. Those who believe that liberation exists, but w hile they have th is belief, they 
do not engage in virtue but only engage in non -virtue . 
Second type  Sentient beings who desire liberation and have fallen  into the extreme of nirvana . 
Two divisions : 
1. Those who are abiding in the non -method ( or incorrect method ). 
2. Those who are abiding in the method . 
Third type  Sentient beings who neither abide in the extreme of samsara nor in the extreme of 
nirvana. These ar e the Mahayanist s who are trained in the path that will bring an 
end to the extremes of samsara and nirvana.  
The main difference between those who are abiding in the non -method and those who are abiding 
in the method is determined by whether they have rea lised that persons and phenomena are empty 
of true existence:  
 Those who realise that persons and phenomena are empty of true existence are those who are 
abiding in the method.   
 Those who have not realised that the persons and phenomena are empty of true e xistence —in 
particular, those who cling on to emptiness to be truly existent —are those who are abiding in 
the non -method (or the incorrect method).  
 
In the context here, ‘method’ refers to the wisdom directly perceiving the emptiness of true 
existence. Al so, ‘method’ here is related to wisdom, not to the mind generation (or the method 
aspect of the path).  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  