Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L21 R1.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:35.457774
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 21                             9 June 2015  
 
 
Purpose and benefit of acqu iring Dharma knowledge . Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone 
Thus.  Verse 131 —132 : The nine forms of defilements. Afflictive obscurations & knowledge 
obscurations. Difference between seeds & predispositions/imprints. Intellectually acquired 
afflictions & innate afflictions. Eight forbearances & eight knowledges.  
 
 
PURPOSE AND BENEFIT OF ACQUIRING DHARMA KNOWLEDGE  
 
We have learn t quite a lot about the Three Jewels , having looked at the eight qualities 
of the Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel and Sangha Jewel. Since we have already studied 
these qualities , we  should use this knowledge, apply what we have learn t and put 
them into practice.  
 
For example, when we recite the prayer of going for refuge and generating 
bodhicitta —“I go for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhar ma and the Sangha” —by 
recalling the eight qualities of the Buddha Jewel , such as it being uncompounded, 
spontaneous and so forth, and their meaning s in our mind,  that will help us to 
generat e faith in the Buddha.  The more qualities of the Buddha J ewel we can 
remember , the more benefi cial it will be for us in terms of developing our faith in the 
Buddha J ewel.  
 
Definitely a t some point in time, all of us may have wonder ed what the purpose or 
benefit of learning all these enumeration s and gathering so much kn owledge is.  
However, it is very helpful i f you are able to reflect on and think about t his 
knowledge you have accumulated. For example, remember ing the qualities of the 
Buddha  Jewel  is a condition  for developing faith in the Buddha J ewel . If you can 
rememb er and recall those qualities, definitely it would be very helpful. But if you do 
not u se, reflect or think about this knowledge , that is a completely different matter.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 2 of 10 Likewise, if you know the eight qualities of the Dharma Jewel and the eight qualities 
of the Sangha Jewel , that would be very helpful in developing faith in the other Three 
Jewels .  
 
Faith has to arise from seeing the reason , i.e., t here must be a reason for faith to arise. 
If our faith in the Three Jewels is engendered by our knowledge and  underst anding 
of the qualities of the Three Jewels, the quality of our faith will be very good. I guess 
perhaps this is the main reason why we are study ing and gathering all th is 
knowledge.   
 
When we recite the verse of going for refuge  to the Three Jewe ls, we can pause after 
saying  the word  “Buddha ” and think about the qualities of the Buddha Jewel. 
Likewise , we can pause after saying the  word  “Dharma ” and think about the qualities 
of the Dharma Jewel. L ikewise , we can pause after going for refuge to the  Sangha  and 
think abo ut the qualities of the Sangha J ewel.  
 
 When we think of the qualities of the Buddha Jewel, in brief , they are condensed 
into the qualities of knowledge, power and mercy (or compassion ).  
 When we think of the qualities of the Dharma Jewel, they can be condensed into 
the qualities of true cessations and qualities of true paths.   
 
Relation ship to the tathagata essence  
When we think of the qualities of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha , that will give rise 
to faith in our mind.  Also when we ref lect on the ir qualities  and appreciate what they 
are stand for , the feeling will come that these three objects of refuge are very good  
and a yearning will arise in our mind  to actuali se the Three Jewels for o urselves .  We 
will want to become the Three Jewe ls. This will happen  when we think about the 
Three Jewels in  relation to the tathagata essence, our buddha nature. Be it the causal  
refuge or the resultant refuge, these come about because there is buddha nature,  i.e., 
the tathagata  essence  does  exist.  
 
When we talked about the tathagata essence, there is the discussion of the clear light 
nature of the mind and the defilements being adventitious. T hese are established 
through various illustrations. When we say the defilements are adventitious , that 
means we  can separate the defilements from the mind  and that we ourselves can 
become the final Three Jewels , i.e., we can actuali se the final Three Jewels . 
 
A vast majority of people  often wonder what the purpose of accumulating so much 
knowledge through studying these great treatises  is. We can look at that as the 
condition  to cultivate faith in the  Three Jewels . In fact, whatever knowledge we have 
gathered th rough our  stud ies must result in an increase  of our faith  and devotion  in 
the Three Jewels. I f our devotio n in the Three Jewels increase s as a result of 
gathering  such knowledge , then we can say that the purpose of acquiring this 
knowledge has been fulfilled.   
 
Sign of having learnt the Dharma  
The great Kadampa masters of the past also said that the sign of h aving learn t the 
Dharma is that one becomes peaceful, serene  and calm.  That comes about through 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 3 of 10 acquiring the knowledge that comes through studying and learning . Then one’s faith 
in the teaching s and in the Three Jewels will increase  and one will become gr adually 
more disciplined, serene, calm  and subdued.   
 
The sign of having meditated is the lessening of our afflictions. If our afflictions such 
as the three poisons gradually weaken  or decrease over time, that is the indication 
that our mind have familiari sed itself with the teachings.  
 
So t he purpose of acquiring all this knowledge through studying and reflecting on 
them is not merely to acquire knowledge. The purpose is to increase our faith and 
devotion. A s I have said , the g reat K adampa masters  had said that the sign of having 
learn t and reflected correctly  on the teachings is when  one becomes calm er and  
more pacified , peaceful  and subdued. T hat is how we can check for ourselves 
whether our stud ies and our reflection s have hit the spot or not  and whethe r they 
are heading in the right direction .  What are we looking out for? To see whether our 
faith and devotion is increasing or not . When you are meditating, check whether your 
meditation is fulfilling its purpose  and also check whether your afflictions ar e 
weakening over time . If they are weakening over time , this indicate s that your 
practice of meditation is on  track.  
 
In order to engender faith and devotion in our heart, we need to study and reflect  on 
the teachings . In that way faith and devotion  will arise. The Buddha had said in many 
sutras  that faith is indispensable for the experiences and reali sations of the path  and 
that without faith, there is no way for positive experiences and reali sations to arise.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
THE NINE FORMS OF DEFILEMENTS  
 
Verse 131  
The nine forms of defilements —(1-3) [the latencies or seeds of] 
desire, hatred, and obscuration [which are overcome by the 
exalted wisdom of a Superior], (4) the strong arousal [or 
manifestation] of those [three poisons],  
(5) The level of] the p redispositions [of ignorance which are the 
means of achieving the uncontaminated actions and the mental 
body in the  continuum of a Foe Destroyer and which are to be 
overcome by the exalted wisdom of the great enlightenment], (6) 
the objects to be abandoned  by the path of seeing [which 
obstruct a common being from seeing reality], (7) the objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation [in the continuum of a 
Learner Superior],  
(8) The objects to be abandoned by the [seven] impure [grounds 
which are to be overcome by the pure grounds],  
And (9) the defilements dependent on the pure grounds [which are 
to be overcome by the vajra -like meditative stabilization],  
 
Verse 132  
Are indicated by [the nine] examples  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 4 of 10 Of the covering of a lotus and so forth,  
But the d ivisions of coverings of afflictive emotions  
Are beyond the limits of number.  
 
The first four defilements  
Of the nine forms of defilements, I have explained the first four. The first three 
defilements are: 
1. dormant desire  
2. dormant anger  
3. dormant obscuration  
The fourth defilement is the strong arousal or manifestation of th ese three  
defilements . 
 
The fifth defilement: the level of the predispositions of ignorance  
The fifth defilement is level of the predisposition s of ignorance . I guess we can 
posit ed them to b e the knowledge obscuration. That should be OK.  
 
Because of the level of the predisposition s of ignorance, there is still exertion 
involved  even though it may be a subtle exertion  or subtle effort . The level of the 
predisposition s of ignorance is  the cause  for the accumulation of uncontaminated 
karma , in dependence on which the bodhisattvas acquire the mental body.  So e ven 
the bodhisattvas on the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds still need to depend on  
subtle exertion in order to work for sentient beings.  By depending on this subtle 
exertion , they take on the mental body  through which they work for sentient  beings.  
 
When one achieve s enlightenment , the level of predisposition s of ignorance would 
have been abandoned. As such , there is no longer any subtle exer tion . It is an 
unshared quality of b uddha s that they can work for the welfare of sentient beings 
such as giving teachings without having to arise  from the ir meditative equipoise 
focus sing on suchness. Only the buddhas can do that . The buddhas can w ork for 
sentient being s spontaneously and effortlessly , and the ir b uddhas activities are 
uninterrupted , i.e., the enlightened activities  of the buddha s are spontaneous, 
effortless and uninterrupted.  
 
On the sentient beings ’ ground , i.e. during the time when one is  a sentient being , 
when one is in meditative equipoise focu ssing on suchness , one sees only emptiness. 
One cannot see the diversit ies of phenomena  so one can not benefit sentient beings  at 
that time . One is not able to work for sentient beings during that m editative 
equipoise  as even the diversit ies of phenomena do not appear to that meditative 
equipoise.   
 
The sixth and seventh defilements: the path of seeing abandonments and the path of 
meditation abandonments  
The sixth and seventh defilements  are the path  of seeing abandonments and the path 
of meditation abandonments  of which there are two:  
1. the a fflictive obscuration s that hinder the achievement of liberation   
2. the k nowledge obscuration s that hinder the achievement of omniscience   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 5 of 10 ~ Afflictive obscuratio ns 
According to the CMWS:  
 the apprehension of true existence is  posited to be an  afflictive obscuration  
 the seeds  that are deposited by this apprehension of true existence are also 
posited as an a fflictive obscuration.  
 
1. the apprehension of true existence  
2. the seed s that are being deposited by this apprehension of true existence  
3. the affliction s such as anger, attachment and so forth arising from th ose seed s 
These three are afflictive obscuration s that hinder the achievement of liberation and 
must be abandon ed in order for liberation to be attained.  
  
The four seals  state : 
1. All composite phenomena are impermanent .  
2. All contaminated phenomena are suffering .  
3. All phenomena are empty and selfless .  
4. Nirvana is peace . 
 
Peace  is nirvana  or liberation. The abandonmen t of the afflictive obscuration s result  
in nirvana  so t hat is liberation.  Why is n irvana peace? This is because i t is the 
pacification of all the sufferings of cyclic existence. The source of all th at suffering is 
the affliction s so when they are abandoned , one achieve s peace.   
 
All Buddhist tenets agree that selflessness must be reali sed in order to achieve 
liberation  but m ost Buddhist tenets assert that  one only need s to reali se the 
selflessness of person s to achieve liberation.  
 
However, according  to th e Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), in order to 
achieve liberation, one must reali se both  the selflessness of person s and the 
selflessness of phenomena.  Furthermore, t he assertion of the CMWS as to what these 
two selflessnesses are is very different fr om the other Buddhist tenets.  
 
To the CMWS, these two selflessnesses are not differentiated by the ir object of 
negation , i.e., true existence or inherent existence .  So whether one is  referring to the 
selflessness of person s or the selflessness of phenome na, the object of negation is the 
same , i.e., inherent existence. The difference between the two selflessnesses is made 
on the basis of emptiness. According to the CMWS:  
 The person does not exist inherently. This is t he emptiness or the selflessness of 
persons.  
 The aggregates that are the bas es of designation  of persons also do not exist 
inherently . The emptiness of the aggregates is the selflessness of phenomena .  
 
So t he two selflessnesses are not differentiated by the ir object of negation , the 
emptiness  of inherent existence , but by the basis of that emptiness —one being 
person s and the other being the aggregates .  
 
In order to achieve liberation , one must abandon the afflictive obscuration s. In order 
to abandon the afflictive obscuration s, one must reali se the selflessness of person s 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 6 of 10 and the selflessness of phenomena.   
 
If you were asked , “Why is it that a ccording to the CMWS  one cannot become an arhat 
just by reali sing the selflessness of person s?” what would be your answer?   
 
This question is addressed  to everyone, in particular , to those who have studied this 
before.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Quick. Anybody has the answer ? The senior one s. Come . Come . It doesn’t 
matter  whether your answer is right  or wrong.  
 
If anyone has the answer , please give your answer. If no one has the answer , then you 
all have to say that you do not know the answer. Either way, you have to say 
something . 
 
Student  1: The a rhat still has self -cherishing. Let’s say he has already reali sed the 
selflessness of person s, then he will become a buddha instead of an arhat.   
 
Khen Rinpoche: You are not answering my question.  
 
If you really want to learn  then you shouldn’t be shy in giving an answer. The answer 
could be right  or wrong but that  is not the point. The point is that when you give an 
answer , you must also be willing to accept the challenge  of defending your answer . 
When I question you, you must be able to defend your answer. T hen the re can be 
some further discussion . This should happen without you f eeling shy or 
embarrassed. If you feel shy or embarrass ed, you can’t really learn . You end up 
learn ing nothing.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Come on. I repeat ed my question t wice already.  
 
Why is it that a ccording to the CMWS  one cann ot become an arhat just by reali sing 
the selflessness of person s? 
 
Student  2: When you reali se the selflessness of a person, you are just reali sing the 
emptiness of oneself. However, you still have to contend with external phenomen a 
besides the person  that you see as inherent ly existen t. Once you see anything 
external to yoursel f as inherent ly existent, the afflictions  will still haunt you.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : What  is the problem if that individual still apprehend s phenomena 
other than person s to be truly existent?  
 
Student  2: Because you see things outside of oneself  to be inherent ly existent , then 
you will react with either attachment or aversion. Your afflictions, their seed s and 
imprints will perpetuate  and continue . You remain trap ped in cyclic existence just 
the same.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: What you have said is correct ! 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 7 of 10 Earlier on, I said that what constitute s the afflictive obscurations are:  
 the apprehension of a self o f person s and the apprehension of a self of 
phenomena  
 the seeds place by these apprehensions of true existence   
 the afflictions such as anger and attachment that arise from those seeds  
 
You need to destroy the enem y, the afflictions . Liberation means to be free from the 
suffering of cyclic existence. In order to be free from the suffering of cyclic existence , 
one must free oneself  from the cause of samsara . The cause of samsara is the 
afflictive obscurations . I have already mentioned what constitute  the afflictive 
obscurations . Since the grasping or apprehension of the self of person s and the self of 
phenomena  are included among afflictive obscurations , then  one must r ealise both 
the emptiness of person s and the emptiness of the aggregates in order to achieve 
liberation.  
 
~ Knowledge obscurations  
What is a knowledge obscuration? There  is this mistake or fault that is the 
appearance of true existence. Whatever appears t o us sentient beings always appears 
to be truly existent . This factor of mistaken appearance  does not accord with reality  
and it a rises from the predisposition s or imprints placed by the apprehension of true 
existence.  
 
~ Difference between seeds and predi spositions/imprints  
With regard to the seeds and predisposition s/imprints, often these two are referring 
to the same thing  and these terms can be used interchangeably. But there are also 
times whe n they refer to two different things. In those instances, there is a 
distinction between the seeds and the predisposition s/imprints . We can take it that  
the seed s are  coarse r and the predisposition s/imprint s are subtle r. 
 
We need to differentiat e between the seed s that are deposited by the apprehension 
of true exis tence and the predisposition s/imprint s that are deposited by the 
apprehension of true existence. Earlier on , I have said  that : 
 the seed that is deposited by the apprehension of true existence is an afflictive 
obscuration  
 the predisposition /imprint that is deposited by the apprehension of true 
existence is a knowledge obscuration  
 
What is the difference then between  a seed and a predisposition /imprint ?  
 The seed that is deposited by the apprehension of true existence has the capacity 
to generate another mom ent of apprehension of true existence. As long as there is 
this capacity to produce a new moment of apprehension of true existence, it is 
called a seed.  
 The predisposition/imprint placed by the apprehension of true existence does 
not have the capa city to produce a new moment of apprehension of true 
existence. Rather, it only has the capacity to produce the factor of mere 
appearance , i.e., the mistaken appearance of true existence.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 8 of 10 
~ When abandonment occurs  
According to the CMWS , when one becomes a  heare r foe destroyer or solitary 
realiser foe destroyer, the afflictive obscurations are abandoned. From the 
perspective of the Mahayana, the afflictive obscurations are abandoned when one 
first achieves the eighth  ground.  
 
Although t he hearer foe destroyer and the solitary realiser foe destroyer have 
abandoned the afflictive obscu rations, they are not buddhas because  they still have 
the level of the predisposition s of ignorance that have yet to be abandoned. They still 
have to depend on subtle  exertion , accumu late uncontaminate d karma  and take on a 
mental body.  
  
When are the knowledge obscurations  abandoned? They are abandoned when one 
becomes a buddha , when one achieves the path of release of the path of no -more -
learning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
~ Intellectually acquired af flictions and innate afflictions  
There are afflictive obscurations that are abandoned on the path of seeing —the path 
of seeing abandonments —and afflictive obscurations that are abandoned  on the path 
of meditation —the path of meditation abandonments. How d o we differentiate 
between the two?  
 
There is the thought apprehending  the ‘ I’ to be truly existent that arises from :  
 adopting certain mistaken philosophical positions or tenets  
 incorrect thinking adhering to certain intellectual concepts   
This is an inte llectually acquired affliction that is a path of seeing abandonment .  One 
can also posit that there are the seeds that are deposited by such  an apprehension of 
the ‘I’ and I guess one should also be able to posit th e instances of anger, attachment 
and so f orth that arise through the force of those seeds.  
 
Having said that, are those afflictions such as attachment and anger that arise from 
those seeds  also intellectually acquired? If you were to say that the afflictions that 
arise from those seeds are innat e, you are going to have a problem . Because you are 
asserting that there are innate afflictions that can arise  from something that is 
intellectually acquired .   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 9 of 10 Do you understand what I’m saying?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: No? Some say no, some say yes.  
 
If there  is anything that you d on’t understand, perhaps you can tell me what it  is.  
Then maybe  I can try to explain again.  This could be difficult for those of you who 
are new  and are hearing this for the first time .  But for those of you who have heard 
this befor e, I guess it shouldn’t be difficult .  
 
Then t here are afflictions that  are innate , i.e., they arise naturally. These innate 
afflictions are the path of meditation abandonments  and cannot be abandoned by the 
path of seeing . They have to be abandoned by the  path of meditation. There are also 
seeds deposited by these afflictions that are also path of meditation abandonments. 
The afflictions such as anger and attachment that arise due to the force of the seeds 
deposited by the innate apprehension of true exist ence  are also afflictions that are 
path of meditation abandonments.  
 
The intellectually acquired afflictions are abandoned by the path of seeing whereas 
the innate afflictions can be abandoned only by meditating on the path of meditation. 
As such, the path of meditation abandonments  are more difficult to abandon than the 
path of seeing abandonments . In other words, t his means the path of seeing 
abandonments are easier to abandon than the path of meditation abandonments.  
 
The knowledge obscurations are not  classified in the same way as the afflictive 
obscurations. For instance, w e would  not say that there are knowledge obscurations  
that are path of seeing abandonments and knowledge obscurations that are path of 
meditation abandonments . A ccording to the Pras angika s, the knowledge 
obscurations can only be abandoned through the power of the p ath of meditation .  
 
The process of abandoning the afflictive obscurations lasts all the way up to the 
achievement of the eighth ground. The process of abandoning the knowl edge 
obscurations only start s from the eighth ground and takes pl ace over the three pure 
grounds , i.e., the eighth, ninth and tenth ground s.  
 
From this , you can see that the process of abandoning the afflictions is no mean feat  
and is  really not easy  even  if we are start ing from the path of accumulation . On the 
path of accumulation and the p ath of preparation, a bodhisattva  start s by weakening 
the afflictions.  Only when the bodhisattva achieve s the path of seeing  for the first 
time is he then able to overc ome the intellectually acquired afflictions.   
 
But at that time, the process of abandoning the innate afflictions has  not even started. 
That process only starts upon entry into the path of meditation  and lasts till the 
achievement of the eighth ground . Only then are the innate afflictions completely 
vanquished. And it is o nly after that  that the process  of abandoning the knowledge 
obscurations  begins.  
  
 On the path of accumulation, th e bodhisattva strive s in the vast accumulation of 
merit and the purificat ion of negativities with the purpose of abandoning the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 21  
Page 10 of 10 obscurations. Due to the force of th at accumulation of merit and purification , he is 
then able to work with his afflictions  and gain some attainment s.  
 On the path of preparation, the bodhisattva reali ses emptiness  via a generic 
image. He has yet to realise emptiness directly.  
 The bodhisattva reali ses the suchness o f the four noble truths  only when he 
achieve s the path of seeing. Th is is when he reali ses emptiness directly  for the 
first time. Because o f seeing emptiness directly for the first time , this is called the 
path of seeing . When the bodhisattva first achieves the path of seeing , he reali ses 
the suchness of the four noble truths. During meditative equipoise, even the f our 
noble truths do not app ear. What he sees is the suchness of the four noble truths. 
What appears is mere vacuity , the absence of the object of negation.  
 
~ Eight forbearances and eight knowledges  
We have to understand that the path of seeing is divided into the uninterrupted pat h 
of the path of seeing  and the path of release of the path of seeing. With regard to the 
uninterrupted path and the path of release  of the path of seeing, there are what we 
call the eight forbearances and the eight knowledge s.  
 
When the bodhisattva achie ves the uninterrupted path of  the path of seeing, he 
achieves the forbearance of Dharma , where he reali ses the su chness of true suffering. 
Likewi se, there are the suchness of true origin s, the suchness of true cessation s and 
the suchness of true paths. The se reali sations are the four forbearances of Dharma . 
They are so -called from the perspective of being the realisation of the suchness of the 
four noble truths. This is according to the perspective of the CMWS.  
 
Then there are the wisdom s that reali se the suchness of the four noble truths. The 
suchness of th ose wisdom s that reali se the suchness of the four noble truths  are 
called the subsequen t forbearance s.  
 
These are the eight forbearances. They are nominally different but they are of one 
entity , i.e., they are one entity  but different isolates.  
 
The eight forbearances are the uninterrupted path  of the path of  seeing  while the 
eight knowledges occur on the path of release of the path of seeing.  
 
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah S oon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 
 