Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L11 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:28.671551
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 11                        19 March 2015  
 
 
Explaining the verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra . Reviewing the meaning of “a visual 
aberration.” Explaining the meaning of “a flame of a lamp.” Chapter One: The Essence of a One 
Gone Thus.  Verses 2 7. Tathagata essence versus buddha lineage.  
 
 
EXPLAINING THE VERSE FROM THE VAJRA CUTTE R SUTRA (cont’d)  
 
Reviewing the meaning of “a visual aberration”  
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud – 
See conditioned things as such!  
 
We had discussed the meaning  of “a visual aberration ” before.   
 
When we look at all our mental states, the consciousnesses  that we have in our 
continuum, we would probably say that every single instance , every single moment  
of these consciousnesses , is polluted by the predisposition s (or imprints ) of 
ignorance. Whatever appears to our mind  and whatever we perceive, all these 
phenomena appear to us  to be truly existent. Although they do not  really exist in that 
way, nevertheless  due to the se predispositions of ignorance, anything and everything 
that appears to us appear s to be truly existent. Just like p eople who , under  certain 
medical conditions, have the vision of falling hairs , in reality, the se falling hairs do 
not exist . It is only because of some medical condition  that they have this vision of 
falling hair s. Likewise, a lthough  phenomena appear to us as truly existent, actually 
they do not truly exist. They do not exist in the way they appear to us.  
 
In fact, with the exception of the b uddhas  and with the exception of the wisdom 
directly perceiving emptiness, all consciousnesses in the continuum of sentient 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 2 of 11 beings, including the conventional valid cogni sers, have th is experience of the 
appearance of tru e existence with regard to whatever object appears to these 
consciousness es. This  is what happens without any doubt.  
 
If you divide sentient beings into ordinary beings and the superiors, even the 
bodhisattva superiors , starting from bodhisattvas on the  first ground all the way up 
to the tenth ground , have the appearance of true existe nce. It is said that this 
appearance of true existence cease s only after enlightenment is achieved .  
 
It is said that only a buddha has abandoned all mistaken consciousnesses . That 
means as  long as one is still a sentient being , even up to the tenth bodhis attva ground, 
there  are still mistaken consciousnesses.  
 
However, a lthough both ordinary beings and the bodhisattva superiors have the 
appearance of true existence , there is a difference between them. Ordinary beings 
definitely have the appearance of true existence . But o n top of that, ordinary beings 
assent to th at appearance . They believe  that things exist in the way they appear , i.e., 
they believe  that things exist truly , that they exist inherently.   
 
What about those who have reali sed the nature of ulti mate reality , i.e., those who 
have reali sed emptiness ? They also have the appearance of true existence  in that 
whatever appears to them appears as truly existent . But b ecause of their reali sation 
of emptiness , they do not assent to th at appearance . Althoug h they still have the 
appearance of true existence , they no longer assent to it  because they know that it is 
not true. Although that is how things appear  to them , they do not believe  it and they 
do not grasp at phenomena to be truly existent. So there is a  difference between 
these superiors and ordinary beings.  
 
Then for t he person who is in meditative equipoise  directly perceiving emptiness , he 
does not have  the appearance of true existence  nor is he  apprehending true existence.   
 
“A visual aberration ” in this verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra  illustrates  the fact that 
while phenomena appear  to be truly existent, they do not exist in that way. Just as 
falling hairs do not exist, the appearance of falling hairs can exist.   
 
While it is true that all phenomen a are in the nature of emptiness and there  is no 
phenomenon that is truly existent , yet  there are phenomena that  are mere 
appearances . They exist in the perspective of a conventional valid cogni ser. Such 
phenomena exist  and we  must be able to posit their existence together with 
emptiness.  
 
If you understand that, then the next analogy in the verse is the “flame of a butter 
lamp ”. 
 
“A flame of a lamp”  
A flame of a butter lamp or oil lamp  does not exist nor is it established from its own 
side as a flame . It is something that arises from the coming together  of many causes 
and conditions. Yo u need to have a lamp , the container  in which you put the butter or 
oil, the wick and so forth. The flame of a butter lamp can only arise when all these 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 3 of 11 factors come togethe r. 
 
Here “a flame of a butter lamp ” highlight s the fact that such a flame can only arise 
from the coming together of  many causes and conditions. As such, it does not exist by 
its own nature , from its own side . The f lame of a butter lamp  is a dependent aris ing, 
i.e., it a rises in dependence upon  the coming together of many causes and conditions.  
 
Likewise, t he samsara that we do not like does not exist under its own power  nor i s it 
established from its own side . Samsara is a product of many causes and condit ions  
and t aking a samsaric rebirth is also the result of the coming together of many causes 
and conditions . Primarily, samsara is the result of karma and afflictions.  
 
Likewise , the sorrowless state that we desire does  not exist from its own side under 
its own power . It is not going to come about automatically from its own side. Rather, 
it can only arise by depending on many factors.  
 
~ Dependent arising or dependent origination  
In his treatise , the Fundamental Wisdom  of the Middle Way , Arya Nagarjuna said  that 
whatever is dependently arisen, that is said to be emptiness. And that which is 
dependently designated, that is said to be the path of the middle or the Middle Way. 
 
There are many levels of meaning to the terms , ‘dependent arising ’ or ‘dependent 
origination ’. Some are subtle r than others.  
 
1. At the level of causality  
The coarsest level of dependent arising can be seen in terms of a cause and effect 
relationship.  By depending on their causes, effects are produced. As such, effects are 
dependent on thei r causes. This is the coarse presentation of dependent arising at 
the level of causality —the relationship between causes and effects . Primarily , effect s 
are dependent on their causes.  This is understood and accepted by the proponents of 
the Great Expositio n School ( GES ), the Sutra School ( SS) and the Mind Only School 
(MOS ). This is dependent arising for the class of impermanent or composed 
phenomena . 
 
2. At the level of the whole and its parts  
Dependent arising at the level of the whole and part s is a subtle r presentation . The 
concept is that a whole  is very much dependent on its parts. You cannot talk of a 
whole without talking of its parts  because  a whole is none other than the constitution 
of its p arts . This level of dependent arising in terms of the whole  and its part s applies 
not only to the class of impermanent or composed phenomena as in the previous 
level of dependent arising. This concept of the whole  and its part s pervades all 
phenomena , including permanent phenomena.   
 
This level of dependent arisin g in terms of the whole and its part s is asserted and 
coherently explained by the proponents of  the Autonomy Middle Way School 
(AMWS ).  
 
 
3. At the level of dependent designation  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 4 of 11 Then we have the subtle st level or meaning of dependent arising —dependent arisi ng 
in term s of how all phenomena are dependently designated.  This assertion is made 
by the proponents of the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), t he Prasangika s. 
This is the subtle st meaning of dependent arising and is also the most challenging 
one to  understand.  
  
Bring to mind any phenomenon —be it an external phenomen on or internal 
phenomen on, be i t a flame of a butter lamp , even our own body , the ‘I’, the self  or 
person. If we look for the imputed object , the flame of a butter lamp or the person , 
what  exactly is the person ? What exactly is the flame of a butter lamp ? Where is it?  
What is it?   When you do a deep analysis, you are left with nothing. You cannot find 
the imputed object.  
 
We could  use a  flame of a butter lamp as an object of enquiry . If it is the correct 
finding, what you find  at the end  is emptiness .  
 
Nevertheless , the object of enquiry does make a difference. It is said that this exercise 
is easier if we use the ‘I’ or person .  We just have to think of the ‘I’ and look for it . 
Where is i t? At the end of looking for the ‘I’, we will discover that the ‘I’ cannot be 
found.  
 
When we look for the real flame of a butter lamp or the real ‘ I’ that  we believe  in, it 
seems that we are not able to point to anything that is the flame of the butter l amp  or 
the ‘I’ .  
 
But t hat does  not mean that the flame of a butter lamp does not exist. That does  not 
mean that the ‘I’ does not exist. It is obvious that there  is a flame of a butter lamp. It is 
obvious that there is an ‘I’.  
 
Let us take the example of the flame of a butter lamp . Does it not function? You 
cannot say that there  is no flame of a butter lamp  as it  does function. First  it has its 
own defining nature in that it is hot, it burns and it functions t o eliminate darkness.  
The fact that w hen you l ook for the real flame of a butter lamp  and you cannot find it , 
that does  not mean that the flame of a butter lamp does  not exist. It exists.  
 
If the real flame of a butter lamp or the real ‘I’ exist s, then when you look for it, you 
should be able to find  it. If something is real, if it exists in the way it appears to you, 
then the more you look for it, the more you should be able to see it. It should be more 
obvious and you should be able to find it.  If there  is something  that you can really 
point to —“Tha t is the flame of a butter lamp!” or “That is the ‘I’!”—then it must be 
found.  
 
But you do not find it. What does that mean? It means that the flame of a butter lamp 
or the ‘I’  does not exist from its own side . It means that  they do not exist  from the 
side of the ir basis of designation  and under their o wn power. Whether it  is the 
aggregates or the ‘I’, its perceived nature of being real, autonomously exist ent or 
existing fr om its own side , does not exist. It  does  not have that nature  at all . Its nature 
is such that it transcends being something that can exist from its own side. T hat 
fact—that it is something that can exist from its own side —can never be discovered 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 5 of 11 because its nature is such that it has never existed from its own side. If it exists in the 
way it appears, then when  we look for it, we should be able to find it.   
 
There are different lines of reasoning for doing such an investigation. If we apply 
those lines of reasoning, we will not be able to find the real flame of a lamp  or the 
real ‘I’ . This  means that their existence  or establishment from their own side  cannot 
stand up to such an analysis .  
 
In the text s that d eal with the Middle Way, there  is a phrase , “unable to withstand  
analysis ” or “unable to bear analysis through reasoning .” If somethi ng exists in the 
way it appears, it should exist from its own side so  that when you look for it, you 
should find it. If you cannot find it, i t shows that inherent existence or existence from 
its own side is something that cannot withstand analysis  or canno t bear analysis 
through reasoning because it cannot be found.   
 
But if you talk about just the ‘I’ itself, not the real ‘I’ but just the ‘I’ that exist s, the 
flame of a butter lamp that exists or the aggregates  that exist , do they exist or not? 
They exist because  reasoning cannot harm  their existence . If you apply reason  and 
you cannot harm the existence of your body , then your body does exist . The very fact 
that your body exists does not go against reasoning.  
 
Going back to looking for the imputed object . Where is this real ‘I’? If the flame of a 
butter lamp, your body or the ‘I’ exist s in the way they appear , that is , appearing to 
exist inherently from their own side, then they ha ve to be found . But they cannot be 
found . They cannot withstand analysis.  
 
Instead, w hat you find  or discover  is the non -existence of true existence. You would 
not discover the non -existence of the ‘I’. Rather you discover the non -existence of a 
truly existent ‘I’. At the end of your analysis, you are not discovering that there is no 
‘I’. You are not discovering that there is no flame of a butter lamp.  
 
Everything in samsara and nirvana —the ‘I’, the body, the mind and so forth —does 
not exist from its own side. Nevertheless, everything exist s. How do we know it exist s? 
Because we e xperience its existence through the benefit or harm we receive when 
we come into contact with these objects. Obviously , they exist.  We experience  the 
enjoyment of  these object s. 
 
But if you dig deeper  and look at their nature , look ing for the real thing —the real ‘I’, 
the real nirvana, the real samsara —what you find is that you cannot find the real 
imputed object. Yet, the imputed object exists.  
 
In the end, there  is no alternative to explain ing existence other than that everything 
that exists , exists  as mer e appearances to a conventional valid cogni ser. Anything and 
everything that exists , exist s as something posited by a conventional valid cogni ser. 
There i s no other option left than this.   
 
Any existen t you can point to  either exists from its own side , und er its own power  or 
not. If it is the former, you should be able to point to something that is the object if it 
exists from its own side. The other option is that i t does  not exist from its own side. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 6 of 11 There  is no other option.  
 
If an existent really exists  from its own side , right there from the basis of designation, 
something that you can point to, then when you look for it, it must be found. If it 
really exists, it must be found.  
 
But when you look for it, you do  not find the real ‘I’, the real body  and so forth.  Yet we 
know that there  is an ‘I’. Th ere is a body  because we experience it. So the conclusion  
is that the only viable  alternative is that phenomena are just mere appearances 
posited by a conventional valid cogni ser. This is how they exist.  
 
Acco rding to  the Prasangika s, the proponents of the CMWS , at the end of the day , 
what the person  is, what the ‘I’ is, is merely imputed in dependence upon the five 
aggregates , the bas es of designation. Which mean s to say that the ‘I’ is not the body, 
not the m ind nor any of the five aggregates . Neither is the ‘I’ all the five aggregates . 
Yet the ‘I’ exist s. So the ‘ I’ exist s as that which is merely imputed in dependence on 
the aggregates. Its existence is no more  and no less than that  which i s just merely 
desig nated, merely impute d by thought , in dependence upon the aggregates.   
 
Having said this, when we look at the ag gregates, suddenly  deep down, we thin k that 
the five aggregates are indeed the bas es of designation of the ‘ I’ and that they are the 
real bas es of designatio n from their own side. The five  aggregates have always 
existed from their own side as the bases of designation for the ‘I’ from its own side  
waiting to be designated.   
 
You know the kind of feeling  I am talking about ? It is t hat kind of feeling . But e ven 
that is wrong. Just as the ‘I’ is merely imputed, the five  aggregates that are the bas es 
of designation for the ‘ I’ are also merely imputed by thought. They do not exist from 
their own side as the bas es of designation for the ‘ I’. 
 
When we say t hat something is established as merely label led by the mind  or exist s 
in mere name or mere convention , the se terms all m ean the same thing. The mind is 
merely label led. It exists in mere name . The basis of designation , the body , also exists  
in mere name . 
  
But w hen we think about establishment in mere name, again , we think that there is a 
real name there. It exists in mere name , but again  we cling to a  real name. But e ven 
that is empty of existing from its own side.  
 
When we say that something  is establish ed in mere name  or mere convention, this 
means that , conventionally speaking , everybody in the world agrees with th e term  
we use. That is about it.  All things exist in mere name. And i f we look for the mere 
name, even the mere name does  not exist from its own side. It is just a mere name by 
convention , famed and known in the world as such. That  is about it. It does  not exist 
from its own side.  
 
What about the mind that imputes  or designates the name ? Even the thought  that 
designates the name does  not exist  from its own side.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 7 of 11 We may think , “Finally , there must be something there imputing all these mere 
name s.” Where then is th is real consciousness ? Even that cannot be found because if 
we were to look  for the thought in our own mind that is imputing —or even  the 
thought in someone else’s mind —when we look for th at imputing thought , where is 
it?  
 
If we were to l ook for it in detail , we cannot find it. Is it the present thought, the past 
thought or a thought that is going to happen in the future? Again , what we find in the 
end is that even the thought is merely imputed.   
 
As such , according to the CMWS , everything is in the nature of emptiness because 
they are dependently designated ( or dependently originated , dependently arisen ). In 
particular , everything that  exist s is merely imputed by thought . As such , they are 
dependently designated. If something is dependently designated, then it cannot exist 
from its own side . It cannot exist inherently. Therefore , the meaning of emptiness is 
dependent arising , or rather specifically , being dependently designated.  
 
In the teachings, this line of reasoning is given to help one understand emptiness:  
 
The subject, the person, is not truly existent  because it is a dependent arising.  
 
The subject, the person, is not truly exi stent: this is the thesis to be proven. The 
reason is: because it is a dependent arising .  
 
What this is saying is that if y ou want to understand emptiness, first  you have to 
understand the m eaning of dependent arising. There are many levels in term s of 
subtlety with regard to dependent arising. It is said that one has to think a lot about 
dependent arising , and then slowly , the meaning of emptiness will become apparent . 
We have to discover for ourselves and think deeply about the meaning of dependent 
arisi ng:  
 starting with dependent arising at the coarse level, i.e., dependent arising in 
term s of causality  
 dependent arising in term s of the whole and its parts  
 finally, dependent arising in term s of how all phenomena are dependent ly 
designat ed  
 
Gradually  one comes to a subtle r understanding of the meaning of dependent arising. 
It is said that when one has the correct understanding of dependent arising —the real 
understanding of dependent arising in term s of how phenomena are dependent ly 
designat ed—then one wi ll be able to destroy the very focus of the apprehension of 
true existen ce, the very thing that ignorance is clinging on  to. Destroying th is very 
thing that ignorance is clinging on  to can induce the experience of what emptiness is.  
 
Through the correct u nderstanding of dependent arising in term s of phenomena 
being dependent designated, you are able to discover from your own experience 
exactly what ignorance is. Ignorance is clinging on  to and focusing on something, 
holding on  to it very tightly. We call t hat the object of negation , that is, true existence, 
inherent existence  or exist ence  from its own side.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 8 of 11 When you r ecogn ise well what ignorance is clinging on  to through your   
understanding of dependent arising , when you are able to see how inherent 
existence does  not exist , then y ou will arrive at an understanding of emptiness . You 
are hitting the point !  Only then can you claim to have some understanding and 
ascertainment of emptiness .  
 
It is said in the Three Principal Aspects of the Path ,  
 
One who sees the cause and effect of all phenomena  
Of both cyclic existence and the state beyond sorrow as forever 
unbetraying,  
And for whom any object trusted in by the grasping mind has 
completely disappeared,  
Has at that time entered the path pleasing the Buddh as.   
 
So the “ one who sees the cause and effect of all phenomena ” as infallible  is the person 
who has the correct understanding of dependent arising , and for whom the object 
that his apprehension of true existence o r ignorance is holding on to so tightly has 
disappeared —that object no longer exists in his experience. This is the person who 
has entered the path  and who makes the buddhas happy.  
 
The person sees that dependent arising is infallible , tha t existents do function . Yet, at 
the same time, in his ex perience , he no longer trust s the very thing that ignoran ce is 
clinging on  to. He sees  that true existence does not exist whatsoever . This is the 
person who is said to have entered the path pleasing the buddha s. Why are the 
buddha s happy with this person?  Because this person has finally started to shake the 
whole  of samsara.  
 
The whole problem is samsara  and its suffering, and the root of all our problem s is 
ignorance , the apprehension of true existence. Someone who really has th e correct 
understanding of d ependent arising, especially at its subtle st level of how all 
phenomena are dependently designated , come s to see emptiness . Then f or such a 
person , the meaning of dependent arising is emptiness and the meaning of emptiness 
is dependent arising. For this pe rson , dependent arising and emptiness are not 
contradictory but compl ementary , i.e., one complements  the other.  
 
It is said that for the person who has a good and correct understanding of the view of 
the Middle Way  (or subtle dependent arising) , when he re flects on dependent arising 
in term s of causality —how effects are dependent on causes and causes bring about 
effects —that  very understanding of dependent arising induces a powerful 
understanding of the empty nature of phenomena and induces th e understandin g of 
emptiness also.  
 
For the person who has the correct understanding of emptiness , that understanding 
comes about through the correct understanding of subtle dependent arising. Since 
the meaning of emptiness is discovered in dependence on the understandi ng of 
subtle dependent arising , the correct understanding and experience of emptiness  
possessed by this person will assist his understanding of dependent arising  too.  This 
is because that very reali sation of emptiness has come about in dependence upon his 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 9 of 11 correct understanding of dependent arising. In this sense, his understanding of 
emptiness compl ements  and helps his understanding of dependent arising. So  they 
do not harm one another.  
 
But this is not to say that therefore the mind that reali ses there i s no true existence, 
that there is no inherent existence , realises dependent arising.  
 
Yes, one has to understand dependent arising , especially subtle dependent arising 
correctly , and through the force of that, one comes to reali se emptiness. The force of  
reali sing emptiness also induces the understanding of dependent arising. But that is  
not to say that the mind that reali ses the emptiness of true existence reali ses 
dependent arising.  
 
This is complicated  and t here are many things you need to know , that you need to 
sort out before this makes sense. One of these things is that emptiness is a non -
affirming negative .   
 
When we say  the word s, ‘emptiness of true existence ’, what those words are getting 
at is simply the negation of true existence  or inherent e xistence . These word s do not 
suggest that there i s something else that ha s to be understood . The ‘emptiness of true 
existence ’ is a simple statement of negation —that there is no true existence —
nothing more than that .  
 
Because the emp tiness of inherent exi stence is a non -affirming negative , as such , the 
mind reali sing emptiness reali ses only that and that alone. Specifically , the  mind 
reali sing emptiness does not reali se dependent arising . But through the force of that 
reali sation of emptiness , it can once again induce  a strong understanding of 
dependent arising.  
 
The next verse in the Three Principal Aspects of the Path  states,  
   
If the appearance of dependent relation,  
Which is unbetraying, is accepted separately from emptiness,  
And as long as they are s een as separate,  
Then one has still not realized the Buddha’s intent.  
 
A person who has found the correct view of the Middle Way is someone:  
 whose understanding of emptiness assists his understanding of dependent 
arising  
 who se understanding of dependent a rising assist s his understanding of 
emptiness  
 
As long as these two appear contradictory , separate  or unrelated , this person has still 
not reali sed the intent of the Buddha.  In other words, a person who sees emptiness 
and dependent arising as contradictor y and not compl ementary  is someone who has 
not fully understood correctly or well the meaning of emptiness.  
 
The next verse states,  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 10 of 11 If [these two realizations] are happening simultaneously without 
alternation,  
And from merely seeing dependent relation as completely 
unbetraying/infallible  
The definite ascertainment comes that completely destroys  
The way all objects are apprehended [as truly existent],  
At that time the analysis of the ultimate view is complete.  
 
Prayers such as the Three Principal Aspect s of the Path  are recited  by many people , in 
which you will find this discussion of emptiness.  
 
Even in the root text of this module , the Tathagata Essence , you will find statement 
like, “Because the nature of the mind is emptiness , therefore it i s in the nat ure of 
clear light. ” There are many statements like this . This means that before you can 
understand the Tathagata Essence , you must have some idea of what emptiness of 
inherent existence  means and how something that is by nature empty can exist. 
Therefore,  gaining some idea of the emptiness of inherent existence become s very 
important.   
 
The final mode of abiding  or the ultimate nature of our mind is unchanging. It has 
always be en like that. That is a fact. Yet we have to say that it is  a dependent arising.  
Its existence must depend on something ; yet its ultimate nature —the suchness or 
emptiness of the mind —has never changed and will never change .  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Question : Is there a common locus between the mental image of a person and the 
person  since a ccord ing to the Prasangika s, the person is mere appearance ? 
 
Answer:  There is no common locus because the mental image of a person is not the 
person. The person that is mere appearance is a fully qualified person who exists.  
 
Question:  Why is the t athagata essence necessarily an emptiness?  
 
Answer:  Although the b uddha  lineage is discussed primarily in term s of the tathagata 
essence , the buddha  lineage is not necessarily the tathagata essence. This will 
become eviden t later on  when we look at V erse 27 that  seems  to indicate that.  
 
Verse 27  
Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive,  
Because suchness is without differentiation,  
And because a [Buddha] lineage exists, all embodied  
Are always in possession of a Buddha essence.  
 
There are different way s of explain ing t he tathagata essence . In Verse 27 , three 
reasons are put forth that attempt s to establish or prove that the tathagata essence 
exists in all sentient beings.  This will become clearer later on.  
 
When we talk about the buddha lineage that is suitable to transform into the body of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 11  
Page 11 of 11 a buddha , there are the naturally abiding lineage and the developmental lineage. The 
reason for this is because when  we talk about a buddha’s bod ies, there are both the 
compounded and uncompounded.  As such , there must be somethi ng that is suitable 
to be transform ed into the compounded body of a b uddha , and l ikewise , there must 
be something that is suitable to be transformed into the uncompounded buddha’s 
body. Therefore, we have the naturally abiding lineage and developmental lin eage.  
 
Question:  Could you please clarify what the u ltimate Buddha Jewel  is? What is the 
pervasion of the ultimate Buddha Jewel versus the final Buddha Jewel?  In Lesson 2 , 
we talked about the ultimate Buddha Jewel  in the sense of the abandonment of the 
afflictive obscurations . Should this not cover the knowledge obscurations as well?   
 
Answer:  In general, the Buddha is neces sarily free from the two obscurations  and n ot 
just free from the afflictive obscuration s. Definitely , the Buddha has to be someone 
who is free of the two obscurations. That is definitely the case.  
 
If you were to compare  the u ltimate Buddha Jewel and the f inal Buddha Jewel , which 
has a broader limit of pervasion? It is the final Buddha Jewel  as it covers more things. 
The ultimate Budd ha Jewel  has a smaller limit of pervasion. So they are not the same  
thing. They do not mean the same thing.  
 
While the ultimate Buddha Jewel and the final Buddha Jewel are not the same , the 
final Buddha Jewel and the final or ultimate r efuge —or the final o r ultimate object of 
refuge —are mutually inclusive. This is as opposed to temporary refuge. So you have 
to be clear with regard to all these terms.   
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 
 
 