Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L19 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.081683
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 19                           23 April 2015  
 
 
Verse from the Vajra Cutter  Sutra: “A dream.” Review of the disintegratedness of karma. 
Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verse 131 : The nine forms of defilements. 
Covering only the first seven defilements from the dormant three poisons to the path of 
meditation abandonme nts.  
 
 
In order to be liberated from the root of cyclic existence , the apprehension of a self 
must be eliminated . The apprehension of a self can only be eliminated with the 
wisdom reali sing selflessness.  With respect to phenomena —the object  of the past, 
the object of the present and  the object of the future —one has to see that they do not 
exist inherently.  
 
VERSE FROM THE VAJRA  CUTTER SUTRA:  “A dream”   
 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a fl ash of lightning, a cloud – 
See conditioned things as such!  
 
“A dream ” is analogous of thing s that have happened in the past. When we remember 
the object s of the past , they appear to exist inherently . We assent to th at appearance  
and apprehend them to exis t inherently . That brings about a range of emotions  such 
as disgust  or attachment.   
 
When we wake  up from a dream, the dream appearances have already ceased to 
exist . But l ater on , when we remember what happen ed in the dream, sometimes we 
react with  differ ent kinds of emotions. Likewise, although things of the past ha ve 
never existed inherently —that  is not their nature —when we apprehend them, we 
believe that they exist inherently and that induces a variety of emotions.  The dream 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 2 of 11 here is an analogy to help u s reflect on how objects of the past do not exist 
inherently.  
 
Is the dream consciousness an erroneous mind? It is a wrong consciousness  but if  it 
is a wrong consciousness, how is it that we are able to remember what has happened 
in the dream when we are awake?  You can not remember something that you had not 
reali sed earlier. Is it not the case that w hen you reali se something , later  on, there  is a 
possibility of remembering what you reali sed? 
 
Khen Rinpoche: Th is is the question. It is j ust a thought . You think about it.  
 
The meaning of recollecti on is remembering something that had been ascertained 
earlier. Isn’t a remembering consciousness or memory then a  subsequent cogni ser?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: This topic  (i.e., lorig) has already been completed.  
 
Is a dr eam consciousness a consciousness that reali ses its object?  
 
(Student ’s response  is inaudible) .  
 
Does t he apprehension of true existence reali se its object ? 
 
How is the second question related to the first question? When you give an answer , 
another questi on is raised . Do you see now the benefit  of this exercise ?  
 
Question  1: Does a  dream consciousness reali se object s? 
 
Student:  Yes, i t has to reali se the object that it sees in the dream . Otherwise , how 
would you have any experience at all?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : So your answer is yes ? 
 
Student : Yes.   
 
Question  2: Does the apprehension of true existence reali se its object , yes or no? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : The answer is e ither yes or no. Whatever your answer is, you have to  
explain  the reason.  I am saying , “realise its object .” If your answer is that it doesn’t 
reali se its object and I ask you why, then you have to explain your answer.  
 
Student:  Yes.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Is the apprehension of true existence a valid cogni ser? 
 
Student : It is v alid but mistaken.  
 
Khen Rinpoc he: I think this will take whole  night.  
 
Student : Then the answer is no.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 3 of 11 Khen Rinpoche : What  is the problem if  it is a valid cogni ser?  
 
Student:  It is valid with respect to its apprehended object but not valid with respect 
to … 
 
Khen Rinpoche : What does  the apprehension of true existence reali se? What does 
ignorance  realise?  
 
Student:  Ignorance reali ses the inherently exist ent object itself.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : How can you realise a non -existent?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: I think this is getting worse  and worse  you kn ow.  
 
This shows how important it is to  think and to as k questions. If you are content and 
simply accept whatever others say and leave it a t that, then there  is no way to learn 
and improve. Going b ack to the question : Does the drea m consciousness reali se 
objects? In our experience , we remember things that we dream of. How does that 
happen?  
 
REVIEW OF DISINTEGRATEDNESS OF KARMA  
 
Maybe we will talk a little  about the disintegratedness we discussed on Tuesday. Th is 
is connected to the analogy of a dream.  
 
Whe n karma ceases, it produce s an effect sometime in the future , i.e., an effect arises 
from th is past karma. According to the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), the 
pastness of karma or the disintegratedness of karma is a composite phenomenon . As 
such, it  produces an effect.  
 
The CMWS  explained that when karma ceases  one day —the disintegratedness of 
karma —the continuum of that karma will produce an effect  when conditions ripe n. 
 
With the exception of the CMWS , every other Buddhist tenet assert s that all 
phenomena exist by way of their own character, from their own side and are 
inherent ly existen t. With the exception of the CMWS , every proponent of Buddhist 
tenet s has to account for how a result can occur after the karma has been 
accumulated  and ceases. F or them, the disintegratedness of karma is a non -
composite phenomenon . As such, they must account for how karma can still give rise 
to a result.  
 
If the  disintegratedness of karma is permanent  and non -composite, it cannot give rise 
to an effect. At the same time, they assert that all phenomena exist by way of their 
own character  and exist from their own side. That means there must be something 
that one can point to  as karma and the result o f karma.  Since they have to account for 
the effects of karma  that is w hy they c ame up with the factor of non -wastage. Some 
proponents of the Mind Only School ( MOS ) came up with th e concept of a mind -
basis -of-all being the basis of infusion of such karmic imprints  while others assert 
that the mental consciousness is the repos itory of karmic imprints. Basically, they 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 4 of 11 had to come up with the concept of karmic imprints  as something that one can point 
to, this being a n ecessary  tenet of those schools.   
 
According to the CMWS , however there is no need to come up with explanations such 
as the factor o f non -wastage, the mind -basis -of-all and so forth . This is because 
according to the  CMWS, all phenomena that exist necessar ily exist in a non -inherent 
way. So phenomena are not inherently existen t and t hey do not exist from their own 
side.  
 
As such, karma does not exist from its own side  and does not exist inherently. The 
production of karma, the arising of a new karma and the accumulation of karma do 
not exist from their own side. Likewise, the disintegration of karma does not exist 
from its own side. It does not exist inherently by way of its own  nature. As such, the 
cessation or disintegratedness of karma is not an inherently existent phenomen on. 
There  is no inherently exist ent disintegration and there is no inherently exist ent 
disinte gratedness.  
 
This is not to say that the CMWS do es not assert imprints. You should not get the 
wrong idea that there i s no such thing as imprints . That is not the point. The point I’m 
trying to make here is that the pastness of karma, the disintegratednes s of karma , is a 
composite phenomenon . Because it is a composite phenomenon, it will give rise to its 
effect . So in the next moment  of the disintegratedness of karma , another moment of 
disintegratedness is produced. This is  because the disintegratedness of  karma is a 
composite  phenomenon. If it is a composite phenomenon,  a functioning thing, it 
necessarily produces an effect. This is the explanation.  
 
What if somebody were to ask you this question :  
 
You say that karma ’s disintegratedness produces disinteg ratedness , i.e., that 
one moment of disintegratedness produces another moment of 
disintegratedness . So there is this  continuum of disintegratedness.  
 
The disintegratedness of a non -virtuous karma produces the next  moment of 
disintegratedness of the non -virtuous karma and so forth. If there are so many 
moments of disintegratedness, does that mean there  are also so many non -
virtuous karma?  
 
If the disintegratedness of karma produces disintegratedness, and that 
disintegratedness produces another moment of dis integratedness, won’t that 
be endless? It follows then that there  is no end to the ripening effects. They 
will be  infinite.  
 
Then t here  is no b uddha lineage  and this means there  is no way to achieve 
enlightenment.  
 
Do you see the point behind this questi on? Is there some benefit or not?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Either you are totally confused and see no point in thinking about this 
or do you have some interest in what I’m askin g here?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 5 of 11 How would you answer this question ?   
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Verse 131  
The nine forms o f defilements —(1-3) [the latencies or seeds of] 
desire, hatred, and obscuration [which are overcome by the 
exalted wisdom of a Superior], (4) the strong arousal [or 
manifestation] of those [three poisons],  
(5) The level of] the predispositions [of ignoran ce which are the 
means of achieving the uncontaminated actions and the mental 
body in the  continuum of a Foe Destroyer and which are to be 
overcome by the exalted wisdom of the great enlightenment], (6) 
the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing [wh ich 
obstruct a common being from seeing reality], (7) the objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation [in the continuum of a 
Learner Superior], (8) The objects to be abandoned by the 
[seven] impure [grounds which are to be overcome by the pure 
ground s],  
And (9) the defilements dependent on the pure grounds [which are 
to be overcome by the vajra -like meditative stabilization],  
 
Among the nine  forms of defilements , the first three are dormant desire, dormant 
anger and dormant ignorance (or bewilderment ) and the fourth is the strong arousal 
of th ese three poisons.  
 
The first three defilements: dormant desire, dormant hatred, dormant ignorance (or 
bewilderment)  
The first three refer  to those afflictions that produce rebirth in the form and formless  
real ms. This require s an explanation of the concentration s and the form and formless 
realms.  
 
First, one need s to have achieved calm abiding . On the  basis of that , through the 
different access es or preparations, one achieve s an actual concentration. This is 
followed by the meditation s on the aspects of coarseness and peacefulness whereby 
one look s at the attributes of a lower realm  and consider s them to be coarse . Then 
one looks at the attributes of a higher realm , finding them peaceful and appealing. 
One  then desire that. This is the meditation on the aspects of coarseness and 
peacefulness.  
 
When one achieve s the first concentration, at that time , the manifest afflictions of the 
desire realm have ceased  or stopped. But that does  not mean that the seeds of the se 
affliction have been removed. They are still there  and a s such , they are called 
dormant.  
 
You may recall from the stages of the path literature  that there are t hree kinds of 
karma : 
1. Non-meritorious karma  
2. meritorious karma  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 6 of 11 3. immoveable karma  
It is the imm oveable karma  that causes one to be born in the form and formless 
realms  and it is the dormant three poisons that cause one to accumulate that karma .  
 
Starting with achieving the first concentration, this is followed by the second, third 
and fo urth concen trations . These are the lands or places of the form realm. The 
beings in th is realm  do accumulate karma but they accumulate only immoveable 
karma. Non-meritorious karma and meritorious karma are not accumulated on the 
basis of an existence in either the form realm or formless realm.   
 
But t hings are not so straightforward. This is what is taught but you may wonder. 
Let’s say you are a form realm god  or a formless realm god. T he question is  this:  
“Why can’t I create meritorious karma ? Why do I only accumula te immoveable 
karma ”?   
 
Non-meritorious karma is the karma to be reborn in the  three  lower realms . 
Meritorious karma is the karma that will cause one to be born as a human or a desire 
realm god.  But the gods in the form and formless realms do not accumula te the 
karma to be born in the lower realms  while they are  there nor do they accumulate 
the karma that will cause them to be reborn as a human or a desire realm god.   
 
The karma that the gods in the form and formless realms accumulate is immoveable 
karma. It is called immoveable karma  because the effect of that immoveable karma 
can only be experienced in the form and formless realms . It will not ripen on the 
basis of a desire realm body. As such, it is called immoveable. The effects of the 
projecting karma accumulated on the basis of a f orm or formless realm existence  can 
only be experienced in the form and formless realm s. This is the meaning behind the 
words ‘immoveable karma ’. 
 
The karma to be born in the desire realm must be motivated by a desire realm 
affliction , i.e., an affliction that belong s to the desire realm. As such, because the gods 
in the form and formless realm s do not have manifest desire realm afflictions, they 
do not accumulate the karma to born in the desire realm.   
 
We are not saying that  the gods in the form and formless realms are guaranteed to 
mov e towards enlightenment. Nor are we saying that the gods in the form and 
formless realms can never be reborn again in the desire realm. We are not saying 
that  because  the gods in the form and f ormless realms often go to the hell realms .  
 
With regard to the realms of cyclic existence, they are often referred to range from 
the Avici  hells up to the peak of cyclic existence , the highest form less realm . That is 
samsara . Samsara means circling . So i t is obvious that cyclic existence is the three 
realms : the desire realms, the form realms and the formless realms. As such, the gods 
in the form and formless realms definitely can be reborn in the desire realm s. But the 
point we are making here now is tha t the gods in the form or formless realms  do not 
accumulate the karma to be reborn in the desire realm s.  
 
But t here are gods in the form and formless realm who  are reborn in the hell realm s. 
What is the cause for that? That is due to their past karma , i.e., the karma they h ave 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 7 of 11 accumulated to be reborn in the hell s in the past.  
 
The purpose of this explanation is because the first three of the  nine defilements 
listed in Verse 131 are the three mental poisons in the form of latenc ies or seed s. We 
call them dormant —dormant attachment, dormant anger, dormant ignorance (or 
bewilderment ). These are the dormant three poisons that motivate the accumulation 
of the projecting karma for the higher realms , i.e., t he form and formless realms .  
 
While this is the case, it is still possible to have manifest afflictions in the higher 
realms.  Although the first three defilements are listed as the dormant three mental 
poisons , they also include their manifest forms , because there are manifest desire 
and manifest bewilderment  in the higher realms.   
 
The fourth defilement: “the strong arousal [or manifestation] of those [three poisons]”  
The fourth defilement refer s to the afflictions that motivate the accumulation of 
meritorious and non -meritorious karma such as:  
 the strong at tachment or desire that leads to the accumulation of meritorious 
karma that causes a good rebirth in the desire realms.  
 the strong anger that leads to the accumulation of the non -meritorious karma 
that causes one to be reborn in the lower realms   
 
I thin k perhaps th is is the reason for classifying the defilements in such a way , i.e., 
separating the dormant afflictions from the afflictions of the desire realms . This is in 
order to relate the afflictions to the three realms.  
 
Another point that is being made here is th is: Of the two —the dormant afflictions 
and the manifest afflictions —the manifest afflictions have to be stopped  first before 
one can overcome the dormant afflictions.  
 
The peak of cyclic existence  is the highest realm in the formless realms .  The level 
below that is called nothingness.  To abandon the afflictions up to that level of 
nothingness, one can depend on the worldly path  that meditates on the aspect s of 
coarseness and peacefulness . But b y depending on such a path, one can only go as f ar 
as the level of nothingness.  
 
The worldly path cannot overcome the afflictions of the highest realm in samsara , the 
peak of cyclic existence. In order to overcome the afflictions of the peak of cyclic 
existence , in particular  to abandon the seeds of th ose afflictions, one has to depend 
on a transcendental path  or non-worldly path . By depending on a transcendental or 
non-worldly path, one abandons the afflictions together with their seeds . Then one 
become s a foe destroyer or arhat.  
 
The fifth defilement : the level of the predispositions of ignorance  
Does that mean the arhat’s job is done in that he has nothing left to abandon? The 
answer is no. In order to understand that there is still something left  to be 
abandoned, we have the fifth defilement , the level of the predispositions of 
ignorance.  
 
What if we were to say that the level of the predispositions of ignorance is simply the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 8 of 11 imprints placed by the apprehension of true existence?  If that is the case, what do 
these imprints do? What do they produce? T hey produce the appearance of true 
existence. Based on this appearance of true existence , subtle effort arises and that 
motivate s the accumulation of uncontaminated karma.  That results in the mental 
body, i.e., a body having a mental nature.  We have discu ssed this before : 
 From the imprints of the apprehension of true existence comes the a ppearance of 
true existence . 
 Then s ubtle effort  arises.  
 This leads to the a ccumulation of uncontaminated karma . 
 The accumulation of uncontaminated karma r esult s in the men tal body  
 
Let’s think about this . There is this mental body.  What is its substantial cause? What 
are its cooperative condition? If you think about it, these are difficult  questions . What 
if we were to say that : 
 the level of the predispositions of ignoranc e is the cooperative condition for the 
mental body ?  
 the uncontaminated karma is the substantial cause of the mental body?  
Is uncontaminated karma consciousness?  Karma is intention  and intention is 
consciousness . It follows then that uncontaminated karma i s consciousness . 
 
I often wonder  whether these issues I b ring  up in class make  any sense  to you at all. 
Otherwise , there is no point continuing  with this approach . Are you follow ing the 
discussion ? Are you interested?  
 
To reiterate, w hat is the substantial  cause  or main producer of a mental body? As I 
said earlier , if we take the level of predispositions of ignorance to be the imprints 
that are planted by the apprehension of true existence , then what do these imprints 
do?:  
 These i mprints produce the appear ance of true existence .  
 Because there is the appearance of true existence , this leads to the accumulation 
of uncontaminated karma.   
 If uncontaminated karma is accumulated , there must be an effect.  
 What is its effect? It is said to be this mental body.  
 
It is said in the teaching s that when the bodhisatt vas are abid ing on the pure grounds 
and work ing for sent ient beings, it still requires effort  on their part , i.e. , they are not 
able to do such work effortlessly .  But t heir kind of effort is unlike the e ffort we exert . 
Our effort or exertion is extremely coarse  while their effort is subtle effort . Only the 
buddhas can work for sentient beings spontaneous ly, without effort . Non -buddha s 
cannot do so. This includ es the bodhisattvas on the pure ground s becaus e they still 
have the level of predispositions of ignorance and uncontaminated karma.  
 
These beings who have such mental bodies  are said to undergo birth and death . But 
again their birth and death are unlike what we experience which is very coarse  and 
gross. Their birth and death is more refined and subtle r and w e ca ll it the 
inconceivable transference of death.   
 
We do possess something that is like  an equivalent of a mental body . This happen s 
when we are in the intermediate state. The body of an intermed iate state being is like  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 9 of 11 a light energy  body  and is not a coarse body made up of blood and bones. It is said 
that the intermediate state being s can pass through walls  as their bodies do not have 
the characteristic of obstructiveness. They can go to and arrive at any place through 
the power of mere thought , i.e., they only need to think of a place and they will be  
there right away.  
 
Perhaps we can compare the inconceivable transference of death that  people with 
mental bodies undergo  to what happen s to us in the intermediate state .  The lifespan  
of an intermediate  state being is said to be a maximum of 49 days. Every seven days , 
if th at being is still in the intermediate state, then th at intermediate state be ing dies 
and is reborn again.  
 
The path of seeing abandonments and the path of meditation abandonments  
In the context of the nine defilements, after the level of the predispositions of 
ignorance come s the path of seeing abandonment s and the path of meditation 
abandonment s.   
 
~ Afflictive obscurations and  knowledge obscurations  
In general, if it is an obscuration, it has to be included either  among the p ath of seeing 
abandonment s or the p ath of meditation abandonment s. In order to understand this, 
we need to have some idea of w hat the obscuration s are. By now, w e would have 
heard th is many times :   
 The obsc uration s are the afflictive obsc uration s and the knowledge obscuration s.  
 The afflictive obscuration s refer to the phenomen a that principally interfere with 
the attainment of liberation . 
 The knowledge obs curation s principally interfere with the a ttainment of 
omniscience.  These are called knowledge obscuration s because they obscure one 
from seeing the diversit ies of phenomena.   
Put an other way, a knowledge obscuration is the obscuration that causes one to arise  
from the meditative equipoise focus sing on emptiness. Until one has  achieve d 
enlightenment, one still has  to go in and out of meditation as one cannot see both 
aspects of phenomena at the same time. It is only when one is a buddha  that one does 
not h ave to arise again  from meditative equipoise as a b uddha abides forever within 
emptiness. Only a buddha can abide in meditative equipoise focus sing on emptiness 
without having to arise from that state  ever again. Th is is the unique defining 
characteristic of a buddha . Nobody else can do that.  
 
This q uestion  then arises : What is the fault or fallacy i f a buddha were to decide to 
arise from his meditative equipoise on emptiness?  
 
The word ‘afflictive ’ in afflictive obscuration s tells us that these obscurati ons have 
their root in the afflictions. The afflictive obscuration s cause one to remain 
unpacified , i.e., they cause one to continue to experience the suffering of cyclic 
existence.  The nature of an affliction is such that it causes the mind to be very 
disturbed , to be   an unpacified state  of mind . There is no peace , whereas nirvana is 
peace  so t he afflictive obscuration s are the phenomen a that obs truct the 
achievement of peace or nirvana.   
 
 What constitutes the afflictive obscuration s? According to the CMWS, the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 10 of 11 afflictive obscuration s are made up primarily of the apprehension of a self 
together with its seed  and the afflictions such as hatred, anger and desire that are 
induced by that conception of a self.  
 What about the knowledge obscuration s? The knowl edge obscurations are made 
up of the imprints that are deposited  by the apprehension of true existence  and 
the mistaken dualistic appearance produced by those imprints.   
So these are the assertions of the CMWS as to what the afflictive obscurations and the  
knowledge obscurations are.  
 
~ The obscurations in terms of the path of seeing abandonments and the path of 
meditation abandonments  
You can also look at the obscuration s in term s of the path of seeing abandonment s 
and the p ath of meditation abandonment s: 
 
 afflicti ve obscurations  that are path of seeing abandonment s   
o The p ath of seeing abandonment s are the intellectually acquired 
apprehension of true existence together with its seeds and the afflictions , such 
as attachment , that are induced by that concep tion  or those seeds.   
o The intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence is abandoned when 
the path of release of the path of seeing  is attained.  
o The intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence arises due to the 
adoption of certain vie ws, asserting  a particular philosophy and so forth. It is 
not innate and it is not natural.  
 
  afflictive obscurations th at are path of meditation abandonment s 
o These afflictive obscuration s primarily refer to the innate apprehension  of 
true existence . This  apprehension has existed within us since beginningless 
time . It is part of our nature , our tendency to naturally think , “I am real. ”  
o They are the innate apprehension of true existence together with its seeds 
and the afflictions that are induced by that c onception or those seeds . 
o The afflictive obscurations that are  the p ath of meditation abandonments 
cannot be abandoned by the path of seeing. T hey can only be abandoned by 
the path of meditation . 
 
The knowledge obscurations are  not divided into intellectua lly acquired and innate. 
According to the CMWS , there are no knowledge obscurations  that are path of seeing 
abandonment s. They are only path of meditation abandonment s. 
 
THE DEFILEMENTS IN VERSE 131 (SEVEN OF THE NINE DEFILEMENTS ) 
 
1. Dormant desire  
2. Dormant anger  
3. Dormant bewilderment   
These afflictions produce rebirth in the form and formless realms . 
 
4.  Strong arousal of those 
three poisons   
These afflictions motivate the accumulation of meritorious and non -
meritorious karma:  
 strong anger leads to the accumulation of the non-meritorious 
karma that causes one to be reborn in the lower realms .  
 strong attachment or d esire motivates the accumulation of 
meritorious karma th at causes a good rebirth in the desire realms.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 19  
Page 11 of 11 THE DEFILEMENTS IN VERSE 131 (SEVEN OF THE NINE DEFILEMENTS ) 
 
5. The level of the 
predisp ositions of ignorance  These are the imprints that are planted by the apprehension of true 
existence  and are the cooperative condition for the arising of the 
mental body.  
 
 
6. Path of seeing 
abandonment s The intellectually acquired apprehension of true ex istence together 
with its seeds and the afflictions such as the attachment that are 
induced by that conception o r those seeds.  
 
 
7. Path of meditation 
abandonment s The afflictive obscurations that are the innate apprehension of true 
existence together wi th its seeds and the afflictions that are induced 
by th at conception or those  seeds.  
The knowledge obscurations  are also included here.   
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 26 APRIL 2015  
1. Discuss the meaning of Verse 27.  
2. Verse 25 lists the four p oints that are difficult to comprehend. What are they?  
3. With reference to Verse 32, what are the four obscurations and what are their 
antidotes?  
4. Explain the connection between the four antidotes and the four results, which are 
the perfection of the qualitie s of purity, self, bless and permanence listed in Verse 
34. (Verses 36 & 37 are also related to this question).  
Optional questions:  
5. Discuss the nine examples (listed in Verse s 97 & 98) and the meanings that they 
exemplify.  
6. There are twelve links of depend ent origination related to the class of thoroughly 
afflicted phenomena but there are also twelve links of dependent origination that 
are related to the class of thoroughly pure phenomena. If so, what do you think 
they are?  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyu rme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  