Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L08 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:27.613419
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 8                        10 March 2015  
 
 
Explaining the verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra : “A star.”  “A visual aberration.”  Chapter One: 
The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verses 20—25. Verse 20: Why the Dharma Jewel and the 
Sangha Jewel are not the final objects of refuge. Verse 21: Only the Buddha is the final object 
of refuge.  Verse 22: Etymology of ‘Jewel’.  Verses 23 —25: The inconceivable basic constituent.  
 
 
EXPLAINING THE VERSE FROM THE VAJRA CUTTER SUTRA  
 
Every time before class  begins  we recite th is verse that comes from the Vajra Cutter 
Sutra : 
 
A star, a visual aberration , a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud – 
See conditioned things as such!  
 
The analogy of “a star”  
The verse starts with “a star .”  This is analogous of how the two levels of realit y or 
two level s of truths  are complete within any specific phenomenon.   
 
When we look ed at the seven diamond topics, we saw how they could be d iscussed 
from an ultimate perspective or a conventional perspective . It is said that within each 
and every single phenomenon , there are these two levels  of truths  that are related to 
the mind to which they appear : 
 There is a level of truth that appears to the non-conceptual wisdom , specifically 
the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness. This level of reality, the appearance to 
the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness , is an  ultimate truth.   
 Then there is a nother level of truth that appear s to a mind called a conventional 
valid cognizer . This is essentially a  valid cognizer in the continuum of a non -
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 2 of 11 superior , someone who has not dire ctly realized emptiness.  This level of reality is 
the conventional truth (or obscurational  truth  or concealer truth ). 
 
For example, take the wisdom directly perceiving the emptiness of the person . It is 
said that in the perspective of this wisdom , the pers on does not appear . Instead w hat 
appears to this mind is the mere emptiness of inherent existence . What appears to 
this mind is the mere negation  of true existence , i.e., the emptiness of true existence .  
 
Although the person does not appear to the wisdom directly perceiving the  
emptiness of a person, this is not to say that the person does not exist. The person  
exist s but the person does not appear to the perspective of this wisdom directly 
perceiving the emptiness of a person.   
 
To illustrate how only the  emptiness of true existence appear s in the perspective of 
the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness , the example of “a star ” is given.  The stars 
are up there in the sky  but they are not seen during daytime . We don’t see stars 
during the day  not because they are not there .  
 
Rather what appears during daytime  is the mere absence of obstructiveness . This is 
analogous of what appears to the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness.  When we 
look at the sky during daytime, what we see is just vacuity  or space , an or dinary 
emptiness with  nothing there . This is analogous of how nothing appears except 
emptiness  to the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness .  
 
In the perspective of this wisdom, only the mere negation of the object of negation , 
the emptiness of true existen ce, appears . In this case, t he basis of designation , the 
person , does not appear to the perspective of th e wisdom directly realizing the 
emptiness of the person.  This is what is said in the teachings about the manner of 
appearance to a wisdom directly perc eiving emptiness .  The analogy of a star is used 
to illustrate th is. 
 
On the other hand, a  great diversity  of phenomena appears  to the conventional valid 
cogni zers, i.e., those valid cognisers who do not realise emptiness . What appear  to 
conventional valid  cognizers are conventional phenomena.  
 
When we talk about consciousnesses  (or minds) that do not have emptiness as their 
object, these mind s that do not realize emptiness  can be valid cognizer s but they can 
be a correctly assuming consciousness, doubt  or even a wrong consciousness. There 
are many possibilities w hen we talk about  mind s that do not realize emptiness . The 
mistaken state s of consciousness —wrong consciousnesses , m istaken 
consciousnesses  and, in particular , those consciousnesses that are pollut ed by the 
apprehension of true existence —experience a whole variet y of mistaken  and wrong 
appearances.   
 
When we talk about conventional minds —the mind s that do not realize emptiness — 
there are instances whereby phenomena conventionally exist in the way th at they 
appear . There is some kind of conventional reality there . But this is not necessarily so  
as there are also many instances whereby the manner of appearance does not reflect 
the reality. There is a whole range of different possibilities of how phenom ena can 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 3 of 11 appear to conventional minds.  
 
But if we are talking about conventional valid cognizers, there is a way of in which a 
phenomenon appears  to conventional valid cognizers. We need to posit a level of 
reality  in relation to a conventional valid cogni zer. 
 
For example, the person appears to the perspective of a conventional valid cognizer 
realizing a person . Just as the person appears  to this conventional valid cognizer 
apprehending a person, this person exists. We need to be able to posit that the 
person exist s and function s.  
 
In the analogy of a star , we do  not see stars during the day time . But a fter the sun sets 
and the sky is dark, suddenly we see a whole constellation  of many stars . This is 
analogous of how a great  diversity of phenomena appears  to the conventional valid 
cognizer.  
 
In essence , the analogy of a star illustrate s how , with regard to a ny given 
phenomenon , there is a coming together of appearance and emptiness :  
 There is one level of reality that appears to the wisdom directly perceivin g 
emptiness  that is an ultimate truth.  
 There is another level of reality that appears to a conventional valid cognizer  that 
is a conventional truth.  
 
The analogy of “a visual aberration”  
Havin g said that about a conventional truth , it should be noted that , for example, in 
the case of a conventional valid cognizer realizing a person , the person does exist and 
function s. But this is not to say that whatever appears to a conventional valid 
cognizer is necessarily  an accurate depiction of how th e phenomenon in  question 
exists .  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Do you understand  what I am saying ?  
 
Those of you who have studied tenets  should know this already. It is clearly asserted 
by the Consequence Middle Way School that in relation to a sentient being, all 
consciousnesses —with the exception of the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness — 
are necessarily mistaken. For those of you who have studied tenets  earlier , this is 
what you should understand immediately in relation to what I have just explained.  
 
So to recap, w hatever appe ars to a conventional valid cognizer, that appearance is 
not necessarily an accurate depiction of the  reality  or the truth  of th e phenomenon in 
question b ecause a ll consciousnesses  of sentient beings —with the exception of the 
wisdom directly perceiving emp tiness —are pollu ted by the latenc ies of ignorance . 
Whatever appears to these consciousnesses always appears  to exist from its own 
side , although in reality that is not the case.  In other words, w hatever appears to a 
conventional valid cognizer appears to b e truly existen t, to exist inherently, to exist  
truly and to exist right there from its own side. From the perspective of the 
Consequence Middle Way school, all these different expressions mean the same 
thing . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 4 of 11 Do the phenomena in question exist in the way  they appear? They appear to exist 
truly but do they exist truly? The answer is no. It is said that phenomena do not exist 
in the way they appear  but e verything that appear s to the conventional valid 
cognizer appear s to exist  from its own side under its ow n power.   
 
If these phenomena that appear to exist from their own side really do exist from their 
own side —if that is the truth  and whatever appears is necessarily how it exists —that 
means not only do phenomena appear  to exist truly , they are indeed truly  existen t or 
inherent ly existen t. Then that must be the  ultimate  or final nature , the final mode of 
being or existence of th ose phenomena , their deepest nature.  
 
Then i f that is the case, then that ultimate mode of being of th ose phenomena —if 
they really exist  in that way —must  appear to the wisdom directly perceiving 
emptiness.  
 
In short, the phenomen a that appear to the conventional valid cognizer to exist  from 
their own side  and to be truly existen t in reality do not exist in that way . They do not 
exist  from their own side. They do not exist  truly . As such , there is a disparity 
between appearance and reality , i.e., a lthough that is not the reality  of the ultimate 
mode of being of phenomena but that is how they appear. The analogy of “a visual 
aberration ” is used to illustrate this.  
 
We can continue with the rest of th is verse  if we find the time do so i n the future. I 
thought it is important and good to have some idea about the two truths because the 
two truths are often discussed in many contexts, even i n this text.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Why the Dharma Jewel and the Sangha Jewel are not final objects of refuge  
Verse 20 is a discussion of the conventional object of refuge.  
 
Verse20  
Because [the verbal doctrine is] abandoned, because [the 
realizational doctrine  in the continuum of a Bodhisattva 
Superior] has the quality of deception,  
Because [a cessation is] a [mere] non -existence, and [non -Buddhas] 
have fright,  
The two forms of doctrine and the community of Superiors  
[Respectively] are not the supreme eternal ref uge.  
 
“Because [the verbal doctrine is] abandoned” : What is abandoned here is the 
scriptural Dharma , what we can read, study and listen to. Once you have achieved the 
final fruit, you do not need to rely on the scriptural Dharma to maintain your 
achievemen t. It is like having to rely on a boat to  cross the ocean . Once you have 
crossed the ocean  and reached the other shore, you do  not need the boat anymore. 
You leave the boat behind and move on. Likewise when you have achieved the final 
fruit, you do  not need to rely on the scriptural Dharma because you have achieved 
your goal.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 5 of 11 Here we are talking about the Three Jewels , in particular the  Dharma Jewel . When we 
talk about the objects of refuge there are many ways of looking at them . Likewise for 
the Dharma J ewel , there is the conventional Dharma Jewel and the ultimate Dharma 
Jewel. In this case, the scriptural Dharma is a temporary object of refuge and there is 
no need to hold on to it forever .  
 
“Because [the realizational doctrine in the continuum of a Bodh isattva Superior] has 
the quality of deception” : “The realizational doctrine”  here refers to the true path s, 
the realizational Dharma Jewel , i.e., the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva  superior . This wisdom directly per ceiving emptiness in 
the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is not the final object of refuge because this 
wisdom has  “the quality of deception. ” 
 
In general , composed or impermanent phenomen a have the “quality of deception ” 
because composed phenomena und ergo change . Therefore they are not  reliable  and 
are not stable.   
 
Some expert  commentators  have explained this section in this way : “The 
realizational doctrine” here is the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva superior that has the quality of deception. T herefore 
these true path s in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior , this realizational 
Dharma Jewel , are not the f inal object s of refuge . Why? B ecause they have the quality 
of deception , mean ing they are changeable and unstable. As such , they would also 
have to say that the form bodies, i.e., the e manation body and e njoyment body and 
the w isdom truth body, which are all composed phenomen a that undergo change , are 
not reliable object s of refuge . They end up by saying that only emptiness is the real 
object of refuge.   
 
Gyaltsab Je disputes this explanation. How then should we understand this “quality 
of deception ”? In the perspective of the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva superior , there is the appearance of a complete absence 
of any stains. Although there is this appearance  of the absence of stains, in reality , 
this is not the case . This is  because th is mind —the wisdom directly perceiving 
emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior —has not finished its task of 
removing all its stains . There are still stains  to be removed  and this bodhisattva 
superior still has more work to do.  
 
Therefore this mind —the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the continuum of 
the bodhisattva sup erior —has yet to be transform ed from a mind with stains into a 
mind that is completely free of stains . The point is th at the wisdom directly 
perceiving emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior  is still a mind with 
defilements , i.e., it has yet to be  separated from all defilements , and there is still some 
way to go before that mind is free of all defilements . As such,  this mind is not the final 
object of refuge.  
 
You have to know that : 
 the scriptural Dharma is not the final object of refuge . 
 the reali sational Dharma, in the form of the true path s in the continuum of a 
bodhisattva superior , is also not the final object of refuge.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 6 of 11 Then w hat about true cessation s? There i s a Dharma Jewel that is true cessation s. 
 
“Because  [a cessation is] a [mere] non-existence” : “[A cessation]”  here refers to the  
nirvana without remainder  that is a true cessation , the mere abandonment of the 
afflictions and suffering .  
 
The key word here is “ [mere ].” What does it suggest? It suggests that there are still 
knowledge ob scuration s that ha ve to be abandoned  and a s such, it is not a final 
object of refuge.  The nirvana without remainder is a true cessation but nonetheless it 
is not the final object of refuge.  
 
So u p to this point in the verse , it is saying that the Dharma J ewel is not the final 
object of refuge. While the Dharma Jewel may not be the final object of refuge  that is 
not to say that it is not an actual refuge. You must make a clear distinction between 
an actual refuge and the final object of refuge. The Dharma J ewel is our actual refuge, 
the real protection , but the Dharma Jewel is not the final object of refuge.  
 
“[Non -Buddhas] have fright”:  The h earer foe destroyer s and s olitary realizer foe 
destroyer s are Sangha Jewel s but they are  not final objects of refuge . Why? Because 
they “have f right” or fe ar. Why are these Sangha Jewel s not the final object s of 
refuge? Because the h earer foe destroyer s and solitary realizer foe destroyers still 
have the knowledge obscurations.  
 
In short : 
 The scriptural Dharma is not t he final object of refuge .  
 The reali sational Dharma is not the final object of refuge .  
 True cessation s are not the final object s of refuge .   
 All non -buddha superiors are not final objects of refuge .  
 
This is where some of the material that were covered  in the tenets  module would be 
useful. You need to be very clear  about them. Otherwise it will be very confusing.  
 
Revisiting tenets  
There are different assertions a ccording to the four Buddhist tenets . Many assert that 
there are three final vehicles wher eas there is also the assertion that there is only 
one final vehicle. If you do not understand that there are differing views as to how 
many final vehicles there are, then you will  be c onfus ed. Th ese topics were already 
covered in the tenets  module and it will be good to revisit them on your own.  
 
There are  proponents of : 
 the Great Exposition  school   
 the Sutra  school  
 the Mind Only  school   
 the Autonomy Middle Way school   
 the Consequence Middle Way school  
 What are their assertions? Who asserts that there ar e three final vehicles ? W ho 
asserts there is one final vehicle? What are the reasons for their respective 
assertions?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 7 of 11 The proponents of the Hinayana tenets basically assert that when the nirvana 
without remainder is attained, the person ceases to exist  and the continuum is 
severed.  
 
Then in the divisions of the Mahayana tenets, even within the Mind Only  school , 
there are those who propound that the continuum of the person is severed and there 
are others  who propound that the continuum is not severed.  
 
According to the proponents of the Mahayana tenets, among t he proponents of the 
Middle Way  schools , which is the highest  tenet system , they assert that there i s just 
one final vehicle. Many reason s are put forth to explain why when the nirvana 
without remain der is attained, the person still exist s and the continuum of the 
person is not severed. There are also reasons to show that if you were to assert that 
the continuum of the person is severed after achieving nirvana , you will encounter 
many logical fallac ies, problems and inconsistencies. There  is much a nalysis and 
discussion  of this issue .  
 
In essence , the reality is that the continuum of the person is not severed  and there  is 
one final vehicle for every one. As such, from th e perspective of this treatise, the 
Sublime Continuum —which adopts the position and perspective of one final vehicle 
for every one—even those who have achieved the arhats hip of the h earer foe 
destroyers and solita ry realizer foe destroyers are not considered to be the final 
objects of ref uge. These hearer  foe destroyers and solitary realizer foe  destroyers 
still have the knowledge obscurations within them . Therefore it is said that they will 
have to enter the Mahayana path to remove th ese obscurations . Only then will they 
become buddha s an d only then will they become final object s of refuge. Before that, 
they are not  final objects of refuge .   
 
If you have studied tenets , you should have some idea what is the difference between 
nirvana with remainder and nirvana without remainder and the ma ny assertions 
according to the various tenets. If you don’t remember these things, then seeing the 
words , ‘nirvana with remainder ’ and ‘nirvana without remainder ’ will not make 
much sense.  
 
This is why I  have mentioned that if you really want to learn, yo u have to understand 
that real learning is not an easy thing.  There  is no way you can really learn by 
focusing on just one area or one particular topic in the entire Buddha dharma .  You 
cannot expect to know everything by studying just one text. It  is impos sible . It 
doesn’t work that way because everything is interconnected.  
 
You have to learn the various topics and not forget what you have learn t because you 
need to put everything together. Otherwise just hoping to learn something from 
whatever topic comes  along , I think that  is not go ing to work. Therefore  you really 
have to work at remember ing and n ot forget ting  the material t hat you have learnt 
earlier.  
 
If you have forgotten  what you have learnt earlier, there i s no benefit in just sitting 
there and fe eling discouraged . That also doesn’t help. Rather than feeling 
disheartened, why not think about what you can do to correct the situation?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 8 of 11 Only the Buddha is the final object of refuge  
Verse 21 is saying in a brief way that only the Buddha is the final object of refuge.  
 
Verse 21  
Ultimately the refuge of transmigrators  
Is just the sole Buddha,  
Because the Subduer has the Body of Doctrine [and thus is the 
doctrine]  
And because [a Buddha] is the finality of the Community.  
 
Ultimately the refuge of all senti ent beings is only the Buddha , no one else. Why? 
Because the Buddha has achieved the dharmakaya  that is separated from or free of 
all fears.  
 
“And b ecause [a Buddha] is the finality of the Community ”:  The “Community ” here 
refers to the Sangha Jewel.  
 
Our kind teacher and founder, Shakyamuni Buddha , has achieved a state of existence 
that is separate from our continuum. It is an achiev ement achieved by some one other 
than ourselves. That is causal refuge , the refuge existing in the continuum of 
some one else.   
 
Every  sentient being up to the superior  who is at the end of the conti nuum of being a 
sentient being , i.e., one moment before enlightenment  is achieved,  still have to work 
towards attaining the dharmakaya , the resultant refuge , which they have yet to 
achieve.  Every one else, including the superiors , is aiming to achieve the state that is 
similar to what Shakyamuni Buddha has achieved , i.e., the resultant refuge.   
 
The c onclusion then is that only the Buddha is the final object of refuge . In order  to 
be a final object of refuge, he has to be free from all fears  and he has to be free of all 
partiality . The final object of refuge helps without considering whether the person 
that he is help ing has helped him in return or has harm ed him. There are no such 
consi deration s. 
 
Etymology of ‘Jewel’   
Verse 22 discusses the etymology of ‘Jewel ’ or the ‘Rare Sublime One.’  
 
Verse 22  
Because of appearing rarely, because of being without defilement,  
Because of having power, because of being the ornament of the 
world,  
Becau se of being just superior, and because of being changeless,  
[They are called] Jewels [literally, Superior Rarities].  
 
Up to this point, the discussion of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  are the Three 
Jewels that have yet to happen. They are the first three o f the seven vajra topics or 
essential points.   
 
What follows next is the fourth vajra topic , the basic constituent .  This is difficult.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 9 of 11 Verse 23 states that the basic constituent is inconceivable.  
 
Verse 24 states that because it is inconceivable, theref ore it is the object of  only the 
buddha s.  
 
Verse 25 stat es the proof for its inconceivability.  
 
Verse 25  
Because [the basic realm is] pure but [appears to be] afflicted,  
Because [enlightenment is] unafflicted but [appears] to be purified,  
Because [the Bu ddha qualities are] undifferentiated phenomena [even at the  
time of common being but are not manifest],  
And because [the Buddha activities are] spontaneous but without 
conceptuality  [these four are inconceivable by common beings].  
 
The section on the basic  constituent is really challenging  so we will start on that in 
the next lesson. Now we have finished with the discussion o f the Three Jewels. I f you 
have questions about the Three Jewels,  you can ask.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Question:  What are the knowledge obscur ations that remain in the state of nirvana 
without remainder or in the state of the cessation of suffering?  
 
Answer:  It is difficult to explain everything right away because there are so many 
things that need to be explain ed prior to that.  
 
Firstly, one has to know that the proponents of Hinayana tenets do not assert a 
presentation of knowledge obscurations.  
 
The proponents of Mahayana tenets do assert knowledge obscurations  but they have 
different presentations of what constitute s knowledge obscurations . The Mind Only 
School has their own take on this as do the proponents of the Autonomy Middle Way 
school, the A utonomist s and so forth. So let us assume here that we have sorted 
everything out and that we adopt the final highest position.  
 
There are many ways of positing ignorance.  If you take ignorance here to mean the 
apprehension of true existence, there is the apprehension of true existence that is in 
the form of a seed . The knowledge obscuration s refer to the predispositions or the 
impr ints left on t he mental continuum by this apprehension of true existence . In 
short, knowledge obscuration s are the predispositions of ignorance.  
 
We then need to understand the difference between a seed and a predisposition. 
What is the seed of the apprehension of true existence ? What is the predisposition of 
the apprehension of true existence? : 
 The seed of the apprehension of true existence is  the potential that has the ability 
to give rise to a new moment or a fresh moment of the apprehension of true 
existence.  
 The pr edisposition of the apprehension of true existence cannot and does not  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 10 of 11 produce a new moment of an apprehension of true existence . Instead w hat it 
gives rise to is an appearance of true existence.   
 
In short, according to the Middle Way Consequ entialist s who hold the highest view, 
the potential that gives rise to this appearance of true existence is posited as 
knowledge obscurations.  
 
Question:  What is the relationship between realizing  the emptiness of inherent 
existence and realizing that attachment is the cause of all suffering as presented in 
the Buddha’s four noble truths?  
 
Answer :  Maybe I will answer that in the next lesson.  
 
 
Dharma 
Jewel  The scriptural Dharma is not the 
final object of refuge because  … 
 when you have achieved the final fruit, you  do 
not need to rely on the scriptural Dharma 
anymore . 
 
The true path s,  the realizational 
Dharma, are not the final object s of 
refuge because  … 
 the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in 
the continuum of a bodhisattva superior has 
not finished the tas k of removing all stains  (or 
defilements) . The bodhisattva superior still 
have some work to  do to transform that mind 
that has stains into a mind that is completely 
free of all stains.  
 
 
The n irvana without remainder is a 
true cessation that is not the final 
object of refuge because  … 
 it is essentially the mere abandonment of 
afflictions and suffering. There are still  
knowledge obscurations that have  to be 
abandoned.  
 
Sangha Jewel  All non -buddha superiors, such as 
the h earer foe destroyer s and 
solitary realizer foe destroyer s, are 
not the final objects of refuge 
because … 
 they still have the knowledge obscurations  so 
they will have to enter the Mahayana path to 
remove the m. Only then can they become 
buddha s and on ly then can they become a 
final obje ct of refuge. Before that, they are not.   
Buddha Jewel  Only the Buddha is the final object 
of refuge because …  the Buddha has achieved the dharmakaya, 
that is separated from or free  of all fears.  
 
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
ANNOUNCEMENTS  
 
 Mani Retreat in Kopan  Monas tery, Nepal from 16 —28 October.  
Khen Rinpoche is organizing and leading a Mani Retreat with a target of 10 
million Mani recitations. Each participant has to recite a minimum of 100,000 
Manis , which Khen Rinpoche said is easily achievable within the retreat  period 
allocated. The retreat will be follow ed by two days (27—28 October) of 
pilgrimage , which is optional. Estimated cost of airfare, food and lodging, travel 
insurance, pilgrimage  expenses and offerings is between S$1600 —1800 . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                  Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
           
Lesson 8  
Page 11 of 11 Registration starts from 17 March and closes on 30 April. There will be a non -
refundable deposit of $500 . Those with their own travel insurance policy will 
have t o produce a copy to the organizer s for refund. This retreat is a retreat in 
noble silence except for a break time of tw o hours during lunch.  
 Yamantaka Retreat  in Kopan Monastery, Nepal from 17 October for 15 days and 
one day for the f ire puja. Venue will be the small gompa beneath the Chenrezig 
gompa . Restricted to maximum of 20 participants.  
 Jangchu p Lamrim teaching s by  His Holiness the Dalai Lama from 24 —28 
December at Bylakuppe  Tibetan Settlement in South India. Details to follow.  
 Kalachakra Initiation by His Holiness the Dalai Lama in Bodhgaya  in early January 
2016 . Details to follow.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyur me; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 