Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L04 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:36.445876
================================================================================

Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , 
Chapter  One : The  Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on 
the Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins 
and Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs . 
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, 
Commentary to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, 
Inc. January 2007) . 
 
Lesson 4            12 February 2015  
 
 
Meditating on Nagarjuna’s Precious Garla nd. Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone 
Thus.  Verse s 3—8. Buddha Jewel.  
 
 
MEDITATING ON NAGARJUNA’S PRECIOUS GARLAND  
It is useful to reflect on this verse from Na garjuna’s Precious Garland  when you 
are trying to understand or meditate on selflessness. He said,  
  
A being is not earth, not water,  
Not fire, not wind, not space,  
Not consciousness, and not all of them.  
What person is there other than these?1 
 
When we look at ourselves, the ‘I’ or person, we appear to be self -institut ed, i.e., 
able to sta nd on our own two feet. This is how the ‘I’ appears. So let us check and 
see if the ‘I’ really exist s in th at.  It is said that in reality the ‘I’, the person or the 
self, exist s as that which is merely posited  or merely label led by the mind.  
 
But in our experience, how does the ‘I’ appear to us? It appears as something real , 
standing on its own two feet , from its own  side. Not only does the ‘I’ appear to us 
in th at way, we  also  assent  to th at appearance and believe  that  is how the ‘I’ 
exist s. What we have  to do then is to check  and see if the ‘I’ really exist s in the 
way it appears to us . We could do that by reflecting on the above verse .  
  
In reality , the ‘I’ exist s as something that is merely label led by the mind  but t hat is 
not how it appears  to us . The ‘I’ appears to us as existing from its own side, able 
                                                           
1 Tsong -kha-pa’s Final Exposition of Wisdom  by Jeffrey Hopkins, Snow Lion Publications, p. 59.   
 
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 2 of 11 to stand on its own two feet  and independent of other factors. Such a self-
instituted ‘I’ is the object of negation . We have to check for ourselves whether 
such a self-instituted ‘I’, exist ing from it s own side , really exist s or not.   
 
The person is merely designated in dependence upon the six elements. While that 
is the case, if we were to look for the person among the six elements, starting 
from  the earth, the fire and so forth, we will not be able t o point  to any of the six  
elements as being the person.  
 
Not only is the person not any of the six elements, the person is also not a 
composite of the six elements. At the same time, the person or ‘ I’ is also not 
separate from the six elements . If you wer e to look for the person outside of the 
six elements  or that is of a different nature or separate entity from the six 
elements, you will also not be able to find such a person .  
 
So what is the person ?  Because the person is merely designated in dependence  
upon the composite of the six elements, as such, the person is not ‘real ,’ i.e., the 
person does not exist from his own side.    
 
Likewise, just as the person is not real in that way, since each of the six elements 
(or constituents) is also merely designat ed in dependence upon their own parts , 
those six elements on their own are also not real.  
 
Just as because of being [only imputed in dependence upon] an  
      aggregation of the six constituents,  
A person is not [established as his/her own] reality,  
So be cause of being [imputed in dependence upon] an aggregation  
Each of the constituents  also  is not [established as its own] reality.2  
 
These verses talk about the selflessness of person  and the selflessness of 
phenomena. First, one reflects on how the person  is not real . Likewise, just as the 
person is not real, one reflects on how the six elements  or constituents 
themselves  are also not real because they are merely designated in dependence 
upon their own parts.   
 
We should understand that the conclusion is not that the person does not exist. It 
is true  that if you were to look for the person among  each of the six elements, you 
will not be able to point to any of the m to be the person. You will not be able to 
point to the composite or the aggregation of the six elements as the person 
either . Then if you were to look for the  person outside of the six elements, you 
will also not be able to point to such a real person.   
 
If the person is not findable among the elements and outside of the elements , 
then one may  think, “Then the person does not exist. ” This is incorrect. While it is 
true that the real ‘I’ cannot be found among the elements , nor outside of the 
elements , this does  not prove that the person does not exist. Rather t his proves 
that the real person does n ot exist. This proves that the ‘I’, the self  or person , 
                                                           
2 Ibid.  p. 59.  
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 3 of 11 does not exist from h er own side and does not exist as real.  
 
As such, the first verse concludes by asking, “What person is there other than 
these?” be cause the person is a coming together of the six elements . What that  
means  is that because the person is merely designated in dependence upon the 
six elements , this shows that the person exists  but the real person does not exist.  
 
The verse says , “A being is not earth, not water, / Not fire, not wind, n ot space, / 
Not consciousness, and not all of them.” T his is what we have to check . We have 
to check if the person is indeed not the earth, if the person is indeed not the fire 
element and so forth.  
 
The question then is whether such an analysis harm s our ignorance that  
misconceiv es the ‘ I’ or not ?  By think ing of the person in this way, will it lead us 
to the reali sation of emptiness ? If it does lead us to reali se emptiness, then our 
analysis must harm our ignorance.  
 
It is relatively easy to be able to d iscover that the ‘I’ is not any one of the five 
aggregates. When  you look at the ‘I’, is the ‘I’ the form aggregate? Then you have 
the head, the arms, the body  and so forth. I t is quite straightforward . Obviously 
the ‘I’ is not  the head, the ‘I’ is not t he hand , the ‘I’ is not the leg  and so forth . It is 
not difficult t o understand that .  
 
But d oes this mean that you know what the object of negation  is? Does it bring 
you closer to harming your ignorance , to reali sing emptiness or not ? It is obvious 
that when you think about it, you will not say , “The ‘I’ is my head .” You will not 
say, “The ‘I’ is my hand .” You cannot  find such an ‘ I’.  But b ecause  you did not find 
the ‘I’ in your head, your arms, your legs  and so forth, d oes it mean that you have 
ascertain ed emptiness?   
 
But if at the end of your analysis —your ‘I’ is not your head  or any of the other 
body parts —there  is still an appearance of a n inherently existent ‘I’, this shows 
that your analysis has not even identified the object of negation. And if you do not 
harm the object of negation, there  is no way to reali se emptiness .  
 
Following what N agarjuna sa id, if this is not the person  and that is not the 
person, i f there is such a real ‘I’, does it exist outside of the aggregates? But when 
you look for the ‘I’ there , you will also not be able to find th e ‘I’.  
 
At the end of your analysis, when you understand  and ha ve this feeling, “The real 
‘I’ does not exist whatsoever . But an ‘I’ exist s. T here is th is ‘I’  that is merely 
designated in dependence upon the  aggregates or the six elements ,” then you 
have really  begun to understand what the object of negation  is. You have to 
identify the object of negation —that is crucial —before emptiness can be reali sed.  
 
Someone who has th e understanding that the real ‘I’ does not exist at all although 
it appears  to exist, that the ‘I’ is only that which is an imputation of the mind ; that 
understanding comes with a real understanding of what selflessness is. This 
person is able to harm  the object of negation . Only then can she have some closer 
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 4 of 11 understanding of emptiness.   
 
When one has that  feeling  that understanding that the ‘I’ is none other than that 
which is merely imputed  by the mind in dependence on the aggregates , that it 
doesn’t exist in the way it appears —it is only then that one will start to see that 
the ignorance apprehending a self is a mistaken consciousness.   
 
It is taught that with this understanding, one can truly see how the ignorance 
apprehending a self is a complete distortion of reality . One  now sees  that the 
non-inherent existen ce of things , i.e., that things do not exist inherently, is what 
really accord s with reality.   
 
With such an understanding and familiarit y, one’s ignorance of apprehending a 
self becomes weaker and weaker over  time  and one will see more and more the 
possibility of liberation and enlightenment . One sees for oneself that liberation 
exist s, that it is really possible to achieve liberation and enlightenment. One also 
sees that all one’s faults, mistakes and obscurations can actually be r emoved .  
 
With this kind of knowledge  and experience , one’s thirst  for or interest in the 
Dharma will naturally  occur . One will seek the Dharma because one sees that the 
Dharma, the teachings  of the Buddha , is unparalleled and in a class of its own .  
Likew ise, one sees that the founder, the Buddha, who taught the Dharma , is also 
in a class of his own . As mentioned in the last lesson , Lama Tsong  Khapa in his 
Dependent Arising: A Praise of the B uddha  had praised the  Buddha as an 
unexcelled and unparalleled  expounder because of his teachings on dependent 
arising.   
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Verse 3  
From Buddha, the doctrine. From the doctrine, the community of 
Superiors.  
From the community, the basic constituent of essential exalted 
wisdom is attained.  
Finally from exalted w isdom is attained the supreme 
enlightenment endowed with the qualities  
Of the powers and so forth and effecting the welfare of sentient 
beings.  
 
The intended audience of these teaching s on the sublime continuum  are 
Mahayanist s, who are distinguished by the ir mind generation. W hat is the goal of 
this mind generation?  
 The goal of this mind generation is to achieve full enlightenment so that one 
can turn the wheel of Dharma  to liberate sentient beings .  
 Through turning the wheel of Dharma, one produce s limitle ss number of 
superiors who are the intended or special  disciples.  
This explain s the goal or purpose of the mind generation in the continu a of the  
intended disciples of th ese teachings .  
 
These intended disciples by seeing the goal , i.e., to attain the Thre e Jewels , 
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 5 of 11 develop the wish to purify the ir basic constituent of defilements. With this 
aspiration to purify their basi c constituent (or the tathagata essence ) of 
defilement s, one can  say that their tathagata essence is then manifest ed.  
 
What then is the boundary  of the tathagata essence ? It exists all the way up  to 
just prior  to the achievement of enlightenment.  
 
“The basic constituent of essential exalted wisdom is attained ,/ Finally from 
exalted wisdom  …”: It is saying here that the basic constituent exi sts all the way 
up to before enlightenment.  The tathagata essence does not exist after 
enlightenment is achieved  so the name tathagata essence does not apply to 
enlightenment.   
 
Since the tathagata essence exists prior to achieving enlightenment, it is su itable 
for the Buddha’s enlighten ed activities to engage these sentient beings.  
 
After t he complete purification of all the stains or defilements , the supreme 
enlightenment is achieved . As such , “Finally from exalted wisdom  is attained the 
supreme enlight enment endowed  with the qualities / Of the powers and so forth 
and effecting the welfare of sentient being s.” Because one has achieved 
enlightenment , one is endowed with (1) the qualities of powers and so forth , and 
(2) the enlightened activities effecting the welfare of sentient beings.  
 
Next is the presentation of the Three Jewels. T here is a brief and an extensive 
presentation.   
 
BUDDHA JEWEL  
 
First is the brief p resentation of the Buddha Jewel.  
 
Verse 4  
Obeisance to the one who has no beginning, middle , or end  
Who is quiescent, who through buddhification became buddhified 
in self -arisen aspect  
And having become buddhified, taught the path of fearlessness and 
permanence so that those who had not realized it might realize 
it,  
And who, carrying the supr eme sword and diamond of knowledge 
and mercy, cuts the sprouts of suffering and destroys the walls of 
doubt that are surrounded by the darkness of various views.  
 
As I have mentioned before , if you really want to learn , then you have to read the 
text a fe w time s before coming  to class , regardless of whether you understand 
what you are reading .  You should read the text a few times and then come to 
class.   If you are reading it for the first time  right now , then there is no way that 
anything can happen.  
 
I am only teaching this because you said you want ed to learn , you want ed to 
study , so this is how I am  going to do it . If you don’t want to study , then there is 
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 6 of 11 no need to do all this. There is no need to talk about all th ese details. I can  just 
say, “There  is the Buddha, Dharma  and Sangha .” Then it is finished.  
 
But if  you sa y that you want to learn then you must read the text on your own a 
few times before coming  to class . Then w hen you come to class, pay attention and 
see whether my explanation make s sense or not , whether it accord s with the root 
text or not.  
 
Here I am explaining the meaning of the root text . When you are listening to me, 
you have to look at your root text. If you just sit there , listening and being content 
with what you hear, you are n ot going to understand much.   
 
The fourth verse starts with , “Obeisance ,” i.e., paying homage  to the Buddha .  
 
What kind of qualities does  the Buddha , the object of our homage, possess ?  In 
the explanation of the qualities of the Buddha Jewel , some are uncompounded  
and some are compounded  
 
Uncompounded qualities  
First , there is an explanation of the uncompounded qualities of the Buddha . “The 
one who h as no beginning, middle, or end ,” is a description of the nature body, 
which is uncompounded . As such , it is not produced , it does not abide  and i t does 
not disintegrate . Therefore it  “has no beginning, middle or end .” 
 
The nature body is being discussed from the perspective o f its factor of natural 
purity , i.e., by nature , it is free from existing inherently. Apply ing this to these 
three words , “beginning, middle or end ,” it is said then that the nature body has:  
 no inherently exist ent beginning  
 no inherently exist ent middle  
 no inherently exist ent end 
 
“Who is quiescent ” or pacified  is referring to the nature body from the 
perspective of its factor of adventitious purity .  
 
Composed qualities  
~ Wisdom directly seeing the two truths  
“Who through buddhification became buddhified in self -arisen aspect ,” refers to 
the Buddha’s composed quality , i.e. , the wisdom that directly perceive s things as 
they are.  “Buddhification became buddhified in self -arisen aspect” : This is 
referring to the wisdom that directly perceive s the two truths.  
 
~ Quality of mercy  
“So that those who had not realized it might realize it ” shows the quality of 
mercy . Out of m ercy for  “those who had no t realized  it,” the Buddha taught the 
path of fearlessness and permanence  so that they “might realise it .”  
 
~ Quality of power  
“And who, carrying the supreme sword and diamond of knowledge and mercy,  
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 7 of 11 cuts the sprouts of suffering and destroys the walls of doubt that are surrounded 
by the darkness of various views ”: The remain der of this verse shows  the quality 
of power . 
In short , this verse shows:  
1. The factor of natur al purity  of the nature body  
2. The f actor of adventitious purity  of the nature body  
3. The quality of mercy  
4. The quality of power  
This is the brief presentation of the qualities of the Buddha Jewel.  
 
Next is the slightly more extensive explanation of those points that I have just 
mentioned.  
 
Verse 5  
Buddhahood has [the eight qualities of] being uncompounded,  
Spontaneous, not being realized through the cause of others,  
Knowledge, mercy, and power,  
As well as being [the fulfilment of] the two aims [of oneself and others].   
 
One can talk about  the Buddha from the perspective of the body of the Buddha  
that is for:  
 fulfilling the purpose of oneself  
 fulfilling the purpose of others  
 
“Buddhahood has [the eight qualities of] being uncompounded ”: This is similar to 
what w as mentioned earlier  in refer ence to the nature body. H ere it is referring 
to the nature body that : 
 has the factor of natural purity  
 is an u ltimate truth  
 is an uncompounded phenomenon  
 
“Spontaneous ,” he re refer s to the factor of adventitious purity  of the nature  body , 
i.e., the nature  body that is purified of the adventitious defilements. This is 
referring to the true cessation s in the continuum of the Buddha . 
 
“Not being realized through the cause of others ” refers to the wisdom that 
directly realizes the ultimate truth , i.e., that directly perceive s the ultimate nature 
of things, seeing them exactly as they are . Such a wisdom is not produced by 
depending on something else.  
 
“Knowledge ” refers to the quality of that wisdom that directly perceive s 
conventionalit ies. 
 
“Mercy ” refers to the quality of mercy . 
 
“Power ” refers to the quality of power . 
 
The quality of spontaneity mentioned above refers to how the Buddha’s activities 
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 8 of 11 of benefitting others are spontaneous  and effortless. They require neither 
motivation nor effort. Th is is only p ossible when one has remove d the obstacles 
to such spontaneity.  
There are different degrees of obstacles , coarse and subtle. The subtle obstacle 
that prevents spontaneity is the knowledge obscuration s but b ecause the Buddha 
is free  of knowledge obscuratio ns, therefore his activities to benefit sentient 
beings are spontaneous  and effortless.  
 
The next three verses expand on what we have just discussed.  
 
Verse 6  
Because of having a nature without beginning [i.e., without production],  
Middle [abiding], or end [cessation], it is uncompounded.  
Because of possessing the quiescent Truth Body,  
It is said to be spontaneous.  
 
Verse 7  
Because of being realized by oneself individually,  
It is not realized through the cause of others.  
Because of realizing [those ] aspects in that way, it is knowledge.  
Because of teaching the path, merciful.  
 
Verse 8  
It is power because of removing suffering  
And afflictive emotions through exalted wisdom and compassion.  
Through the first three, one’s own welfare [is accomplish ed];  
Through the latter three, others’ aims.  
 
SUMMARY  
 
How many qualities does the B uddha  possess  in this context ? It is said there are 
eight  qualities . 
1. Buddhahood has the quality of being uncompounded. This show s the 
Buddha’s quality of natural purity.  
2. The quality of spontane ity refer s to the quality that occurs d ue to the 
complete pacification of all effort and motivation. The nature  body  has two 
divisions. This quality of spontaneity refers to th e quality of the nature body 
that is the factor of adventi tious purity , i.e., the factor of being purified of the 
adventitious defilement s. Here it is referring to the true cessation s in the 
Buddha’s continuum.  
3. “Not being realized through the cause of others ,” indicat es the B uddha’s 
wisdom that directly perceive s phenomena as they are , i.e., the wisdom that  
directly perceive emptiness.  
4. “Knowledge ” refers to the B uddha’s wisdom that directly perceives  
conventionalit ies. 
5. “Mercy ” refers to the great compassion in the continuum of the B uddha.  
6. “Power ” refers to the qua lity of power .  
7. The quality of fulfilling one’s own purpose.  
8. The quality of fulfilling the purpose of others.  
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 9 of 11 This is an introduction of the Buddha Jewel who we entrust ourselves  to, 
generate faith and take refuge in . The Buddha Jewel is said to possess these eight 
qualities.  
 
The next three verses is the clarification of these eight qualities. We can look at  
them in the next class. Please read your root text. For now, you have to know 
what these eight qualities of the Buddha  are. You have to know that th ere are 
eight  qualities and you have to know what they are.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
(A student requests for clarification of the meaning of the supreme emanation 
body  and the ordinary emanation body ). 
 
Answer:  Indeed t here are many things to know and  words  and termin ologies to 
learn.  
 
Let’s  deal with the supreme emanation body. An example of the supreme 
emanation body is Shakyamuni Buddha. In reality, Shakyamuni Buddha was 
enlightened a long time ago . He displayed twelve deeds such as the deeds of 
being born , achievin g enlightenment and then passing into parinirvana  and so 
forth . The emanation  body  that displayed these twelve deeds is called the 
supreme emanation body and is only accessible to people who have pure karma .  
 
On the other hand, t he emanation body in gener al need not be one that display s 
the twelve deeds. In fact , a buddha can manifest as all kinds of emanations. A 
buddha can manifest as a dog, as a human being, as one’s parents, as  the virtuous 
friend  and so forth.  These emanations of a buddha are called emanation bodies. 
They are emanated for the sake  of helping all  kinds of beings. A s such , you do not 
need pure karma to see or to come in contact with these emanation bodies.  
 
Seeing the complete enjoyment body that is adorned with the major signs and 
mino r exemplifications is even more difficult  as that is  only accessible to the 
bodhisattva superiors.   
 
With regard to a buddha, for example, his nature body which are the factor of 
natural purity and the factor of adventitious purity  or his wisdom directly 
perceiv ing all phenomena , i.e., both the ir ultimate truth and the ir conventional 
truth —these  truth bodies of a buddha can only be directly realized by other 
buddhas themselves . Even the bodhisattva  superiors cannot realize th ese 
directly.  
 
Question :  Among  the eight qualities, there are compounded and uncompounded  
qualities. Can you please elaborate on the compounded qualities?   
 
Answer:  The qualities of being uncompounded and spontaneous refer  to the 
factor of natural purity and the factor of adventitious  purity related to the nature 
body. These two are uncompounded qualities.  
 
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 10 of 11 The qualities of the wisdom that directly see s the two truths and the qualities of 
knowledge, mercy  and power are  the compounded qualities.  
 
Question: “Who through buddhification became buddhified in self -arisen aspect ” 
(Verse 4), w hat is the meaning of “self-arisen aspect ”? 
 
Answer:  “Who through buddhification became buddhified in self -arisen aspect ” 
refers to the self -arisen wisdom , omniscience. Achieving  omniscience , i.e., movin g 
from the last moment of being a sentient being to becoming a buddha , that 
achievement of enlightenment is not dependent on a guru. One achieves it by 
oneself . It happens within one ’s meditative equipoise. So from  being a sentient 
being , you become a budd ha in that single meditative equipoise . One has to 
achieve this for oneself by oneself.  
 
Question : I would like to clarify two of the four reliance s: 
 Do not rely on the words but rather rely on the ir meaning.  
 Do not rely on the interpretative meaning  but r ather rely on the definitive 
meaning.  
What is the difference between the two  as they seem to have a similar message ? 
 
Answer:  “Do not rely  on the words ” means not to qualif y something as good or 
bad merely based on  whether the words themselves sound pleasa nt or not.   
 
The Buddha had made statements such as , “Phenomena are truly existen t.” You 
cannot take th ose statements literally because , in reality , things are not truly 
existen t. Therefore the meaning of that statement made by the Buddha is 
interpretativ e in that you need to find out the intent behind that statement.  
There is something more than the literal meaning of those words . As such , it is 
not definitive.  
 
Why can’t we take such statement s made by the Buddha such as “Things are truly 
existen t,” literally? Because it goes against reality  as in reality, things are not 
truly existen t. As such , we cannot take that statement literally. Of course, there 
were reasons behind why the Buddha said that. There must be a deeper purpose 
behind that statement  and the Buddha must be trying to convey something else. 
Therefore , as such , you cannot take it literally. The meaning of that statement is 
only interpretive.  
 
Question:  What does pure karma mean?  
 
Answer:  Pure karma means that you are free of the karma that prevents  you from 
seeing the supreme emanation body! 
 
You have to read the root text on your own whether you understand it or not . 
Then when you hear the commentary, you try to relate the explanation given to 
the root text . Th is is how th e text can become clearer over time. You must read  
the text .  
 
But you cannot expect to understand this text by reading  alone as it is a difficult 
Ami tabha Buddhist Centre                                                                         Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                         Tathagata Essence  
                                                                                                                                                                     
 
Lesson 4  
Page 11 of 11 text to understand. You won’t be able to understand it by just looking at the 
words. You can not expect to understand what “ unco mpounded ” mean s, what 
“spontaneous ” mean s. That is not possible. There are so many  other things you 
have to put in place.  
 
If something is “ uncompounded ,” there must be something that is “compounded .” 
The opposite of being uncompounded is being compounded . “Compounded ” or 
composed means something that is produced , abide s and then disintegrate s. 
What  is production? What is abiding? What is disintegratedness? You have to 
gather so much information and then slowly put them  together. So 
understanding is not go ing to happen immediately.  
 
The point here is that the Buddha who you take refuge in has the quality of 
mercy, knowledge, true cessation s and so forth . This is the Buddha who we 
entrust ourselves to.  
 
This section  here  is explain ing who we are taking refu ge in. If you relate this to 
the lam-rim, in the section o n refuge when it talks about the qualities of the Three 
Jewels , it is explain ed why the Bud dha is  a suitable object of refuge . Four reasons 
were  given :   
1. He has freed himself from all faults , obscur ations  and mistakes. This  indicates 
the quality of true cessation s.  
2. The Buddha is skilled in the method of freeing others from their fear s and 
suffering. Th is refer s to the quality of knowledge . He knows exactly what to 
do.  
3. The Buddha possesses the great  compassion that is free from bias. That is 
referring to the Buddha’s quality of mercy.  
 
So what is the fourth reason ?   
 
THE EIGHT QUALITIES OF THE BUDDHA  JEWEL  
 
1 Quality of being 
uncompounded  Factor of natural purity (the nature body 
that is pure from  the beginning is 
uncompounded i.e. it is not produced, does 
not abide, and  does not disintegrate) . 
7. Fulfilling the 
purpose of oneself   
2 Quality of being 
spontaneous  Factor of adventitious purity (the nature 
body that is free from adventitious 
defilem ents) . Spontaneous refers to the true 
cessation s in the continuum of the Buddha.  
 
3 Quality of not being 
realized through the cause 
of others  The wisdom that directly perceive s 
emptiness . 
 
4 Quality of knowledge  The wisdom that directly perceives 
conve ntionalit ies. 
8. Fulfilling t he  
purpose of others   
5 Quality of mercy  The great compassion in the continuum of 
the Buddha . 
 
6 Quality of power  Depending on the power of knowledge and 
power of mercy, it can completely remove 
and destroy suffering and it s causes.  
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Rachel Tan ; 
edited by Cecilia Tsong.  