Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L18final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:29.003252
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 18                           21 April 2015  
 
 
Review of the verse from th e Vajra Cutter Sutra . The object of the three times: the past, 
present and future. As it relates to the analogy of “a dream.” As it relates to the discussion on 
karma : How do we account for the cessation of karma and the arising of its fruitional effect 
after a long interval . The disintegratedness of karma.   
 
 
REVIEW OF THE VERSE FROM THE VAJRA CUTTER SUTRA (CONT’D)  
 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud – 
See conditi oned things as such!  
 
“A star”  
In the earlier discussion of the analogy of “a star ,” there was an explanation of the 
two levels of truth or reality : 
1. There is a level of reality tha t appears to an unmistaken mind.  
2. There is another level of reality that appears to a mistaken mind.  
 
For object s that appear to , are established or posited by a mistaken mind , you have to 
understand that non -existent s are  included as well.   Among the different kinds of 
mistaken consciousness es, there is a category of mistaken c onsciousnesses that is a 
wrong consciousness. A w rong consciousness is a mind that engages erroneously 
with its object of the mode of apprehension . The apprehension of true existence  is an 
example . The object of the mode of apprehension , the apprehension o f true existence , 
is an example of a non -existen t. 
 
“A visual aberration”  
Although true existence appears to th is apprehension of true existence, does true 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 2 of 11 existence exist in reality  as it appears? No, true existence does not exist whatsoever . 
Nevertheless , there is th e appearance of true existence to th is apprehension of true 
existence. That is why “a visual aberration” comes after a star . Although there ha ve 
never been any truly existen t phenomena , that is not the same as saying that 
phenomena are non -existent. While phenomena do not exist truly, phenomena do 
exist.  
 
“A flame of a lamp”  
What is an existen t? An e xisten t is that which appears to a conventional awareness 
(or mind ), i.e., a phenomenon that is a mere appearance to or is posited by a 
convention al awareness . To highlight that phenomena are dependently arisen , there 
is the next example in the verse , “a flame of a lamp .” 
 
Although this is the state of reality —it is how phenomena have always been and will 
always be —why do we suffer  then in the first  place ? Why are we unhappy? Although 
phenomena have never and will never exist truly, due to our mind being polluted  by 
the apprehension of true existence , we conceive that everything  exist s truly  or 
inherently , as being established in and of themselves . Believing this in turn induces 
and gives rise to attachment  and anger , leading to problems and suffering.  Although 
in re ality nothing exists truly  and does not exist in the way it appears , nevertheless 
we conceiv e that anything that exists to exist truly .  
 
“An illusion”  
The next analogy , “an illusion ,” illustrates th is. An illusion is none other than a mere 
appearance to a mistaken mind . It does not exist in the way it appears. Nevertheless , 
an illusion looks real to th e mistaken mind. This  analogy highligh ts the fact that while 
things do not truly exist , nevertheless they appear  to have an objective existence ; 
they appear to exist truly.   
 
This apprehension of true existence —conceiving phenomena to have an objective 
existen ce, exist ing inherently in and of itself —is the root of all confusion, all 
problems and everything that is undesirable. Samsara is the outcome .  
  
“A drop of dew, or a bubble”  
If we want to reduce our problems  and our suffering, what is the method? The 
method is to reflect on impermanence and how everything that is associated with 
samsara is in the nature of suffering.  As such , after “an illusion ” comes “a drop of 
dew , or a bubble .” “A drop of dew ” is the analogy for us to reflect on impermanence  
while the water bubble helps us to reflect on how anything that is associated with 
samsara  is in the nature of suffering.  These two reflections help us to reduce our 
suffering .   
 
“A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud”  
These three analogies exemplify the supreme methods to overcome samsara.  
 
True suffering s has four characteristics : 
1. impermanen t 
2. suffering (or miser y) 
3. empty  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 3 of 11 4. selfless  
 
We reflect on the impermanent nature of suffering .  Then we reflect on how cyclic 
existence is in the nature of suffering .   
 
When we look at the third ch aracteristic  from the viewpoint of the Consequence 
Middle Way School (CM WS), ‘empty ’ here  refers to the emptiness of a self-sufficient 
person  while the fourth characteristic, ‘selfless ’, refers to subtle selflessness from the 
viewpoint of the CMWS .  
 
Under standing t he fourth  characteristic, selfless , i.e., subtle selflessness, is the 
supreme method  while t he first three —impermanen t, suffering, empty —prepar es 
and m oves one in the direction of th at ultimate or highest solution,  i.e., generating 
the wisdom rea lising selflessness. The wisdom reali sing selflessness is indispensable 
for eliminating the root of cyclic existence. Without the wisdom reali sing selflessness, 
the root of cyclic existence cannot be cut. If the root of cyclic existence cannot be cut, 
ther e is no way one can stop cyclic existence  (or samsara).  There is no way to achieve 
liberation . 
 
It is mentioned in one sutra , “There is only one door to peace ,” i.e., there is only one 
door that lead s to liberation. What is th is door? It is the wisdom real ising 
selflessness ; specific ally, the wisdom reali sing the emptiness of inherent existence.  
 
It is said that the wisdom reali sing the emptiness of inherent existence is the sole 
antidote to samsara , the only door to liberation. You m ust establish in your  own 
mind why  this is so. It all boils down to what the root of samsara  is. The root of 
samsara is not simply an erroneous mind . It is a conception of a self, the conception 
of true existence , the conception of inherent e xistence . Only the wisdom reali sing t he 
emptiness of such a self, i.e., selflessness, and the emptiness of true existence  that can 
act as a direct antidote against the apprehension of true existence . This is the reason 
why the wisdom reali sing selflessness is the only solution  to samsara.  
 
While the ‘I’ or person conventionally exist s and is merely imputed , we have never 
conceive d it in that way. We always believe that there is a real ‘I’ existing in and of 
itself  and we cling on to that concept. Likewise , when we think of our mind, our 
consci ousness, our thoughts, we conceive that our mind,  consciousness  and thoughts  
are real  and truly existen t, existing right there from their own side.  Essentially , this 
conce ption of true existence  is the root of all our problems  because it gives rise to 
every single destructive emotion . Due to that, we accumulate karma . Samsara then 
follows. Therefore , the  main solution is to realise that we ourselves, the ‘I’ or person , 
our mind, our consciousness  and our thought s do not exist inherently , do not exist 
truly .  
 
When we talk about com ing to an understanding  or realisation that we , ourselves , 
and our mind s do not exist truly , this is not an exerci se in creating something fresh or 
new. It is not as if the mind has always been truly existent and we are trying to make 
it non -truly existent . That is not the case . Our mind, we ourselves and everything that 
exist s have  always been and will always be empty of existing truly . So when we say 
that we should come to an understanding and reali sation that the ‘I’ or the mind  is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 4 of 11 empty of existing truly, it is to reali se the way things have always been.  
 
When we  have some understanding of the emptiness of true existence —how we 
ourselves do not exist in the way we believe we exist and how the mind do es not 
exist in the way we be lieve it exist s—only then  will the statement s, “The mind is in 
the nature of clear light” and “ The defilements are adventitious ” start to make a little 
bit of sense. So firstly,  before we can even talk about the tathagata e ssence , we really 
must have some understanding of emptiness —that e verything that exists has the 
nature of emptiness . 
 
The object of the three times: the past, the present and the future  
When we consider the emptiness of any object, we can classify the existence o f the 
object of our inquir y into the object  that existed in the past, the object of the present 
and the object of the future. Whether it is the object of the past, the object of the 
present or the object of the future, we bring them and their empty nature to mind , 
i.e., all of them  do not exist truly.   
 
~ “A dream”  
Perhaps t he analogy of “a dream ” from  the verse in the Vajra Cutter Sutra  is to help 
us understand how the very entity or nature of the past itself  is empty of existing 
truly —the very concept of a past  and that which exis ts in the past  do not exist in and 
of themselves . 
 
In a dream , we experience a variety of objects  and t here could be  appearance s of all 
kinds of thing s. In a dream , there could be something very attractive  and very 
pleasant or it could be  a nightmare where  we see very unpleasant  and frightening 
things . If we remember our dream when we wake up and it happens to be a good 
dream,  sometime s we can even feel attached to the  object or the experience  of the 
dream . We feel good about it. However, if it was a nightm are, by recalling what had 
happened  in the dream, fear arise s even when we are awake.  
 
Everything we experienced or that had happened in the dream  is not real. Yet w hen 
we are awake, we still cling on to that dream experience  if it was a good dream or 
gene rate fear if it had been a terrible experience. The dream experience is over when 
we are awake. The object in our dream is no longer there but we  can still be attached 
to or be fearful of it, clinging on to the dream  experience . 
 
Likewise, wh ile things tha t existed in the past  no longer exist , nevertheless  we can be 
attached to or have aversion for them  still. The things that existed in the past  do not 
exist truly and have never exist ed truly but we still conceive them to have an 
objective existence . Becaus e we conceive them to be truly existent , that leads to 
clinging  and attachment.  
 
When we talk about the three times —the past, present and  future —most Buddhist 
tenets assert that the past and the future are permanent. But the CMWS asserts  that 
the three tim es—the past, present and future —are functioning things  and are 
impermanent.   
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 5 of 11 ~ Discussing karma  
This brings us to the discussion of karma. It is said clearly in the teachings that the 
results of karma  will never go to waste. One of the characteristics of  karma is that if 
an action is created, it s result will not perish on its own. Buddha himself said so. This 
is a core belief and assertion of all Buddhist tenets in that : 
 all actions never go to waste .  
 all actions will definitely produce results .  
If the result of an action will not perish on its own , that  means it is certain that once 
an action  (or karma ) is accumulated , it will definitely produce a result . It is only a  
matter of time.  
 
It is said in the teachings that there can be many intervening eons,  i.e., a very long 
period of time, from the time the karma ceases to the time it brings forth its result. 
How then do we account for an action producing an effect so far down the road ? This 
is an important question  and all the different Buddhist tenets hav e their own 
explanation s to account for th is non -wastage  of the karma created . 
 
Once  you initiate the karma , whether it is virtuous or non -virtuous, if it exists  
continuously  and maintains its own momentum without ceasing , that will mean it is 
permanent an d eternal . How then will it ever give rise to its result ? Once an action is 
created, if it is not subject to change  and remain s the same , this is akin to saying that 
it is permanent  and unchanging . How can s omething that is permanent  and 
unchanging produce  an effect  that is supposedly the res ult of that karma ? That is the 
problem . 
 
If you were to take the position that when karma  is accumulated, it disintegrates  and 
ceases in the next moment , then from the second moment, its disintegratedness has 
set in.  From that moment to the time its effect issue s forth from that karma, there is 
this huge gap of time again . If it has ceased in the second moment, what is happening 
in the interval between the disintegration of that action to the time it issues forth its 
effect?  If you were to say it is unchanging and static , once again you have the same 
problem — how  can you experience the effect?    
 
You have to focus, listen and then think  about this . Do you get what we are trying to 
figure out here?  
 
Everybody accept s that if you create and accumulate karma , you have to experience 
its effect.  It does not matter how long the intervening period may be. It can be a very 
long  time , eons and eons , but t he point here is that there will come a time when you 
have to experience the  effect. How do you account for that? How do you connect the 
karma to its effect?  
 
If you were to say that once you start creating the karma, it continues and does not  
cease, that means the karma does not change and is static.  If it is static, even if you  
assert that it continues, there is no way you can assert how it can produce an effect 
because a permanent phenomenon cannot produce an effect , permanence being  non -
momentary .  
 
If you say that once you create karma, it ceases in the next moment , i.e., it becomes 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 6 of 11 non-existent  in the second moment , again how do you account for that karma giving 
rise to an effect?   
 
~ The assertions of the four tenets  
Anyway, back to the original point. H ow do you account for karma giving rise to an 
effect sometime in the fu ture? The four Buddhist tenets have their own assertions  
that t ry to offer a coherent explanation for this.   
 
According to the Great Exposition School (GES), the Vaibashika s, there is what they 
call the factor of non -wastage. This factor of non -wastage is  a non -associated 
compositional factor  that i s not the karma itself but th is factor guarantees that the 
effect will be experienced.  The example given by the GES is that of an IOU slip, i.e. 
when you borrow money from someone , you issue an IOU to the person  who loan ed 
you the money as a guarantee that the loan will be repaid.  
  
The proponents of the Mind Only  School (MOS) assert that there is a mind -basis -of-
all. The first moment the karma is produced, it is approaching its disintegration.  
During the time w hen the karma is disintegrating , this phase is called the karma 
approaching disintegration  and an impr int or impre ssion of that karma is left on the 
mind -basis -of-all. At a later time, when the impr int of that particular karma is 
activated, then one experi ences the fruitional or ripening effect  of that karma.  
 
The proponents of the Sutra  School (SS) and the Middle Way Autonomists (MWAS) 
assert that an imprint of the karma is left on the mental consciousness. At a later  time 
when the conditions  are ripe, the karma activates and you experience the effect. For 
the SS and the MWAS, the basis of infusion of the karmic seeds is the mental 
consciousness . 
 
As many of you are already aware , the GES, SS, MOS and the MWAS are the same in 
asserting that most if not all  phenomena exist by way of their own character.  
However, from the highest school point of view, this is akin to saying that everything 
exist s inherently.  
 
So for the GES, SS, MOS and MWAS, when karma is accumulated , it disintegrates  and 
ceases. For them, the disintegratedness of karma is a permanent  phenomenon. As 
such, it  is non -momentary. Because  the disintegratedness of karma is permanent, it 
cannot give rise to an effect.  That is a problem. Therefore, they resort generally to the 
concept of imprint s as they have to account for the connect ion of the end of karma  
and the experienc ing of its effect .  
 
On the other hand, t he Middle Way Consequentialist s (the Prasangikas or the 
proponents of the Consequence Middle Way School)  say that there is no need for 
such complicated theories such as imprints or the mind -basis -of-all in order to 
present a coherent  explanation . They assert that i n fact the disintegratedness of 
karma is merely imputed by thought and it does not exist by way of its own 
character. Therefore , it can give rise to effects  since t he disintegratedness of karma 
does not exist inherently , i.e., t here is no inherently exist ent disintegratedness. This 
is because disintegration happens due to causes and conditions.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 7 of 11 Production does not exist inherentl y, i.e., t here  is no inherently existent production 
because production is due to causes and conditions. Likewise, there is no inherently 
existent disintegration because disintegration happens due to causes and conditions.  
 
The CMWS asserts  that disintegra tedness, the ‘pastness ’ of the karma , is a composite 
(or composed) phenomenon  and is impermanent . It does not exist inherently 
because disintegratedness is a result of causes and conditions.  
 
According to the CMWS, a vase’s disintegratedness (or karma’s di sintegratedness) — 
the past ness of a vase (or the past ness of karma) —is a composite phenomenon 
because it is produced from causes and conditions. The disintegratedness of a vase 
(or disintegratedness of karma ) is an affirming negative.   
 
Phenomen a can be di vided into positive and negative  phenomena . There are two 
kinds of negative  phenomena : 
1. the n on-affirming (or non -implicative ) negative  
2. the a ffirming (or implicative ) negative  
 
Now we are just plant ing imprint s! Perhaps after some time you will understand 
what is being said.   
 
Question:  What does the disintegratedness of the vase affirm?  I understand that a 
non-affirming negative means that it does  not affirm anything.  
 
Answer:  Think of how your mind arrives at the understanding of the 
disintegratedness of  the vase. The v ase’s disintegratedness is the past ness of the 
vase . It happens after the vase has disintegrated .  
 
How do you come to understand that? It is based on negation . The vase is 
disintegrating . The vase is becoming non -existen t. Based on that , you then come to 
have an idea of the past ness of the vase, i.e., the disintegratedness of  the vase .  
 
In order to conceive the vase ’s disintegratedness, that  comes about due to the vase 
disintegrating . The vase has to cease to exist in order to have the vase’s 
disintegratedness. Is n’t a negation taking place ?  The v ase’s disintegratedness can 
only come about through the disintegrati on of the vase , i.e. , it ceas ing to exist . It is  
becoming non -exist ent. 
 
Then think about the vase ’s disintegratedness. What is implied  here ? That 
disintegratedness of the vase happens due to certain causes and conditions . The 
point here is that the word ‘disintegratedness ’ implie s that it is due to causes and 
conditions.  
 
Question:  The CMWS  says that the disintegratedness of karm a is a composite 
phenomenon. How then do they account for the long interval between the 
accumulation of th at karma and its effect?  The other schools account for this through 
the concept of imprints .   
  
Answer:  The CMWS  are not against nor do they reject the idea of imprints. There are 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 8 of 11 imprints. T he context of our discussion  here  is examining what connects the end of a 
karma  to its results . The o ther tenets have to be creative and came out with the idea 
of karmic imprints being stored somewhere . All of them , except the CMWS , believe 
that everything that exist must exist by way of their own character. There must be 
something findable  and inherently existent, r ight there from its own side . So they 
came out with concepts such as the factor of non -wastage  and the basis of infusion  
for the karmic imprints to be the mind -basis -of-all or the mental consciousness . 
 
But the CMWS say s, “There is n o need to  make things so complicated . Just look at 
karma itself. When karma is accumulated, it disintegrates . The disintegra tedness  or 
the past of this karma does not exist inherently  because disintegratedness is a 
composite phenomenon  arising from causes and  conditions .   
 
Since the disintegratedness of karma is a composite phenomenon , that 
disintegratedness will produce its o wn effect —the next moment of 
disintegratedness, i.e., the disintegratedness of disintegratedness. The next moment 
of disintegratedness will produce the next moment of disintegratedness  and so forth . 
This is because disintegratedness is a composite phenomen on. T herefore , it is 
impermanent  and produces its own effect  in the next moment. Th is is how you 
connect the disintegration of karma to the time when its result is experienced . There  
is this continuum of disintegratedness. ”  
 
This is a difficult point. Nev ertheless, it has been so asserted by the savio ur, 
Nagarjuna and the glorious Chandrakirti.  
 
Question:  Can I cite an example to clarify this point? For example, a mango seed is 
produced . At that moment, the disintegratedness of the mango seed starts. You can 
keep the seed for years until the time when  it meets the conditions of water, sun and 
so forth . It sprouts into a mango plant. During all that time, the disintegratedness of 
the mango seed is occurring. That is, the mango seed is existing but it is 
disintegrating all the way from the moment it is produced until it becomes a plant 
many years later. Is that what you mean?  
 
Answer:  During the time when the seed exists , production, disintegration  and 
abeyance are occurring simultaneous ly. What is  the probl em?  
 
Student:  The disintegratedness of that seed i s occurring throughout those times  
because as you say it is a composite phenomenon. It  is the same with karma. I  am 
trying to account for how this disintegratedness of the seed  or our karma  can cause 
the ef fect to occur so many years after its production. Is what I said about the mango 
seed correct? If it is, then that’s fine.   
 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know  ...  
 
We can also talk about  whether karma ’s disintegratedness is virtuous or non -
virtuous. The disint egratedness  of virtuous karma is virtuous. This also applies to the 
disintegratedness of non -virtuous karma.  
 
If you look at the difference  between the CMWS and the other Buddhist tenets , the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 9 of 11 other Buddhist tenets  do not know how to posit disintegratednes s as a composite 
phenomenon . They all posit that disintegratedness is a permanent phenomenon , i.e., 
a non-composite phenomenon. The CMWS  on the other hand posit s that 
disintegratedness —the past ness of a vase  or the past ness  of karma —is a composite 
phenomen on and is impermanent . Therefore , it can produce its own effect , i.e., the 
disintegratedness of disintegratedness.  What accounts for this difference boils down 
to whether one asserts that things exist by way of their own character or not.  
 The CMWS  asserts  that everything th at exists does not exist truly and does not 
exist inherently.  
 As such, t here i s no inherently existent disintegratedness.  
 Why is disintegratedness not inherently existent? Because it is a phenomenon 
that is dependent on causes and cond itions.  
 If it is dependent on causes and conditions, then it  is a composite phenomenon  
and is impermanent . 
 
For the CMWS , when they look at the past ness  of a vase, the disintegratedness of the 
vase, that can only come about when the vase ceases to exist —it has disintegrated . As 
such, you can talk about the disintegratedness of the vase.  
 
While it is a composite phenomenon, if you were to look for th at composite 
phenomenon in that factor of disintegratedness, it is neither one with  nor different  
from the f actor of disintegratedness . Basically , there is no inherently existent 
disintegratedness . There is no inherently existent composite phenomenon either. 
They are merely imputed  just as everything else is merely imputed. So y es, i t is a 
composite phenomenon b ut it is merely imputed by thought.  
 
The CMWS  answer s this fundamental question by asserting that  when an action, 
karma , disintegrates  and ceases, the next moment of disintegratedness is produced . 
Thus it is a composite phenomenon. As such, it produces its  own effect —the next 
moment of disintegratedness . That moment of disintegratedness produces its own 
next moment of disintegratedness and so forth. So t here  is this continuum of 
disintegratedness  that links and connects the end of action  (karma ) to the time  when 
the ripening effects of that karma is experienced.  
 
This is a difficult point . If you think about it, it is really challenging for us to conceive 
how  this continuum of disintegratedness can bring forth a fruitional effect. I n theory, 
it sounds goo d but then e ven the theory is difficult. E ven if you were to get something 
out of this theory —that disintegratedness produces the next moment of 
disintegratedness  that in turn produces the next moment of disintegratedness  and 
for however long  it takes, there  will come a time when the effect is produced —when 
we think again about t he fruitional effect s of the karma such as rebirth or some 
painful experience, that production seems real , does it not ? There i s this arising of a 
real  fruitional effect.   
 
When we t hink about imprints  and t ry to explain how we experience things due to  
the ripening of certain imprints, it  is easie r for the mind to conceive this. But when 
we try to think of how this continuum of disintegratedness can then bring forth a 
fruitional effec t, it is difficult for us to conceive  this.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 10 of 11 I guess all the se problems arise because we do not have the experiential knowledge 
of what inherent existence  is. We cannot even identify properly what the object of 
negation is. We cannot differentiate between  inherent existence and existence  itself .  
 
There is scriptural proof for the CMWS'  assertion that disintegratedness is a 
composite phenomenon. In the Sutra of the Ten Grounds , there is a quotation that 
says , “Aging and death are prod uced by the condition of birth.”  
 
What is death? When we refer to death, the person has already died . The dying is 
done . The person is dead. So the person doesn’t exist.  That is said to be a result of 
birth. If death is produced by birth, then  what produces disintegratedness?  It is the 
same line of reasoning.  
 
Nagarjuna gave another example . When we talk about the extinguish ing of the flame  
of a butter lamp , it is produced by the exhaustion of the wick and the butter . They are 
used up. Likewise, t here are people who die due to  lack of food or medicine. Because 
of the lack of food or medicine, death occurs. The phenomenon in question is the lack 
of food or lack of medicine. This example helps  us understand that disintegratedness 
is a functioning thing . It is produced  and i s a co mposite phenomenon.  
 
The CMWS is saying that disintegratedness is a produced or composite phenomenon . 
When the karma is accumulated , it doesn’t have to last for a long time . Being a 
momentary phenomenon, it is disintegrating all the time. So in  the very n ext moment, 
it has disintegrated and already ceased  to exist . That next moment is the 
disintegratedness of karma .  Because that disintegratedness is a composite 
phenomenon, it is produced from causes and conditions  and it necessarily produces 
its own effec t. That produces the next moment of disintegratedness  and so on.  There 
is a continuum of disintegratedness . All of them are functioning things.  
 
However, this does not mean that the CMWS  does not talk about imprint s. The CMWS  
talks about imprints as well.  If you talk about imprint s, there must be something 
holding those imprints . That i s called the basis of infusion.  Most of the tenets talk 
about the basis of infusion in terms of th e mind  or consciousness  such as  the mind -
basis -of-all or the mental conscio usness. But the CMWS  has their own take as to what 
is the basis of infusion of such imprints.  
 
According to the CMWS, the basis of infusion of the imprints is the mere ‘I’.  The 
imprints are left on the mere ‘I’ that becomes the repository  for the imprint s.  
 
This is  difficult . The main problem is because we are clinging on to true existence  and 
inherent existence  and we cannot accept  that .  
 
According to the CMWS,  as cited in Chandrakirti’s auto -commentary to his own 
Supplement to the Treatise on the Midd le, there are two bas es of infusion : 
1. The t emporal basis of infusion is the consciousness . 
2. The a ctual  basis of infusion that exist s throughout all time  is the mere ‘I’. 
 
Khen Rinpoche: Sorry . We went off in a different direction today.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basi c Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 18  
Page 11 of 11 For the CMWS, the p ast is a functioning thing. If you get the idea that the past is a 
functioning thing  and not a permanent phenomenon, then the mission has been 
accomplished !  
 
Question:  You talk ed about the past being a functioning thing. In that case, there 
should be a fu ture that is also a functioning thing, just as with disintegratedness , 
there will also be the production of a phenomen on. Otherwise, the phenomen on will 
keep on disintegrating and will never produce a final result. So if there is a past ness , 
there should also be a future ness?   
 
Technically, a phenomen on has both a disintegratedness and produce dness to 
another  phenomen on because there is both a pastness and a futureness of the next 
moment.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t understand  your question. Sorry, there’s no time.   
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 