Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L14 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:46.361675
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 14                              7 April 2015  
 
 
Explaining the verse from  the Vajra Cutter Sutra (cont’d): “An drop of dew, or a bubble .” 
Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verses 30 —37. Clear light nature of the mind: 
The ten aspects (cont’d) . Reviewing Verse s 30 —33: (1) The entity  & (2) The causes. Verses 
34—37: (3)  The effects. Connecting Verse 27 with Verse 34.  
 
 
EXPLAINING THE VERSE FROM THE VAJRA CUTTER SUTRA  (CONT’D)  
 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud – 
See conditioned  things as such!  
 
“A drop of dew , or a bubble ” 
The analogy of “a drop of dew ” is helpful in understanding the faults or the 
disadvantages of cyclic existence. Let  us say there is a drop of dew on the tip of a 
flower petal or a blade of grass. When the sun rises, the drop of dew will evaporate 
very quickly.  
 
Any phenomenon that comes in to being through the aggregation of causes and 
conditions —that is, all composed  (or conditioned, compounded, composite) 
phenomena —is essentially impermanent. Impermanence mean s that they have the 
nature of disintegrating from moment to moment. All impermanent phenomena are 
established in the nature of disintegrating momentar ily.  
 
What causes impermanent phenomena to have this nature? The cause is none other 
than the very cause  that brought about the production of th e impermanent 
phenomenon in question  in the first place . 
 
We should apply our understanding of impermanence to the things that we 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 2 of 10 experience in life , starting with our bod y, our love d ones, our possession s and so 
forth. The point is to see how they are impermanent in nature  and that they are 
undergoing change and disintegrating from moment to moment . They are no t stable  
and there  will come a time when these things will cease to exist. If we understand 
that this is the  nature of composed  phenomena , this  will help us to have less clinging  
and less attachment to these things.  
 
We can deriv e the same understanding from the analogy of the bubble. A bubble 
easily can cease to exist . All you need to do is to poke it and it wi ll just disappear.  If 
we look at the nature of the water bubble, it comes from water. W hen you poke th e 
water bubble, it burst s, disintegrates  and becomes water  again . 
 
When we talk about feelings, we can divide feelings into three types —pleasant  
feeling s, unpleasant feeling s and neutral feeling s. 
 
Let us look at unpleasant feeling s. When an unpleasant feeling arises, it arises in the 
nature of pain  or suffering . That is its nature.   
 
Our pleasant feeling s are essentially the feeling of contaminated pleasu re. When the 
feeling of contaminated pleasure  or happiness arise s, it arise s in the nature of 
suffering . However , although that is the reality , we don’t recogni se this because it is 
not apparent to us . When that feeling of contaminated pleasure ceases , it also 
disintegrates in the nature of suffering . So it arises in the nature of suffering and it 
disintegrates in the nature of suffering.  
 
Neutral feeling s are also in the nature of suffering . That is also not apparent to us and 
we do  not recogni se it. We do  not even know that they are  in the nature of suffering . 
Neutral feeling s are the foundation  or the basis for other suffering s and it also 
induces other sufferings.  
 
The water bubble is analogous of how all our feelings of pleasure  and suffering  and 
neutra l feeling s are in the nature of suffering . Although they appear differently, they 
are all in the nature of suffering  just as a water  bubble arises in the nature of water , 
and then dissolves back in to the nature of water. Likewise , whether it is the feeling  of 
pleasure, pain or a neutral feeling , although we think they are different, actually they 
are all the same , i.e., they are all in the nature of suffering.  
 
When we come across analogies in the Vajra Cutter Sutra  such as  “a drop of dew , or a 
bubble ,” tha t is advice for us to reflect  on and to be reminded of the faults and 
disadvantages of our samsara.  
 
Although  the feeling s of pleasure, suffering and neutral feeling s appear different, we 
do not recognize that they are all in the nature of suffering . This is especially  so with 
regard to the pleasurable feeling s we experienc e.  W e cannot imagine  and see how 
they can be in the nature of suffering  but i n reality , that is the case.  
 
However, the s uperior beings  see suffering as suffering , and t hey see that whi ch is in 
the nature of suffering  to be in the nature of suffering. They see things a s they are. As 
a result , true suffering is a truth for the superior ones , and therefore , it is called a 
noble truth , i.e., literally , a truth for the superior s. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 3 of 10 CLEAR LIGHT  NATURE OF THE MIND: THE TEN ASPECTS (CONT’D)  
 
We have started looking at the ten aspects that show that the mind is in the nature of 
clear light. If you want to look at these ten aspects in a simple way, then they can look 
simple . But if you  think and try to examine them more deeply, you will see that they 
are really challenging.  
 
Reviewing Verses 30 —33: (1) the entity, (2) the causes  
The first of these ten aspects is the aspect of the entity , which basically talk s about 
how the mind is in the nature of c lear light. That is explained through the analogy of 
the purity of a jewel, space and water  as in Verse 30  (a, b).  
 
Verse 30 a,  b 
Like the [natural] purity of a jewel, space, and water,  
The nature [of the basic constituent] is always unafflicted.  
 
Although  our mind  is in the nature of clear light, it is not called the truth body or the 
dharmakaya. In order for  our mind  to be transformed into the truth body, there must 
be the cause s for that transformation  to take place . Therefore, the second aspect is 
the aspect of the cause s, which seeks to explain how that transformation can come 
about when all the causes are present. T hese are mentioned briefly in Verse 30  (c, d) . 
 
Verse 30 c,  d 
It arises from (1) devotion to the [Great Vehicle] doctrine, (2) the 
higher w isdom [realizing selflessness],  
(3) [The immeasurable] meditative stabilization [endowed with 
bliss], and (4) compassion [for sentient beings].  
 
These are the four causes that must be present to effect the transformation of the 
mind into the dharmakaya : 
1. devotion to the Mahayana  (or Great Vehicle) doctrine  
2. the wisdom reali sing selflessness  
3. concentration  or meditative stabilisation   
4. compassion  
 
These four are causes  but they are also  antidotes . If they are antidotes, what are they 
antidotes to ? If there are f our antidotes, there must be four obstacles  or 
obscurations. The four obstacles are listed in Verse 32.  
 
Verse 32  
(1) Hatred for the [Great Vehicle] doctrine, (2) view of self,  
(3) Fear of the sufferings of cyclic existence [and thus seeking one’s 
own pe ace and happiness],  
And (4) not having concern for the welfare of sentient beings  
Are the four forms of obstructions [preventing manifestation of the Buddha 
nature respectively]  
Of (1) those of great desire [who do not at all abandon cyclic existence], (2)  
Forders, (3) Hearers, and (4) the Self -Arisen.  
The causes of purifying [those] are the four aspects  
Of the practices of special devotion [to the Great Vehicle] and so forth.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 4 of 10 The four obscurations are :  
1. dislike  and hatred for the Mahayan a 
2. the view of self  
3. fear of the sufferings of samsara  
4. not having concern for the welfare of sentient beings , i.e., not having the 
wholehearted resolve that comes from generating t he personal responsibility ,  
thinking , “I will work for the benefit of sentient beings  by myself alone. ”   
 
Verse 33  
Those who have the seed which is devotion to the Supreme Vehicle,  
The mother which is the wisdom giving birth to the Buddha qualities,  
The womb which is the bliss of concentration, and the nurse which is 
compassion  
Are the [Bodhisattva ] children born from [the mind of] the Subduer.  
 
Verse 33 is seeks to explain how  a bodhisattva is born and how that bodhisattva 
gradually become s enlightened  by using the analogy of a prince who is born to a 
wheel -turning king.  
 
What are the causes then that must be complete d before the transformation of the 
mind into the dharmakaya can happen ?  
 First , you need great devotion, belief  in and aspir ation for the Mahayana.  
 Once you have that, there is the opportunity to develop great compassion.  
 Once great c ompassion is developed, there is the opportunity to develop the mind 
of enlightenment.  
 And once the mind of enlightenment , bodhicitta , is generated , as a bodhisattva, 
one is able to cultivate the union of calm -abiding and special insight .  
The bodhisattva  then will have the complete causes that enable him to actuali se the 
dharmakaya.  
 
Devotion to the Mahayana means having faith in the Mahayana. Of the different kinds 
of faith, it is the faith of conviction in the presentation of causality as presented in t he 
Mahayana.  When one has this faith of conviction  in the Mahayana , one can induce a 
mind that yearns for enlightenment  and year ns for the Mahayana . It is  a mind that 
seek s and want s enlightenment , it want s the Mahayana . 
 
The faith of conviction in the Ma hayana can induce  the yearning for full 
enlightenment. When one truly aspires for enlightenment  that  would , in turn , induce 
a strong yearning to search for the causes of enlightenment. On the basis of that, one 
cultivate s the calm -abiding  of the Mahayana . One cultivates the special insight of the 
Mahayana. One then achieve s the union of these two , calm -abiding and special 
insight . Once one achieves that, one has  the full and complete causes for achieving 
enlightenment. From then on, one  gradually  progresses  towards the actuali sation of 
omniscience.  
 
3.  The effect s 
The n ext aspect is the effect s. Once you have the causes for actuali sing the 
dharma kaya, then what are the effect s that are achieved?  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 5 of 10 Verse 34 a, b 
The perfection of the qualities of purity, sel f, bliss,  
And permanence [of the Truth Body which is the fruit of  purifying 
the obstructions through their antidotes] is the fruit.  
 
Earlier on , Verse 27 seeks to prove the existence of the tathagata essence in all 
sentient beings :  
 “Because a perfect Budd ha’s body  is pervasive ”: This is an explanation from the 
perspective of the result.  
 “Because suchness is without differentiation” : Th is is an explanation from the 
perspective of the nature.  
 “Because a [Buddha ] lineage exists” : Th is is an explanation from the perspective 
of the cause.  
 
~ The c onnect ion between Verses 27 and 34  
I think perhaps one can relate the explanation of how the tathagata essence exi sts in 
all sentient beings from the perspective of the result to “the perfection of the quality 
of pur ity” stated in Verse  34. 
 
“Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive”  expla ins the presence of the 
tathagata essence in all sentient beings from the perspective of the result.  It is saying 
that the enlightened activit ies of the d harmakaya are continuous ly emanating to and 
engaging with all sentient beings.  
 
The dharmakaya acts as the condition for showing sent ient beings the  Dharma. When 
the Dharma is revealed to sentient beings, there will be sentient beings that  develop 
interest and belief in or d evot ion towards the Dharma . With that devotion  towards 
the D harma, they can then pr oceed  towards achieving the dharmakaya themselves.  
So among the four effects (or results ), the first is the perfection of the quality of 
purity.  
 
With regard to t he second effec t—the perfection of the quality of self —I think you 
can relate this to the  second line in Verse 27 , “Because suchness is without 
differentiation .” The perfection of the quality of self is achieved through the wisdom 
that has suchness as its object that realises the selflessness of person s and the 
selflessness of phenomena. The ultimate form of the wisdom that has suchness as its 
object  is none other than the dharmakaya.  
 
In the discussion o f this line in V erse 27 , it was explained that the indispensable 
object for the wisdom is none other than suchness or reality . So the second effect of 
the four effects is posited to be the perfection of the quality of self.   
 
The third line of Verse 27 —“Because a [Buddha]  lineage exists” —is an explanation of 
how all senti ent beings possess the tathagata essence from the perspective of the 
cause. In this context  here , “lineage ” refers to the developmental lineage.  Because the 
developmental lineage  exists  in the minds of sentient beings , therefore  the 
cultivation of compassi on is possible . Then there is the d evelopment of concentration  
and so forth. The two results  are the perfection of the quality of bliss and the 
perfection of the quality of permanence.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 6 of 10 In Verse 34, four qualities  are stated : 
1. the perfection of the quality of purity  
2. the perfection of the quality of self  
3. the perfection of the quality of bliss  
4. the perfection of the quality of permanence  
These four qualities  are the effects or the result s.  
 
If you link them with the aspects of the entity of the lineage and the  causes for the 
transformation of th at lineage into the dharmakaya , the perfection of the quality of 
purity : 
 Is related to the first line of Verse 27 , “Because the Buddha ’s body  is pervasive .” 
 Linking t hat to the aspect of the causes (or antidotes) , it is the first of the four 
antidotes , devotion to the doctrine . It was said earlier that the enlightened 
activities of the dharmakaya is a condition for the revelation of the Dharma to 
sentient beings . Th is can cause sentient beings to develop devotion for the 
doctrine. As a result of such devotion, they then proceed towards actuali sing the 
dharmakaya.  
 At the time of the effect, this is the perfection of the quality of purity .  
 
The second effect, the perfection of the quality of self : 
 Is related to the second line of Verse 27 —“Because suchness is without 
differentiation ”—which explain s how the tathagata essence exist s in all sentient 
beings through the perspective of the nature.  
 When related to the four antidotes , it is the antidote of the wisdom  realising 
selflessness .  
 The effect or result of that is the perfection of the quality of self.  
 
The perfection of the quality of bliss and permanence : 
 Is related to the third line of Verse 27 —“Because a [Buddha] lineage exists .” In 
this context here, t he lineage prim arily refers to the developmental lineage.  
 Because the developmental lineage exists, therefore one can cultivate  and 
develop compassion and concentration , the remaining two causes or antidotes .  
 The results are the perfection of the quality of bliss and the perfection of the 
quality permanence.  
 
PROVING THE EXISTENC E OF 
THE TATHAGATA ESSENC E 
(VERSE 27) ASPECT OF THE CAUSES   
(VERSE 30 C, D)  ASPECT OF THE EFFECT S (OR 
RESULTS) (VERSE 3 4) 
“Because the Buddha’s body is 
pervasive ”: The explanation from 
the pers pective of the result.  “(1) Devotion to the [Great 
Vehicle] doctrine .” The p erfection of the quality of 
purity . 
“Because suchness is without 
differentiation ”: The explanation 
from the perspective of the 
nature.  “(2) The higher wisdom 
[realizing selflessn ess].” The p erfection of the quality of self . 
“Because a [Buddha] lineage 
exists ”: The explanation from the 
perspective of the cause.   “(3) [ The immeasurable ] 
meditative stabilization 
[endowed with bliss ].” The p erfection of the quality of 
bliss . 
“(4) Compassion [for 
sentient beings ].” The pe rfection of the quality of 
permanence . 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 7 of 10 ~ Extensive presentation of the aspect of the effects  
Verse 35  
In brief the fruits of these [four causes, devotion to the Great 
Vehicle and so  forth,  
Are attainments of th e four qualities] distinguished as  
Purity and so forth [i.e., self, bliss, and permanence] through being 
antidotes  
That are opposite to the four erroneous aspects [impurity and so 
forth] with  respect to the Truth Body.  
 
“The four erroneous aspects ” are rel ated to the ultimate mode of abiding of 
phenomena . There are also four erroneous aspects that are related to the 
conventional mode of abiding of phenomena.  
 
I would think it is alright  to posit the four erroneous aspects that are related to the 
conventiona l mode of abiding of phenomena are the four erroneous views that we 
usually talk about , that is :  
1. apprehending that which is impermanent to be permanent  
2. apprehending that which is unclean to be clean  
3. apprehending that which is in nature of suffering to be happiness  
4. apprehending th at which is selfless as  having a self 
 
“That are opposite to the four erroneous aspects with respect to the Truth Body”  is a 
discussion o f the four erroneous aspects with respect to the ultimate mode of abiding 
of phenomena.   
 
The four aspects (or attributes) of true suffering  are:  
1. impermanen t 
2. miserable (or of a suffering nature ) 
3. empty  
4. selfless  
 
The four erroneous views from the perspective of the ultimate mode of abiding 
means  to apprehend : 
 impermanence as tru ly existen t  
 misery o r that which is in the nature of suffering as truly existent  
 that which is empty as truly existen t  
 that which is selfless as truly existent   
‘Selfless ’ here is posited to be coarse selflessness  so this is apprehending coarse 
selflessness to be truly exi stent.  
 
The result of applying the antidote  of devotion to the Mahayana doctrine is the 
perfection of the quality of purity. What is posited as this quality? The perfection of 
the quality of purity is the  final sphere of reality that is purified of the af flictive 
obscurations and knowledge obscurations. It is a purity because it is purified of the 
two obscurations.  
 
The perfection of the quality of self is achieved through cultivating the perfection of 
wisdom , i.e., t he wisdom directly reali sing emptiness . What this wisdom reali ses is 
the ultimate  final nature of phenomena , their lack of a self .  This is like the space -like 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 8 of 10 emptiness that is devoid  of all elaborations. Such a sphere is the ultimate nature of 
reality , the suchness of phenomena . It is the ultimate mode of abiding of phenomena.  
 
It is said that through meditating on the sky treasure meditative stabili sation, one 
can achieve the d harmakaya  that p ervades all phenomena.  T he dharmakaya is such 
that it pervades all of space , i.e., w herever there is space, the dharmakaya is there . It 
pervades the entire existence. This is the perfection of the quality of bliss.  
 
Here we are talking about enlightenment  and buddha hood . The result of meditating 
on compassion is that a buddha is able to work for numbe rless sentient beings for as 
long as space exists  and for as long as sentient beings exist . A buddha continuously 
engag es sentient beings without interruption. This is what you have to understand 
when we talk about the last quality here , the perfection of the quality of permanence. 
Because of  meditating on compassion, the  buddhas  work for sentient beings 
uninterruptedly  and continuously without a break ; that is, they are working  eternally 
for sentient beings.  
 
Verse 36  
Because that [Truth Body] is naturall y pure [from the start]  
And because [the adventitious defilements as well as] the 
predispositions are  abandoned, [this possession of the two types 
of purity] is [a perfection of]  purity.  
Because the elaborations of [the conception of] of self [imputed by 
the Forders]  and of the selflessness [conceived by Hearers and 
so forth]  
Have been pacified, it is [a perfection of] holy self.  
 
Verse 37  
Because the [subtle] aggregates which have a mental nature  
And their cause [the level of the predispositions of ignora nce] have 
been  removed, it is just [a perfection of] bliss.  
Because cyclic existence and nirvana are realized as equal [in 
nature]  
It is [a perfection of] permanence [that is, unbroken (fulfillment) of 
the two  aims].  
 
The perfection of the quality of p urity is the d harmakaya. Two reasons are given  for 
why this is so :  
1. because  “that [Truth Body] is naturally pure  [from the start]”  
2. “because  [the adventitious defilements as well as]  the predispositions are 
abandoned ” 
 
“Because the elaborations of [the concepti on of] self [imputed by the Forders] and of 
the selflessness [conceived by Hearers and so forth]/ Have been pacified”: The 
dharmakaya is also the perfection of the quality of self because the dharmakaya is the 
stillness and pacification of the view of the self that is “[imputed by the Forders ]” as 
well as a pacification of all elabo rations of true existence. Such pacification  is 
complete and permanent in that the view of self and the elaborations of true 
existence will not arise any more. So it  is a subsid ence of all elaborations  and the 
stillness and pacification of true existence . In fact , the subsidence of  all elaborations 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 9 of 10 of true existence is a subsid ence of all duality.  As such, it is a perfection of the 
ultimate or holy self . 
 
The dharmakaya is the per fection of the quality of bliss , “Because the subtle 
aggregates which have  a mental nature and their cause [the level of the 
predispositions of ignorance]1 have been removed .” Th e cause s are the removal of :     
1. the level of the predispositions of ignorance   
2. the uncontaminated  karma  
Because these two causes have been removed, so the dharmakaya is the perfection of 
the quality of bliss .  
  
The d harmakaya is the perfection of the quality of permanence , “Because cyclic 
existence and nirvana are realized as equ al [in nature] .” As such, it is the ultimate  
final freedom from the two extremes.  
 
This is the explanation of the third aspect, the fruit s or the effect s, i.e., h ow the 
dharmakaya is these four qualities.  
 
The perfection of the quality of purity exists o nly on the b uddha ground. The hearers 
and solitary realiser arhats and even the eighth ground bodhisattvas do not possess 
this perfection b ecause they still possess the obstacles that hinder the achievement 
of this perfection .  
   
The hearers , solitary realiser arhats and the bodhisattvas who have achieved 
mastery do not possess the perfection of the quality of purity because they still have 
the level of the predispositions of ignorance , the subtle elaborations of the 
appearance of true existence.  
 
Likewis e, these beings including the bodhisattvas who have achieved mastery do not 
have the quality of the perfection of bliss because they still have that body of a 
mental nature that arises from the uncontaminated karma motivated by the level of 
the predisposit ions of ignorance.  
 
The point is that because of the elaborations of true existence, one accumulates 
karma . For the se beings, they accumulate uncontaminated karma , resulting in the 
production of a mental body. As such, they do not achieve the perfection o f the 
quality of bliss.  
 
Also , once they have this body of a mental nature, they have to experience the 
inconceivable transference of death. They  have to die in that way. Because they 
undergo this inconceivable transference of death, they do not possess t he perfection 
of the quality of permanence.  
 
Summary  
These perfections of the qualities of purity, self, bliss and permanence only exist on 
the buddha ground. The h earers  arhats, s olitary realiser arhats and the bodhisattvas 
abiding on the pure ground s do not possess these qualities.  
                                                           
1 The l evel of predisposition of ignorance is the predisposition of grasping at true existence. (Page 3, 
Lesson 19, First Basic Program , Module 10).   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Page 10 of 10  
Why do these qualities only exist on the bu ddha ground?  
1. Non-buddhas do not possess the perfection of the quality of purity . In order to 
possess that, the two obscurations must be removed. Only the buddha s have done 
that.  
2. You have to relate t he perfection of the quality of self  to the elaborations of true 
existence. In order to achieve the dharmakaya, in order to have the perfection of 
the quality of self, there has to be a direct reali sation of emptiness in which all 
elabo rations of true existence ha ve been pacified  including the appearance of true 
existence , such that one will never ever have to rise again from that equipoise. 
This applies only to  a buddha.  
 
Why is the perfection of the quality of self like that? It has t o be a reali sation whereby 
you need not have to arise from it ever again. You are directly immersed in 
emptiness whereby all elaborations of true existence —including all appearance s of 
true existence —are pacified to the extent that there is no more arising  from that, i.e., 
there is no need to arise from that any more.  
 
What is the problem if there is still the appearance of duality, if there is still any form 
of the elaborations of true existence ? This would mean that there is still the 
accumulation of unco ntaminated karma that leads to the acqu isition of a kind of 
embodiment;  in this case, a mental body or a body o f mental nature . Once you have a 
mental body, you do not have the perfection of the quality of bliss.  
 
The perfection of the quality of bliss is  a quality that arises through the 
extinguishment of the mental body. The mental body undergoes birth and death. 
What is born , dies but the birth and death of such an aggregate are not d ue to karma 
and afflictions. Nevertheless, the mental body has to unde rgo the inconceivable 
transference of death. The perfection of the quality of permanence is a quality that is 
free  from th e inconceivable transference of death.   
 
If you analy se the words of th is root text, there is so much to think  about. I t is very 
deep  and profound, and difficult. When you examine it in a simple way, it  is 
straightforward . You just have to know that there are these four qualities, why only 
the buddhas have them  and why the non -buddhas do  not. If you want to look at it in a 
simple way, i t is not difficult .  
 
Why do only the buddhas have the perfection of the quality of purity? Why is it that 
the non -buddhas do not have this perfection ? As stated in Verse 36,  it is because the 
truth body , the dharmakaya , is naturally pure and because the p redispositions have 
been abandoned . Therefore , it is the perfection of purity and f reedom  from the two 
obscurations. That’s it.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 