Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L22 final 2.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:36.700083
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsa p Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 22                            11 June 2015  
 
 
Eight forbearances and eigh t knowledges. Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  
Verse s 131 —133: The nine forms of defilements  (cont’d) . Verses 13 4: Who possesses the 
nine defilements. Verses 135 —143: Applying the nine examples to the nine forms of 
defilements. The four maras.  
 
 
Question : In Lesson 20, y ou mentioned that manifest attachment and manifest 
obscuration can motivate the accumulation of immovable karma  that results in 
rebirth in the form and formless realms . Do these two afflictions relate to the first 
three dormant m ental poisons or do they relate to the fourth mental poison  (i.e., “the 
strong arousal [or manifestation] of those [three poisons]”) ? 
 
Answer:  What I said was that the first three f orms of defilements out of the nine  are 
dormant  desire , dormant anger and d ormant obscuration . I said that manifest 
attachment and manifest obscuration can be included within the categor ies of 
dormant attachment and dormant obscuration because they can motivate the 
accumulation  of immovable karma. That’s it. But that  is not sayin g that dormant 
attachment is the same as manifest attachment.   
 
The fo urth defilement out of the nine is listed as “the strong arousal [or 
manifestation ] of those [three poisons ].” The manifest forms of the  three poisons are 
not listed separately  but rathe r they are classified as one category. Essentially , they 
are the strong manifestation s of the three mental poisons that lead to the 
accumulation of  the projecting karma for rebirth in the desire realm.  
 
Student:  When I went for a walking meditation retreat , I was told that the attachment 
to the pleasurable experie nce during that kind of retreat —where  you try not to think  
of anything  but simply observ e the movement of one’s body —will result in the 
accumulation of immovable karma for rebirth in the form and f ormless realm s. Could  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 2 of 10 attachment to the pleasurable experience of this type of meditation be an example of 
the manifest attachment that will lead to the accumulation of immovable karma for 
rebirth  in the form and formless realm s? 
 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t th ink so. What do  you all think? When you meditate and you are 
attached to th at meditation , do you accumulate the karma to be reborn in the form and 
formless realms ? 
 
It is difficult to accumulate the karma to be born in the higher realms , i.e., the form 
and formless realms . You must have achieved one of the concentrations or an access 
to one of those concentrations , i.e., i n order to accumulate immovable karma, you 
need very good concentration . In this context, good concentration means  that at the 
very least , you need to have  achieved calm -abiding.  
 
Question:  We have always been told that  the three mental poisons  are attachment, 
anger and ignorance. But here, there are alternative terms such as  ‘dormant 
obscuration ’ or ‘dormant bewilderment ’ being used . In th e context of this particular 
text we are studying , is there some subtle difference between ignorance , obscuration 
and bewilderment  or can we just use  ‘ignorance ,’ the term we are most familiar with?  
 
Answer:  When we settle on the ir meaning , they are the sa me but there are different 
words in Tibetan —ti mug  is bewilderment whereas ma rigpa  is ignorance.   
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
EIGHT FORBEARANCES & EIGHT KNOWLEDGES  
 
In the last lesson we  discussed the afflictive obscurations that are the p ath of seeing 
abandonments , the eight forbearances and the eight knowledges.   
  
 From the perspective of seeing the suchness of the four noble truths , there are the 
four forbearances : 
1. the f orbearance  of true suffering s 
2. the f orbearance of true origin s 
3. the f orbearance of true cessation s 
4. the f orbearance of true path s 
 From the perspective of the seeing the suchness of the wisdom s that reali se the 
suchness of the four noble truths , there are the four subsequent forbearances.  
Altogether , there are eight forbearances  that make up the uninterr upted path of the 
path of seeing . These eight are nominally different but one in entity, i.e., they are one 
entity with different isolates.  
 
The uninterrupte d path of the path of seeing is: 
 the direct antidote to the afflictions that are the p ath of seeing  abandonments . 
 the direct antidote to the seeds of the afflictions that are the p ath of seeing 
abandonments .  
 
In the wisdom of the u ninterrupted path of the path of seeing , there are no afflictions  
that are the path of seeing abandonments. This is becaus e during the uninterrupted 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 3 of 10 path of the path of seeing , as it is such a powerful antidote to the path of seeing 
abandonments, there is no opportunity for th ose afflictions to arise . As t hey cannot 
arise , they are not abandoned yet.   
 
When we talk about the eight forbearances i n the uninterrupted path of the path of 
seeing , this is in relation to someone who has actuali sed the path of seeing for the 
very first time.  
 
In that same meditative equipoise, that individual achieves the path of release of the 
path of seeing  and achieves the eight knowledges  that are made up of the four 
knowl edges and  the four subsequent knowledges . These are the eight knowledges  
that are the path of release of the path of seeing.  These are similar to the eight 
forbearances  in that:  
 from the perspective of reali sing the suchness of the four noble  truths as the 
object , we have the four knowledges .  
 from the perspective of seeing the suchness of the subject , i.e., the wisdom that 
reali ses the suchness of the four noble truths , there are  the four subsequent  
knowledges.  
 
In summary:  
 The eight forbearances are the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing .  
 The eight knowledges are the path of release of the path of seeing  that is achieved 
after the intellectually acquired afflictions are a bandoned.  
Collectively , they are known as the sixteen moments of forbearance and knowledge.  
 
According to the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), the Prasangika s, the 
eight forbearances are achieved simultaneously . The eight knowledges are also 
achieved  simultaneously.  
 
THE NINE FORMS OF DEFILEMENTS (CONT’D)  
 
Verse 131  
The nine forms of defilements —(1-3) [the latencies or seeds of] 
desire, hatred, and obscuration [which are overcome by the 
exalted wisdom of a Superior], (4) the strong arousal [or 
manif estation] of those [three poisons],  
(5) The level of] the predispositions [of ignorance which are the 
means of achieving the uncontaminated actions and the mental 
body in the  continuum of a Foe Destroyer and which are to be 
overcome by the exalted wisdom of the great enlightenment], (6) 
the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing [which 
obstruct a common being from seeing reality], (7) the objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation [in the continuum of a 
Learner Superior],  
(8) The objects to be abandoned by the [seven] impure [grounds 
which are to be overcome by the pure grounds],  
And (9) the defilements dependent on the pure grounds [which are 
to be overcome by the vajra -like meditative stabilization],  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 4 of 10 Among the nine defilements, we have tw o more to cover: the eighth defilement are 
the objects to be abandoned by the impure grounds and the ninth defilements are 
dependent on the pure grounds.   
 
Verse 132  
Are indicated by [the nine] examples  
Of the covering of a lotus and so forth,  
But the div isions of covering of afflictive emotions  
Are beyond the limits of number.  
 
Verse 133  
These nine defilements —desire and so forth — 
Are briefly indicated respectively  
By the nine examples  
Of the covering of a lotus and so forth.  
 
Verses 1 32 and 133 are sum mar ies.  
 
WHO POSSESSES THE NINE DEFILEMENTS  
 
Who are the individuals that possess these defilements? The se are identified in Verse 
134.  
 
Verse 134  
[By way of possessing] impurity [mainly] through four, one,  
Two, and two of these defilements respectively  
Childish [common beings], Foe Destroyers,  
Learners and the intelligent ones.  
 
 The first three defilements are dormant anger, dormant attachment and dormant 
obscuration.  
 The fourth defilement is the strong manifestations of those three poisons.   
The first  four defilements are possessed by ordinary beings who have not entered 
any path.  
  
 The fifth defilement is the level of the predispositions of ignorance  and these are 
possessed by the hearer foe destroyers and the solitary realiser foe destroyers, 
i.e., the arhats.  
 
 The sixth and seven defilement s—the path of seeing abandonments and the path 
of meditation abandonments —are found in the mental continu a of learners  that 
include s ordinary beings who have entered a path . It can also include the 
Hinayana learn er superiors.  
When we talk about learner s and non -learner s, the word ‘learner’ is not used for 
ordinary beings who have not entered a path. It is used for those beings who have 
entered a path and would include ordinary beings who have entered the path.  In 
Verse  134, the word ‘learner’ is used. What kind of defilements are in their mental 
continu a? Their defilements are the path of seeing abandonments and the path of 
meditation abandonments.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 5 of 10  In Verse  134 , “the intelligent ones ” are the bodhisattvas. What ar e the defilements 
that are found in their mental continu a? These are the defilements  of the seven 
impure grounds and “the defilements dependent on the pure grounds ,” (the 
eighth and ninth defilements).  
 
THE NINE FORMS OF DEFILEMENTS  BEINGS WITH THE DEFI LEM ENTS  
The first to the fourth defilements: d ormant anger, 
dormant attachment , dormant obscuration and the 
strong manifestation of those three poisons .  Ordinary beings that have not entered any 
path .  
The fift h defilement: the l evel of the predisposition s 
of ignorance .  Hearer foe destroyers and solitary realiser foe 
destroyers.  
The sixth and seventh defilements: the p ath of seeing 
abandonments and the path of meditation 
abandonments .  Learners that include  
 ordinary beings who have entered a path . 
 Hinay ana learner superiors . 
The eighth and ninth defilements: The abandonments 
of the seven impure grounds and the abandonments 
dependent on the pure grounds.  The bodhisattvas  or “the intelligent ones.”  
 
Next follows a long explanation on the examples that exemplif y the defilements. I  am 
going to explain the verses from the root text  so you have to refer to the m as we go 
along.  
 
When you read Verse 134 and if you have understood what I just said, that fulfil s the 
purpose of explaining that verse.  
 
Verses 13 5 to 138 are explanation s of the first four  defilements —the three dormant 
poisons and the strong arousal or manifestations of th em. 
 
Verse 135  
Just as a lotus born from mud  
Pleases the mind when it is [newly] present,  
But later [when old] does not please,  
So [when the latencies of] desire [become manifest attachment   
through improper mental application, one is] happy [but when it 
ceases one is unhappy, due to which it is like the pleasure of 
seeing a lotus]  
 
Here th e example  is exemplifying the meaning  that is referring to dormant desire : 
“[When the latencies of ] desire [become manifest attachment t hrough improper 
mental application,  one is ] happy, but [when it ceases one is unhappy].”   
 
The next verse  is where  anger is likened to the bees.  
 
Verse 136  
Just as bees, having become greatly disturbed,  
Sting  [and thereby generate pain],  
So [manifest anger] is generated [from the latencies of hatred]  
Whereby [pangs of] suffering are generated in [one’s own and 
others’] hearts.  
 
When bees are disturbed, they will attack  and sting . After  the bees have stung their 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 6 of 10 victim , they themselves will die  so bees may cause others to lose the ir life and they 
themselves will lose their li ves as well. In the same way, anger destroys  or hurts  
others and ourselves.  
 
Next is an exemplification of ignorance or obscuration .  
 
Verse 137  
Just as a kernel of rice and so forth is [not seen  
When] obstructed on the outside by the husk,  
So perception of the factuality of the essence [of a One Gone To 
Bliss]  
Is obstructed by the egg -shell  of ignorance.  
 
We cannot see the kernel of rice because there is a husk  covering it. Likewise , our 
apprehension of true existence , ignorance , obscures our tathagata essence  and 
obstructs us from seeing  it.  
 
The n ext verse explain s the fourth defilement —the strong manifestation of the three 
mental poisons —by likening it to filth.  
 
Verse 138  
Just as filth is disagreeable,  
So, because of being a cause of [many faults such as] reliance [on 
the attributes of the Desire Realm  
Through] the desires of those having attachment [to the Desire 
Realm],  
That which is aroused [by the three poisons is a source of 
renunciation] like a pile of filth.  
 
How does one relate the example of filth to the strong arousal of the  three mental 
poisons? “Desire s” here primarily refer  to sexual desire , which comes about in 
dependen ce on semen and blood , substances that are considered undesir able and 
filthy.  Likewise, strong arousal of the three mental poisons is  likened to filth  as these 
unclean substance s obstruct the achievement  of the path of seeing .  
 
I am trying to see the relationship between the example and the meaning here. “Filth” 
is referring to the substances , semen and blood , that one depend s on for  the arousal  
of sexual desire . Likewise, by depending on the strong arou sal of the three mental 
poisons then one is obscured  from achieving the Path of Seeing . Because of the strong 
arousal or manifestation of the three mental poisons , we cannot achieve the arya 
paths. If one cannot achieve the arya paths , then one continue s to accumulate the 
karma to reborn in the cyclic existence.  
 
Next  is applying the example to the defilement of the level of predisposition s of 
ignorance.  
 
Verse 139  
Just as [a great treasure of] wealth is obstructed [by the earth]  
And therefore [the poor]  do not know of it and do not obtain the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 7 of 10 treasure [as an object of use],  
So for beings [bereft of the wealth of good qualities] the self -arisen 
[exalted wisdom of inexhaustible] good qualities  
Is obstructed by the level of the latencies of ignorance [and  thereby 
is not seen].  
 
Just as we would not be able to see a treasure that is buried underground because it 
is covered by the earth , likewise the self -arisen , i.e., refer ring t o the tathagata 
essence , is obstructed by the level of the predisposition s of ignorance . Hence  we are 
unable to uncover this tathagata essence  in that we cannot separate the defilements 
from the tathagata essence.  There is a time  when we can see the tathagata essence 
that is free from all defilements but what obstruct s us from doing  so now is the level 
of the predisposition s of ignorance.   
 
The next two verses connect the example s to the next two defilements —the path of 
seeing abandonments and the path of meditation abandonments.  
 
Verse 140  
Just as through the gradual growing of th e sprout [of a tree] and so 
forth  
The covering over the seed is gradually rent asunder,  
So through [gradually generating the exalted wisdom] seeing 
suchness  
[The afflictive emotions] which are to be abandoned by the path of 
seeing are overcome.  
 
“Just as through the gradual growing of the sprout ”: There is a seed that has the 
capacity to transform into the sprout. The sprout issue s forth from the seed gradually 
and then become s the sprout .  When that happen s, the covering of the seed is torn 
apart.   
 
Likewise , through seeing emptiness directly for the first time, one achieves the path 
of seeing and one reali ses selflessness directly. One enters the uninterrupted path of 
the path of seeing. When one breaks  through that reali sation and goes on t o the path  
of release of the path of seeing, then  the intellectually acquired afflictions are 
abandoned.  
 
In the n ext verse, the path of meditation abandonments  are likened to tattered 
garments.  
 
Verse 141  
From relation with the path of Superiors [directly seeing the reality 
of the four truths],  
The objects of abandonment by the exalted wisdom of the path of 
meditation  
Of those who have overcome the essence [or main of the objects of 
abandonment —the false view of] the transitory collection [as 
inherently existent  I and mine and so forth] —  
Are indicated as like tattered garments [in that they lack a core of Realizes emptiness for 
the fi rst time  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 8 of 10 hardness ]. 
 
When one achieves the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing , that uninterrupted 
path acts as the direct antidote to the intellectually acquired affliction s, i.e., the 
intellectually acquired view of the transitory collection .  These are abandoned by the 
path of seeing .  
 
From the perspective of the Hinayana, the defilements that remain to be abandoned 
are likened to tattered garments . These remnan t defilements are to be abandoned by 
“the vajra -like meditative stabilization ” (Verse 131) of the path of meditation .   
 
The next two verses relate to the last two defilements —the defilements dependent 
on the impure grounds and the defilements dependent on  the pure grounds.  
 
Verse 142  
The defilements dependent upon the seven [impure] grounds  
Are similar to the defilement of the covering of a womb [since what 
one has is not seen or since those defiled states of mind involve 
exertion].  
Like being freed fro m the covering of the womb, [the arising of] the 
exalted non -conceptual wisdom [without exertion on the pure 
grounds]  
Is like [the birth of] a developed [universal monarch, in that such 
does not depend upon exertion].  
 
This verse  refers to the defilement s that are dependent upon the seven impure 
grounds. In order to achieve the non-conceptual wisdom of the eighth ground, first 
one must be free of the defilements related to the seventh ground. It is only when one 
is freed from th ose defilements that one c an achieve the exalted non -conceptual 
wisdom of the eighth ground. This achievement i s likened to the birth of a universal  
monarch emerging from the womb.  
 
Verse 143  
The defilements related with the three [pure grounds]  
Are to be known as like an earth [ mold] that covers [a golden 
statue].  
They are overcome by the vajra -like meditative stabilization  
Of those great beings [at the end of the continuum of being a 
sentient being].  
 
The defilements related with the three pure grounds —the eight, ninth and tent h 
grounds —are likened to the mould in which a statue of the Buddha  is cast. Let’s say 
you are making a golden statue . You would have a mould in which the statue is cast. 
Once the statue is formed,  in order to reveal that statue, you have to break open the 
mould and release the statue from it.  
 
Likewise , one has to overcome the defilements  that are related with the three pure 
grounds by overcom ing the uninterrupted path at the end of  the continuum of  a 
sentient being.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 9 of 10   
Verse 144 is a summary.  
 
Verse 144 a , b 
In that way , the nine defilements  - desire and so forth –  
Are similar to the examples of the lotus and so forth.  
 
Up to here, we have been talking about the objects that  obscures, i.e., the obscurer. 
What follows is the discussion of that which is ob scured.  
 
So far we have been talking about the nine obscuring factors  or obscurers , the 
defilements .  You have to know what they are and when they exist.  When you have 
some idea of the nine obscuring factors , the defilements , then when we talk about the 
four maras , you will understand better the explanation  given .  
 
THE FOUR MARAS  
 
Buddhahood is about being victorious over the four maras . That is why t he buddhas 
are the victorious one s. 
 
The mara of the aggregates  
The mara of the aggregates can be explaine d in the ir coarse  form and subtle form.  
 The coarse mara of the aggregates refers to the contaminated appropriated 
aggregates that arise from karma and afflictions.  
 The subtle mara of the aggregates refers to the mental body that arises from the 
level of predisposition s of ignorance and uncontaminated karma.   
 
The mara of afflictions  
Earlier , we said that the afflictive  obscuration s obstruct the achievement of 
liberation.  The second mara  is the mara of afflictions  that can also be explained in the 
terms of  the coarse and subtle.  
 The coarse mara of afflictions refers to the manifest afflictions —the six root 
afflictions and twenty secondary afflictions .  
 The subtle mara of the afflictions is the seeds that are deposited by these 
afflictions.  
 
The mara of the  Lord of Death  
The third mara is the mara of the Lord of Death.  
 The coarse mara of the Lord of Death is the d eath that occur s uncontrollably due 
to karma and afflictions.  
 The subtle mara of the Lord of Death is the inconceivable transference of death  
that happens when one has  a mental body. Even those who have achieved the 
mental body  are not free from death because th ey still undergo this inconceivable 
transference of death .  
 
The mara of Devaputra  
The fourth mara is the  mara of Devaputra . Deva  means god  and putra  means son.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 22  
Page 10 of 10 
Directly r ealises 
emptiness for the first 
time Uninterrupted path at the 
end of the continuum of 
a sentient being  
 In some texts, this mara of Devaputra refers to th e hindrance s that prevent one from 
being free  of the first three maras.  
 
The course mara of Devaputra refers to the god that shoots the five arrow s of anger, 
attachment, ignorance, pride and jealousy . When one is  hit by these arrows then 
there is the condition for manifest anger, desire and so forth to arise that interrupt 
one’s practice of virtue . 
 
In the Golden Rosary of Excellent Explanation s, Je Rinpoche  explicitly mentioned that  
once one has achieved the path of seeing , one is free  of this mara of Devaputra. What 
does this statement mean? Does it mean  that when one has achieved the path of 
seeing , one is free  of the coarse form of the mara of Devaputra?  
 
If you look at this from  the perspective of the Mahayana, in relation to the sharp - 
facult ied trainee s, the bodhisattvas on the path of preparation who have achieved the 
signs of irreversibility can overcome this mara. The person of sharp facult ies 
achieve s freedom from this mara  of Devaputra on the Mahayana path of preparation.  
 
In the Ornament of Essential Explanation , Gyaltsa p Je said that as long as one 
possess es the other three maras , one will not be free from the mara of Devaputra .  
This means that one can only be free of th e mara of Devaputra when one has 
achieved enlightenment.   
 
So now you have some understanding of what the four maras are and what being 
victorious over the four maras  means . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  Realizes emptiness for 
the first time  