Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L02 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:37.311561
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 1 of 12 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs . 
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 2                    5 February 2015  
 
 
The need for reflection and analy sis. Sign of correct meditation.  Chapter One: The Essence of 
a One Gone Thus. Verse 1. Explaining the seven diamond topics from the perspective of the 
ultimate and the conventional.  
 
 
NEED FOR REFLECTION AND ANALYSIS  
 
In one of his writing s, Lama Tsongkhap a mentioned that he was  not eas ily satisfied 
by a meag re amount of learning. Instead h e stud ied extensively the text s composed 
by the Two Supreme and the Six Ornaments who were the great Indian masters .1  
 
Lama Tsongkhapa said that in order to free oneself  and sentient beings from the 
three kinds of suffering of cyclic existence and to place oneself and others in the city 
of liberation , then one must undertake the three fold activities  of hearing the 
teachings, reflecting on their meaning and then familiari sing one’s mind with what 
one has ascertained.   
 
The highest  or ultimate goal that anybody can achieve  is the non -abiding nirvana , a 
state whereby one ’s own purpose and the purpose and welfare of others are 
completely  fulfilled. In order to achieve this goa l, one must know the path that brings 
one to that state .  Therefore one has to learn and understand that path.   
 
We must remember t he reason why we  are educat ing ourselves in the teachings of 
the Buddha —why we are study ing and listen ing to the teaching s and why we are 
reflect ing on th em. Our studies here are unlike ordinary education . We are not here 
to accumulate facts and become intellectual s. Rather, we are here  engaging in these 
                                                           
1 The Two Sup reme and the Six Ornaments are Nagarjuna, Aryadeva, Asanga, Vasubandhu, Dignaga, 
Dharmakirti, Gunaprabha and Shakyaprabha.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 2 of 12 extensive studies and reflection  with  the goal of achieving th e non -abiding  nirvana. 
You have to remember this all the time and keep this in your heart.   
 
Lama Tsongkhapa had mentioned that it is not correct to be satisfied with some 
meag re learning , i.e., it is not correct to be satisfied with knowing just a small portion 
of the  Buddha ’s teachings or knowing just a single subject matter. Rather one has to 
know  everything . One has to learn everything.  One has to study extensively and 
correctly so that one comes to know what one is going to practi se.  
 
Whatever you have learnt t hrough your studies, you should analy se and reflect on it 
in order to gain a definite conviction and certainty about what you have learn t. It is 
only t hrough such reflecti on and analy sis that you can gain  a definite heartfelt 
conviction in what you have heard  and learn t, “This is really true . This is really the 
case .” This experience will n aturally spur you on and make you even more  
hardworking. You will take an interest in your practice  and j oyous effort will arise.  
 
With joyous effort , you will meditate on the teaching s, i.e. , familiari sing your mind 
with what you have ascertained. It is through th is process of familiari sation  that 
experiences and reali sations of the path will arise  in your mind. This is the order of 
how you are supposed to progress in y our learning and practice.  As you continue to 
familiari se your mind with what you have already ascertained , through such  
repeated familiari sation , the experiences and reali sation s of the path will arise in 
your  mind , which will  then continue to evolve and g row. 
 
As I had mentioned briefly in the last class, on the basis of having examined well the 
root of all of our problems —i.e., the source of every single misery and problem —
when we come to see for ourselves that it is  only the Buddha , nobody else , who has 
clearly shown the way to eradicate th e root of all our problems, t hen a very special 
kind of trust in and devotion will arise towards the Buddha. We will also realise that 
the Buddha is really in a class of his own.  He is unparallel ed compared to other 
found ers of other religious or philosophical tradition s. In this way, we  ascertain for 
ourselves that the Buddha is a valid  and trustworthy authority.   
 
With respect to his presentation of  the four noble truth s, the Buddha talked about 
true suffering s. He said that the true origin of all our problem s is our ignorance  
apprehending a self . The only antidote to that is the wisdom reali sing selflessness.  As 
before, w e have to see for ourselves through thinking and analy sis that this is the 
case. We have to see for ourselves through thinking that the only way out is to 
understand and reali se this very special wisdom  that reali ses selflessness.  
 
This is why it is very important to arrive at this understanding.  We really  must sit 
down , reflect and analy se what we have  learn t. It is not enough just to hear  or just  to 
study the teachings .  We must reflect and analy se critically , applying reason ing to 
what we have heard , “Is this true? Is it really like that? ” We have to think deeply until 
we have gained a conviction. Th is is what we need to do. So for that purpose, first , we 
must hear the teaching s.   
 
My job here is to present to you the material  and ex plain  it to you . In the course of my 
explanation, if there is anything that you are not sure  of, that you are unclear a bout, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 3 of 12 or you have found something that seems to you to be not so correct, then you should 
bring it up and ask . It is t hrough such question s and answer s and discussion s that  we 
can shine more light on this material  and understand it better.  
 
It is importan t that you think about these teachings. Y ou must have questions, doubts  
and qualms . But in order for you to have question s in the first place , you must start 
by thinking about the material . If you just sit there and accept, “So it is like this. It is 
like that,” without think ing further, then  of course you won’t have any questions.  
 
In order to have question s arise , first you must think , “What is this ? W hat is that ?” 
And i n order for that to happen, your mind must be fresh and alert.   
 
Also i t will n ot wor k if every time you move on to a new section, you forget what was 
taught in the previous section .  If that happens, t hen of course you will not have any 
question s either.  
 
All of you have already heard these  teachings many times —how we should listen to 
the teaching s and how the teaching should be delivered . It is there in the beginning of 
the lam-rim literature . You already know this. With regard to how we should listen to 
the teaching s, we need to refresh our memory, remember those tea chings and then 
put them into practice.   
 
SIGN OF CORRECT MEDITATION  
 
I had explained to you the meaning of what a shastra  or treatise is.   A treatise is a text 
whose subject matter can cure or pacify the  enemy , the affliction s in our mind , and 
protect us from the suffering o f the lower realm s and the suffering of cyclic existence. 
This is what the subject matter can do for us. So when we listen to the teaching s, we 
need to do it in such a way that  these two functions can actually happen and have 
these effect s on us .  
 
It is m entioned in the advice of the great Kadampa master s of the past that  the signs 
of having studied extensively are  being subdued and disciplined. This means the 
more you learn , over time , you become more subdue d, calm er and more peaceful. 
Also the more you learn , the more you know . That has to be accompanied with less 
arrogance and less pride. That is something we all need.   
 
It is said that one’s studies ha ve gone wrong if one’s learning only serves to promote 
one’s arrogance, one’s pride, one’s jealousy  of other s and one’s negative sense of 
competitiveness . It is important that these things do not happen  because the goal 
behind  learning is to pacify the affliction s in our mind.   
 
Likewise , these Kadampa masters  also sa id, “ The sign  of having meditated  on the  
teaching s is the weakening of one’s afflictions. ” This is a correct sign. If one find s 
one’s  affliction s becoming weaker over time as the result of one’s meditation, then 
this is a sign that one is really meditating  well . Whether a person is a great medit ator 
or not depends on whether her afflictions are weakened over time as a result of her 
meditation. Th is must be the sign of a great or correct meditator  because what has 
been causing us to suffer , that has been tormenting us and keeping us in cyclic 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 4 of 12 exis tence  is none other than our afflictions.   
 
Our accumulation of karma is commensurate with the strength of our affliction s. So if 
the affliction s are very strong and powerful , we tend to accumulate more karma and 
stronger karma. If the affliction s are weak ened, then  corresponding ly the frequency 
of the accumulation of karma and the intensity of the karma that is accumulate d will , 
likewise, b e weaker.   
 
I don’t have to remind you of the importance of setting up the correct motivation for 
learning. I don’t have to do this over and over again. We have to keep this in mind 
and remind ourselves every time when we have the opportunity to learn the 
teaching. We need to watch our mind and adjust our motivation according ly.  
 
Actually you  already  know this . You have learn t this already  but knowing , “I should 
do this ,” doesn’t help at all. What helps is using what we have heard , what we know 
and apply ing it. We  have to try to do that.   
 
The whole point of learning the teaching s, understanding the teachings and even 
explaining the teaching is none other than to discipline our own mind and to subdue 
our mind . This has to be the motivation .  That is why  setting our motivation in the 
beginning of the teaching s or any practice is emphasi sed. When we adjust our 
motivation, it makes a big difference because we are nudging our mind towards the 
correct direction . Therefore it is very important  to do so . 
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Verse 1  
Buddha, doctrine, community, basic constituent, enlightenment,  
Qualities, and finally, Buddha activities — 
The body of the entire treatise is in brief  
These seven diamond topics.  
 
The subject matter of this treatise, The Sublime Continuum , is the seven diamond 
topics  or the seven vajra essential points . They are : 
1. Buddha  
2. Doctrine (or Dharma ) 
3. Community (or sangh a) 
4. Basic constituent  
5. Enlightenment  
6. Qualities  
7. Buddha activities (or enlightened activities ) 
 
SEVEN DIAMOND TOPICS: (1) BUDDHA  
 
What  is Buddha ? One can explain this from an ultimate perspective or from a 
conventional perspective.  We can talk about the u ltima te Buddha jewel : 
(1) in the sense of the abandonment of the afflictive obscuration s, i.e., the nature 
truth body (or the svahhavakaya)   
(2) in the sense of the wisdom that directly perceive s all phenomena. , i.e., the wisdom 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 5 of 12 truth body (or jnanakaya )  
 
The usual si tuation is this. F or most people , when they t hink about the Buddha, they 
look at the Buddha only from the perspective of his form , just as we tend to per ceive 
another person in relation to the body of that person. This happens  when one does  
not have a  good  understanding of who the Buddha really is. So we have to think  more 
deeply  about this .  
 
The ultimate Buddha Jewel is the true paths and true cessations in the continuum of 
a buddha superior.  The ultimate Buddha J ewel  refers to the truth b ody or the 
dharm akaya , which has two divisions : 
1. the nature truth body  
2. the w isdom truth body   
 
The conventional Buddha J ewel refer s to the form body  (or rupak aya) which also has 
two divisions : 
1. the c omplete enjoyment body  (or sambhogakaya ) 
2. the e manation body  (or nirmanakay a)  
 
Having said this, more questions will arise : 
 What is the nature body?  
 What are the true cessation s in the continuum of a Buddha?  
 What is the w isdom truth  body?  
In order to fully un derstand what Buddh a is, we have to know all these things . 
 
The s ame  thing goes to the form body.  
 What is the enjoyment body?  
 What is the emanation body?  
 What are the ir differences?  
 
From this you can see that when you start to think, so many questions come up.  As 
such, there is no way one can know everything simply by reading or studying just 
one topic or one text. That is impossible ! This is because everything is 
inter connected. What is not obvious under one subject matter or one text , you have 
to look for it in another teaching or text. Therefore in order to be able to know 
everything, you have to have an overview of all the Buddha ’s teachings . You have to 
study extensively .  
 
In order to succeed in that, you cannot forget what you have learn t earlier  after you 
have finished studying one topic and move d on to another subject or another text. If 
you forget what you have learn t earlier, it is not possible for you to make all these 
different connection s. Then there is no way that you could build up the complete 
picture.  
 
(2) DHARMA JEWEL   
 
As this is a Mahayana treatise,  we are discussing the presentation of the Three Jewels 
here in relation to the Mahayana. As such the ultimate Dharma J ewel here refers to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 6 of 12 the true paths and true cessations  in the continuum of the bodhisattva superior.  
 
The conventional Dharma J ewel would  be texts such as  the sho rt, middling  and 
extensive Perfection of Wisdom  sutras . 
 
(3) SANGHA JEWEL  
 
Since we are talking about this in the context of the Mahayana, the ultimate Sangha 
Jewel here is the true paths and true cessations  in the continuum of a bodhi sattva 
superior  and the c onventional Sangha Jewel is t he Mahayana superior.  
 
For those who have not learn t the Buddha ’s teaching s, they will think  that the  
Dharma Jewel is only the teachings of the Buddha and point to a text or the 
scripture s, “This is the Dharma Jewel .” But that is not the  real Dharma Jewel .  
 
If you think about it, you will come to see that the ultimate , the actual Dharma Jewel ,  
is the true paths and true cessation s because the true path s and true cessation s are 
the actual refuge . The tr ue path s lead to the true cessation s that protect and free  us 
from our afflictions  and suffering . It is mentioned in the teachings  that among the 
Three Jewels , the Buddha, Dharma  and Sangha , the Dharma is our actual refuge  that 
actually protect s us. What i s this Dharma? It is the true path s and true cessation s.  
 
Likewise, t he actual  Sangha Jewel is the mental quality  of the true paths and true 
cessations . That is the real meaning of the Sangha Jewel  but there are many pe ople 
who are not aware of this . When they think about the s angha, the y basically  think of 
the ordained people.  
 
From this short explanation, you can see how important it is to study widely because 
the more you know, the more information you will have at your disposal for you to 
think about,  to work out and for your critical  analysis.  
 
Likewise , the more you know about the Three Jewels, you will come to a better 
understanding of them and that will definitely  help with  your faith  in and devotion 
towards the Three Jewels.  Studying extensive ly can also help  to make your faith and 
devotion much more stable.  
 
But, a s I have said earlier , all these benefits will not happen if you just listen to the 
teachings. They are not going to happen  through mere listening to the teachings.  If, 
on the other ha nd, on the  basis of having heard and read the teaching s, you think 
about them and analy se them till you come to the point , “This is really true . It cannot 
be anything else, ” then of course your ascertainment will promote faith  and trust in    
and devotion towards the Three Jewels.  
 
(4) BASIC CONSTITUENT  
 
Likewise, y ou can look at  the basic constituent  in an ultimate way or a conventional 
way : 
 The basic constituent from the ultimate point  of view refers to the emptiness of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 7 of 12 inherent existence of the minds of sentient being s.  
 The basic constituent from the conventional point of view refers to the potential 
in the minds of sentient being s that is amenable to the  development of both 
worldly and transcendental qualities.  
 
(5) ENLIGHTENMENT  
 
There is also an explanation  of enlightenment  from the ultimate or conventional 
point of view.  The explanation of enlightenment is the same as that for the Buddha 
Jewel.  
 Enlightenment from the ultimate point of view refers to the dharmakaya.  
 Enlightenment from the conventional point  of view refers to the rupakaya.  
 
Then a q ualm will naturally arise: I f Buddha and enlightenment are the same thing,  
what is the point of repeating them, mentioning them twice by using different words?  
 
Although Buddha and enlightenment are referring to the same thing , Buddha refers 
to the buddha that you can and will become but it has  not happened yet. 
Enlightenment  on the other hand refers to the buddhahood that has already been 
attained by others , i.e., it is possessed by somebody other than you rself . 
 
(6) QUALITIES  
 
 The ultimate qualities refer to the qualities of the Buddha s uch as the ten powers 
and so forth.  
 The conventional qualities refer to the twelve ripened qualities.  The Buddha 
possesses the 32 major signs. I guess  these could also be posited as co nventional 
qualities.  
 
(7) BUDDHA ACTIVITIES  
 
 The ultimate Buddha activities would be the activities of wisdom . An illustration 
would be  the wisdom of accomplishment.  
 The conventional Buddha activities would be the enlightened activities of the 
Buddha such as the activity of giving  teaching s of the Dharma.  
These are what are mentioned in the teaching s about these seven vajra points from 
the ultimate and conventional perspective s. 
 
SEVEN DIAMOND TOPICS  ULTIMATE  CONVENTIONAL  
1. Buddha Jewel  The true  paths and true 
cessations in the continuum of a 
Buddha superior  or the    
truth body (dharmakaya ):  
1. the n ature body 
(svabhav akaya)  
2. the w isdom truth body 
(Jnanakaya)  The Buddha ’s form body 
(rupakaya ): 
1. the c omplete enjoyment body 
(sambhogakaya)  
2. the e manation body 
(nirmanakaya ) 
 
2. Dharma Jewel  The t rue paths and true 
cessation s in the continuum of 
the bodhisattva superior . Texts su ch as  the s hort, middling and 
the extensive Perfection of Wisdom  
Sutras.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 8 of 12 SEVEN DIAMOND TOPICS  ULTIMATE  CONVENTIONAL  
3. Sangha Jewel  The true paths and true 
cessation s in the con tinuum of 
the bodhisattva superior . Mahayana superior  
4. Basic constituent           
    (or tathagata essence ) The emptiness of inherent 
existence of the minds of sentient 
being s.  
 The potential in sentient beings ’ 
mind s that is amenable to the 
develop ment of both worldly and 
transcendental qualities . 
5. Enlightenment  
(This is the same as the ultimate 
& conventional Buddha Jewel 
but Buddha refers to the buddha 
that you will become in the 
future whereas enlightenment 
refers to what has already been 
achi eved by someone other than 
yourself).  The state of dharmakaya  of the 
Buddha.  
 The form body of the Buddha  
 
6. Quality  The qualities of the Buddha such 
as the ten powers.  12 ripened qualities, t he 32 major 
marks of the Buddha  and so forth . 
 
7. Buddha ac tivities  The activities of wisdom , e.g., the 
wisdom of accomplishment  The e nlightened activities of the 
Buddha such as the activity of 
teaching the Dharma.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Question : Why is  there a division of  these topics into the ultimate and  the 
conventi onal?  
 
Answer:  Before we can appreciate why there is such  a presentation, first, you must 
have some understanding of the two truths.  
 
The two truths is an explanation of what constitute s reality  that is referring to what 
actually exists . The presentation of reality , anything that exists, can be subsumed into 
the two levels  that we call the ultimate truth and the conventional truth.   
 
On the basis of any chosen object that exists , that object has the t wo levels of truth  to 
it:  
 There is a level of truth tha t is in harmony  with or consisten t with what appears 
and how the object actually exists . The level of truth where there is no disparity 
between  how the object appears and how the object exists is called the ultimate 
truth . 
 There is another level of truth w hereby there is a disparity between how that 
object exists compared to how it appears. Th is level of truth is c alled the 
conventional truth.  
 
Because there are these two levels of truth to any phenomenon, these truths are 
apprehended by two different minds :  
 A valid cogni ser distinguish ing an ultimate  
 A valid cogni ser distinguish ing a conventionality  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 9 of 12 These two levels of truth for any chosen phenomenon are what constitute reality or 
existence. That is the nature of things,  of how things are.  
 
The prese ntation of the four noble truths is based on an understanding of these two 
truths. Why? Because there is a level of truth that is a fundamental disparity between  
how thing s appear and how they actually  exist. There are states of mind or 
consciousness es that m isperceive  reality , assenting to t his disparity  by engaging it in  
an erroneous way thereby bringing on suffering. This distorted state of mind is what 
constitutes  true origin s. Because  of this distorted state of mind , you have its result , 
problem s and all the suffering s. This is the true origin s and true suffering s of the four 
noble truths. .  
 
We can apply this understanding to a specific example , a person  or the ‘I’. W hen we 
think of the ‘I’ , whether it is pertaining to ourselves or someone else, how does  it 
appear  to our mind ? First, the foundation is th e appearance of something real  and 
independent,  existing right there from its own side, existing inherently  and existing 
truly . There is such an appearance.  
 
But not only is there this appearance but we a ssent to th at appearance and we 
believe in th at appearance . We hold on  to it, “It is really true! T hat is how it is !” It 
appears in th at way  and th at is how it is. Then this becomes the source for anger  and 
attachment  to arise .  
 
When an affliction arises,  we follow after th at affliction and we accumulate karma. 
When we accumulate karma, we have to experience its result . We are propelled along 
the cycle of death and rebirth . This is how we circle in samsara.  
 
By not understanding how this disparity between  appearance and reality is false and 
by believing  in it, we generate the true origin s that lead to true suffering s. Th is is 
from the view of the conventional truth.    
 
Based on the final nature of reality —the ultimate truth —when there is no disparity 
betwe en appearance and existence , we have true paths and true cessation s.   
 
When we use the term , ‘the two truths ,’ this is what reality is . The explanation of 
what constitute s reality is these two levels of truth . Because  reality  is such with these 
two levels  of truth , therefore when we talk about the path leading to freedom from 
all problems and suffering, there is also method and wisdom .   
 
What is this wisdom? This wisdom is explained from the perspective of th e mind that 
understands the ultimate nature of reality , the ultimate truth.  When you are engage d 
in seeking permanent freedom from all suffering , you need to cultivate a path that 
combines  both method and wisdom.  
 
Because there is this path that combines both method and wisdom , what you can 
achieve in the end are the two bodies , the form body and the truth body of a buddha.   
 
By depending on the path of wisdom, the wisdom directly perceiving selflessness , 
you achieve the final true path s and true cessation s. The final true path s and true 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 10 of 12 cessation s that are in the continuum of the Buddha superior  is the ultimate Buddha 
Jewel.  
 
From this you can see, that with reality as the basis of the two truths, by engag ing in 
the path that combines both method and wisdom , you can achieve the t wo bodies of 
the Budd ha.  
 
The method aspect of the path would be cultivating qualities such as great 
compassion  and bodhicitta. By depending on such a path, the method aspect 
culminates in the achieveme nt of the c onventional Buddha Jewel, the form body of a 
buddha .  
 
Now you will have some idea  as to why we talk about the Buddha Jewel in the 
ultimate sense and in the conventional sense. But that is one way of expla ining the 
two truths . There are also other wa ys of explaining the ultimate and the 
conventional.  
 
The true path s and true cessation s in the continuum of a Buddha superior  is the 
direct object of utili sation  of the buddhas , i.e., it can only be apprehended by other 
buddhas . Only a buddha can directly realise  another buddha ’s true path s and true 
cessation s. In that sen se, this quality in the mental continuum of a Buddha superior is 
the ultimate, highest  attainment .  
 
The conventional Buddha Jewel refers to the two form bodies —the complete 
enjoyment body and the emanation body. The emanation body  can be seen by 
disciples  who have pure karma. The complete enjoyment body can be seen by 
bodhisattva superiors whose mind are more developed . Bodhisattvas are not 
buddha s. T hey are still sentient beings. So the c onventional Buddha Jewel is  
accessible to sentient beings. In that s ense, the form bodies are called conventional. 
This is another way  of explain ing the conventional Buddha Jewel and the ultimate 
Buddha Jewel.  
 
When we talk about the Dharma Jewel , this is also presented in as the ultimate  
Dharma Jewel and the conventional  Dharma Jewel.  The ultimate Dharma Jewel is 
true path s and true cessation s, the actual  or real Dharma Jewel  that protects  us. 
 
The conventional Dharma Jewel refers to the scriptures, sutras and actual teachings 
of the Buddha. The ultimate Dharma Jewel  is what actual ly protects us . So when we 
say that the conventional Dharma Jewel refers to the sutras or the teachings, the 
word ‘c onventional’ conveys the sense that it is not the actual thing that protects you. 
It is the ultimate Dharma Jewel , the true path s and true cessation s that protects you .  
 
Khen Rinpoche: That was a g ood question.  
 
When we are learn ing these teachings , it is inevitable that different words are used , 
which may be challeng ing for some people. Setting aside the ir meaning, even the 
word s themselves are difficult.  
 
Question:  Is the definition of the u ltimate buddha nature , ‘the emptiness of sentient 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 11 of 12 beings’ mind’ or ‘the sentient beings’ minds’ emptiness?  
 
Answer:  If we are not debat ing or analy sing further , then you can treat these two 
terms to be the same. What is usually said is that t he basic constituent (also referred 
to as the naturally abiding lineage ) or tathagata essence refers to the suchness of the 
mind of sentient being s. I think I will not explain further  as you may get confused . 
 
Question:  When we are referring to the three refuge jewels, to understand them in a 
simple way, can I say that:  
 the ultimate refuge jewel —be it the ultimate Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel or 
Sangha Jewel —is a mental quality since they refer to the true path s and true 
cessations in the mental continua of a Buddha superior or bodhisattva superior 
whereas  
 the conventional refuge jewel is something physical such as a person like the 
Buddha or an arya bodhisattva or the actual scriptural teachings?  
 
Khen Rinpoch e: Yes, you can say that.  
 
Question:  Under qualities, the ultimate qualit ies refer to the ten p owers. How are 
these ten powers related to the ultimate truth? Are they all wisdom s? 
 
Answer:  Yes, they are mainly wisdom s. 
 
This is just a brief presentation of  the seven vajra points. The y will be further  
elaborat ed in the subsequent verses. Most of this chapter is  dedicated to the 
tathagata essence. Then t here is also an explanation on the purpose of explaining 
these vajra topics and why they are ordered in thi s particular way.   
 
Whether you understand or not  at this point , what you have to do is to at least 
memorize wha t these seven vajra topics  are, what constitute s the ultimate Buddha 
Jewel, the c onventional Buddha Jewel and so forth. When you have memorised this 
material, then you will have something to work with and your understanding will be 
clearer as you make your way through this text. That is the foundation. You must 
remember  these points .  
 
The question  was asked, “W hy were these topics  presented from the ultimate and the 
conventional perspectives?” T he wh ole point of doing so i s to make things clearer . 
Otherwise, we can just say , “Buddha .” But w e want to know what a buddha is . To 
make that clear er, the text explains, “From the ultimate point of view , it is this and 
from the conventional point of view, it is this. ” That in turn w ill lead to many other 
questions . Then the subject matter becomes clearer and clearer.  
 
If you were to look at Buddha from the top down, these question s will arise:  
 Why are the re these two bodies —the truth b odies and the form bodies of the 
Buddha?  The answer is that there is the path that consist s of method and wisdom.  
 Why is the path like that? Because the reality is that there are two levels of truth .  
 Why are the re these two  truths?  
 What is the ultimate truth?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Progr am – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
 
Lesson 2  
Page 12 of 12  What is  the conventional truth?  
 What does it mean when it is said that there is no disparity between how 
something appear s and how it exist s?  
 What does it mean when it is said that there is a disparity between how 
something appears and how it exists?  
 How do these two levels of truth constitute every single phenomenon?  
So it is not easy.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Rachel Tan ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 