Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L05 final2.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:37.919382
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 1 of 12 Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana, Chapter 
One: The Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs . 
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter, translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
  
Lesson 5                24 February 2015  
 
 
Achieving liberation. Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Reviewing Verse 5.  
Buddha Jewel.  Verses 9—12. Dharma Jewel.  
 
 
ACHIEVING LIBERATION  
 
What is liberation ? 
Nagarjuna said in his Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way that liberation is the 
final cessation or exhaustion of ka rma and afflictions.   
 
A whole host of discursive thoughts arise f rom our karma and afflictions . What 
follows is suffering.  What is the root of these discursive thought s? Their root is said 
to be the elaboration of true existence .  
 
The elaboration of tru e exis tence ceases or is exhausted by the realization of 
emptiness. Liberation  then is the final cessation and exhaustion of all karma and 
afflictions . But liberation cannot arise without a cause. The cause is the force of the 
antidote exhaust ing the affli ctions. Liberation is then achieved.   
 
We circle in cyclic exis tence under the  power of our karma and afflictions . Of the 
two, the main cause of cyclic existen ce is the afflictions.  It is said that through the 
force of applying a strong antido te, one is ab le to reduce the strength o r power of 
the afflictions t o the point that one will no  longer freshly  accumulate propelling 
karma. Then e ven though one has accumulated such karma in the past , as the 
strength of the afflictions that nourish  the karmic seeds  are now much weaker, 
those karmic seeds can  no longer bear fruit . They can no longer come to fruition . 
These karmic seeds can be likened to rotten or burnt seeds.  
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 2 of 12 What is liberation? Liberation has to be understood at the level of the 
consciousness . It refer s essential ly to the suchness of one’s mind  for liberation is the 
cessation or exhaustion of karma and afflictions.  
 
How is liberation  achieved ?  
On the basis of our contamina ted appropria ted physical and mental aggrega tes, we 
experience  the different kin ds of suffering such as aging, sickness and death . The 
cause of our appropriated  contaminated physical and mental aggregates is our 
karma and afflictions. Specifically our set of appropriated  contaminated physical 
and mental aggregates is the result of the karma that arise s due to our afflictions.  
 
How did the afflictions  that are responsible for the accumulation of the karma arise? 
The a fflictions  arise mainly from incorrect mental attention , i.e., the elaboration of 
true existen ce. The elaboration of tru e existen ce is the root from which the 
afflictions arise.  
 
~ Apprehension of inherent existence  
We have discussed this before. How does a person or any other phenomenon  that 
appears to us, how does it appear? It appears to us to be existing right there from its 
own side.  
 
Not only does  everything appear  to us to exist from its own side . We assent to th at 
appearance. We believe that this is how everything exists. W e are not able to realize 
that they are mere appearances.   
 
The evolution is like this :  
 The object  in question appear s to us  to exist from its own side .  
 We assent to th at appearance , believ ing that , in reality , this is how it really 
exists .  
 With that as the basis, incorrect  mental attention s ets in  by exaggerat ing the 
reality of the object.  
Because we have already assented to the appearance of true existence, we believe 
that that is how the object exist s, that that is the truth. Because we hold so firmly to 
this ‘ truth ’, incorrect mental attention sets in b y exaggerating the qualities of the 
object.   
 
Let’s take the example of an attractive object. I ncorrect mental attention  
exaggerate s its beauty beyond what is actually there . Likewise  for an ugly object , 
incorrect mental attention also exaggera tes the ugliness of that object beyond what 
is actually there . The a pprehension of true existence is the basis upon which 
incorrect mental attention arise s, exaggera ting the good or bad qualities of the 
object in question . All kinds of exaggeration  and superimposition set in that lead to  
the arising of very strong  attachment  and d esire  or anger  and aversion . Due to the 
arising of these affliction s, karma is accumulated . Then one has to experience the 
result s of that karma , suffering .  
 
~ Re futing inherent existence and re alising emptiness  
It is said by Nag arjuna that the elaboration of true exis tence cease s or is stopped by 
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 3 of 12 emptiness. Since th at apprehension of true existence i s the root of all our problems 
and suffering , what stops this apprehension ? It is none other than emptiness.   
 
The apprehension of t rue exis tence is the grasping at phenomena as existing from 
its own side. We  have heard that phenomena do not exist  from their own side  but 
this is something that we have to establish for ourselves.  
 
For example , we can take the person as our object of en quiry. Remember the verse 
from the Precious Garland ,  
 
A being is not earth, not water,  
Not fire, not wind, not space,  
Not consciousness, and not all of them.  
What person is there other than these?1 
 
On the basis of this verse, one can analy se and check  whether the person does exist 
from her own side or not.   
 
In the above verse, Nagarjuna said that the person is not real because it is merely 
designa ted in dependence upon the  collection of the six elements. And e ven the six 
elements individually are not real because they are merely designated in 
dependence upon their own parts. It is also mentioned that space itself is not real  
and does not exist from its own side. Why is that so? Because space  is none other  
than the mere absence of obstructiveness , a mer e absence of an element such as 
form. Even form itself does not exist  from i ts own side either. And so name s, terms 
and labels  themselves do not exist  from their own side.2  
 
There are many reason s that refute the very concept of exist ence from its own sid e 
but t his is something that we need  to prove to ourselves. We need  to think about it .  
 
First, we need to understand that there is no such thing as inherent existence . We 
need to ascertain and be convinced about that. This definite understanding , 
ascertai nment and conviction  are able to directly counteract our apprehension of 
true existence. Why? Because with such understanding and ascertainment , our 
mode of apprehending any object will be in d irect  contradiction to how ignorance 
apprehend s th e object.  Therefore the a scertainment of the emptiness of inherent 
existence is a ble to directly harm the mode of apprehension o f ignorance.  
  
By cultivating  and increasing the strength of  this ascertainment of the emptiness of 
inherent existence, the stronger this as certainment , the weaker will be the 
apprehension of a self. Th is is how one progresses along the path s and ground s.  
 When one reaches the path of preparation, one reali ses emptiness via a generic 
                                                           
1 Tsong -kha-pa’s Final Exposition of Wisdom  by Jeffrey Hopkins, Snow Lion Publications, 2008. p. 59.   
2 Because the phenomena of forms  
   Are only names, space too is only a name.  
   Without the elements, how could forms exist?  
   Therefore even name -only does not exist (Verse 99, Chapter 1, Precious Garland  by Nagarju na,    
translated by Jeffrey Hopkins, Snow Lion Publications, 2007).  
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 4 of 12 image.  
 When one reaches the path of seeing, one see s emptin ess directly . At this point 
in time, because of one’s direc t realization of emptiness , one’s apprehension of a 
self is weakened to the point whereby it can no longer give rise to  the afflictions 
that will lead  one to accumula te fresh projecting karma.  
 On t he path of meditation, by familiari sing oneself over and over again with  the 
mind that directly perceive s emptiness, there will come a time when one can 
completely eliminate karma and the afflictions .  
 When one does that , one achieves liberation . This is the path of no-more -
learning.  
Basically this is how o ne progress es on the path.  
 
It is very important that you gain an understanding o f all these points . You need to 
think and come to understand for yourself:  
 how you suffer in samsara  
 how you circle in samsara over and over again due to your own karma  and 
afflictions  
 how your ignorance , the apprehension of a self, is the root of all your problems   
In particular , you have to see and prove to  yourself why  the reali sation of emptiness 
can liberate you from grasping at a self  and h ow your own  understanding of 
emptiness can harm your ignorance .  
 
When you are able to resolve these issues for yourself —when you can really see and 
feel it —then you can truly understand the possibility of liberation .  
 
You will also  come to understand that no one, except the Buddha , has taught  this 
entire path . In particular , he talked about dependent arising. Then you w ill be able 
to develop a faith in the Buddha ’s teaching s that is acquired through reason ing.  
 
If you were to refle ct well  on all the various points  that I have just brought up , then 
you will gain a good un derstand ing of what the Three Jewels are. Here, w hen we 
talk about the Three Jewels, we are talking about the resultant  Three Jewels , what 
we can achieve for ourselv es. W e will understand that these Three Jewels are 
achievable, that it can happen to us  in our mind . This is important.  
 
Having seen for yourself that the apprehension of true existence is  the real harm -
doer and that it can be destroyed , you can then see the possibility of  achieving  
freedom  from all suffering for yourself .  
 
Liberation lies within us  
But w hat makes all th is possible? All th is is made possible because  it is said that we 
possess  the potential to achieve such an understanding , that such liber ation is right 
there with in our own being.  
 
You have heard that our mind is said to be in the nature of clear light . Whether you 
call it the clear light nature of  the mind , the tathagata essence or basic constituent, 
this is what gives  us any chance or hope for liberation.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 5 of 12 It is said that m ental qualities , such as the mind that  realises selflessness  and 
develops compassion , are able to increase without limit , unlike physical qualities 
that are limited by constraints.  There is only so much that we can do  in relation to 
our physical  qualities . You cannot increase th em indefinitely . But mental qualities 
can be developed without limits. Furthermore it  is said that mental qualities , once 
developed, can increase  further without  much additional eff ort. T hat is th e 
difference between physical and mental qualities.  
 
Once certain m ental qualities are developed in the mind , all it needs is a small 
condition acting as a catalyst  for that mental qualit y to arise in the mind  again  
without us putting in a lot of effort.  
 
The qualities that are achieved on the path s and grounds are qualities that still 
requir e some effort  for the m to arise. The motivation to act is still require d all the 
way up to even the tenth ground.  
 
But on ce enlightenment is achieved , no more motiva tion  is required . All the 
activities of a buddha  are said to be spontaneous in that they arise primarily due to 
the p ower of the prayers  that were made  while the practitioner was on the path. 
After achieving enlightenment , the power of the pray ers and aspi ration are 
complete. A s such , all the spontaneous and effortless activities of a buddha arise  due 
to the power of these completed prayers .  
 
A Buddha ’s enlightened activities will engage sentient beings uninterruptedly 
forever  until the end of  the time , until the end of samsara , when there are no more 
sentient beings  left. It is said that the spontaneity of a buddha’s enlightened 
activities is liken ed to a reflection in the mirror. That r eflection appears on the 
mirror without any effort.  While one is still  on the path, i.e., when one has yet to 
become a b uddha, one still needs  effort  and the motivation  to do something. But a 
buddha does not need to be motivated as his activit ies are effortless.  A buddha is 
someone who has fulfilled both his own aims and the aims of others.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
REVIEW  
 
Verse 5  
Buddhahood has [the eight qualities of] being uncompounded,  
Spontaneous, not being realized through the cause of others,  
Knowledge, mercy, and power,  
As well as being [the fulfilment of] the two aims [of onese lf and 
others].  
 
Verse 5 talks about the eight  qualities of the Buddha J ewel.  Buddhahood is said to 
have the quality of “being uncompounded .” This refer s to the factor of  natural purity 
of the nature body . The quality of being “spontaneous ” refer s to the f actor of 
adventitious purity  of the nature body. What prevent spontaneity are the 
obscuration s. When one is free of the obscuration s, then one is “spontaneous. ” 
Even the bodhisattva s from the first to the tenth grounds are unable to work 
spontaneously and effortlessly for sentient being s because  it is said that they 
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 6 of 12 possess the  factor of the twelve  links that are included  in the knowledge 
obscuration s.  
 
Generally speaking, the presentation of the twelve links  of dependent origination is 
made from the persp ective of the afflictions . But there is also an explanation of the 
twelve links from the perspective of the knowledge obscuration s.  
 
There  is a category of karma called uncontaminated  (or pure) karma.  The subtle 
knowledge obscuration s bring about the accu mulation of pure karma . Through that , 
on the basis of having acquired a mental body, the bodhisattva  superior undergoes 
the inco nceivable transference of death. This is a way of explain ing the twelve links 
in relation to beings who  accumulate pure karma.  
 
In order to do spontaneous and effortless work for sentient beings, one must 
abandon the twelve links that are included in the knowledge obstruction s. Only a 
buddha can do that because in order to do that , one has to achieve the nature body 
that is the fac tor of adventitious purity.  
 
The Buddha Jewel also possesses  the quality of “not being realized through the 
cause of others .” At the very last moment of one’s existence as a sentient being , how 
does one become a buddha in the next moment? Th is is achieve d during meditative 
equipois e. D uring the end of the continuum of a sentient being and within the 
meditative equipoise directly focus sing on emptiness, one moves to the path of no- 
more -learning  and o ne becomes a buddha . One does that by oneself without hav ing 
to rely on anyone else.   
 
The first three qualities —the qualities of being uncompounded, spontaneous  and 
not being realized through the cause of others —are presented mainly from the 
perspective of achieving one’s own purpose  or aims.  
 
The next three qualities —the qualit ies of knowledge, mercy and power —are 
qualities that are related to the fulfilment of the aims of others .   
 
The q uality of knowledge refers to the Buddha’s quality of knowing all 
conventionalities.  
 
The quality of mercy and the qualit y of power are qualities that arise from the 
Buddha’s knowledge of conventionalities. Since the Buddha  knows all 
conventionalities , he knows that the tathagata essence exist s in the continuum of 
every sentient being. Knowing that, the Buddha generates merc y.  
 
The Buddha perceives the two truths directly. He perceives the ultimate nature of 
all phenomena and h e also perceives all conventionalities. But h is knowledge of the 
ultimate nature of all phenomena is said to be related to t he fulfilment of his own 
aims while h is knowledge of conventionalities is discussed in relation to the 
fulfilment of the aims of others.  
 
What would you say i f somebody  were to  ask you, “Why is it that the Buddha’s 
understanding of the ultimate nature of all phenomena is class ified under the 
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 7 of 12 fulfilment of his own aims and not the aims of others ?” 
 
DHARMA JEWEL  
 
Verse 9  talks about the Dharma Jewel , i.e., true cessation s and true paths.   
 
Verse 9  
Obeisance to the sun of excellent doctrine, not non -existent,  
Not existent, not existe nt and non -existent, and not analyzable as 
other th an existent and non -existent, devoid of description,  
Known by oneself individually, quiescent, undefiled, illumined with 
the light  rays of exalted wisdom,  
And thoroughly destroying desire, hatred, and obsc uration with 
respect to all  objects of observation.  
 
“Obeisance to the sun of excellent doctrine, not non -existent, / … Known by oneself 
individually, quiescent  …”: This is a description of true cessation s. 
  
“… undefiled, illumined with the light rays of e xalted wisdom, / And thoroughly 
destroying desire, hatred, and obscuration with respect to all objects of 
observation .”: This is related to true path s.   
 
The verse starts with a description talking about the four extremes. Here we are 
talking about the tru e cessations that are natural purity that is “not non -existent, 
not existent, not existent and non -existent, and not analyzable as other than existent 
and non -existent.” Here we are talking about the nature or entity of true cessations 
that are natural pur ity.  
 
The true cessation s that are natural purit y are free from the four extremes of 
permanence and annihilation. If you analyse the four extremes or possibilities 
between permanence and annihilation, you will find that they do not exist 
inherently.  
 
 There isn’t such a thing as inherently existent non -dependence.  This constitutes 
the extreme of permanence.  
 Asserting that things do not function conventionally is to assert the extreme of 
annihilation , i.e., such things do not exist for t hings do function c onventionally.  
 These two are not inherently existent.  
 Things  that are not th ese two also do not exist inherently.   
So these are the four extremes. For t he true cessation s that are natural purity , no 
matter how you analy se the four extremes , you will not be able to point to 
something that is inherently existent.  
 
True cessation s that are n atural purity ca nnot be described with mere words  so it is 
“devoid of description .”  
 
“Known by oneself individually ” means that it can only be experienced or known by 
a mind to which all dualistic appearance s have subsided.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 8 of 12 When you talk about this from the perspective of the mind that realizes it, then it is 
said to be something that is “devoid of description, known by oneself individually ”. 
Such true cessation s that are natural purity can only be known by a mind for which 
all dualistic appearances ha ve subsided.  
 
We had discussed e arlier how karma and afflictions are the root s of cyclic existence . 
Karma arises from our a fflictions and the afflictions arise from incor rect mental 
attention .  Here, a ll these causes of cyclic existence have been pacified. So 
“quiescent ” is referring to that factor of purity of adventitious stains of true 
cessations that comes from the pacification or destruction of the apprehension of 
true existence, incorrect mental atten tion, the afflictions and so forth  which are the 
causes of cyclic existence.   
 
True paths  
“Undefiled” —here we are talking about true path s—refer s to the stainless wisdom 
directly perceiving emptiness. Earlier on we had d iscussed how incorrect mental 
attention gives rise to all the different afflictions by superimposing qualities on the 
object of observation thus giving rise to desire , hatred and so forth. The wisdom 
directly perceiving emptiness is free or purified of any  of the se obscurations  and is 
therefore “ undefiled ” or stainless. “Undefiled” pertains to that wisdom’s quality of 
purity.  
 
This wisdom directly perceiving emptiness is also said to possess “the light rays of 
exalted wisdom” that has completely destroyed “desire, hatred, and obscuration 
with respect to all objects of observation.” B eing “illumined with the light rays of 
exalted wisdom ” is a reference to its  quality of clarity  that can act as an antidote 
against afflictions such as desire  and hatred , and the obscuration s that arise from 
incorrect mental attention.  
  
“Not non -existent, Not 
existent, not existent and 
non-existent, and not 
analyzable as other then 
existent and non -existent ” True cessation s that are natural purity free from 
these four extremes of permanence and annihilation . True 
cessation s 
“Devoid of description ” True cessation s that are natural purity that cannot 
be described with mere words .   
“Known by oneself 
individually ” True cessation s that are natural purity can only be 
experienced by a mind to which all dualistic 
appearances have subsided.  
“Quiescent ” Factor of purity of adventitious stains of t rue 
cessation s, i.e., being puri fied of the adventitious 
stains that are the causes of cyclic existence — 
apprehension of true existence, i ncorrect mental 
attentions, afflictions and so forth.  
“Undefiled ” The quality of purity of th e stainless wisdom directly 
perceiving emptiness .  True path s 
“Illumined with the light 
rays of exalted wisdom, and  
thoroughly destroying 
desire, hatred, and 
obscuration with respect to 
all objects of observation”  The quality of clarity of the stainless wisdom 
directly perceiving emptiness  that can act as an 
antidote against afflictions , such as desire and 
hatred, and the obscurations that arise from 
incorrect  mental attention.  
.  
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 9 of 12 Eight qualities of the Dharma Jewel  
Verse 10  
Due to being unthinkable, without the two [i.e., contaminated 
actions and  afflictive emotions],  
Without conceptions, pure, clear, and antidotal,  
The doctrine is that which is and that by  which there is the [state]  
Devoid of passions —having the character of the [last] two truths.  
 
1. Earlier we had referred to how true cessation s that are natural purity are devoid 
of the four extremes . This is beyond the grasp of our mind  and is therefore 
“unthinkable .”  
2. “Without the two ” means without any karma and afflictions.  
3. “Without conceptions” means without the conception s of true existence.  
4—6. The q ualit ies of being “pure, clear and antidotal”  refer to the qualities of true 
paths.   
 
Up to “antidot al” we have six qualities. Although reference has already been made to 
true cessations  and true paths , if we were to enumerate true cessations and true 
path s separately, then we h ave eight qualities. The first three qualities are 
subsumed under true cessat ions. The next three qualities are subsumed under true 
path s.  
 
EIGHT QUALITIES OF T HE DHARMA JEWEL  
1 “Unthinkable ” The true cessations that are natural purity are 
beyond the grasp of the mind . 7 
true 
cessation s 2 “Without the two ” Without any karma and afflictions . 
3 “Without conceptions ” Without the conceptions of true existence . 
4 pure   
8 
true path s 5 clear   
6 antidotal   
 
The four noble truths can be included or subsumed within the two truths: - 
 the truth of the thoroughly afflicted class  
 the truth of the complete ly purified class.  
 
Verse 11  
This devoid [and making devoid] of passions is included  
Within true cessations and paths.  
Respectively those are also to be known  
By way of three qualities each.  
 
Verse 12  
It is unthinkable because of bein g unanalyzable, inexpressible, and 
known by  Superiors.  
Due to being quiescent it is without the two,  
And it is without [improper] conceptions.  
The three, purity and so forth [i.e., clear and antidotal] are like the 
sun.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 10 of 12 Now we have finished with the Dharm a Jewel. If you have any questions about the 
Dharma Jewel, we have a few minutes.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Student:  Regarding your question —“Why is the Buddha’s understanding of the 
ultimate truth classified under the fulfilment of his own aims and not the aims of 
others?” —my answer is this: C an that be refer ring to the wisdom reali sing 
emptiness during the Buddha’s  last m oment as a sentient being ? Therefore  his 
knowledge of the ultimate truth helps only him to overcome the knowledge 
obscuration s. Therefore it doesn’ t help other sentient beings.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : The qualities pertaining to the kn owledge of the ultimate nature of 
things are class ified under the fulfilment of one’s own aims whereas the quality of 
knowledge itself is class ified under the fulfilment of the aims of others. The question 
is why can’t it be the other way round?  Another way of putting it is this: Why can’t , 
for example,  the quality of knowledge be included under the fulfilment of the aims 
of oneself?  
 
Student : Because “knowledge ” here only refe rs to his knowledge of conventional 
truth . It does not include  his understanding of ultimate truth.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:   Another way of putting it is this: Why can’t the Buddha’s knowledge 
of how things actually exist , their final nature , be class ified under the fulfilment of 
the aims of others. What  is wrong with classifying that understanding of the 
ultimate nature of phenomena under the fulfilment of the aims of others?  
 
Student: Because my understanding is that his knowledge of the ultimate truth 
results in the nature body , the dharmakaya . This  doesn’t benefit sentient beings 
directly. Also , I had read that this knowledge , his wisdom realizing emptiness , is to 
purify his own defilements. In that sense, that knowledge is for his own benefit , to 
help him become a buddha. Therefore it doesn’t benefit sentient beings . 
 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know.  
 
Student:  Another question . You have asked us to think about the twelve links of 
dependent arising in the past  module. Tonight we heard that the twelve links of 
depen dent arising c ould  be used to explain how the bodhisattva suffers from his …  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Who say “suffer ”?  
 
Student : That was a different set of twelve link s? This present set of twelve link s has 
nothing to do with samsara ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t sa y the bodhisattva s “suffer. ” 
 
Student : You had asked us then (in a previous module), “ Does the bodhisattva 
superior still have any of the twelve links?” Just now  you sa id the twelve links c ould  
be used to explain how a bodhisattva up to the tenth ground st ill ha ve the 
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 11 of 12 knowledge obscurations . Due to that , he has uncontaminated karma , result ing in the 
inconceivable transference of death. I am clarifying that the twelve links you talk 
about now has nothing to do with the twelve links we use to explain samsara . Am I  
correct?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Ye s. 
 
Question:  My understanding is that for a superior being, they no longer have the 
ignorance of the first link. It seems like today you are saying that such a being still 
has the twelve links. Can you please clarify ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche:  You are not listening . May be you are not listening well ! 
 
The twelve links is usually discussed in the context of how someone circles in cyclic 
existence under the power of karma and afflictions . Motivated by ignorance, one 
accumulates karma an d so forth. So one circles in cyclic existence  primarily due to 
the power of the afflictions .  
 
The discussion today of the twelve links in relation to the bodhisattva superiors 
does not pertain to that. The discussion of the twelve links that is included within 
the knowledge obscurations does not pertain to how sentient beings circle in cyclic 
existence under the power of karma and afflictions.  
 
Here we are talking about the links in relation to the bodhisattva superiors. That’s 
where you hear  the term , ‘the levels of the predispositions of ignorance ’.  
 
Motivated by the subtle knowledge obscurations, the bodhisattva superiors 
accumulate pure karma . They  then take on a mental body. With that mental body, 
they undergo the inconceivable transference of death . Bodhisattva superiors do not 
have true sufferings  unlike  ordinary sentient beings who circle in cyclic existence 
under the power of karma and afflictions .  
 
The bodhisattva superiors , although they possess a mental body, do not have true 
suffering s. This mental body undergoes birth and death. Although the  bodhisattva 
superior s undergo birth and death, th at experience of birth and death is not the 
result of karma and afflictions . Their mental bod y came about du e to their pure 
karma.  
 
With this mental body , they experience the inconceivable transference of death. 
When a bodhisattva superior becomes a buddha, he no longer has a mental body. He 
no longer undergoes the inconceivable transference of death for he has pacified the 
twelve links that is included wi thin the subtle knowledge obscurations. As such , he 
is “quiescent ” or pacified.  
 
Prior to becoming a buddha, although the  bodhisattva superiors  do work for 
sentient beings , their work for sentient beings requires  effort and motivation. When 
a bodhisattva superior becomes a buddha, his activities or work for sentient beings 
become spontaneous and effortless.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Ce ntre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 5  
Page 12 of 12 My question now is this: Does a buddha accumulate karma?  
(Responses from s tudent s are inaudible ). 
 
Khen Rinpoche: No? The Buddha doesn’t create good  karma? The Buddha gives 
charity to sentient beings . The Buddha doesn’t create good karma  by doing that ?  
 
I’m now asking you.  The  Buddha gives charity to other sentient beings . Does the 
Buddha create good karma or not?  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme ; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee and Julia Koh ; edited 
by Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 
 