Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L20final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:37.580279
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 1 of 10  
Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating t he Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyalts ab Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 20                           26 May 2015  
 
 
Reviewing the v erse from the  Vajra Cutter Sutra .  Revi siting the disintegratedness of karma. 
The basis of infusion of imprints.  Why the mere ‘I’ is posited to be the enduring basis of 
infusion.  Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verse 131: The nine forms of 
defilements.  
 
 
REVIEWING THE VERSE FROM THE VAJRA CUTTER SUTRA  
 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud – 
See conditioned things as such!  
 
I have given some explanation s of this vers e but it is important that you think about 
its meaning .  
 
“A star”  
“A star ” is analogous  of how within every phenomenon there are two levels of reali ty, 
i.e., the two truths:  
 there is an object , an ultimate  truth , the ultimate nature of reality  
 there is an  object that appears to a conventional awareness  
 
As I mentioned before, a variety of appearances appear s to the conventional valid 
cogni ser (or conventional  awareness).  Some of these appearances are existent s 
whereas others are not , i.e., whatever appear s to a conventional awareness is not 
necessarily an existent.  
 
Furthermore, whatever appears to a conventional awareness does not necessarily 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 2 of 10 exist in the way it appears to this mind.  All appearances to the conventional valid 
cogni ser distinguishing a con ventionality  appear as truly existent. This is necessarily 
so on the sentient beings ’ ground. But d oes that mean that phenomena are truly 
existent  and exist in the way they appear? No.  
 
“A visual aberration”  
So “a visual aberration ” mentioned in the verse  from the Vajra Cutter Sutra  is 
analogous of this fact. A person who does  not have any defects in his eyes will n ot 
experience the vision of falling hair s. If falling h airs do exist , they must be seen by 
someone who has non -defective eyes. Likewise , althou gh phenomenon appears to be 
truly existent, they do not exist  truly. For if phenomena are real in the sense of 
existing truly that must be realised by the wisdom of the meditative equipoise of a 
superior  but that is not the case.   
 
Although phenomena do no t exist truly, we cannot posit the non -existen ce of 
phenomena because phenomena function  and we experience their benefit and harm . 
Although phenomena do not exist truly, they exist as mere appearances. This is 
asserted by the Consequence Middle Way School  (CMWS) .  
 
“A flame of a lamp”  
Phenomena exist . They are also dependently arisen. In order to help us to 
understand th is fact, there is the analogy of “a flame of a lamp .” The flame of a butter 
lamp comes into being through the aggregation of many  causes an d conditions. It 
exist s as a dependently arisen phenomenon.   
 
What these three analogies —“the star, a visual aberration , a flame of a lamp ”—seek  
to explain is the actual situation , i.e., how things exi st. The reality  is that there are 
two facets of truth. Although things do not exist from their own side , nevertheless 
they do exist  and function. They exist  as mere appearances.  
 
“An illusion”  
But whenever we turn our attention to the whole gamut of phenomena, we 
experience both suffering and  pleasure , depend ing on how we view the m. Although 
things do not exist from their own side, in and of themselves , we apprehend them to 
exist in that way. This induces anger  and aversion for objects that cause us problems 
and suffering and attachment for objects  that give us some experience of pleasure.  
 
This is akin to how an audience reacts to the illusion that is created by an illusionist. 
An illusionist con jures  up an image and the audience believes  that what they are 
seeing is real . They react according ly. Sometimes th ey get excited . Sometimes they 
experience fear.  The illusionist does not see the illusion that he has conjure d up to be 
real  because he understand s that it is an illusion. As such , he does not react in the 
way that the audience does. He is neither attached  to nor fearful of the illusion that 
he has created.  
 
Likewise, when we realise that things do not exist in and of themselves, that they do 
not exist from their own side, th is reduce s our fear and the whole range of emotions 
that come from believing that things are real.  In short , all the fear s that we 
experience in cyclic existence are the result s of the mistaken mind . In particular , they 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 3 of 10 originate from our apprehension of true existence. That being the case, how  do we 
rid ourselves of this source of all our fears? Th at answer comes in the rest of th e 
verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra , “a drop of dew, or a bubble, / A dream, a flash of 
lightning , a cloud .” 
 
“A drop of dew”  
 “A drop of dew ” shows the impermanence of phenomena . They can cease to exist 
very q uickly  so they do  not remain for a very long time. Likewise , all composite 
phenomena that arise from causes and conditions necessarily  undergo momentary 
change . They do not abide for even a moment . Instead, t hey are unstable , 
disintegrat ing from moment to moment . Even w e, ourselves , are like that —changing 
from moment to moment . Other people are also like that. By understanding how 
composite phenomena are momentary, we can reduce our attachment and grasping  
to them .  
 
“A bubble”  
All composite phenomena are i mpermanent . Al l contaminated phenomena —
everything that is included in cyclic existence —are suffering  or in the nature of 
misery . This is shown by “a bubble. ”  
 
There is the suffering of suffering  and the suffering of pain . We also have the 
suffering of cha nge that refers to the contaminated feelings of pleasure that we all 
experience  but w e do not thin k that our feelings of pleasure are suffering . Although 
they are in the nature of suffering, we think of those pleasurable feelin gs as real 
pleasure . However , they are  actually in the nature of suffering.  
 
With r egard  to the analogy , the bubble is essentially  made of water . It arises as a 
water bubble and when the water bubble  burst s, it becomes water  again . So 
regardless of how it manifests, its entity  or nature is water .  
 
Likewise , all the feelings that we experience in cyclic existence —pleasurable feelings , 
neutral feelings  and so forth —although they seem d ifferent, essentially they have the 
same nature . They are all in the nature of suffering.  By r eflectin g on impermanence  
and how everything in samsara is in the nature of suffering, we can deal with our 
suffering  and reduce it. We will be able to deal with our afflictions like attachment , 
craving and so forth .  
 
But reflecting on these points alone will not  enable us to liberate  ourselves from 
cyclic existence . In order to do that, we must eradicate the very root of cyclic 
existence , that is, the apprehension of a self . As such , there is a need to generate th e 
wisdom reali sing selflessness.  
 
“A dream”  
As me ntioned in the teaching s, with regard to all p henomen a—be it a phenomenon 
of the past , a phenomenon of the present or a phenomenon of the future —we should 
bring to mind how they are all empty of existing inherently.   
 
The analogy of “a dream ” help s us to understand how a phenomen on of the past  is 
empty of existing inherently.  In a dream , we may see many different things . When we 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 4 of 10 wake up from the dream,  if we still remember the dream, some  emotional reactions 
may still arise in us . Sometimes we may be very e xcited and attached to what we saw 
in the dream . Sometimes we become very fearful and develop aversion to what we 
saw in the dream. When we are awake , whatever we saw in the dream no longer 
exist s. Nevertheless , the memory of the m can still trigger a react ion in us.  
 
Likewise , although  events that happened in the past  do not exist inherently , they can 
cause an effect in the future . An example  of this is karma. A karma that was created  
or accumulated in the past can produce an effect  in the future .  
 
Revisi ting the disintegratedness of karma  
We had discussed briefly the disintegratedness of karma. It  is not that the CMWS  
does  not have an explanation of how when an action is accumulated  and done, an 
imprint is left on the continuum and that imprint can give r ise to an effect in the 
future. It is not that they do not have such an explanation  and i t is not that they are 
against this explanation .  
 
But w hen the CMWS explains  how karma can give rise to its effect in the future, they 
do not need to resort to that e xplanation of karmic imprint s being  left on the mind . 
Rather , their expla nation focuses on the disintegratedness of karma.  
 
Once a karma is accumulated and the action ceases, that cessation of karma —in 
other words, its moment of disintegratedness —is a pro duced or composite 
phenomenon. As such , that moment of disintegratedness gives rise to the next 
moment of disintegratedness and so forth.   This is how the CMWS  explains the link 
between the cessation of karma  and the experiencing of the effect s of th at karma in 
the future.  
 
In his works such as the Seventy Stanzas  on Emptiness  and so forth, Nagarjuna  
employs many reasons  seek ing to explain how disintegratedness is a product  and a 
functioning thing.  
 
Another example: a person is dying and a person who is de ad. Death happens after 
dying. In the twelve link s of dependent origination, the last link is the link of aging 
and death . One has to age before one dies. Because of certain causes and conditions, 
one dies . That death, the ‘deadness ’ of the person, is a pr oduct because it was caused 
by something  and as such, it is a product , a functioning thing  and a composite  
phenomenon . In the same way, it produces its next moment of disintegratedness and 
so forth.  
 
The assertion that disintegratedness is a functioning th ing is an uncommon assertion 
of the CMWS. The other tenets , from the Autonomy Middle Way School  (AMWS)  and 
those below  it, are unable to and do not posit a past phenomenon to be a functioning 
thing.  In particular, they do  not posit  disintegratedness to be  a functioning thing.   
 
The CMWS  does assert imprints  or predispositions . It is not that it does not assert 
imprints . In the works of the glorious Chandrakirti such as  his Commentary on the  
“Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on t he Middle ’”, there are many p assages that  
explicitly show that the CMWS does  assert  imprints . The word ‘imprint s’ often  comes 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 5 of 10 up in his works  where it is stated that imprints  are placed on  the mental continuum. 
The knowledge obscurations are also explained in relation to the men tal continuum.  
 
The basis of infusion for imprints  
There is also much discussion w ith regard to the basis of infusion for imprints . There 
is the discussion on the meaning of the continuum of the mind. The Mind Only School 
(MOS) asserts a consciousness that  is called the mind -basis -of-all that is the basis of 
infusion of imprints.  
 
What is the basis of infusion of imprints  according to the CMWS ?  There is much 
discussion  on this . In Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illumination of Thought, his commentary 
on Chandrakirti’s Commentary on the “Supplement to (Nagarjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the 
Middle ,’” the basis of infusion of imprints is posited to be the mere ‘I’ that is 
design ated in dependence on the mental continuum.  
 
It is very difficult to understand  how the mere ‘I’ can  act as the basis of infusion of 
imprints. In the first place , it is difficult for us to even grasp  or have a feel for the 
mere ‘I’ that  is merely imputed by thought . Indeed , this is very profound  but the key 
point is that every phenomen on that exists is in th e nature of emptiness . All 
phenomena —including the ‘I’ that is the basis of infusion  of the imprints —do not 
exist inherently.   
 
According to the CMWS , the re are two different bas es of infusion :   
1. The temporary basis of infusion is the mental consciousness . 
2. The enduring basis of infusion is the mere ‘I’. 
 
Form cannot act as  the basis of infusion for imprints.  
 
With regard to the consciousness , the sense consciousness is  not posited as the basis 
of infusion of imprints  as it is not stable in the sense that i t is not enduring .   As  such , 
it is difficult to posit a sense consciousness to be the basis of infusion of imprints . The 
mental consciousness  is posited as the temporary basis of infusion because it is more 
stable  and enduring  compare d to a sense consciou sness.   
 
Sense consciousness es are not enduring and stable  because they do not manifest all 
the time . When one goes to sleep , they cease  and become dormant  whereas the 
mental consciousness is always there .  
 
~ Why the mere ‘I’ is posited to be the enduring  basis of infusion   
This is something for you to think about here .  
 
The sense consciousness cannot be th e basis of infusion of imprints. The CMWS  
posit s the mental consciousness to be the temporary basis of infusion of imprint s. 
The mental consciousness of an individual progresses  as he enters the path  that 
starts with the path of a ccumulation  followed by t he path of preparation. When he 
enters the path of seeing , it is said that his mental consciousness will transform in 
entity into an uncontaminated wisd om or path .  
 
Among t he nine types of defilements, there are the path of seeing abandonments and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 6 of 10 
the path of meditation abandonment s. When an individual enters the path of seeing 
in meditative equipoise , he first achieves the uninterrupted path of the path of 
seeing.  
 
During the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing, during that wisdom, the path of 
seeing abandonments that are the afflictions and the path of seeing abandonments 
that are the seeds of those afflictions  do not exist. But a t this time, the  path of seeing 
abandonments have not been abandoned yet. It  is just that they are not appearing  
due to the force of the path , the antidote.  
 
After the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing  comes the path of release of the 
path of seeing. That  is when t he path of seeing abandonments are abandoned  and 
true cessation is achieved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 One achieves true path o n the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing .  
 One achieves true cessation on the path of release of the path of seeing .   
There is in deed an order . True cessation com es after true path , i.e. t rue cessation is 
the result of true path.  
 
When we talk about true cessation , it is not a fully qualified result  in that  it comes 
about due to true path acting as the f ully qualified cause and con dition . Nevertheless , 
true cessation can only be achieved in dependence upon true path. The point is that 
these two are not achieved simultaneously.   
 
Then a qualm  arises : Do es the person on the path of seeing possess  the path of 
meditation abandonments , in particular, the seeds of the afflictions that are the p ath 
of meditation abandonments? One would have to say yes. 
 
But if one were to say yes, where then do they exist? Where is the repository of those 
seeds?  
 
One cannot posit the mental consciousness of th e person on the path of seeing to be 
the repository of the seeds of the afflictions  that are the p ath of meditation 
abandonments. Why? This is b ecause his consciousness has already been 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 7 of 10 
transformed into the entity of an uncontaminated path. One cannot  posit that 
wisdom, an uncontaminated path , to be the repository of the path of meditation 
abandonments.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As such, the CMWS asserts that the repository of th ose seeds is the mere ‘I’ that is 
designated in dependence upon the mental contin uum.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Are y ou getting something  out of this or not ?  
 
Even if you don’t understand  everything , do you see what I  am driving at? Are you 
getting  the essence?  
 
I have said a fair bit. Can somebody summari se the essence  of what I have said ?  
 
Student : The CMWS  posits that the predispositions are deposited on the mere ‘I’ 
because when the bodhisattva achieve s the path of seeing, his mind is transformed 
into a mind of wisdom and that cannot be the repository for the afflictions that are 
the path of meditation  abandonments . But the afflictions that are the path of 
meditation abandonments have to be deposited somewhere .  The CMWS  posit s that  
they are deposited on the mere ‘I’.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Great ! You got it ! I hope the others got that. You must get the point.  
 
Question: Does this also apply to the arhats who have achieved the direct reali sation 
of emptiness? For the arhats, are the  knowledge obscurations also deposited on the 
mere ‘I’? 
 
Khen Rinpoche: Of course. There  is no other option. That  is the only way.  
 
In order to be a n enduring basis of infusion , it has to be something that exists all the 
time. As such, the enduring basis of infusion of imprints is  the mere ‘I’.  
 
“A flash of lightning”  
Back to the verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra , “a dream, a flash of lightning , a cloud .” 
Just as “a dream ” is analog ous of how past phenomena  do not exist inherently , “a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 8 of 10 flash of lightning ” is used to explain how present phenomena do not exist inherently.  
 
If you think of a flash of lightning,  you can’t r eally point to it and say , “It is arising .” 
Nor w hen it arises,  “There it is .” Or when it is ceasing to exist , “It is disappearing .” A 
flash of lightning comes and goes quickly. As such, you can’t pinpoint the beginning, 
the middle or the end of a flash of  lightning.  
 
Likewise, when we talk about a present phenomen on and examine  it, it is difficult to 
point to what exactly this object is. If we were to examine its cause, its entity and the 
effect that it will produce, there  is nothing we can really point t o that is th e object.  
When we look for th e object that our ignorance is clinging on  to, believing that there 
is an inherently existent object that we can point to, we cannot really point to what 
exactly th e object is. As such, the teachings say that all ph enomena are mere 
appearances . They do not exist inherently.  They do exist  but they exist as nothing 
more than mere appearances. Phenomen a have nothing beyond that. They are mere 
appearance  like a flash of lightning .  
 
“A cloud”   
The analogy of “a cloud ” helps us to reflect on how future phenomena do not exist 
inherently.  Cloud s appear in the vacuity of an empty sky .  The sky itself does not 
have the ability and capacity to produce rain , hail or snow , yet in that sky  clouds can 
form. When clouds form under  certain conditions , they can give rise to heavy rain fall, 
hail or snow.  That rain can nurture crops that will give  rise to a harvest.   
 
In the statement , “The mind is in the nature of clear light ,” the sky is likened here to 
the tathagata essence , the cle ar light nature of the mind. Due to the coming together 
of the afflictions, karma and the ir seeds —these factors that exist on the clear light 
nature of the mind —a variety of experiences, their effects, arise. W e experience these 
effects be it suffering or pleasure that arise . These effects arise from the coming 
together of the factors  of karma and afflictions and so forth .  
 
The effects themselves do not exist from  their own side.  They do not exist in and of 
themselves. Likewise , the causes that give rise t o th ese effects  of karma and 
afflictions and so forth  do not exist  in and of themselves . They are not real  and do not 
exist  from their own side . They do not come together in an inherently exist ent way  
and then produce an inherently exist ent effect and resu lt.  
 
The analogies of “a dream, a flash of lightning , a cloud ” help us understand how 
phenomena of the past, present and future  are empty of existing inherently . In 
general, they help us understand that phenomena are empty of existing inherently. 
By reali sing this, we will be able to eradicate once and for all the root cause of all our 
problems.   
 
It will be benefi cial if we put aside some time to reflect on the meaning of this verse . 
When we recite th is verse , we can also think about the meaning of the ve rse, starting 
with “a star, ” followed by “a visual aberration ” and so forth . The entire practice is 
encapsulated in that verse.  
 
The four seals state that:  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 9 of 10 1. All composite phenomena are impermanent .  
2. All contaminated phenomena are suffering .  
3. All phenomena  are empty and selfless .   
4. Nirvana is peace.  
 
As stated in the third seal , “All phenomena are empty and selfless .” By reali sing how 
all phenomena are empty of existing inherently, one achieves peace , the liberation 
that is the pacification of the afflicti ons. When one achieve s liberation , that is 
freedom from the afflictions.  
 
It is the s ame with the four noble truths —how  true suffering s originate from true 
origins ; how true cessation s come about in dependence upon true path s. When we 
reflect on these tea chings, the final conclusion we reach will be the same.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Verse 131  
The nine forms of defilements —(1-3) [the latencies or seeds of] 
desire, hatred, and obscuration [which are overcome by the 
exalted wisdom of a Superior], (4) the strong arou sal [or 
manifestation] of those [three poisons],  
(5) The level of] the predispositions [of ignorance which are the 
means of achieving the uncontaminated actions and the mental 
body in the  continuum of a Foe Destroyer and which are to be 
overcome by the ex alted wisdom of the great enlightenment], (6) 
the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing [which 
obstruct a common being from seeing reality], (7) the objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation [in the continuum of a 
Learner Superior],  
(8) Th e objects to be abandoned by the [seven] impure [grounds 
which are to be overcome by the pure grounds],  
And (9) the defilements dependent on the pure grounds [which are 
to be overcome by the vajra -like meditative stabilization],  
 
Of the nine defilements, what is the difference between the first  three  and the fourth , 
i.e., the difference between the latencies of the three poisons —dormant desire, 
dormant hatred  and dormant obscuration —and the strong arousal of those three 
poisons?   
 
Student : The first three refer to the non -manifest three poisons in the beings of the 
form and formless realms whereas the fourth one  refers  to the afflictions in the mind 
of desire realm beings.  
 
 The first three  dormant form s of the three poisons motivate  the immovable 
karma  that results in a rebirth in the form and formless realms . 
 The three poisons in the ir manifest form result in the accumulation of the 
meritorious karma that leads to a rebirth in the desire realm.  
 
When referring to the three dormant poisons, we do not neces sarily have to posit 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 20  
Page 10 of 10 them to be seeds. What is being posited is that these are the afflictions that motivate 
the accumulation of  immovable karma.  
 
It is said that strong manifest anger does not motivate the accumulation of 
immovable karma , but manifest at tachment  and manifest ignorance (obscuration or 
bewilderment ) can motivate the accumulation of immovable karma  that i s the 
projecting karma that results in a rebirth in the form and formless realms.  
 
“The strong arousal  [or manifestation]  of those  [three poisons]” refers mainly to the 
strong manifest anger that motivates the accumulation of the karma for rebirth in the 
desire realm. Strong manifest anger cannot  motivate the accumulation of immovable 
karma. The accumulation of the projecting karma for rebir th in the desire realm c an 
be manifest anger  or manifest attachment or manifest ignorance .   
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 