Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L03 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:35.766684
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana, Chapter One: The 
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs . 
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter, translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 3                  10 February 2015  
 
 
The four reliances. Manifest and h idden phenomena . Review: The basis, the path and the 
result. Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verse 1 -2. Why seven vajra topics? 
Alternative presentation. Explanation of the term, ‘vajra topic’.   
 
 
THE FOUR RELIANCES  
 
The Buddha ha d advised us  that we should not accept whatever he said simply out of 
respect for him , “Oh, this was said by the Buddha .” Rather, the Buddha said that we 
should check and investigate thoroughly whether what he said accords with how 
things really are , whether he speaks  the truth. O nly then should we adopt his 
teachings and put them into practice.   
 
If there is a need to investigate  his teachings, how should we go about doing it? There 
must be a structure  govern ing such analysis , which is based on the four reliance s:  
1. Do not rely on the person  but rather rely on the Dharma . 
2. Do not rely on the words but rather rely on the ir meaning.  
3. Do not rely on the interpretative meaning  but rather rely on the definitive 
meaning.  
4. Do not rely on the ordinary mind but rather rely on wisdo m. 
 
1. Do not rely on the person but rather rely on the Dharma  
“Do not rely on the person ” means to not simply follow the person just because he is 
famous or he has many followers , but rather to examine what he has said  or his 
teachings . If they are worthw hile, then  take them up and adopt them . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 2 of 11 2. Do not rely on the words but rather rely on the ir meaning  
“Do not rely on the words ” means to n ot simply trust whatever is said because it 
sounds good  or if it was delivered in a very charismatic way  with very ni ce 
pleasantries , but rat her to examine the meaning  behind w hat is said.  
 
If the subject matter, the meaning behind the words , is worthwhile  and correct, only 
then you should adopt it.  In the context here , we are talking about the Dharma  so 
even if the pre sentation is not very pleasant  or the words used are not very poetic 
but if they convey the correct meaning of what one should abandon and what one 
should adopt , then we should put them into practice.  
 
But if the meaning does not accurately convey what on e needs to abandon and what 
one needs to adopt , then no matter how appealing the presentation may be, it would 
not benefit us.  
 
3. Do not rely on the interpretative meaning  but rather rely on the definitive meaning.  
“Do not rely on the interpretative mean ing” means to not just look at the words 
literally,  i.e., do not just follow after the words but rather to examine their ultimate 
meaning  or the ultimate intent  behind the words . We should look for the main point.  
 
4. Do not rely on the ordinary mind but rather rely on wisdom  
“Do not rely on the ordinary mind ” means to not rely just on hearing and reflection, 
but rather  we should attempt to generate an experience of the teachings that comes 
from the meditation  familiari sing the mind with the topic. Ideally,  we should work at 
having a direct experience of the teaching s in question . 
 
Whatever result is achieve d through simply hearing and reflecting on the teachings is 
not stable. Stability only comes through familiari sation and tasting the teachings for 
your self. Once you have experienced  and tasted the teachings, then that is something 
worthwhile  and trustworthy  that you can rely on. The main point is that we need to 
be able to elicit an experience of the teachings for ourselves. Th is is what we should 
place o ur hope s and trust  in, our own valid experience.  
 
MANIFEST AND HIDDEN PHENOMENA  
 
Since investigation is important, what are the objects that we should investigate? 
Everything that exist s is either a manifest phenomenon or hidden phenomen on. In 
the categor y of hidden phenomen a, there are (1) phenomen a that are slightly hidden 
and (2) phenomen a that are extremely hidden  (or obscured ). As such , these are the 
three categories of phenomena to be known.   
 
Manifest phenomena  
There are obvious things such as the f orm that is experienced by our eye 
consciousness , the sound that is experience d by our ear consciousness , the taste that 
is experience d by our tongue consciousness  and the tactil e object that is experience d 
by our body consciousness and so forth. Form, sou nd, smell, taste and tactile objects 
are examples of m anifest phenomena . You can experience them directly w ithout 
analysing and having to think about them .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 3 of 11 Slightly hidden phenomena  
There are also many phenomena t hat cannot be directly experienced  and can only be 
understood through reasoning. For example, if you see smoke billowing up from a 
certain place, although you only see the smoke, from the presence of th at smoke, you 
can infer that there is a fire . In this case , although we can not see the fire dire ctly, 
nevertheless we can understand  that a fire exists through the correct proof provided 
by the smoke. There are many such phenomena that can be understood through 
employing the correct proof or reasoning.  
 
Extremely hidden (or obscured ) phenomena  
The cl ass of extremely hidden phenomena is very difficult to understand even with 
the use of reasoning. An example would be the subtle working s of karma and its 
results. We can only understand and trust the existen ce of such a phenomenon by 
trusting and dependin g on the speech of a valid person.  
 
But we are not talking here about just trusting anyone in a casual way. Before we 
trust that person, we would h ave already subjected  that person to much scrutiny 
such as  examining the teachings he has given. Upon such careful examination, when  
we see that whatever he has taught is true and furthermore, he has proven himself to 
be true with regard to many other things , then we can place our trust in the speech of 
that person.  
 
Je Rinpoche , in his Dependent Arising: A P raise of the Budd ha, said  
 
This very path of dependent arising,  
the reason for seeing your words as unparalle led, 
generates conviction in the validity of other teachings.  
 
Because of the Buddha’s very precise and subtle explanation of dependent arising, 
therefore the Buddha is an  unpa ralleled expounder  of the teachings . By relying on 
Buddha’s explanation of dependent arising, we  can develop certainty and come to 
realise this truth for ourselves .   
 
When we ascertain this truth for ourselves, we will accept th e other extremely 
hidden  phenomena that the Buddha has talked about . Lama Tsongkhapa said that 
this was the case for himself . Based on seeing how  the Buddha was unmistaken with 
respect to the explanation of dependent arising, he came to believe in those other 
extremely hidden phenomena such as the qualities of the path s and grounds  and so 
forth.  If you recall some of the description s of the various qualities that the 
bodhisattvas achieve on the ten bodhisattva grounds , they are truly inconceivable. 
Then whe n you look at the qualities that the Buddha is said to possess, they are even 
more inconceivable. But on e come s to trust  that such attainments  exist  through 
gaining conviction in the Buddha’s presentation of dependent arising.  
  
So extremely hidden phenom ena can only be understood by depending on the speech 
of another person.  A simple example to help you understand extremely hidden 
phenomena would be your  belief that you were born on s uch and such a day at such  
and such  a time. There is no reason for you to believe that you were born on that day 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 4 of 11 and time other than being told of this by your parent.   
 
To understand and accep t an extremely hidden phenomen on, we  have to depend on 
the speech of another person , but it is not as simple as that. First , you must h ave 
ascertained correctly that th at person is indeed a valid authority . Second, y ou must 
also ascertain that th at valid person will not tell you something that is not true. It is 
not simply a matter of believing , “It is like that b ecause he said so .” You h ave to apply 
many reasons  and there are many points that you have to think about  before you can 
settle the issue and say , “OK, what that person said i s true .”  
 
In order to understand anything, we have to critically examine and analy se it. It is the 
same f or the Buddha’s teachings . You have to critically analy se and think  about them 
especially when you are study ing these great treaties . One of the reasons  why we 
study such text s is to analy se, to think about them  and ascertain them for ourselves  
so that we can develop conviction  in the subject matter . As I mentioned in the last 
lesson in response to a question  that was posed , this is something we really have to 
discover and understand for ourselves .  
 
REVIEW  
 
We talked about : 
 the basis —the two truths  
 the pa th—method and wisdom   
 the result —the two bodies  of a buddha  
 
The basis  
The basis  is that every phenomenon that exists has two facets  or two levels of truth, 
the ultimate truth and the conventional truth.  These two truths abide in every single 
existent. The  two truths are one entity but different isolates.   
 
We must understand what these two truths are . Not only that. Our understanding of 
one level of truth must not contradict our understanding of the other level of truth. If 
that were to happen, th is means that you have not fully grasped the meaning of these 
two truths. We must know how to be able to posit these two levels of truth and have 
them co-exist harmoniously.   
 
Let us u se the person as an illustration. What is the person? The person is a mere 
appear ance to the mind that it is appear ing to. This mind is a mind that does not 
investigate nor analy se. So to this mind that neither investigate s nor analy ses, there 
is this mere appearance of a person . This is an illustration of a conventional 
phenomenon . 
 
If you were to go beyond mere appearances , if you were to start analy sing, “What 
exactly is the person ? What is its ultimate nature ? How does it exist? ” this analysis is 
called distinguishing the ultimate.  
 
At the end of that analysis , you will not find the  person . You cannot find a person that 
you can point to , i.e., t he findable person cannot be found ! Instead w hat you will find 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 5 of 11 is the emptiness of an inherently existent person . Th is is the ultimate nature of the 
person , i.e., when you look at the person f rom the ultimate point of view . You  do not 
find the non-existence  of the person . This is not what you will find . What y ou find  is 
the emptiness o f an inherently existent person .  
 
This is the import, the meaning behind the statement , “Not seeing is the bes t seeing .”  
This is what is found by the mind distinguishing the ultimate. At the end of th at 
analysis , what the mind  find s is not the non -existen ce of a person . What the mind 
finds in the end is the emptiness of an inherent ly existent person, that is to s ay the 
inherently existent person does not exist whatsoever. That is what you will find. 
There is nothing beyond that  so this is the ultimate or the final na ture  of the person.  
 
The path  
As mentioned earlier, a t the time of the basis, in reality, all phe nomena that exist has 
two levels of truth, the ultimate truth and the conventional truth. These two truths 
are one entity but different isolates. As such, the path also has two aspects:   
 The method aspect of the path deals with  conventional phenomena . 
 The wisdom aspect of the path refer s to the mind that understands  and sees the 
ultimate truth.  
 
At the time of the basis, the  two truths are one entity . Likewise, a t the time of the 
path, the practice s of method and wisdom must not be separate d. There is a c oming 
together of method and wisdom  at the time of the path.  
 
The two levels of truth —the ultimate  truth and the conventional truth —are said to 
be one entity but different isolate s. To better understand this, perhaps we can think 
about the four -fold emptin esses that were taught in the module on the Heart of the 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra : “Form is empt y, emptiness is form. Emptiness is not 
other than form . Form is also not other than emptiness .” 
 
The result  
By depending on a path that unites method and wisd om, one achieves the result  of 
the two bodies —the truth body and the form body. One can also call these bodies the 
ultimate body and the conventional body respectively.  
 
A buddha’s exalted body and a buddha’s  exalted mind are one . They are inseparable , 
in undifferentiated union . If you have a good understanding of what a buddha really 
is—how a buddha’s exalted body, exalted speech and exalted mind are in one 
undifferenti ated union —then you will understand what it means when the  teachings 
say that whatever is perceived by a buddha’s mind, the buddha’s holy body is there . 
Wherever the buddha’s holy body is, the buddha’s speech is also there.  
 
You will also come to understand how all the numberless buddhas  can abide on one 
single atom.   
 
When you understand  in this way what a buddha really is and what are the qualities  
of a buddha , it makes a big differen ce to your mind. That is why even in this text 
there is a presentation of the Three Jewels.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 6 of 11 When you have that understanding of how inconceivable the Buddha i s—when you 
really understand that whatever is perceived by the mind of the B uddha, the 
Buddha’s holy exalted body is  there ; wherever the B uddha’s body is, the B uddha’s 
exalted speech is there  because these three are in one undifferentia ted union —then , 
what ever practice s you do , be it going for refuge or purifying your negativities , it will 
make a huge difference.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
WHY SEVEN VAJRA TOPICS?  
 
Verse 1  
Buddha, doctrine, community, basic constituent, enlightenment,  
Qualities, and finally, Buddha act ivities — 
The body of the entire treatise is in brief  
These seven diamond topics.  
 
It is taught that the seven vajra topics (or diamond topics) are definitely enumerated 
as seven. Why? This is so from the perspective of cause and effect .  
 
What is our final  object of attainment? Our final object of attainment is the final 
Three Jewels. W hen we talk about accomplishing our own purpose s and  
accomplishing the purposes of others and bringing th ose two accomplishments to 
complete fulfilment , both are encompassed in achieving the final Three Jewels .  
 
(1) – (3) Buddha, doctrine & community (Buddha, Dharma and Sangha)  
From the perspective of the result  after you have put in all the effort to achieve your 
objective, what do you achieve ? You have “Buddha, doctrine , commun ity,” i.e., the 
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.   
 
In order to achieve the result, t he Buddha, Dharma and Sangha , you must create the 
cause. There are two types of cause s: 
1. the s ubstantial cause  
2. the cooperative condition  
In a simple way, you can say , “I need the  causes and conditions to produce that effect  
(or result). ”  
 
An illustration of this concept of substantial cause and cooperati ve condition  is this:  
In order for a sprout to be produced, an indispensable cause is the seed . So in this 
case, the seed is th e substantial cause of the sprout . But in order for the sprout to 
grow, you need the cooperative conditions of water, soil, fertili ser, warmth and so 
forth.  
 
(4) Basic constituent  
The fourth  of the seven vajra topics  is the basic constituent.  Its cause is  essentially 
the tathagat a essence, the suchness with defilements.  
 
This s uchness with defilement s is given  the name , ‘cause ’. From the very beginning, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 7 of 11 this tathagata essence is pure by nature . If it is not pure by nature, then you will not 
be able to pos it the purity of adventitious defilements .  
 
This tathagata essence is an uncompounded phenomenon , a permanent 
phenomenon . As such , it cannot produce a phenomenon  that undergoes momentary 
change. Therefore it is not a fully qualified cause , i.e., it is not  a real substantial cause . 
Nevertheless , because the existence of this suchness with defilement s is 
indispensable for the achievement of the final Three Jewels , it is given the name 
cause.  
 
You will recall that these seven vajra topics can be approached from both the 
conventional and the ultimate perspective s.  
 
From the ultimate point of view, the basic constituent  would be this suchness with 
defilement s. From the conventional point of view , it refers to the potential in the 
mind that is suitable to be tra nsformed into or to become a buddha. Th is 
conventional basic constitue nt is what you can call an actual substantial cause.  
 
The suchness  or emptiness of our mind is an ultimate truth. The mind’s factor of 
clarity and knowing  (or awareness ) is the conventi onal aspect of th at mind.  These 
two levels of truth have always been there and exist naturally . These are the two 
facets of the mind. As such, at the time of the result, these two facets of the mind can 
become the two bodies of a buddha.   
 
All of us posse ss a mind that ha ve such a nature. In fact,  the minds of all sentient 
beings ha s those characteristics. Our minds are naturally pure  and all sentient beings 
possess th e potential that can be transformed into enlightenment. As such, one can 
argue that all s entient beings can become buddha s.  
 
Therefore  the cause of enlightenment does not exist outside . It exists within  oneself. 
Every sentient being possesses that potential . For as long as one has been in 
existence, that potential has always been there. So th ere is no need to create a cause 
outside of one’s  mind because the cause is already present in one’s  mind.  
 
Therefore it is said in the teaching s that enlightenment is not far away . Buddhahood 
is not far away. If you think about what we have just discusse d, then you can see how 
that is true  because the cause of enlightenment is not outside . It is inside , within us. It 
has always been there . The cause of enlightenment is not far away  as it is within each 
and every sentient being . The import of saying that e nlightenment is not far away  is 
that the cause of enlightenment is not outside but within us. So w hat one has to do is 
to work with one’s mind , i.e., work with what one has.  
  
But the teachings also say that enlightenment is not near. Enlightenment is not  near 
because in order to achieve the enlightenment, one has to undertake hardships  and 
bear difficulties in r emov ing the adventitious defilements , the two obscurations.  
Without bearing hardships and remov ing the two obscurations, enlightenment 
cannot be a chieved  and thus, enlightenment is not near.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 8 of 11 In essence, all sentient beings possess b oth causes of enlightenment —the substantial 
cause and the cooperative conditions.  
 
(5) – (7) Enlightenment, qualities and Buddha activities  
Enlightenment , qualities a nd Buddha activities are posited as the cooperative 
conditions that we need to achieve enlightenment.  
 
First, Shakyamuni Buddha practi sed and achieved enlightenment . Then he turned the 
wheel of Dharma. By depending on the Buddha making available his teach ings 
through the turning of the wheel of Dharma —the Buddha  activity of giving 
teachings —we have to actuali se what he has taught  by practising the teachings . That 
is how we remove the adventitious defilements  that are obscuring our basic 
constituent. Throug h that, w e achieve enlightenment.  
 
So t hese are the cooperative conditions . You need enlightenment, i.e., some one who 
is a buddha to teach the Dharma, then qualities and Buddha  activities . The last three 
vajra topics are the cooperative conditions that yo u need to achieve enlightenment.  
 
The seven vajra topics are definitely enumerated as seven because of what we have 
just discussed. In short, when we talk about the object of attainment  or the  object of 
achievement , then these are the three —the Buddha, Dh arma and Sangha , the final 
Three Jewels .  
 
In order to achieve these  final Three Jewels , you need the cause. Here the basic 
constituent is called the cause  but you also need the supporting cooperative 
conditions. Therefore you need to rely on the enlighten ment that exists in some one 
else’s mind, his qualities and his Buddha activities.  
 
There are many causes of enlightenment , far more than what is enumerated here. 
But here we are discussing why the enumeration of the seven vajra topics is 
definitely seven.  There are many causes of enlightenment and they can be subsumed 
among these seven vajra topics , i.e., you can include them  somewhere within this 
presentation. As such, these are the seven vajra topics.  
 
When we refer to achieving the final three objects of refuge , final here pertains to the 
state of full enlightenment. In order to achieve this state, one needs  to familiari se 
oneself, meditate on, actualise and internalise the correct view.   
 
To develop the correct view, you need to create the causes  for t hat as well. How then 
do you actuali se the correct view? We all possess the basic constituent, the tathagata 
essence , the emptiness of our mind that is by nature pure. Because by nature it is 
empty of existing inherently , it is possible to reali se the empt iness of our mind.  
 
We have the potential to reali se this because of our mind’s factor of clarity and 
awareness , especially the factor of awareness that a llows us to correctly apply 
ourselves to the method . This means to develop the correct mental attenti on, i.e., to 
be able to adopt correctly what is needed to reali se the correct view.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 9 of 11 That ability  of our mind to be aware of things —the factor of awareness —is inherent 
in all of us. We all have it  naturally so it is possib le to reali se and actualise the c orrect 
view. Through that, we can become a buddha. It is like that because the ultimate 
nature of the mind is that it is empty of existing inherently and it  is by nature pure.  
 
However, a lthough we naturally possess the cause for actuali sing the correct v iew, in 
order to actuali se it, we need the cooperative conditions : enlightenment, qualities 
and Buddha activities.  We need to depend on someone other than ourselves. By 
depending on someone else, we can actuali se the correct view. This is how Gyaltsab  
Je explained the definite enumeration of the topics as seven.  
 
So far, this explanation s tarts with presenting  the Buddha, Dharma  (or doctrine) and 
Sangha (or community) as the resultant refuge,  i.e., what you yourself are going to 
achieve  in the future , and enlightenment is posited as the causal refuge, i.e., it refers 
to someone other than you rself whom  you can depend  on.  
  
Alternative presentation  
But there  is a presentation whereby these two refuges are reversed. The Buddha, 
Dharma  (or doctrine) and Sangh a (or community) are p osited as the causal refuge, 
i.e., you are relying on someone other than yourself , and enlightenment is posited as 
the resultant refuge.  
 
If we were to explain the sequence of the seven vajra topics starting with the Buddha, 
Dharma  and Sangha as the causal refuge , it would go like this:  
 First, the Buddha came  and t urned the wheel of Dharma . 
 By depending on the turning of the wheel of Dharma , individuals who actuali sed 
the Dharma Jewel bec ame the Sangha Jewel .  
 By working hard at pract ising the Buddha’s teachings , they removed the 
defilements from the suchness of their minds.  
 When all the defilements are completely removed from the ir minds, they 
achieve d enlightenment.  
 When they achieve enlightenment, they will achieve the qualities of  
enlightenment .  
 They will also engage in the Buddha activities .   
 
So this first verse  gives a brief presentation of the subject matter of this treatise.  
 
Explanation of the term, ‘vajra topic’  
Then there is an explanation of the term, ‘ vajra topic ’ or t he ‘vajra essential points’ . 
Why are they called the vajra topics or the vajra essential points? It  is called ‘vajra ’ 
because the meaning of what these seven points are cannot be sufficiently conveyed 
through the use of just conventional terms  or words . Th ey are beyond the scope of 
ordinary thought. They are only directly accessible to  the superiors. Th is is why they 
are called ‘vajra ’.  
 
If we take the ultimate truth as an example , in the short homage to the perfection of 
wisdom, the perfection of wisdom is called the inconceivable and inexpressible 
perfection of wisdom . It is called inconceivable because one cannot truly understand 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 10 of 11 what emptiness is and one cannot truly understand the mind that directly perceives 
it w ith mere ordinary thought. The meaning of emptiness is that it is an object that 
cannot be conveyed sufficiently using words or terms. Likewise, the wisdom that 
directly reali ses emptiness also cannot be sufficiently conveyed by using ordinary 
words. Only the superior in meditative equipoise ca n fully comprehend and taste 
what emptiness is  and know what the meditative equipoise directly focus sing on 
emptiness means. For th ese reason s, these topics are called ‘vajra ’.  
 
Likewise when we look at the seven vajra topics from the ir ultimate perspecti ve, 
because of th at, they are called ‘vajra ’.  
 
In this context , ‘topic ’ or ‘essential point ’ refers to the treatise itself. It  is called the 
topic or essential point because, first , you have to hear it, learn it and study it . Then 
you reflect on it . After that , you internali se and actuali se it directly.  
 
In order to show that these seven vajra topics were  not creat ed by Maitreya  himself , 
the next verse cites the scriptural source s for these seven vajra topics.  
 
Verse 2  
These [seven] in connection are to be known by way of their own natures  
In this order in the [ Questions of] King Dharanishvara Sutra — 
The [first] three from the introduction  
[And the other] four from the divisions of the attributes of the intelligent  
     [Bodhisattvas] and of Conquerors  
 
I think we do not n eed to talk about that so let us treat that as done.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Question: In the last lesson you mentioned  that the u ltimate Sangha Jewel refers to 
true path s and true cessation s in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior and that 
the conventional Sangha Jewel refer s to a Mahayana superior. My question is  this: 
Why is the conventional Sangha Jewel a Mahayana superior and not bodhisattva 
superior ? In the paths and grounds, we were taught that there  is a difference 
between the bodhisatt va superior and the Mahayana superior.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: So you got your  answer?  
 
Student:  I would think that they are the Mahayana superior , right?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes . 
 
Question:  Can you please elaborate on the Three Final J ewels ?  
 
Answer:  
 The final Budd ha Jewel is the Buddha. Y ou can say that it is the four bodies.  
 The f inal Dharma Jewel is the true path s and true cessation s in the continuum of a 
buddha superior.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 3  
Page 11 of 11  You can posit the final Sangha Jewel as a buddha superior or you could say that it 
is the enjoyment body  and emanation body.  
 
Question:  I refer to our discussion on one entity and two isolates.  Referring to the 
four empties , “Form is empty. Emptiness is form. Emptiness is not other than form. 
Form is not other than emptiness .” Can I c onfirm tha t the emptiness of form and form 
are the same entity but different isolates.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.  
 
Question:  I am confused by the statement, “Emptiness is form .” Emptiness is not form 
because one is an ultimate truth , the other is a conventional truth ; one is permanent, 
the other is im permanent  and one is uncompounded  while t he other is compounded. 
Emptiness is not form because of the different nature s of emptiness and form itself. 
So why is, “Emptiness is form” among the four empties?  
 
Answer : What is po sited as form? Form is just th e mere appearance to the mind to 
which it appears . That mind does not investigate and does not go beyond th is 
superficial appearance. There is such a mind . To that mind , that mere appearance  of 
form is posited as form .  
 
But if you are not satisfied with that mere appearance, if you were to investigate  
further, “What is form ? Where is it ? What is it ?”, then that  becomes an analysis of the 
ultimate already.  
 
At the end of th at correct analysis, what you find is the form ’s empti ness , its lack of 
inherent existence, i.e., it does not exist inherently. That is w hat you find . So this is 
meaning of the first one statement, “Form is empty .” That i s the ultimate natur e of 
form;  it is empty of existing inherently.  
 
While it is by natur e empty of existing inherently, nevertheless, it exists. It  is a 
manifestation arising from the nature of emptiness. It exi sts as mere appearance. 
This is what is meant by , “Emptiness is form .” 
 
This is an example of not relying on the words but relying on  their meaning.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee and Julia Koh ; edited 
by Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 
 
 
 