Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L17final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:45.469966
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 1 of 13 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 17                           16 April 2015  
 
 
Chapter One: The Essence of  a One Gone Thus.  Verses 1 13—131. The nine examples that 
explain how the defilements are adventitious and the nine meanings that pertain to the class 
of the thoroughly afflicted phenomena. Discussion on the clear light nature of the mind from 
the conventio nal and ultimate points of view and from the viewpoint of the tenets. Verse 
130: The nature of the mind is clear light but the defilements are adventitious. Verse 131: 
Listing of the nine obscurations.  
 
 
In the last lesson , I said that in The Tathagata Es sence , nine examples were taught to 
establish that the defilements are adventitious . Through that, one comes to 
understand that  the nature of the mind is clear light.  
 
In each of those nine examples, there is the object that is obscured and the obscuring 
factor. Likewise, when explaining the meaning of those nine examples, there is the 
explanation of what is obscured and what the obscuring factor is . 
 
We went through the list of the nine meaning s of the obscuring factors . These pertain 
to the nine obscurat ions  that are exemplified by the nine examples .  
 
ESTABLISHING THE OBS CURATIONS TO BE ADVENTITIOUS THROUGH  THE NINE EXAMPLES  
THE OBSCURATIONS  THE EXAMPLES  THE OBSCURED  THE 
OBSCURING  
1. Dormant a ttachment .  “A Buddha [dwelling inside ] 
an ugly lotus .” A budd ha. Ugly lotus . 
2. Dormant a nger . “Honey in [the middle of 
many ] bees .” Honey . Bees . 
3. Dormant i gnorance . 
 “A kernel  inside a husk .” Kernel . Husk . 
4. The strong manifest 
afflictions of ignorance, 
anger and attachment . “Gold within filth .” Gold . Filth . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 2 of 13 ESTABLISHING THE OBS CURATIONS TO BE ADVENTITIOUS THROUGH  THE NINE EXAMPLES  
 
5. The lev el of the 
predisposition s of 
ignorance . 
 “A treasury [of jewels ] in the 
earth [under the house of the 
destitute].”  Buried treasury of 
jewels .  Earth . 
6. The path of seeing 
abandonment s. “[The capacity of growing 
stalks] and so forth [existing] 
in a small see d.” Capacity to grow 
into a tree . Seed . 
7. The p ath of meditation 
abandonment s. “The image of a Conqueror 
[made from precious 
substance] inside a tattered 
garment .” Image of a buddha . Tattered 
garment . 
8. The obscurations of the 
impure grounds , i.e., 
first to seventh grounds.   
 “A lord of humans [who is a 
Universal Monarch] inside  the 
womb of a lowly woman .” A baby who will 
become a wheel -
turning king . Womb of a 
lowly woman . 
9. The obscurations of the 
pure grounds , i.e., 
eighth to tenth grounds  “A precious [golde n] image in 
an earthen [mold ].” Precious golden 
image . Earthen 
mould . 
 
5. “A treasury [of jewels ] in the earth [under the house of the destitute]”   
The fifth example pertains to th e level of the predispositions of ignorance  and is 
related to t hree verses , Verses 113 to 115, in  the root text .    
 
Verse  113  
Just as an inexhaustible treasure exists  
Under the home of those destitute  
But those persons do not know of it  
And that treasure does not say to them, “I am here,”  
 
Verse 114  
So because of not reali zing this which is like a treasure of jewels 
inside the mind,  
[Naturally] undefiled [and thus] having a nature [ultimately] 
without  
[Newly] establishing [qualities] and removing [faults that earlier 
existed],  
All these beings continuously undergo many f orms of the suffering 
of poverty.  
 
Verse 115  
Just as to a poor person under whose house a treasure of jewels is 
concealed  
That treasure of jewels does not say, “I am [here]”, and that person 
does not know of it,  
So the Sage is born in the world [and tea ches doctrine] in order that 
sentient beings, like poor persons,  
In whose home of the mind the treasure of the [uncontaminated 
element of a Superior’s] qualities resides, could attain it.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 3 of 13 In th is example, there is a destitute person who  is unaware that h is house is sitting 
on a load  of treasure. As such, he remains poor. Likewise, when applie d to the 
meaning, although ordinary sentient beings like us possess the tathagata  essence , we 
are not aware of this. 
 
We possess th is Dharma treasure within us  that h as always been with us and can 
help us achieve omniscience. This Dharma treasure makes it possible for us to 
experience every happiness . It is none other than the tathagata  essence  that  is the 
mind’s emptiness of true existence . This is the ultima te nature  of the mind.  This 
quality of the mind has always existed  and is not freshly produced from causes and 
conditions . As such, this tathagata  essence has no begin ning.  
 
Since w e possess the tathagata  essence, it can be activated . As such, the buddhas  
descend i nto various world systems like ours and  turn the wheel of Dharma to 
enable us to activate our tathagata essence.  In that sense, the dharmakaya acts as the 
empowering condition for the manifestation of  the tathagata  essence . But the main 
cause is that we h ave to work hard and put in  the effort.  
 
6. “[The capacity of growing] stalks and so forth [existing] in a small seed ”   
The path of seeing abandonments are exemplified by t he next example  that is related 
to the next three verses , Verses 116—118 .  
 
Verse 1 16  
Just as a seed [capable of producing a tree] which exists in a fruit of 
a mango tree and so forth —  
[The seed being] undivertible [from giving rise to a sprout when it 
meets with favorable conditions] —  
Gradually turns into the phenomenon of a majestic  tree,  
Through the plowing of the ground, water, and so forth,  
 
Verse 117  
So the [uncontaminated] virtue which is the essential constituent of 
the [Superior] qualities  
Inside the covering of the skin of the fruit of ignorance and so forth 
of sentient bei ngs  
Gradually becomes the phenomenon of a King of Subduers  
In dependence upon this and that virtue [which is with the 
essential constituent].  
 
Verse 118  
Just as a tree grows from within the skin covering a mango or 
palmyra fruit  
By way of the condition s of water, sunlight, air, earth, season, and 
space,  
So the sprout of the seed of a perfect Buddha contained inside the 
fruit -skin of the afflictive emotions of sentient beings  
Increases into [direct] perception of the [element of Superior] 
qualities due  to this and that virtuous condition [of the two 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 4 of 13 collections of merit and wisdom which serve as the causes of 
liberation].  
 
Here, a seed that has the capacity of producing a tree is used as an example . When 
that seed is assisted by water, fertili ser and so  forth, it will transform into a tree  or 
plant .  
 
The seed must have th e capacity to produce a tree . Otherwise , even if the cooperative 
conditions like water, fertili ser and so forth are present, the seed will not be able to 
produce a tree.  If the seed doe s not have the capacity  to produce a tree , for example , 
a seed that is burnt or scorched by fire, then even meeting with the cooperative 
conditions  for the production of a tree  will not result in such a transform ation . 
 
The meaning  is this: W e have the tat hagata essence that is by nature pure and 
virtuous  but it is covered by ignorance . When the cooperative conditions of hearing, 
reflecting and meditating on the teachings come together, this allows  the tathagata  
essence to manifest.  By hearing, reflecting a nd meditating on the teachings, one can 
awaken the Mahayana lineage , enter the Mahayana path  and gradually traverse  the 
paths and grounds . In the end, one actuali ses the truth body, the dharmakaya . This is 
like the result of a  seed that has been fully  tran sformed into a tree.  
 
7. “The image of a Conqueror [made from precious substance] inside a tattered garment”  
The path of meditation abandonments are exemplified by the next example  that goes 
with V erses 119 —121.  
 
Verse 119  
Just as a god, having seen an i mage of the Conqueror  
Made from a precious substance, wrapped in a tattered smelly 
cloth,  
And abiding on a road, speaks to someone about the fact of its 
dwelling on the road  
So that it could be released [from that tattered garment],  
 
Verse 120  
So [the Buddhas] endowed with the eye of unimpeded [perception 
of all things] —  
Having seen that the phenomena of a One Gone Thus, wrapped in 
the [adventitious] afflictive emotions of various types,  
[Exists] even in animals —teach methods likewise for the sake  
Of freeing [the basic constituent].  
 
Verse 121  
Just as one with the divine eye, having seen the image of a One Gone 
Thus that has the nature of a precious substance  
Abiding on a road, wrapped in a smelly cloth, reveals this to 
someone in order that it migh t be freed,  
So, having perceived that the basic constituent dwelling on the road 
of cyclic existence, bound in the tattered garment of the afflictive 
emotions  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 5 of 13 [Exists] even in animals, the Conqueror teaches doctrine so that it 
might be freed [from obstru ctions].  
 
This example seeks  to show that the path of meditation abandonments are 
adventitious.  Here  is the example of a precious image of a buddha  wrapped in a 
piece of tattered cloth . If the statue of the Buddha remains wrapped in that piece of 
tattered cloth, no one is going to see it. But some one,  such as a worldly god , has the 
ability to see through  the cloth  and to point out to others that there is something 
inside  it. Likewise, when applied to the meaning, the Omniscient One sees that the 
tathagata  essence is temporarily being obscured by the afflictions. This tathagata 
essence  exist s in all sentient beings , even in the continu a of animals. The buddhas 
then teach or show the path of Dharma with the hope of liberating sentient beings.  
 
8. “A lord of hu mans [who is a Universal Monarch] inside the womb of a lowly woman ”  
The obscurations of the impure grounds  are exemplified by this example t hat goes 
with V erses 122 —124.  
 
Verse 122  
Just as an ugly woman without protector,  
Dwelling in a rest -house with n o protector  
But holding in her womb a glorious king,  
Does not know that a lord of humans dwells in her belly [and thus 
suffers the derision of others and so forth],  
 
Verse 123  
So being born in cyclic existence is like the dwelling -place without 
protect ion [from various sufferings];  
Impure sentient beings are like the woman endowed with a womb;  
And the undefiled basic constituent is like [the king] dwelling in her 
womb  
As it is due to possession of this that is protection [from suffering].  
 
Verse 124  
Just as, although a lord of the earth dwells in the womb of a woman 
wearing smelly clothing on her body and having an ugly form,  
She undergoes supreme suffering in a protectorless dwelling -place,  
So although there is a protector dwelling inside their ow n [minds], 
transmigrators having a protectorless mind  
Dwell in a state of suffering due to a mind made unpeaceful by the 
power of the afflictive emotions.  
 
The example here is of an ugly  woman who is living alone and does not have anyone 
to protect her .  She happens to be pregnant with an heir to a glorious king. When 
applied to the meaning, like this ugly woman, every afflicted sentient being  born in 
cyclic existence  possesses the tathagata  essence but they are not aware that they 
possess it.   
 
When this ugly  woman , who does not have any  protector , gives birth  to a son who 
gradually grows up and becomes a wheel -turning  king, she will be free of her 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 6 of 13 poverty. Likewise, when one’s tathagata essence is activated , purified  and refined , 
one finally achieves the dharmakaya  and become s a buddha  and is then free of all 
problems.  When one is liberated from o r free  of all the obscurations, one can be a 
savio ur to others.  
9. “A precious [golden ] image in an earthen mold ” 
Next are the obscuration s of the pure grounds. E ven the se are adventitious . This goes 
with V erses 125 —127.  
 
Verse 125  
Just as having seen a statue [made from] melted gold inside [an 
earthen mold],  
Of full [size with all features, its own entity being] quiescent of 
defilement [but] its outside having a nature of an earth [mold],  
One who knows this removes the external obstruction  
In order to cleanse the gold inside,  
 
Verse 126  
So having perceived that the defilements  
Of the natural clear light are adventitious,  
Transmigrators who are like [the earthe n mold which is] the 
location of the precious substance  
Are cleansed of defilements and become supremely enlightened.  
 
Verse 127  
Just as one skilled [in making statues] —knowing that a statue 
contained inside an earthen [mold]  
Made from blazing undefiled  gold has a nature of quiescence [since 
it is without defilement] —removes the earthen [mold],  
So the omniscient [wisdom of the Buddha], knowing the quiescent 
mind like pure gold,  
Removes the obstructions through exposition of the doctrines 
[which are met hods for this] by means of accomplishing [the 
gentle pressure of] the stroke [that removes the earthen mold].  
 
The example here is of a statue that is cast from m olten  gold  but it is still in side the 
mould. If the statue is still in side  the mo uld, we are n ot going to see it so w e have to 
remove the mo uld in order to reveal the precious statue.  Likewise, t he buddhas 
perceive the defilements of the natur al clear light mind are adventitious. B ecause of 
this,  the buddhas teach sentient beings the method s to pur ify th ese obscurations  and 
through that, their tathagata  essence can manifest.  
 
THE MIND IS IN THE NATURE OF CLEAR LIGHT  
 
From the conventional and ultimate point s of view  
Here w e talk about the mind that is in the nature of clear light . Generally speakin g, 
what it means is that the nature of the mind is n ot polluted by defilements , i.e., the 
defilements do not abide in the nature of the mind. Besides explaining this from the 
usual ultimate point of view, I think you can also explain that th e mind is in th e 
nature of clear light  from the conventional point of view .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 7 of 13  
When we talk about the mind, wha t exactly is it? What is its entity? It is that which is 
clear and knowing (or luminous and cogni sant), and refers to that factor of 
experience  that is able to c ogni se and be aware of any object that appears to it. It 
refers to its potential or ability to be aware of objects . That is, that which has the 
capacity to be aware of objects is termed consciousness  or the mind . But this factor 
of cl arity and awareness is not the ultimate nature of the mind.  
 
The tantric presentation of the extremely subtle mind  
If we were to explore this conventional nature of the mind from the tantric point of 
view , it offers a deeper  explanation . The word ‘mind ’ that is usually referred  to in 
highest yoga tantra does not necessarily mean all kinds of mind s. Most of the time , it 
is referring to the extremely subtle mind  that is called the mind of clear light.  
 
This extremely subtle mind doesn’t have any beginning nor will it come to an e nd.  
This is the mind that goes on to enlightenment. This extremely subtle mind is the 
mind from the conventional point of view as explained in tantra.  
 
The mind that moves from life to life is this extremely subtle mind. When  this 
extremely subtle mind manifest s, all the coarser levels  of consciousness es in our 
mind  are not manifest as they  have already dissolved . At the time of death, all the 
coarser level s of consciousnesses  have  dissolved and the culmination of th at 
dissolution process is the extremely subtle mind.  
 
So when one dies, one dies with this extremely  subtle mind  that move s on to the next 
rebirth and from life to life . This is what goes on as the continuum of this extremely 
subtle mind never ceases. If one is going to achieve enlightenment, t he continuity of 
this extremely s ubtle mind transforms into the wisdom truth body. In other words, it 
is the substantial cause of the wisdom truth body. 
 
In Buddhist tantra, we talk about  the: 
 basis clear light,  
 path clear light   
 resultant clear light  
 
When we talk about the clear light on these  three occasions, there  are: 
 the objective clear light   
 the subjective clear light  
 
So c lear light can refer to the objective clear light and the subjective clear light . 
Basically  this is referring to the object and  the object possessor  respectively . The 
objective clear light means that there is an object . The s ubjective clear light means 
that there is a n object possessor,  the mind.  
 
For us ordinary beings, we possess the extremely subtle mind  that manifests at the 
time of death . This is the clear light of the  basis, specifically , the subjective clear light 
of the basis. The emptiness of this clear light mind  that is one entity with the mind of 
clear light  is the objective clear light . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 8 of 13 When this extremely subtle mind  of clear light is transformed into the entity of a path  
i.e., this extremely subtle mind has ascertain ed emptiness, then th is is the path clear 
light and the subjective clear light . The object that is apprehend ed by this mind, 
emptiness , is the objective clear light on  the occasion of the path.  
 
When the extreme ly subtle mind transforms into the entity of the path —it has 
ascertain ed emptiness  and has emptiness as its object —it is explained in the 
teaching s that such a mind is very refined  and subtle  and is very powerful in 
removing the obscurations .  
 
When all obscurations are finally removed by this e xtreme ly subtle mind reali sing 
emptiness, then this extreme ly subtle mind of the path  becomes the dharmakaya  that 
can be considered also from the subjective point of view and the objective point of 
view.  
 
At the time of the  result  of the dharmakaya : 
 There  is the facto r of natural purity that is the nature body (svabhavikakaya ), 
which can be posit ed as the objective clear light .  
 There is the wisdom truth body that is the subjective clear light .   
 
 OBJECTIVE CLEAR LIGHT  SUBJECTIVE CLEAR LIGHT  
Basis Clear Light  The emptiness of this clear light 
mind.  The extremely subtle mind that 
manifests at the time of death.  
Path Clear Light  The object that is apprehen ded by 
this mind, emptiness.  The extremely subtle mind that has 
ascertained emptiness.  
Resultant Clear Light  Factor of natural purity that is the 
nature body.  Wisdom truth body.  
 
This is in respon se to a student ’s earlier  question about the statement  that the mind 
is in the nature of clear light . I guess you can talk about it from both the conventional 
and the ultimate point s of view :  
 The conventional nature of the mind  can be termed as ‘ the mind is clear light ’.  
 The ultimate nature of the mind , i.e., its emptiness of true existence , can be 
termed as ‘ the mind is in the nature of clear light ’. 
 
When you look at the tantric explanation , when you look at  the mind from the 
conventional and ultimate point s of view , i.e., its conventional and ultimate natu re, 
does it not make sense?  
 
From the viewpoint of the tenets  
But if you think about this from the perspective of the lower tenets —starting from 
the Autonom y Middle Way School  (the Autonomists or Svatantrikas) and including 
the Mind  Only School  (the Cittam atrins) —all of them assert that the ‘I’  exist s 
inherently  and that there is something that one can point to as the ‘I’. For them, the ‘I’ 
is imputed in dependence on the consciousness , which is the ‘I’ that they  can point to.  
 
Since all the tenets, with t he exception of the Prasangika s, assert that anything that 
exist s exist s inherently , for them, the ‘I’ must exist inherently  in that there is 
something that one can point to as the ‘I’ right there from its own side : 
 For the Svatantrika s, they assert that i t is the mental consciousness .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 9 of 13  For the proponents of the Mind  Only  School , it is the mind -basis -of-all.  
For them, the very thing that moves to enlightenment is the mental consciousness . It 
is the mind that moves  to enlightenment  and the mind  that moves t o enlightenment  
must be in the nature of clear light.  (56.0)  
 
Let us use an example. Generally speaking, children are innocent  in that t hey tend to  
say whatever comes to  their mind . They are straightforward in that way and don’t 
have m any discursive though ts. Gradually , as the children grow up, their mind s are 
filled with all kinds of concepts, thoughts, ideas and so forth . In that sense , their 
minds are obscured and they have lost their innocence.  Just like the child, t he mind  
that is in the nature of clea r light  gradually  has obscurations heap ed on it, obscur ing 
its nature.  
 
There are children who remember the experiences of the ir past lives especially when 
they are still very young , around one to two years old. The ability to remember their 
past lives also has to do with the ir living condition s; for instance, whether the 
child ren are  kept physically clean and whether the type of foods that they are serve d 
is contaminated.  
 
If conditions are such that the child ren are kept clean  and their mind s are still fresh 
and pure, they will be able to  remember their past lives. However, when they grow 
up and reach the age of around ten  to twelve , I don’t think they  are able to remember 
anything. In fact, t hey will forget everything  as w hatever they were able to remem ber 
before becomes n on-existen t. This happen s because the mind is gradually being filled  
with and obscured by all kind of thoughts, ideas, concepts  and so forth.  
 
For the Svatantrika s and Cittamatrin s—those who assert th at the ‘I’ is the 
consciousness —it is the consciousness that moves from life to life and if there is 
improvement, then it is the consciousness that improve s.  
 
This is what I think from the perspective of those who assert that the ‘I’  is the mental 
consciousness or the mind -basis -of-all—it is that which has the ability to perceive 
object and is that which has the nature of clear light.   
 
When it come s to the Prasangika s (proponents of the Consequence Middle Way 
School) , to them, nothing exists inherently  and if you were to search for the imp uted 
object, it cannot be found. This includes the ‘I’ that cannot be found among its basis of 
designation. The mere ‘I’ is nothing more than that which is imputed upon —and you 
can say this —the emptiness of the mind.   
 
The implication is that when  you say  that the mind is in the nature of clear light , that 
is none other than its emptiness of true existence  or inherent existence.  The 
consciousness exists in the nature of emptiness . It does not  exist inherently but it 
does exist conventionally. You could say that the consciousness or any other 
phenomenon arises from the nature of emptiness. It is imputed as a consciousness 
because of its ability to cogni se or be aware of objects.  
 
I think perhaps this is what we can think about from the sutra perspective but the 
final explanation is the tantric explanation . From that point of view, you can then talk 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 10 of 13 about clear light  and w hen you talk about clear light , there is the objective clear light 
and the subjective clear light.  
 
 Verse 128  lists the examples of th e obje cts that are obscured.  
 Verse 129, starting from the lotus, swarm of bees and so forth, lists the obscuring 
factors given in the examples.  
 Verse 130 states the meaning of the mind  being in the nature of clear light but the 
defilements are adventitious.  
 
Verse 130  
The coverings of the afflictive emotions in the continuums of sentient 
beings,  
Because of not being related [with the nature of the mind, are 
adventitious but  have abided] beginninglessly [together with the 
element of a Superior’s  qualities.  
Howe ver the undefiled nature of the mind  
Is said to [have abided as the great pure nature without being polluted 
by those  faults] beginninglessly.  
 
The nature of the mind , the tathagata essence , is obscured by the adventitious 
defilements , but the adventitious  defilements do not abide within the nature of the 
mind. Why  is this so ? Because the adventitious defilements themselves are by nature 
empty. This is something for us to think about .  
 
We say that the tathagata essence of sentient being s has never been pol luted. Its 
nature is clear light because it has  not been polluted by the adventitious defilements.  
The defilements do not abide within the nature of the mind.   
 
Why?  Because the defilements have never resided in the nature of the mind  and they 
have never polluted the nature of the mind. A s such , the mind is in the nature of clear 
light and is by nature empty. Because of that, the defilements are said to be 
adventitious. As the defilements are adventitious , therefore all sentient beings are 
said to possess the tathagata essence.   
 
Do you see th is line of reasoning?  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Question : In the previous lesson you said that the  mind apprehending inherent 
existen ce, ignorance, doesn’t go on to enlightenment . My qualm is this: T he nature of 
the mind is clear  light. For example, when the defilements that are the seed s are 
activated , they give rise to t he apprehensions of inherent existent. So ignorance is 
actually clear and knowing. I f you say ignorance does  not go on to enlightenment , 
then you would have to s ay that certain emptiness es of the mind are not the 
tathagata essence.  
 
Answer : Ignorance doesn’t go  on to enlightenment  nor does its emptiness that is one 
entity with that ignorance go  on to enlightenment. We are not saying that the 
emptiness of ignorance  is the tathagata essence. Who sa id that?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 11 of 13  
Question:  Is ignorance a mind?  
 
Khen Rinpoch e: We would h ave to say yes.  
 
Question : Isn’t t he emptiness of ignorance also a mind?  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  Are you getting  from bad to wors e? 
 
Question:  Are t here not certai n emptiness es of the mind that are not the tathagata 
essence?  
 
Answer:  Ignorance is an affliction  that is an object of abandonment . It is abandoned 
by applying an antidote. As such , the continuum of ignorance is cut . Since the 
continuum of ignorance is sev ered before enlightenment , ignorance doesn’t go  on to 
enlightenment . If ignorance cease s, its emptin ess that is one entity with it  also  ceases. 
It also doesn’t go  on to enlightenment. It is not the tathagata essence. Therefore, you 
can say that the ignoran ce’s emptiness of true existence is not  the tathagata essence.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Verse 131  lists the nine obscurations.  
 
Verse 131  
The nine forms of defilements —(1-3) [the latencies or seeds of] 
desire, hatred, and obscuration [which are overcome by the 
exal ted wisdom of a Superior], (4) the strong arousal [or 
manifestation] of those [three poisons], (5) The level of] the 
predispositions [of ignorance which are the means of achieving 
the uncontaminated actions and the mental body in the  
continuum of a Foe Des troyer and which are to be overcome by 
the exalted wisdom of the great enlightenment], (6) the objects 
to be abandoned by the path of seeing [which obstruct a 
common being from seeing reality], (7) the objects to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation [in the continuum of a 
Learner Superior], (8) The objects to be abandoned by the 
[seven] impure [grounds which are to be overcome by the pure 
grounds],  
And (9) the defilements dependent on the pure grounds [which are 
to be overcome by the vajra -like meditativ e stabilization],  
 
These nine defilements are exemplified by the nine examples of the obscuring 
factors . In this way, they seek to show that those nine defilements are adventitious.  
 
Verse 132  
Are indicated by [the nine] examples  
Of the covering of a lot us and so forth,  
But the divisions of coverings of afflictive emotions  
Are beyond the limits of number.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 12 of 13  
If you were to expand on the afflictions  to includ e the secondary affliction s and so 
forth,  then they are  endless.  
 
In the root text itself, the nine defilements are merely enumerated  but there is no 
discussion of what the nine really are. However, i n the original commentary  
composed  by Asanga  to this Uttaratantra , there is quite an elaborate  discussion of 
these nine defilements.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
Question : Why is the term, “clear light nature ,” used instead of emptiness?  
 
Answer:  The d harmakaya  encapsulates both the object and the object p ossessor (or 
subject). In general, the t ruth body, i.e., the dharmakaya or the embodiment of truth , 
is referring to the factor of natural purity that has been separated from the 
adventitious defilements . But if you think about what the term encapsulate s, besides 
the object, the object being emptiness, you have to talk about the subject .    
 
The d harm akaya works for sentient  beings  but does e mptiness work for sentient 
beings ? 
 
(Inaudible  response from student) .  
 
When we talk about the dharmakaya that work s for sen tient beings, it has to be the 
wisdom truth body. Is the w isdom truth body the truth body or not?   
 
The dharmakay a is that factor of natural purity that has been separated from the 
adventitious defilements and its support , the wisdom truth body.  They are separate  
or different natures. The main producer or the substantial cause  for this must  exist at 
the time of the p ath, during the time of being a sentient being.  
 
From the general point of view , what is the substantial cause  or the main producer of 
the wisdom truth body? It is the last moment of a sentient being ; specifically , it is the 
uninterrupted path of the end of the continuum of a sentient being. That 
uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being directly reali ses 
emptiness . In the next moment, it becomes the wisdom truth body.  
 
Anyway , if you were to say that the substantial cause, the ma in producer , of the 
wisdom truth body, is the wisdom  that directly realizes emptiness, what is wrong  
with that ? The wisdom directly perceiving  emptiness is the substantial cause , the 
main producer  of the w isdom truth body. Do you a ccept  that ?  
 
Then  let’s bring our attention to this mind —the uninterrupted path at the end of the 
continuum of a sentient being . Is that  mind in the nature of clear light? Yes or no?  
 
(Inaudible response from student) .  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 17  
Page 13 of 13 Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah S oon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 