Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L24 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:27.949838
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 1 of 13 Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana, Chapter One: The 
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter, translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsa p Darma Rinchen © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007).  
 
Lesson 24                            18 June 2015  
 
 
Q & A. Chapter One: The Ess ence of a One Gone Thus.  Verses 144 c, d —154 : The nine 
examples of the obscured .  
 
 
Question : Are our innate afflicti ons intellectually acquired in a previous life ? I ask this 
question because otherwise , how could we be born with buddha nature and at the 
same time , have innate afflictions?  
 
It seems to me, the innate afflictions must have been intellectually acquired in a 
previous life for if they are n ot intellectually acquired, it would mean that you are 
naturally born with them  and that is inconsistent w ith being born with buddha 
nature.  
 
Answer:  When the tathagata  essence is taught, i t is said that the tathagata  essence is 
beginningless , i.e., it has no beginning.  If the tathagata  essence has no beginning, then 
you will also have to say that  a se ntient b eing also has no beginning. Y ou will not be 
able to point to a moment in time when you  can say, “This was when a sentient being 
began .”  
 
When we say that a sentient being has  no beginning, we are saying in effect that 
consciousness has no beginning. If co nsciousness has a beginning , then sentient 
beings will have a beginning  but s ince consciousness has no beginning, there  is no 
beginning to a sentient being  either .  
 
We have to think of the consciousness in terms of it being a continuum. The stream of 
cons ciousness has no beginning . If we were to p osit a beginning , there will be many 
logical fallacies that we cannot uphold . It is stated v ery clearly in text s by Dignaga  
and Dharmakirti  that consciousness cannot arise from a prior moment of matter. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 2 of 13 Consciousn ess can only arise from consciousness or a non -associated compositional 
factor, i.e., a n imprint  established by  consciousness.   
 
Following this reasoning, since the mind can only come from a prior moment of 
consciousness or from a n imprint established by c onsciousness, then as such, we will 
not be able to posit a first moment of consciousness. As such, consciousness has no 
beginning . If consciousness has no beginning, then there  is no beginning to a sentient 
being  and the innate afflictions in the continuum  of a sentient being would have no 
beginning as well. For as long as sentient beings have exist ed so the innate afflictions .  
 
It is difficult to conceive that a sentient being , the mind and the afflictions have no 
beginning but if we were to think about this logically  and apply reasoning, if we were 
to posit a beginning to a sentient being, to the mind, the innate afflictions  and so 
forth, we will run into many logical fallac ies that will make our position  untenable.   
 
As to whether innate afflictions can arise from the seeds established by the 
intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence, I don’t think so but I’m not 
sure.   
 
If you remember our earlier discussion, we said that the intellectually acquired 
apprehension of true existence and the see ds established by this apprehension  are 
posited  as path of seeing abandonments. Then what about the afflictions that arise 
through the force of those seeds  established by the intellectually acquired 
apprehension of true existence ?  Are those afflictions path of seeing abandonments 
as well ? This  is something for us to think about.  
 
Are the afflictions that arise through the force of the seeds established by the 
intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence necessarily path of seeing 
abandonments?  
 
Another way of posing this question is : Are there  afflictions that arise from the seeds 
established by the intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence that are 
path of meditation abandonments?  
 
I’m not sure whether the afflictions that arise th rough the force of the seeds 
established by the intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence are 
necessarily  path of seeing abandonments or not.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you clear about this ? If not, ask more  questions . 
 
Question:  You said that there  is no beginning to the afflictions , that they are part of 
the mental continuum . Then b uddha nature must also be part of th is continuum  at 
the same time . How can buddha nature co -exist with afflictions?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Does anybody ha ve a  better answer  for this question?  
 
Student  1(who posed the question) : For them to co -exist, the afflictions must come 
after wards . They can not always be there together with buddha nature at the same 
time . To me, the affliction s have to have a beginning. You agree that once we  reach 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 3 of 13 buddhahood, the a fflictions do  not exist anymore. They are abandoned. So in order to 
have an end, maybe there must be a beginning?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : If we were to take up your position , then there was a time when we 
were pure and somehow we got afflic ted. So we were buddha s first and then we got 
afflicted.  
  
Student  1: If my position was incorrect and your position is right —you posit that the 
two, the afflictions and buddha nature , must exist at the same time —how is that 
consistent? I’m happy to accept  that but please explain to me how it  is consistent that 
buddha nature and afflictions  can co-exist , when one means the other doesn’t exist ?  
 
Student 2 : I think the text say s that the tathagata  essence is actually the emptiness of 
sentient beings ’ mind. So tathagata  essence refers to the emptiness of sentient 
beings ’ consciousness es. It is possible to have a consciousness that apprehends 
inherent existence , that the appearance of inherent existence appear s to that 
consciousness and at the same time it is e mpty. So the tathagata  essence can exist 
along with a mind that apprehends inherent existence. To me , it is possible for that to 
exist .  
 
I’m trying to think of the story of how when sentient beings first appear, they are 
made of light  and their minds are clear but after a while, they begin to have more and 
more afflictions and acquire a  coarse body. This was how it was described to me. At 
least , I remember  that they became coarser and coarser.  
 
I think the minds of sentient beings  actually have  the appear ance of inherent 
existence from the very beginning . It is a mind of defilement  and its emptiness is the 
tathagata  essence. That  is my contention.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: That sounds good.  
 
Student 2:  Thank you.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  You said that a sentient being necess arily has the appearance of true 
existence since beginningless lifetime s but there must be a reason for t hat 
appearance of true existence . If you assert that there is  the appearance of true 
existence , then you must posit  that there is an apprehension of tr ue existence  that 
must have been there since beginningless lifetime s too. Is that what you are saying?  
 
As long as one is a sentient being, definitely , there are appearances of phenomena to 
that sentient being . Whatever appears  necessarily appears as truly  existent . For 
sentient beings like ourselves who have not entered the path , as long as there is an 
appearance of true existence, there is necessar ily an apprehension of true existen ce, 
i.e., the grasping at phenomena to be truly existent.  
 
From this, we can say that the innate afflictions have always accompanied the mind  
for as long as the mind has existed . As such, since the mind has no beginning, 
therefore, you can not posit a beginning to the innate afflictions. So the innate 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 4 of 13 afflictions have no beginni ng. But although the innate afflictions have always 
accompan ied the mind, the y have never abided in the nature of the mind.  
 
Khen Rinp oche: I think that i s the best answer. I don’t know. I can’t think of anything 
better than that . 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
THE NINE EXA MPLES OF THE OBSCURED  
 
With regard to the nine example s exemplifying that which is obscured , in meaning , 
‘that which is obscured ’ refers to the tathagata  essence.   
 
Verse 144  c, d 
Because of having three natures, the basic constituent  
Is qualitatively simi lar with [the nine examples of] a Buddha so forth.  
 
“Because of having three  natures ”: This is related to Verse 27 where three reaso ns 
were given to show that the t athagata essence exist s in all sentient beings.  
 
Verse 27  
Because a perfect Buddha’s body i s pervasive,  
Because suchness is without differentiation,  
And because a [Buddha] lineage exists, all embodied  
Are always in possession of a Buddha essence.  
 
Here the verse is establishing that the tathagata essence exists in all sentient beings 
from the pe rspective of the result, the nature and the cause . What are the three 
reasons that show that sentient beings possess the tathagata essence?  The reasons 
are that : 
1. Sentient beings are suitable receptacles  to be engaged by the enlightened 
activities of the dharmakaya .  
2. The suchness of the s entient beings ’ mind is not of  a different nature from the 
dharmakaya . 
3. Sentient beings possess in them the potential to transform into a buddha’s body .  
 
“Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive ”: Here it is saying that  sentient beings 
are suitable receptacle s for the enlightened activities of the dharmakaya.  The 
explanation of  what the dharmakaya  is will follow.   
 
Verse 145  
The [three] natures of this [essence] —the Doctrine Body of self -
arisen exalted wisdom,  
The [un changeable] suchness, and the lineage [for achieving 
Buddhahood]  
Are to be known [respectively] through the [first] three examples,  
One [example, gold,] and the [remaining] five [examples].  
 
 There are three examples that correspond to the first nature —“the Doctrine Body 
of self -arisen exalted wisdom.”  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 5 of 13  One example corresponds  to the second nature —“the [unchangeable] suchness.”  
 Then the re are five examples that correspond  to the third nature —“the lineage 
[for achieving Buddhahood].”  
 
THE NINE EXAMPLES OF T HE OBSCURED  
 The Three Natures  The Nine Examples  
First nature       “The Doctrine Body of 
self-arisen exalted 
wisdom .” 1. A buddha  
2. Honey    
3. Kernel  
Second 
nature  “The [unchangeable ] 
suchness .” 4. Gold  
Third nature     “The lineage  [for 
achieving Buddhahood] .” 5. Buried t reasur y of jewels  
6. Sprout  with capacity to grow into a tree   
7. Image of a buddha  
8. A baby who will become a wheel -turning king  
9. Precious g olden image  
 
Three examples corresponding to the dharmakaya  
Let’s look at the three  examples  corresponding to th e dharmakaya . The dharmakaya  
(“the Doctrine Body”) is known to have two aspects : 
1. The dharmakaya of reali sation  that refers to the wisdom directly realising 
emptiness.  
2. The dharmakaya of teaching s that has two divisions:  
 interpretive sutra s 
 definitive sutras  
 
Verse 146  
The Doctrine Body is to be known as having two aspects —  
The very undefiled element of [a Superior’s] qualities [the actual 
realizational Doctrine Body that is the object of the exalted 
wisdom of individual insight],  
And the teaching, causally  concordant with [realizing] that, of the 
mode  
Of the profound [emptiness] and the mode of the various [vast 
conventionalities such as the grounds and paths that are taught 
in accordance with the interests of trainees —the imputed 
Doctrine Body, the verbal ized doctrine].  
 
“The very undefiled element of [a Superior’s] qualities [the actual realizational 
Doctrine Body that is the object of the exalted wisdom of individual insight]” i s 
referring to the dharmakaya  of reali sation , the wisdom that directly reali ses the 
element that has been separated from the defilements.   
 
The Buddha taught what he reali sed. He reali sed emptiness directly and base d on 
that reali sation, he taught . That subject matter forms the main body of the definitive 
sutra s while the sutras th at teach conventionalities are posited as the interpretative  
sutras . 
  
Verse 147  
Since the [realizational Doctrine Body] is beyond the world,  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 6 of 13 An example [capable of illustrating it] is not observed in the world.  
Therefore [the body of] a One Gone Thus an d the basic constituent  
Are indicated to be similar  
 
Verse 148  
The teaching of the mode of the subtle profundity [of emptiness]  
Is like the single [sweet and delicious] taste of honeys.  
The teaching of the mode of the various aspects of [method]  
Is to be known as like [the various] kernels [of grains dwelling] in  
     the covering of various [husks].  
 
There are three  examples  exemplifying the dharmakaya:  
1. The body of a Buddha  
2. Honey  
3. The kernel of grain  in its husk  
 Of the three examples, the body of a Budd ha exemplifies the dharmakaya  of 
reali sation.  
 “The single [sweet and delicious] taste of honey s” exemplif ies the definitive 
sutra s. Just as honey is always sweet, likewise  the subject  matter of the definitive 
sutra s, the nature of emptiness , is always the  same . It doesn’t change.  
 The interpretative sutra s are sutra s whose main subject matter are the 
conventionalities , i.e., the whole variety and diversity of phenomena . The example 
of the kernel of grain in its husk exemplifies the interpretative sutra s. Why? 
Although many different conventionalities are taught in the interpretative sutras, 
essentially they  are all methods leading to the reali sation of emptiness. After 
peeling away the husk , at its heart, w hat you find is a grain. Likewise , although 
many di fferent conventionalities are taught in the interpretative sutras, 
essentially they are all methods leading to the reali sation of emptiness .   
 
Think about th is evolution : 
 One achieves the dharmakaya of reali sation, the wisdom truth body .  
 What do the enli ghtened activities  of that dharmakaya  do? It teaches the Dharma 
to sentient beings.  
 Both the interpretive and the definitive sutras are revealed and taught to sentient 
beings. These are the enlightened activities of the wisdom truth body , the 
condition fo r the sutras to be taught.  
 Then by depending o n the meaning of those sutras , sentient beings put them into 
practice.  
In that sense, that is how the enlightened activities of the dharmakaya engage  
sentient beings. The enlightened activities of the Buddha’ s speech i s said to be able to 
engage any sentient being.  
 
Verse 27  
Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive,  
Because suchness is without differentiation,  
And because a [Buddha] lineage exists, all embodied  
Are always in possession of a Buddha essence . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 7 of 13 “Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive ”: T he enlightened activities of the 
dharmakaya engage sent ient beings b ut we have to think about how  this is done . Do 
they engage all sentient beings?  It is a fact  that if one is a sentient being, one 
necessa rily has th e capacity  or potential to be engaged by the enlightened activities 
of the dharmakaya. This capacity to be so engaged exists from the side of the sentient 
being.  
 
One example corresponding to suchness  
In verse 27, the second line sa ys, “Because  suchness is without differentiation .” What 
is suchness exemplified by? The next verse is the example of gold that exemplifies 
that second nature , suchness.  
 
Verse  149  
[The suchness which is] the nature [of phenomena] is [always] 
changeless [such that ev en though it appears to be related with 
afflictive emotions, there is no change in its own entity just as 
gold does not change by falling into filth],  
And it is [naturally] virtuous [and supreme just as gold is beautiful 
and valuable, and in another way, it is virtuous in the sense that 
just as gold is fit to be crafted into adornments, so virtue is 
generated when suchness is observed], and [the entity of the 
basic constituent] is pure [just as gold is pure of defilement].  
 
How does gold exemplify the seco nd nature , suchness ? The entity of gold does not 
change and  by itself, it does not rust. It will never change its nature. Gold will always 
be gold  and it can be shaped into different things —ornaments, jewellery and so forth .  
 
Gold exemplifies the suchness  that i s the tathagata essence . In meaning , the tathagata 
essence —the suchness of the mind —is by nature pure  and would never change into 
something else. The mind that reali ses the suchness of the mind is by nature 
virtuous.  
 
Five examples corresponding to  the lineage  
Next are the exemplifications correspond ing with the lineage. There are five 
examples that exemplify the lineage : two exemplifying the entity or nature  of the 
lineage and three examples exemplify ing the capacity  or potential  of the lineage .  
 
The two examples that exemplify the entity of the lineage are the examples of “a 
treasur e [that naturally remains under the ground]” and “ a fruit tree [that gradually 
grows with exertion].”  
 
Verse 150  
Like a treasure [that naturally remains under the grou nd] and a 
fruit tree [that  gradually grows with exertion]  
The lineage is to be known as having two aspects —  
[The pure element of a Superior’s qualities] that naturally abides 
since beginningless [time]  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 8 of 13 And [the developmental lineage of] supreme virtue [ newly] 
aroused [through the exertion of hearing and so forth that are 
concerned with the naturally abiding lineage].  
 
With regard to the entity of the buddha lineage, there are two:  
1. the naturally abiding lineage  
2. the developmental lineage  
 
The naturally abi ding lineage has always been there  by nature whereas the 
developmental lineage arises through activities such as hearing, reflection and so 
forth.  
 
The naturally abiding lineage is likened to a treasure  that refers here to naturally 
occurring minerals , precious stones , gold  and so forth that are not man -made. It is 
from these natural  resources a s the bas e from which other kinds of precious 
substances can come about . For example, gold comes from gold mine s and diamond s 
from diamond mine s. Likewise , the natu rally abiding lineage is the basis that makes 
the achievement of the ten qualities of a buddha such as the ten powers  possible. The 
tathagata essence is the basis that makes it possible for all the qualities of 
buddhahood  to be achieved.  
 
The developmental  lineage  is likened to a fruit tree  that has the potential to bear 
fruit. If you carefully nurture a fruit tree  by giving it water, fertilizer  and so forth , 
then it can grow and one day it would give you a bountiful harvest of fruits. Likewise, 
if we caref ully nurture  the developmental lineage —the capacity in us to become a 
buddha —by exerting ourselves in hearing, reflection and meditation , these qualities 
will increase more and more and we will become a buddha.    
 
Next are the  three examples that exemplify  the capacity  or potential of the lineage.  
 
Verse 151  
It is asserted that the Three Bodies of a Buddha  
Are attained through these two causal lineages;  
Through the first, the first body [the Doctrine Body, is attained];  
Through the second, the latter tw o [Bodies of Complete Enjoyment 
and Emanation are attained].  
 
In th e context  here , the three bodies are:  
1. the nature body  
2. the enjoyment body  
3. the emanation body  
 The nature body is achieved in dependence upon the naturally abiding lineage. 
How does that happe n? The naturally abiding lineage is the mind ’s emptiness of 
true existence. By taking that as an object of  meditation, focu ssing and meditating 
on it , one accumulates the collection of wisdom . In dependen ce on that, one 
achieves the nature body.  
 By dependi ng on the developmental lineage, the complete enjoyment body and 
the emanation body are attained. With one’s practices conjoined with love and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 9 of 13 compassion, one accumulates the collection of merit  in dependence on which one 
achieves the two form bodies , the enjoyment body and the emanation body.  
 
Verse 152  
[The natural purity and] beauty [of good qualities] of the Nature 
Body  
Is to be known as like an image [made from] a precious substance,  
For [that which abides] naturally [from the start] is not made 
[thro ugh new exertion]  
And the qualities [of the powers and so forth] are a treasure of 
precious substances. [A statue made of precious substance does 
not depend upon its own compositional activity.]  
 
The example here is that of a statue of a buddha that is mad e from precious 
substance s. With respect to the precious substance, it could be gold or anything that 
occur s naturally and not newly fabricated. By using this naturally occurring precious 
substance , one can then transform that substance into a buddha statu e that fulfils  the 
hope s of sentient beings. Likewise , the nature body does not come about through 
causes and conditions. Nevertheless , the nature body is beneficial for sentient beings.   
 
In V erse 153 , the first half describ es the example correspond ing to the enjoyment 
body and the second half describe s the example correspond ing to the emanation 
body.  
 
Verse 153  
Because of possessing the great [wealth of] the kingdom of the 
Great [Vehicle] doctrine [of the profound and the vast,   
The Complete Enjoyment B ody which] completely enjoys [or makes 
use of the Great Vehicle doctrine] is like a Universal Monarch 
[who controls the glorious wealth of the seven precious 
substances and the four continents].  
Because of having the nature of a reflection [of appearances  in 
accordance with whatever will tame trainees]  
An Emanation [Body] is like a gold image.  
 
Just like “a U niversal Monarch, ” a wheel -turning king exerts control over his kingdom 
and is able to enjoy all that he controls. In the same way, the enjoyment bod y (the 
sambhogakaya) completely enjoys the Mahayana teachings.  It is useful to know that 
the enjoyment body possesses the five certainties:  
1. the c ertainty of abode : the  complete enjoyment body abides only in A kanishtha . 
2. the c ertainty of entourage : the entou rage of the complete enjoyment body is 
necessarily made up of Mahayana superiors  only . 
3. the c ertainty of Dharma : the complete enjoyment body teaches only the 
Mahayana Dharma.  
4. the c ertainty of time : the complete enjoyment body exists as long as samsara 
remai ns. 
5. the c ertainty of body : the complete enjoyment body possesses the thirty -two 
signs and eighty exemplifications.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 10 of 13 As the complete enjoyment body remains as long as samsara exist s, this means that 
the complete enjoyment body does not show the aspect of pa ssing away into the 
sorrowless state. Here t he emanation body is likened to “a gold image ” of a buddha. 
Gold can be fashioned into different things , i.e., it can appear as a statue  or jewel lery 
and so forth. In essence, the emanation body is not of a disti nct nature from the 
dharmakaya  but it appears in different form s to trainees according to their 
disposition and capacity.  
 
EXAMPLES EXEMPLIFYIN G THE LINEAGE  BODIES OF THE BUDDHA  ATTAINED  
The entity of the lineage  A treasur e (exemplifying the 
naturally abi ding lineage).  Nature body .  
A fruit tree  that has the 
potential to bear fruit 
(exemplifying the 
developmental lineage).  Complete enjoyment body & the  
emanation body .  
The capacity of the 
lineage  A statue made of precious 
gems .     Nature body . 
A baby with the potential to 
become a wheel -turning king .  Complete enjoyment body .  
 
A go lden image of a buddha.  Emanation body . 
 
Next is a discussion about the consciousness that perceive s the basic element, the 
tathagata essence , i.e., the person who real ises the basic constituent.  
 
Verse 154  
The ultimate [essence] of self -arisen [Buddhas, spontaneous and 
uncompounded]  
Is to be realized through just faith [by common beings, Hearers, Solitary 
Realizers, and Bodhisattvas who have newly entered their vehicl e and is not 
realized by them just as it is.  
For example] the blazing light of the disc of the sun  
Is not seen by the eyeless.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
LAMRIM MEDITATION PROGRAMME  
 
There has been quite a long break  since we last talked about the lam-rim meditation  
programme .  
 
For those who signed up for the programme last year , up to this point in time, I guess  
you would have  completed the meditation s on the path shared with the person of 
small capacity. I really think that the se meditation topics in the context o f the person 
of small capacity are extremely important , especially for us , beginners.  
 
If we relate this to the topic of the lineage or buddha nature, then simply possessing  
the lineage in itself is insufficient . Although we may possess the lineage , if we  were to  
leave things as they are, that is not enough. What we have to do is to awaken or 
activate that lineage and that is done through hearing, reflection and meditation.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 11 of 13 Accumulating merit and purifying the mind of obscuration s and negativities become  
extremely important . Otherwise, there is no way to awaken the lineage. In order for 
one to have a really good practice of accumulating merit and purifying obscurations, 
this very much depends on the quality of one’s refuge in the Three Jewels . If one’s 
refuge doesn’t really hit the mark , it is difficult to have a good practice of 
accumulating merit and purifying the mind of obscuration s. 
 
Refuge is essentially faith in the Three Jewels . If you have strong refuge , then you 
would have faith , devotion and tru st in the working s of karma and its effect. When 
one really ha s faith and a strong conviction in karma and its effects , that make s a big 
difference to the quality of one’s practice of abandoning negativities and cultivating 
virtue.  
 
If you have practi sed well, all the  negative discursive thoughts , worries, fears and 
frustrations related to the  attachment to and preoccupation with the a ffairs of this 
life will naturally weaken and subside. Only when that happens is there the mental 
space to reflect on and c onsider one’s future li fe. Gradually , one’s interest in one’s 
future life w ill become stronger and stronger.   
 
In order for real refuge to arise in our heart, first we must be aware of the suffering 
that we would endure in the lower realms —the hell  realms,  the hungry ghost and 
animal realms. We have to feel th is certainty , “I have accumulated all these non -
virtues . Each instance of th ese non -virtues will have four results as explained in the 
lam-rim such as th e fruitional result of a definite rebirth in the  hells, the hungry 
ghost or animal realm s.”  
 
We have to feel that we have accumulated the causes of definitely going to these 
realms. O nce we are there, the suffering is unbelievabl y terrible  and w e have  to 
experience those suffering s for a very long time . If we don’t think about these points  
and if we are unable to feel that fear, then it is very difficult for us to have real 
reliance on the Three Jewels , entrusting ourselves to the m. It is not possible.   
 
So we must think of the suffering s that we will e ndure in the lower realms in the 
future and how they will definitely happen to us because of the certainty of the 
karma that we had accumulated as causes. There must be this sense of worr y and 
fear without which there is  no reason for us to seek protection . With that worr y and 
fear , then we will be motivated to entrust ourselves to and take wholehearted refuge 
in the Three Jewels , especially if we are convinced that the y definitely have the 
power to protect us from those sufferings . We need th e conviction t hat the Three 
Jewels can do the job . Then pure refuge can arise.   
 
It is not as if you haven’t heard all th is before . You know all this. Y ou have already 
studie d all these  points . This is just a reminder.  
 
Prior to the reflection of the suffering of the l ower realms, first we have to reflect on 
how precious is the opportunity we have with our human life of freedom s and 
endowments. We have to reflect on how precious it is and how difficult it is to obtain  
it. A t the same time, it is not going to last  and it  can come to an end very soon . When 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 12 of 13 the end of this life comes, when we die, there  are only two ways  to go in terms of our 
rebirth —going up or going down.  
 
After that , we think of the suffering s that we will have to experience if we are born in 
the lower r ealms.  We think about the certainty that our non -virtues will ripen in the 
form of suffering in the lower realms . That will bring about fear and prompt us to 
take refuge in the Three Jewels .  
 
When we have a good practice of taking refuge in the Three Jew els, we will also lead 
our life according to the laws of karma and its effects. Then we will be able to do a 
proper practice of abandoning non -virtue and cultivating virtue.  
 
We need a reasonable practice of all of these topics before we can  have a reason able 
chance of activating  or awakening our buddha nature.  
 
You shouldn’t think that there is an end to meditating on the topics on the path 
shared with the person of small capacity. These topics are very important as they 
culminat e in faith in the Three Je wels and faith and conviction in karma .  
 
As we have discussed before, faith is so important. We need faith  without which it is 
very  difficult to acquire any qualities . When we have faith in the Three Jewels , then 
we would have a very good practice of accu mulating merit and purifying our mind of 
obscuration s. If we are able to do these practices well, then something positive  can 
happen to us .   
 
As I said earlier, if you reflect well on the topics in the path shared with the person of 
small capacity, the many negative discursive thoughts, distractions, worries, fears, 
frustration, anxiet ies and so forth related to the preoccupation with the happiness of 
this life  will naturally subside  and weaken . This is quite obvious. We can experience 
it for ourselves and  see it happening in others .  
 
This in turn gives  us the mental space to think , “Perhaps there is really a point to 
practi sing the Dharma .” We have to feel this for ourselves. We have to see why we 
need to practi se the D harma. We have to see the point  of d oing so because when we 
don’t see the point ourselves , it is very difficult to try to practi se Dharma.   
 
After training the mind in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity , 
then one trains in the path that is shared with the person of med ium capacity.  
 
Why is there a need to progress in that way? Because even if one feels that , “I am 
definitely  going to get a good rebirth  and I will get a good rebirth ,” one has to 
understand that no matter how many and whatever good rebirths one gets, they are 
still samsaric rebirth s.  
 
The nature of all samsaric rebirth s is that they will never trans cend  the nature of 
suffering.  There are many meditation s on the different kinds of sufferings such as 
the general suffering of cyclic existence and so forth.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 24  
Page 13 of 13 Then o ne needs to understand the causes of cyclic existence —what the different 
kinds of afflictions  are, how they a rise in us , how they mot ivate the accumulation of 
karma and how we circle in samsara due to karma and afflictions.  
 
The end result is to develop th e wish , “I better get myself out of this cyclic existence . I 
must free myself from samsara .” Then you develop a yearning for freedom and for 
liberation. This is how we should reflect on the path that is shared with the person of 
the medium capaci ty by  following the outlines of the stages of the paths.  
 
For those of you who are still in th e meditation program me, you can reflect and 
meditate on the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity for the next 
few months.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven.  Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 
 