Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L01 final3.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:45.774372
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsab  Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsa p Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007)  
 
Lesson 1                    3 February 2015  
 
 
Why we need to understand dependent  arising. Story of Arya Asanga. Meaning of the title of 
the root text. Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus. Verse 1.  
 
 
WHY WE NEED TO UNDERSTAND DEPENDENT ARISING  
 
In Dependent Arising: A Praise of the Buddha, Lama Tsongkhapa sa id: 
 
Having seen th e truth , you taught it .  
Those following you  will leave all troubles far behind ,  
for they will cut to the root of every fault.   
 
In this composition, Lama Tsongkhapa  is praising the Buddha as some one who s ees 
directly both the ultimate and conv entional na ture of all phenomena and ha s 
understood correctly the principles of dependent arising (or dependent origination ). 
He praises the Buddha for this excellent presentati on o f dependent arising and, in 
particular , his detailed explanation of subtle dependent a rising.  
 
In the verse quoted above, Lama Tsongkhapa  is saying this, “If I w ere to follow 
correctly what you , the Buddha , has taught in relation to subtle dependent arising, if I 
were to listen to the teachings on this subject, reflect on their meaning and 
familiari se my mind with whatever I have ascertained, then I would be able t o leave 
all my troubles behind.”  “Troubles ” here include  the suffering of all future lives ; for 
example, being reborn in the hells and so forth . It also  includes all the suffering of 
cyclic existence.  
 
So Lama Tsongkhapa  is telling us that if  someone were  to follow correctly the 
teachings of subtle dependent arising and reali se them , then  she would  be able to 
free herself of  all problems and sufferings . Why is this so ? For she “will cut to the root 
of every fault .” That is, when someone is able  to understand correctly the meaning of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 2 of 10 subtle dependent arising, she will be able to eradicate the root of every single 
problem, the ignorance that mistakenly apprehend s a self.   
 
This is som ething that we must understand  for ourselves. This is the reason why we 
listen to the teachings, why we familiari se our minds with the  teachings , why we 
reflect on the teachings and why we meditate on the teachings .  
 
In order to reflect and then meditate on the  teachings, first we must  know what the 
teachings  are. We do this through hearing the teachings.   
 
The root of every single problem , difficulty and suffering, such as the suffering s of 
birth, sickn ess, aging, death and so forth , lies in our ignorance , our apprehension of a 
self. The only antidote to this ignorance is to reali se emptiness by understanding 
subtle dependent arising. Through  our underst anding of subtle dependent arising , 
we arrive at the reali sation of emptiness , the mode of apprehending the person and 
reality that is completely opposite to and directly contradict s the mode of 
apprehension of our ignorance . When this happens, our ignorance, our mistaken 
apprehension of a self , can be weakened over time.   
 
This is an essential point that we have to sort out for ourselves . We  have to think 
about it . We have to understand how  the realisation of emptiness that is achieved by 
understanding subtle dependent arising  contradict s ignorance directly . When we are 
able to see that for ourselves, then we will f eel that there can really be an end to all 
our problems . There can be an end to our samsara. When we then talk about nirvana 
or liberation from all suffering, we f eel that such a thing exists and is really possible .  
 
As Lama Tsongkhapa  said,  
 
Hav ing seen the truth, you taught it.  
Those following you will leave all troubles far behind ,  
for they will cut to the root of every fault.   
 
This  is the main goal  behind our learn ing the teachings of the Buddha and why we 
reflect and put them  into practice , i.e., to understand th e crucial point s of subtle 
dependent arising . Through that we can overcome all our faults and problems.  This is 
really a very important point .  
 
In order to  be able to see for ourselves the truth behind th is verse, we need a 
reasona ble understanding of dependent arising and, in particular, a reasonabl e 
understanding of subtle dependent a rising. We need to have some experience , some 
feeling internally  of how , through an understanding of subtle dependent arising, 
there is at least a sl ight weakening of our ignorance. When we have some experience  
of th is, then enthusiasm will arise and that will spur us on to continu e our quest on 
this path.  
 
With such an experience , we will develop a very special kind of faith and trust in the 
Buddha.  So w e really need to taste and feel the teachings for ourselves . This can only 
come about through reflection. Once you get some experience and have tasted the 
teachings  in this way , then the enthusiasm  and yearning for the teachings will 
naturally arise. Until you have tasted the teaching s, no matter how much study ing or 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 3 of 10 reflection you may have done , it is quite difficult to have a sustained enthusiasm to 
carry on with your practice. So this is a very important  point . You really have to taste 
the teachings for yourself  and that has to come from reflecti ng on the teachings.  
 
If we were to reflect well on the meaning of this verse , it is said that, “Those following 
you will leave all troubles behind ,” i.e., we will gradually leave all our problems far 
behind  when we have a taste  of or an experience of subtle dependent arising.  
 
Why is this so ? Because th e understanding of subtle dependent arising is the only  
antidote to our ignorance, the apprehension of a self . This is the root of every single 
problem . We ne ed to think about this because without thinking about it, we will not 
see how th is is so. The more we think about it, the more we will come to see how th is 
is so . Then we will come to reali se that  in this world, only the Buddh a—and nobody 
else —had taught d ependent arising .  
 
Lama Tsongkhapa  continues ,  
 
Those , however , outside your teachings,  
though they practice long and hard,  
are those who beckoned back faults,  
for they are welded to view s of self.    
 
There are many rel igious traditions in this world , each with their own founders . 
Many of them teach people to be ethical. There are instructions or advice from the se 
religious traditions to avoid harming others through the practice of giving up the ten 
non-virtues. There are also some religious traditions that teach the achievement of 
various elevated state s of concentration and so forth.   
 
Although this is the case, if we  were to think about this deeply , practi sing these 
teachings alone and achieving those various practices  really do not bring about much 
benefit . Such practices alone do nothing at all to our ignorance. They do not harm the 
ego or our ignorance at all . No matter what we do,  as long as the ego  or our 
ignorance , which is our mistaken apprehension of a self, is still there and is not 
harm ed, since ignorance is the root of all the other misconceptions, faults and 
mistakes,  then our faults will always be there. We will always possess faults and we 
will always make mistakes.  In fact, when we are not careful, sometimes these so -
called practices seem  to only increase our ignorance  and our ego.   
 
If one doesn’t understand  well the presen tation of dependent origination , then what 
will happen? As Lama Tsongkhapa  said, “… though they practice long and hard , /are 
those who beckoned back faults .” Such pract itioners may be very sincere, try ing very 
hard and work ing at whatever  practices for a very long time  but the se practices will 
only bring back faults over and over again. Why? Because they are still “welded to 
views of self.”  
  
Then Lama Tsongkhapa  goes on  to say ,  
 
Ah! When the wise sees the difference,  
how could they not revere you  
from the very depths of their hearts ! 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 4 of 10 As a Buddhist, we have devotion  and faith in and respect for Shakyamuni Buddha, the 
founder of the  Dharma of this world . But we should understand  and see for ourselves 
why he deserves such respect . Why is he so different from founders of other religious 
traditions?  What makes him so special ? What makes him  stand out?   
 
When you think about his presentation o f subtle dependent arising, you  will then  
come to understand that the Buddha was not someone who simply taught a path that 
led to a temporary elimination of faults. The Buddha was someone who has shown 
the path to the total and permanent eradication of all faults and mistakes through th e 
eradication of the root of those faults and mistakes.  Lama Tsongkhapa  is saying that 
the wise who understand th ose points that I ha d just brought up are the ones who 
would respect the Buddha from the very depths of their hearts.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
There is a collection of texts called the f ive treati ses that were attributed to Maitreya 
Buddha. The text that we are going to study is one of these treatises called the 
Uttaratantra  or the Sublime Continuum .  
 
Before Shakyamuni Buddha manifested appear ing in this w orld, in the pure land of 
Tushita, he enthroned Maitreya Buddha as his regent. After enthroning Maitreya 
Buddha as his regent, he then manifested being born in this world , achieving 
enlightenment and so forth.  
 
In the future, Maitreya Buddha , the fifth of  the 1000  buddhas , will descend in to this 
world during this fortunate eon.  According to some scholars, they assert that 
Maitreya is a buddha  while  other s assert that Maitreya is a tenth ground bodhisattva.   
 
How did the five treati ses attributed to Maitrey a appear in this world? These 
teachings were made available in this world through Arya Asanga. About 900 years 
after the parinirvana of Shakyamuni Buddha, Arya Asanga appeared in this world . He 
received these teaching s directly from Maitreya Buddha, and it was him who 
disseminated these teachings in this world. Arya Asanga was also the trailblazer of 
the Mind Only School.  
 
STORY OF ARYA ASANGA  
 
I will tell you a short story about Arya Asanga. When Arya Asanga was born, he was 
taken care of primarily  by his mother . His mother taught him the various traditional 
arts and sciences.  
 
One day , he asked his mother , “What does my father do?”   
 
His mother told him , “The purpose of my giving birth to you is not for you to follow in 
your father’s footsteps . Rather my  motivation is for you  to help with the teachings of 
the Buddha because the se teachings are in decline . I hope you will bring extensive 
benefit to the teachings of the Buddha .” His mother then encouraged  him to give up 
the lay life and become a monk.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 5 of 10 It is said that the mother of Arya Asanga was not an ordinary person . She was 
some one who was  blessed and guided by Chenrezig. She wanted to revive the 
Buddha’s teachings that were in decline . At that time, b ecause of the  prevailing social 
norms , on the basis  of being a woman , she knew she wouldn’t be able to do much for 
the teachings of the Buddha. Therefore she thought of giving birth to a son who could 
work for the teachings of the Buddha. With that motivation, she got married to a 
person of royal lineage a nd gave birth to Arya Asanga.   
 
Arya Asanga grew up , took full ordination  and became a gelong . He then engaged in 
the study of the teachings for five years. It was said that  every year, he was able to 
internalise 100,000 verses of the teachings. He was not only able to internali se the 
words of the se verses but also the ir meaning s.  
 
Arya Asanga then engaged in hearing and reflecti ng on the teachings of the Buddha, 
focussing primarily  on the three scriptural collect ions , the Tripitaka. In particular, he 
had great interest in wanting to understand the extremely difficult points o f the 
teachings o n the perfection of wisdom , in particular, the hidden meaning of the 
Perfection of Wisdom  sutras . He really wanted to understand those teachings .  
 
He decided to rely on a particular buddha  that  will help him to achieve his wish. He 
checked and discovered that if he was to engage in and accomplish the practi ce of 
Maitreya Buddha , he would be able to receive the teachings that will allow him to 
fathom the extremely diffi cult to fathom meaning of  the Perfection of Wisdom sutras .  
 
It is said that he entered into retreat for twelve years focus sing on Maitreya Buddha.  
Many of you may have heard of this story. After the first three years, not to mention 
seeing Maitreya Buddha , he didn’t even get any sign of having some contact with 
Maitreya Buddha . He got discouraged and decided to end his retreat. But something 
happened that made him enter into retreat again. But t he s ame thing happened after 
the sixth year  and the ninth year . Finally , at the end of the twelfth year, not only had 
he not seen Maitreya Buddha, he had not even achieved any good sign s. So he was 
very discouraged and decided to give up. Because he had not gotten any sign of 
seeing Maitreya Buddha  after twelve years  in retreat , he ended his retreat.  
 
One day, he saw a dog that was suffering from a serious injury  with  its wound 
infested with maggots. He generated great compassion for th at dog. As a result of 
generating great compassion for th at sick dog, he purified much of his negativities 
and obscurations . There and then, that sick dog suddenly appeared as Maitreya 
Buddha.  As a result of the purification of his negativities and obscurations due to his 
great compassion arising for th e sick dog, in place of the sick d og, he saw Maitreya 
Buddha.  
 
When he saw Maitreya Buddha, he told Maitreya Buddha , “I tried  so hard for twelve 
years . Where were you? I didn’t even see you.”  When Arya Asanga said this to 
Maitreya Buddha , he wep t because  he was so discouraged.  
 
Maitreya Buddha said to him , “No matter how much rain may fall on the ground, if 
there is no seed, nothing will grow. You  did not see me  during those twelve years 
because of your obscurations . In fact , I was there all along. Because of your great 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 6 of 10 compassion arising  for that sick dog, your obscurations were purified and now you 
are able to see me.”  
 
Arya Asanga had been in retreat for twelve years . He had endured much hardship 
through his meditation s and recitation s and that, c ombined with  the arising of great 
compas sion for the sick dog , the obscurations that prevented him from seeing  
Maitreya Buddha  were finally purified.  
  
Maitreya Buddha asked him , “Now that you see me, what do you want from me?”  
 
Arya Asanga replied, “My wish is to disseminate and to spread the  Mahayana 
teachings. ” 
 
Maitreya Buddha told Arya Asanga , “If that  is what you want, hold on to my robes.”  
 
Arya Asanga held on to the robes of Maitreya Buddha  who then took him to the pure 
land of Tushita. In some accounts, it is said that Arya Asa nga sta yed in the Tushita 
pure land for fifty human years . Another account states that he was there for twenty -
five human years. But whatever the case may be, whether it was  fifty years or 
twenty -five years , during that time, he listened to teachings from Maitrey a Buddha, 
particular ly the five treatises of Maitreya  Buddha . He listened to those teachings and 
was able to retain all those teachings in his mind . During that time, it was said that he 
also accomplished the attainment of the dharani of non -forgetfulness.   
 
Khen Rinpoche: We need that ! 
 
Arya Asanga then came back to this world .  Gradually h e wrote  down the teachings 
that he had heard from Maitreya Buddha and then disseminated them in this world. 
These five treatises from Maitreya Buddha clarified the hidde n meaning of  the 
Perfection of Wisdom sutras.  
 
During the lifetime of Arya Asanga, there was a king who recite d the Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutra  daily . When h e heard about Arya Asanga , he thought , “If he is really an 
arya being , a superior being, he must be  able to read the mind s of others. Let me 
check him out.”  
 
He summoned many teachers and a great assembly of Sangha . He gathered them 
with the intention of checking whether Arya Asanga was clairvoyant and able to read 
the mind s of others. The king thought , “If Arya Asanga could read the mind s of 
others , I would treat him well. Otherwise, I would put him down. ”   
 
The king had a buffalo painted white and locked it up in the house. In a golden vase, 
he filled the bottom half of the vase with excrement  and all kinds of filth  and the 
upper half with honey. Then he asked Arya Asanga , “What  is in the house and what is 
in this vase?” There is an account of how Arya Asanga answered the king. The king 
also asked Arya Asanga questions from the Perfection of Wisdom Su tra.   
 
The king was very i mpressed with Arya Asanga’s answers  and developed great faith 
in Arya Asanga . From then  on, Arya Asanga became very famous.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 7 of 10 The five treatises of Maitreya  Buddha were  also disseminated widely . There are also 
histor ical accounts  of Arya Asanga  going to Central India . There are account s of him 
founding many Dharma communities and monasteries and so forth. In the later part 
of his life, he also became the abbot of Nalanda monastery for twelve years.  
 
One of the lessons that we can  draw from this short account of Arya Asanga’s life is 
that if we really want to achieve something —in this case , understanding the 
Buddha’s teachings  well —then you need to work very hard  and e ndure the 
difficulties  that arise . This is one lesson that we sh ould draw from his life story.  
 
The fact that we have this opportunity to meet these five treatises of Maitreya 
Buddha , such as the Uttaratantra  or the Ornament of the Mahayana Sutra , is really 
due to the kindness of Arya Asanga. It is through the kindnes s of Maitreya  Buddha  
and Arya Asanga that these teachings exist in this world . These teachings have been 
preserved uninterruptedly over many centuries  and we now have the opportunity to 
come into contact with these texts . Not only that, we have the opportu nity to 
examine the words and meanings of these texts  and the opportunity to gain a 
reasonable understanding of these texts . All this is made possible through their 
kindness.  
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
MEANING OF THE TITLE OF THE ROOT TEXT  
 
The title of this root text  in English  is The Tathagata Essence, the Great Vehicle 
Treatise on the  Sublime Continuum.  
 
“The Great Vehicle ” here is  the Mahayana . When we talk about the vehicle, they can 
be classified into the causal vehicle and the resultant (or effect) vehicle . Here  we are 
primarily referring to the perspective of  the resultant (or effect ) vehicle . The “yana” 
in Mahayana  refers to the vehicle  or platform that can deliver  us to the resultant (or 
effect) stage  of buddhahood.   
 
When we talk about “yana, ” we can either talk about the vehicle in the sense of :  
 the result  (effect ) that we will achieve , our final destination or  
 the vehicle or plat form  that will bring us there.  
Here, I think , primarily  it has to do with the Mahayana path  which is the vehicle that 
can bring us to the result , full enlightenment.  
 
This is a Mahayana treatise on the sublime continuum. Continuum in English is gyu in 
Tibetan  or tantra  in Sanskrit . This is an explanation of the tathagata essence  which is 
commonly translated and referred to as buddh a potential or buddha nature , but it is 
more accurate to use the term, t athagata essence.  
 
The tathagata essence continues uninterruptedly  forever. As i t has always been 
there , this is the mean ing behind the word , “continuum .” The tathagata essence exists  
at the time of the basis , it exists at the time of the path when one is travelling towards 
buddhahood , and at the time of full enlightenment, the tathagata essence is also 
there .  
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 8 of 10 When we talk about the expression s, “the clear light nature of the mind ,” “the factor 
of clarity and awareness (or knowing)”  or “the mind’s emptiness of true existence ,” 
all these exist uninterruptedly in a continuum  forever : 
 at the time of the basis  when one is sentient being  
 at the time of the path when one is travelling towa rds enlightenment  
 at the time of the result, i.e., full enlightenment when one become s a buddha   
But t hey are called different names at different stages of one’s development  because 
the bas is for these attributes are different . The basis for these attrib utes differs at the 
time of the basis, at the time of the path  and at the time of the result .   
 
“Sublime”  is uttara  in Sanskrit  and la na me pa  in Tibetan. In English , it literally 
mean s unexcelled , i.e., there  is nothing higher than th is. In what way the n is this text 
unexcelled ? There are different ways to explain this.  
 
 One explanation is that because the subject matter of this particular treatise is the 
seven vajra  (or diamond) topics , this text is unexcelled  and there i s nothing 
higher than this.  
 According to Gyal tsab Je, one of the main  disciples  of Lama Tsongkhapa,  the 
meaning of “sublime” means “at a later  time .” Here “later ” refer s to the third 
turning of the wheel of Dharma. I’m not exactly sure about this  but p erhaps what 
Gyal tsab Je is trying to say is that this treatise, the Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum , is a text that comments on the teachings belonging to the 
third turning of the wheel of Dharma.  
 
The Sanskrit for the word “treatise” is shastra , a word that brings  shasa  and traya  
together . Shasa  has the connotation , ‘to amend, to fix or to change ’ and traya  has the 
connotation , ‘to rescue, to sa ve, to protect .’ As such, when you put the two words 
together, then the meaning of treatise or shastra is something that cure s us of our 
afflictions  and protects us from the suffering of the lower realms and the suffering of 
cyclic existence in general . As such, for a text to be a Buddhist treatise, it s subject 
matter must perform these two functions: (1) it must be able to cure us o f our 
afflictions and (2) it must be  able to protect us from the fears of the lower realms and 
cyclic existence in general.  
 
Sanskrit  Tibetan  English  
Mahayanuttaratantrashastra  Thekpa Chenpo Gyu 
Lamä Tenchö  Mahayana Sublime Continuum  
uttara  la na me pa  sublime  which can mean (1) unexcelled  or (2) 
at a later time , i.e., referring to the third 
turning of the wheel of Dharma  
tantra  gyu continuum  
shastra  tenchö treatise , i.e., a text whose subject matter can   
(1) cure us of our afflictions a nd 
(2) protect us from  the suffering of the lower 
realms and the suffering of cyclic existence .  
 
Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus  
 
Homage to all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 9 of 10 The text starts with , “Homage to all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas .”  This is a verse of 
homage by  the lotsawa , the translator who translated this text from Sanskrit into 
Tibetan. There are many reasons why the translators of the past always pa id homage 
at the beginning of their works. One reason is that whenever one engages  in an 
activity like this, i t has to be conjoined with refuge. So w hatever practices we do, our 
practices  should be conjoined with the mind of refuge.   
 
Likewise, when the translator s of the past first embark ed on any translation work, 
they would go for refuge to the Three Jewels . Through th e act of paying homage, the 
merit created would help to ensur e that the translation project would be successfully 
completed without any obstacles along the way.  
 
Verse 1   
Buddha, doctrine, community, basic constituent, enlightenment,  
Qualities, a nd finally, Buddha activities — 
The body of the entire treatise is in brief  
These seven diamond topics.  
 
The subject matter  of this treatise is the seven vajra  (or diamond) topics. The 
number of v ajra topics is definite . It is seven.  
 
The s even vajra topic s or the seven essential points  are indicated in the first two 
lines of Verse 1:  
1. Buddha  
2. Doctrine  
3. Community  
4. Basic constituent  
5. Enlightenment  
6. Qualities  
7. Buddha activities  
Of the seven, we will cover only the first four : Buddha, doctrine, community and basic 
constituent.   
 
These seven vajra topics or essential points are treated from t wo perspectives —from 
the conventional perspective and from the ultimate perspective.  
 
There  is also a discussion on th e order of these seven v ajra essential points , i.e., 
basical ly why they are  ordered in this way. We may look into this on Thursday.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Question:  You mention ed that the continuum  of the clear light  mind exist s during the 
basis  and during the path until enlightenment. Can I then ass ume that this clear ligh t 
mind is a permanent phenomenon ? If it is not a permanent phenomenon, what are 
the changes  that occur ?  
 
Answer : The factor of clarity  and awareness  of the mind  exists  all the time. It has 
always been there . It exists at the time of the basis , in the pres ent moment. It 
continues to exist when one enters the path  and it will continue to exist even after 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                            Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                            Tathagata Essence  
 
 
Lesson 1  
Page 10 of 10 one has achieved  enlightenment. In that sense,  that continuum is eternal —it has 
always existed and it will always exist but its nature  or entity is imperman ent.  
 
The ‘I’ or the person  who is imputed in dependence on the five aggregates  has always 
been there . It will always exist even when one has achieve d enlightenment. I t has 
always been there  and it will always be there . In that sense it  is eternal . But th e ‘I’ or 
the person is always  changing. The nature  or enti ty of the person is impermanent . 
While it exists forever, it is impermanent.   
 
Think about  the smallest possible atomic particles  that aggregate to form and take 
the shape of different objects. I do n’t think the se particles will ever come to an end. 
They have always been there  and t hey will never cease to exist . They will continue to 
exist forever.   I think that the most fundamental basic building block of matter, the se 
smallest particles, would prob ably exist forever.  
 
The natural ability of the mind to understand and comprehend objects and events  —
for objects to  appear to t he mind and for the mind to be aware  of them —this factor of  
clarity  and awareness  cannot  be permanent. If it  is permanent , then  you cannot 
explain how it undergoes changes , how it experiences things and how it thinks 
differently at different times .  
 
Likewise , although the person has always existed and will forever exist , yet the 
person , the ‘I’, is not permanent . If the ‘I’ is pe rmanent , how then do you explain that 
sometimes the ‘I’ experiences happiness and , at other times, experiences suffering  
and feels sad ? How would you explain that?  Obviously there is a n ‘I’ or ‘me’ who is 
suffering or  who  is happy . We have to account for such an ‘I’. This is e specially since 
we have to be able to account for how a n ‘I’ or person  can come from a previous life 
and we have to account for how this ‘I’ moves on to a future life .  
 
According to non -Buddhist traditions that assert reincarnation, there must be 
something that endures from life to life , that move s from the previous life to this life 
and then from this life to the next life. There is this person who must remain and who 
doesn’t change. These non -Buddhists philosophers who accept reinca rnation  apply 
their own reasoning and they conclude that such a person must be permanent and 
unchanging. The lives may be different but the ‘I’ or the person  who moves from life 
to life must be the same  and therefore must be unchanging . This is the positio n of 
some non -Buddhist tradition s.  
 
In Buddhism , we refute the existe nce of a permanent ‘I’.  The ‘I’ who is the 
experiencer of happiness  and suffering cannot be unchanging. If it is unchanging , 
then how can it experience happiness one day and suffering the next ? But a lthough 
such an ‘I’ or p erson  is impermanent and undergoes change, n evertheless the 
continuum of the ‘I’ is eternal.   
 
Likewise, when we talk about the factor of the clarity and awareness of the mind or 
the mind’s emptiness of true existence,  that factor of clarity and awareness  is 
impermanent and undergoes change, but its continuum, its very existence , is eternal.  
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  