Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L10 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:36.967331
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 10                        17 March 2015  
 
 
Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Reviewing Verse 22: Etymology of ‘Jewel’.  
Verses 23 -25. The fourth vajra topic: the basic constituent. Summary of these verses.  
 
 
REVIEWING VERSE 22  
  
Etymology of ‘Jewel’  
Verse 22 look s at the etymology  of ‘Jewel’,  or literally , a rare sub lime one.  
 
Verse 22  
Because of appearing rarely, because of being without defilement,  
Because of having power, because of being the ornament of the world  
Because of being just superior, and because of being changeless,  
[They are called] Jewels [literally,  Superior Rarities].  
 
“Because of appearing rarely” : Just as it is very difficult  and rare to be able to possess 
a wish -fulfilling jewel , actually it is very rare for a buddha to descend and come to a 
world system . At this time , when we have some slight id ea of what a buddha is , it 
becomes very important then for us to take refuge in the Buddha.  
 
In any particular world system, there are four periods : 
1. the eon of formation  
2. the eon of abiding  
3. the eon of destruction  
4. the eon of nothing ness   
During this very lo ng period of time, a buddha only appears during the eon of 
abiding . Furthermore, a b uddha comes in the eon of abiding when the lifespan of 
human being are on the decline.  So the coming of a buddha is extremely rare . We 
have met the teachings of the Buddha  so it becomes very important for us to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 2 of 10 generate pure refuge  in him . 
 
“Because of being without defilement ”: The B uddha is like a perfect wish -fulfilling 
jewel , wh ich is free of all faults and stains. Likewise , the B uddha is without 
defilement  because he does not possess any faults ; so he does not possess the faults 
of not being able to protect us or grant us refuge . Therefore, it is inappropriate for us 
to entrust ourselves to or take refuge in worldly gods  or deities . Such beings are not 
able to protect us or fully guide us because they possess faults  unlike the Buddha 
who is without defilement. The point is that we should not entrust ourselves  to or 
take refuge in worldly gods , but rather , we should go for refuge and entrust ourselves 
to the Buddha.  
 
“Because of having power ”: Here, the Buddha is likened again to a wish -fulfilling 
jewel , which has the power to grant us the necessities of life and enjoyments if you 
pray to it. Likewise, the Buddha has power s such as the five types of super 
knowledges and so forth. As such, the Buddha can act as our guid e and our refuge.  
 
“Because of being the ornament of the world” : If we possess ed a wish -fulfilling jewel, 
then we would have the best worldly ornament. Likewise , if we depend on the 
Buddha, who is like an “orna ment of the world,” and take wholehearted and sincere 
refuge in him, we can achieve all the goals and purposes , that is, the temporal 
goodness or provisional goals and the definite goodness or definite excellence.  
 
“Because of being just superior” : Just a s a wish -fulfilling jewel is superior to all other 
kinds of jewels, the Buddha is superior to all other objects of refuge.  Among all the 
sources of protection or objects of refuge, the Buddha is unparalleled.  
 
“Because of being changeless” : A wish -fulfill ing jewel is also changeless . Regardless 
of what  we may do to it, it remain s a wish -fulfilling jewel. Likewise , the Buddha is 
neither  affected by praise nor criticism. Whether you praise or critici se the Buddha , it 
does not matter to him because h e does no t possess any partiality . As such , he is able 
to grant refuge  to all who seek it.  
 
This is an explanation of the word , ‘Jewel’ or the ‘Rare Sublime One,’ using  the 
analogy  of the wish -fulfilling jewel.  
 
So up to here in the text, the first three of the sev en vajra topics have been discussed.  
Next , we will start with the fourth vajra topic , the basic constituent.  
 
THE FOURTH VAJRA TOPIC: THE BASIC CONSTITUENT  
 
Verse 23 refers to the inconceivable nature of the causes and conditions for the 
arising of the thr ee virtuous Jewels.  
 
Verse 23  
Those from which  the three virtuous Jewels arise  
Reality with defilement and without defilement,  
The qualities of undefiled Buddhahood, and the Conqueror’s activities — 
Are objects just of those [directly] perceiving the ultim ate. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 3 of 10 “Reality with defilement” : This is the tathagata essence, which can be referred to also 
as suchness with defilement.  It is said to be the substantial cause of the Three Jewels  
and the substantial cause of enlightenment . You must understand how to int erpret 
this within the context  here . I have explained this before . Suchness with defilement 
or the tathagata  essence is not a fully qualified cause per se but nevertheless , there is 
a way of explaining why it can be called a cause. Suchness with defilement  is posited 
as the substantial cause of enlightenment .1 
 
“Without defilement”: This refer to the suchness without defilement that is the fifth 
vajra topic , enlightenment. T his enlightenment, jangchu b, or suchness without 
defilement , is posited as a contrib utory or cooperative condition.  
 
“The quality of undefiled Buddhahood ” refers to the sixth vajra topic , qualities .  This 
is also a contributory or cooperative condition  from which the three virtuous Jewels 
arise.  
 
“The Conqueror ’s activit ies” refers to the  seventh vajra topic , Buddha activit ies. T his 
is another contributory  or cooperative condition.   
 
It is said that by depending on the suchness with defilement  that is the substantial 
cause and the other cooperative conditions, one can achieve the Three Jew els. 
 
The substantial cause and the cooperative conditions by which the Three Jewels will 
arise is something that can only be directly perceive d, in a complete and exact  way as 
they are , by a buddha. As such, they “are the objects just of those [directly] perceiving 
the ultimate.”   
 
Verse 24  
The lineage of these Three Jewels  
Is an object [only] of those perceiving all,  
For it is inconceivable due to four reasons  
In accordance respectively  with those four aspects.  
 
Why can only a buddha directly perceive exa ctly and completely the fact that the 
Three Jewels will arise in dependence upon these substantial cause and conditions ?  
This is b ecause they are the object s of direct comprehension of only the buddhas . As 
such , they are inconceivable for non -buddhas.  It is said that there are four reasons  
for this . 
 
First, t he object s of direct perception of a buddha are identified  in Verse 23 in the 
context  of discussing the causes and conditions for the aris ing of the Three Jewels :  
 the suchness with defilement  is the s ubstantial cause  
                                                           
1 This tathagata essence is an uncompounded phenomenon, a permanen t phenomenon. As such, it 
cannot produce a phenomenon that undergoes momentary change. Therefore it is not a fully 
qualified cause, i.e., it is not a real substantial cause. Nevertheless, because the existence of this 
suchness with defilement is indispensa ble for the achievement of the final Three Jewels, it is given 
the name cause.  (Page 7, Lesson 3).  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 4 of 10  the three cooperative conditions2  
Altogether we have identif ied these  four objects  that are stated to be t he object s of 
direct perception of the b uddha s only .  
 
Verse 24 explains why only a buddha can directly perceive these  objects .  
 
My attempt at explaining this is done in relation to the words of the root text  so you 
have to look at the root text  as we go along . I will try to explain the se verses.   
 
Verse 25 is es tablishing  or proving why these objects are inconceivable.   
 
Verse 25  
Because [the basic realm is] pure but [appears to be] afflicted,  
Because [enlightenment is] unafflicted but [appears] to be purified,  
Because [the Buddha qualities are] undifferentiated phenomena 
[even at the  time of common being but are not manifest],  
And b ecause [the Buddha activities are] spontaneous but without 
conceptuality  [these four are inconceivable by common beings ]. 
 
“Because [the basic realm is] pure but [appears to be] afflicted”  
Here, “pure” refers to the natural purity of the minds of the senti ent beings in that 
the affliction s have never reside d with in the nature of the mind  itself. In that sense , 
the mind is, by nature , “pure. ”   
 
Yet, this s uchness  of the mind is accompanied by defilement s. So t he first line is 
basically talking about the tat hagata essence, suchness with defilement.  
 
It is very difficult for us to conceive of these two coming together —a mind that is by 
nature pure , yet it is accompanied by defilement s (or stains and afflictions). This is 
difficult to comprehend and is therefo re inconceivable.  
 
The explanation of how this is so has yet to come . At this point, w e are not proving 
anything yet. W e are just  stating a thesis that we need to examine  further:  On the one 
hand , we are saying the mind is pure , but at the same time, we are also saying that it 
is afflicted. Th is is what makes it inconceivable.  
 
“Because [enlightenment is] unafflicted but [appears] to be purified”  
This is the second inconceivable point that is a n explanation of undefiled 
enlightenment , i.e., the suchness w ithout defilement . This suchness without 
defilement was  never afflicted  before —“because [enlightenment is] unafflicted” —
yet, there c omes a time when it is purified of the adventitious defilements. Again, 
when you put these two things together, you have ano ther phenomenon that is quite 
difficult to comprehend  and is inconceivable . 
“[Enlightenment  is] unafflicted” here refers to  the suchness without defilement.  
Since beginningless lifetime s, it has never been in the nature of afflictions , i.e., 
afflictions d o not abide in the nature of this suchness . It is by nature pure. Yet there 
                                                           
2 These are (1) the reality or suchness “without defilement,” (2) “the qualities of undefiled 
Buddhahood” and (3) “the Conqueror’s activities.”   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 5 of 10 come s a time  when it is “purified ” of or separated from adventitious defilements  so 
enlightenment can occur.  
 
“Because [the Buddha qualities are] undifferentiated phenomena [even a t the time of 
common being but are not manifest”  
The Buddha’s  qualities are un defiled , yet the suchness abiding on these undefiled 
qualities  is not of a different nature from the suchness of sentient beings ’ mind s. It is 
difficult to comprehend how  these t wo—the suchness of the Buddha’s qualities and 
the suchness of sentient beings’ mind s—are undifferentiated  in nature.  
 
“And because [the Buddha activities are] spontaneous but without conceptuality”  
This line refers to a  buddha’s  enlightened activities. It  is said that when a buddha 
perform s activities for the benefit of sentient beings , these activities engage sentient 
beings spontaneously , without the need for intention or motivation . They are 
automatic.  
 
So these are the four things that are difficult to  comprehend  and are inconceivable:   
1. The tathagata essence is pure by nature , yet it is accompanied by defilements.  
2. The suchness without defilement, enlightenment, is unafflicted , yet there comes a 
time when it is purified of adventitious defilements.  
3. The suchness of Buddha’s  qualities and the suchness of sentient beings’ mind s are 
by nature undifferentia ted.  
4. The Buddha’s  enlightened activities are spontaneous , without conceptuality.  
 
Let us look at each of these points one by one.  
  
1. The tathagata ess ence is pure by nature , yet it is accompanied by defilements.   
Suchness with defilement is the natural emptiness of the mind s of sentient beings. It 
is by nature pure , yet at the same time , the minds of sentient beings are 
contaminated by or polluted with  afflictions . It is difficult to comprehend how these 
two can co-exist.  
 
If you bring these two together, you must be able to posit a cause and effect 
relationship between a contaminator and the contaminated  (or the polluter and the 
polluted) . How are you  going to posit th is cause and effect relationship for the 
suchness of the mind?  
 
On the one hand, there is the natural purity of the mind , its e mptiness . Yet at the 
same time , there is activity and th is is also valid. The point here is the di fficult y of 
understand ing that the two truths  have a common basis , that phenomena by their 
nature are empt y, yet at the same time, one can posit  that phenomena exist and can 
function .   
 
If you think about this from the perspective of the t enets, all the tenets —with t he 
exception of the Consequence Middle Way School —assert that if anything exists , it 
exists inherently. For them, because phenomena exist inherently, therefore cause and 
effect can work  and you can posit an action, agent and object .  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 6 of 10 For these proponents of inherent existence, if a phenomenon does not exist from its 
own side, i.e., the phenomenon in question is only merely labelled by thought, then 
there  is no way to explain h ow cause and effect can work . There  is no way for them to 
explain coherently how there can be an action, agent and object.  Therefore, w ith the 
exception of Consequence Middle Way School  (CMWS) , every other Buddhist tenet  
asserts that everything that exists exists by way of their own nature, from their own 
side, and are inherently exis tent, truly existent.  
 
They say that if things are merely label led ( or imputed by thought ), then things 
cannot function. T o them, merely label led by thought is no differen t from saying that 
you can make up anything with your mind. As long as you label  som ething, then that 
something exists. To them , this is not acceptable.  
 
They give the example of a sprout arising from a seed.  They say that there must be 
something from the side of the seed , something from its own side that has the ability 
or potential, t o give rise to the sprout. Otherwise , you could produce anything from 
that seed other than its own sprout. Why is it that it can only produce  a sprout and 
not anything else? So to them, this shows that there must be something  right there 
from its own side  within the cause itself. This is the assertion or the belief of every 
Buddhist tenet with the exception of the highest school.  
 
Likewise, these Buddhist tenets assert that there must be something from the side of 
virtue that produce s happiness. Why does virtue produce  only happiness ?  Why does 
non-virtue produce  only suffering? It can not be because they are merely labe lled by 
the mind. There has to be something right there  from the side of the cause .  
 
This is why the proponents of Autonomy Middle Way Schoo l (AMWS) disagree with 
the proponents of the Consequence Middle Way School  (CMWS) .  
 
The proponents of the AMWS  assert  that : 
 If phenomena are merely labelled by thought  and they do not exist from their 
own side, then one cannot account for production and d isintegration.  
 If one cannot account for production and disintegration, this means that one 
cannot account for cause and effect.  
 If that is the case, t hen one cannot posit the four noble truths , which become 
invalid.  
 If the four noble truths are invalid , then the Three Jewels cannot exist.  
 
Do you understand their argument against the CMWS? To them, if phenomena do not  
exist from their own side, all these other things cannot exist  either .  
 
The proponents of the CMWS also talk about the same things but they turn the 
argument around in this way by saying this:  
 If phenomena exist from their own side, there  is no way to talk about c ause and 
effect.  
 As such, there i s then no way  for one to talk about the four noble truths.  
 As such, there  is no way one can talk about Three Jewels .  
 
The point is that most people have difficulty putting the two together —something 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 7 of 10 that i s by nature empty , yet it can function. That  is the most difficult thing. It  is 
related here to how the mind’s suchness with defilement is by  nature pure , yet it 
comes complete with afflictions.  
 
Returning to the difficulty of understanding the two truths —how the two truths can 
come together on any single basis in tha t, although by nature it is empty, yet because 
it is empty, therefore it can function. The coming together of these two things is very 
difficult to understand.   
 
It is said that if one has the correct understanding of the emptiness of inherent 
existence,  through the force of th at reali sation  and correct understanding , 
automatically  without choice, one will understand that conventionalities exist and 
function.  
 
Someone may claim to be an expert on the emptiness of true existence , but if th is 
person’s understanding or reali sation of emptiness does not automatically lead him 
to accept  the presentation of conventionalit ies—that things can function and are 
valid —then he has not realised anything at all.  
 
What we are trying to understand here is the first point that is difficult to 
comprehend: The tathagata essence is pure by nature, yet  it is accompanied by 
defilements , that is, something that i s by nature pure , yet there is the activity of 
pollution.  
 
2.  T he suchness without defilement, enlightenment, is unafflicted, yet there comes a time 
when it is purified of adventitious defilemen ts. 
Suchness without defilement was never afflicted by defilement  before  because the 
defilements  themselves , such as the afflictions of desire and so forth , can never have 
suchness as their object of observation. For example, desire can never focus on 
such ness because desire is essentially a yearning, a mind seeking or  wanting 
something. Can desire seek  out suchness? If it can, then that will make desire a 
virtuous mind , which is n ot possible . Therefore, suchness without defilement was 
never afflicted by de filement s previously .  
 
When one says the mind is polluted by afflictions , these afflictions can have the mind 
as their object of observation. When afflictions focus on the mind as their object of 
observation, among t he retinue of the affliction s, there ca n arise a variety of different 
mental factors.  Because  the mind can be the object of observation of the afflictions, as 
such, the mind can  be and is polluted by the afflictions .  
 
If we say that defilements such as attachment and so forth cannot focus on t he 
suchness of the mind as their object of observation , then what  exactly  is suchness 
with defilement? What is defiling this suchness?   
 
First, you have to be clear that the suchness of our mind is  accompanied with 
defilement . Therefore , it is called suchn ess with defilement , i.e., our t athagata 
essence.  
 
But i f somebody were to say , “Suchness with defilement  actually is not  defiled 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 8 of 10 because it can never be the object of observation of an affliction ,” then what are you 
going to say?  
 
This is not an easy poi nt. It requires focus, attention, constant analysis and reflection .  
Then, maybe you will get something. It  is like this: sometimes , you think you have 
some understanding bu t when you think about it  more deeply, y ou get the feeling 
that you are losing that  understanding . It seems to have gone away  somewhere!   
 
The mind that is polluted by the afflictions  is the object , which is by nature empty. 
The s uchness of this mind is the suchness with defilement.  If you were to say that 
this suchness is not defiled, i t would follow then that anybody should be able to 
directly perceive this emptiness, the suchness of the mind . All of us would be 
superior beings !  
 
Why is it that we cannot directly perceive this suchness with defilement? That is 
because it is obscured by  the defilements . Therefore , we cannot directly perceive this 
suchness  with defilement .  
 
Review  
~ Suchness without defilement  
Suchness without defilement has never been afflicted by any defilement  before . Why  
is this so ? Because defilement s, such as attac hment and so forth , cannot focus on this 
suchness,  i.e., it cannot take this suchness as its object of observation.  
 
This is the way to understand how suchness without defilement was never afflicted 
by defilement  before .  
 
~ Suchness with defilement  
When we talk about the mind  of sentient beings —the mind that is afflicted or 
polluted by the defilements  or afflictions —this mind can be the object of observation 
of the afflictions.  The suchness or emptiness of t his mind that is polluted by the 
afflictions is  suchness with defilement. Because it is suchness  with defilement , 
therefore it cannot be directly perceived.  
 
If the suchness of this mind was not accompanied by defilements, we would be able 
to perceive this suchness . But we cannot perceive this suchnes s. Why? Because it is  
obscured by defilement s.  
 
The m ind and its suchness (or emptiness ) are one entity. Therefore, it can be said 
that if the mind is polluted by defilements, the mind’s suchness is also polluted by 
defilements . 
 
Returning to t he second d ifficult point  with regard to the suchness without 
defilement . It was never previously afflicted by defilement  because of the reasons 
mentioned earlier . There will come a time whereby it is purified of the adventitious 
defilement. The coming together of th ese two things is a difficult thing to  
comprehend . It is inconceivable.  
 
Earlier we saw  how if a mind is polluted by defilements, its suchness , which is one 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 9 of 10 entity with this mind , is also polluted by defilements. Th is means the mind i s 
accompanied with de filements. But when this mind that is polluted by defilements 
becomes free of the m, then  you can also say its suchness, which is one entity with 
this mind, will be free  of or separated from the defilements . 
 
Whether it  is suchness with defilement or suchne ss without defilement, it is  
dependent on th at mind that it is one entity with.  
 If the mind that it is one entity with is defiled, then the suchness  of th is defiled 
mind  will be suchness with defilement.  
 If the mind that it is one entity with  is undefiled , then the suchness of th is 
undefiled mind will be suchness without defilement.  
 
You must not have the expectation that you can figure this out right away . It is  
something that you n eed to read and think about over an d over again. This comes 
with time. If  you get disheartened just because you don’t understand upon hearing 
this for the first time, that is not very helpful , because you are not going to achieve 
anything.   
 
Khen Rinpoche:  You get some idea  of what I’m talking  about today? It is g ood if you ge t 
some idea . If y ou don’t have any idea  of what I am talking about , just hear ing the words 
is also very good. But for t hose who did not hear anything at all, then that is not good.  
 
SUMMARY OF VERSES 23 TO 25  
 
Verse 23 is about the  inconceivab le nature of the four causes and conditions for the 
arising of the Three Jewels.  
 The substantial cause is the s uchness with defilement , i.e., the tathagata essence .  
 The cooperative conditions are:  
1. the s uchness without defilement  
2. the qualities of undefiled Buddhaho od  
3. the Conqueror’s activities  
Only a b uddha can directly perceive , completely and exactly , these four causes and 
conditions.  
 
Verse 24 explains why this is so.  
 
Verse 25  establish es the inconceivability of the four reasons : 
1. “Because [the basic realm is]  pure but [appears to be] afflicted”  means that the 
natural purity of the mind s of sentient being s is accompanied by defilement. As 
such, it is called the suchness with defilement . “Pure” here refers to the natural 
purity of the minds of the sentient being s in that the affliction s have never abided 
within the nature of the mind  itself .  
2.   “Because [enlightenment is] unafflicted but [appears] to be purified ”: 
“Enlightenment ” refers to the suchness without d efilement.  Such suchness 
without defilements from ti me without beginning has never been afflicted ; yet 
there come s a time that it is purified of the adventitious defilements.  
3. “Because [the Buddha qualities are] undifferentiated phenomena  [even at the 
time of common being but are not manifest ”: The Buddha’s qualities are 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 10  
Page 10 of 10 undefiled , yet the suchness abiding on these undefiled qualities is not of a 
different nature from the suchness of the minds of sentient beings .  
4. “Because [the Buddha activities are] spontaneous but without conceptuality  
[these four are incon ceivable by common beings] ”: The Buddha’s enlightened 
activities are spontaneous without conceptuality  
 
The emptiness of mind is suchness . If that suchness is polluted by the afflictions, then 
it is suchness with defilement. Because it is suchness with def ilement, therefore it 
cannot be directly perceived. Why? Because it is obscured by the defilement s.  
 
If the mind that it is one entity with is undefiled, then the suchness of that undefiled 
mind will be suchness without defilement.  Suchness without defile ment has never 
been afflicted by defilement s before . Defilements , such as desire and so forth , can 
never have suchness as its object of observation . Therefore, suchness without 
defilement was never afflicted by defilements  previously . Nevertheless, t here w ill 
come a time whe n it is purified of the adventitious defilement s.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 