Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L12 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:44.863250
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 1 of 10 
 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 12                        26 March 2015  
 
 
Chapter One: The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verses 25 —31. Reviewing Verse 2 5: The four 
difficult points . Verse 26: Cause & conditions. Verse 27  & 28: Proof that we possess the 
tathagata essence. Verse 29: The clear light nature of the mind: the ten aspects. Verse 30: the 
entity and th e causes. Verse 31. Extensive presentation of the entity . 
 
 
Question:  The subtle motivational effort is one of the main obstacles  to the 
attainment of spontaneous effort . As far as I know, it is a knowledge obscuration , and 
necessarily , an obstruction to o mniscience. Is it classified under the big, middling or 
small obstruction? When it  is pacified, does it mean that the bodhisattva supe rior will 
proceed directly on to the path of no-more -learning  and that the four  bodies of a 
buddha will be actuali sed imme diately?  
 
Answer : The subtle motivational effort arises in  dependen ce on the force of the 
knowledge obscurations. But to say that the subtle motivational effort is a knowledge 
obscuration, that has to be discussed further. T here are three  knowledge 
obscur ations in terms of the ir level of subtlety . Perhaps you can say that then there 
are three  levels of the subtle motivational effort.  Once you have abandon ed even the 
smallest of the knowledge obscuration s, then the four  bodies are actuali sed. 
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
REVIEWING VERSE 25 : THE FOUR DIFFICULT POINTS  
 
Verse  25  
Because [the basic realm is] pure but [appears] to be afflicted.  
Because [enlightenment is] unafflicted but [appears] to be purified,  
Because [the Buddha qualities are] undifferentiated phenomena    
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 2 of 10 
       [even at the time of common being but are not manifest],  
And because [the Buddha activities are] spontaneous but without  
       conceptuality  [these four are inconceivable by common beings].  
 
1. “Because [the basic realm is] pure but [appears] to be af flicted”  
The first difficult point is related to the tathagata essence or suchness with 
defilement. The tathagata essence is naturally pure of stains ; yet it is said to be 
accompanied by defilements . This comes across as a contradiction.  
 
When we say that the tathagata essence (or basic constituent ) is naturally pure, what 
this means is  that right from the very moment it exist ed, it has always  existed as 
something that has never ever been truly existent. It  is by nature not truly existent. 
As such, the tath agata  essence is naturally pure.  
 
But i f the tathagata essence is naturally pure, why then do we also refer to it as  
suchness with defilement? Wh y is it accompanied by defilement s?  
 
The way to understand this is that the basis of th e suchness here is the mind. We are 
talking about the mind ’s suchness. Because the mind is polluted by defilements  or 
stains , the mind’s suchness that is one entity with it is likewise accompan ied by 
defilements. Th is is the reason why we say that the tathagata  essence is suchne ss 
with defilement or accompanied by defilements .  
 
What is the proof ? Why is this an accurate reason? Because the mind is accompanied 
with defilements, the mind ’s suchness that is one entity with the mind is also said to 
be accompanied with defilements. You have to say that  because i f you say the 
suchness of the mind is naturally pure , and therefore , it cannot be accompanied by 
defilements , why is it that we do not see the suchness of the mind?   The reason why 
we do not directly see the suchness of the min d is because something is obscuring us 
from doing so. Therefore, it is accompanied with defilements.  
 
To recap, t he way to understand the first difficult point —that the tathagata essence 
is pure but it appears to be afflicted —is this: T hat s uchness is natu rally pure  and i t 
has never existed inherently, i.e., it did not come into existence with the nature of 
inherent existence. As such, the suchness is by nature pure . However, i t is a suchness 
that  is accompanied by defilements but the defilements are advent itious. S o when we 
say suchness with defilement here, it is a suchness with adventitious  defilements .  
 
2. “Because [enlightenment is] unafflicted but [appears] to be purified”  
Enlightenment is by nature unafflicted . W hat is enlightenment? Enlightenment 
comes  about through the purification of defilements. On the one hand , we say that 
enlightenment is by nature pure ; yet enlightenment or suchness without defilement  
is purified .  
 
Enlightenment is suchness without defilement . Enlightenment here is the 
dharmakaya , the t ruth body. Within the truth body, there is:  
 a nature body that is a natural purity  
 a nature body that is an adventitious purity  
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 3 of 10 
 Let us  consider the nature body that is a natural purity. Th is nature body  (or the 
svabhav akaya) is by nature pure  and empty of inherent existence . The afflictions 
have never abided in the nature of this suchness. So it has always been unafflicted , 
yet we say that later on it is purified  of adventitious defilements. It is difficult to 
comprehend these two points  as they se em to contradict  one another.  
 
The example given in the text is gold . There are instances when refined gold is 
tarnished. Gold by nature is gold. Whatever is tarnishing th e gold is not in the nature 
of the gold  itself . One can polish the refine d gold , and at the end of that process , when  
the substance that is tarnish ing the gold  is removed , what remains is the refined g old. 
Gold b y nature has always been gold from the beginning. One can relate this example 
to the mind. T he mind is pure by nature ; yet there  can com e a time when it is purified 
of stains.  
 
3. “Because [the Buddha qualities are] undifferentiated phenomena [even at the time of 
common being but are not manifest]  
The third difficult point  to comprehend  is related to the Buddha qualities —that the 
suchness of the Buddha  qualities is of an undifferentiable nature from the suchness 
of a sentient being’s mind.  
 
There is  no contradiction here because during one’s time as a sentient being, one is 
not yet a buddha . Therefore, one does  not possess Buddha qu alities.  One becomes a 
buddha when the adventitious defilements are purified. When the defilements are 
purified, that very suchness that is purified is a quality which exists naturally right 
there.  
 
4.   “And because [the Buddha activities are] spontaneous  but without conceptuality”  
The fourth difficult point relates to the fact that the Buddha activities are 
spontaneous, yet they arise without any conceptuality. It is said that the Buddha 
activities engage fully with sentient beings in accordance with thei r mentality and 
their level of merit. Such engagement is spontaneous, effortless and arise s with out 
any preceding thought  that think s, “I am going to do this. ”  So this is a difficult point 
to understand.  
 
CAUSE AND CONDITIONS  
 
Verse 26 is a presentation o f the cause s and condition s.  
 
Verses 26  
[The basic constituent that is] the object to be realized, [the      
enlightenment that]  realizes it.  
[The Buddha qualities that are] branches of this, and [the Buddha 
activities that  are] for the sake of causing re alization — 
Of these, respectively the first topic [the basic constituent] is the 
cause  
Of purification; the [other] three are conditions [of purification].  
 
“[The basic constituent that is] the object to be realized, [the enlightenment that] 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 4 of 10 
 realizes it ./ [The Buddha qualities that are] branches of this, and [the Buddha 
activities that are] for the sake of causing realization —”: The object to be realised 
here is the basic constituent or tathagata  essence . This is the suchness with 
defilement. When it is directly reali sed, then one achieves the state of enlightenment.  
Otherwise , one continues to remain in cyclic existence.  
 
The main cause for  actuali sing the dharmakaya  is the wisdom directly reali sing 
emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior. The dharmakaya  we are 
referring to her e is specifically the wisdom truth body  (or jnanakaya ).  
 
While the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva 
superior is the main cause for actuali sing the wisdom truth body, having said that , if 
this wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva 
superior does not have a proper focus, such a wisdom cannot be developed. The main 
focus of that wisdom is the suchness with defilement. As such, the suchness with 
defilement i s considered the ‘cause’ of enlightenment.  
 
“Of these, respectively the first topic [the basic constituent] is the cause / Of 
purification ”: The point is that you have to know why the tathagata essence or 
suchness with defilement is label led as a cause of enlightenment. The finality of this 
wisdom  directly  perceiving emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is 
enlightenment.  
 
“[The Buddha qualities that are] branches of this ”: The branches here refer to the 
Buddha qualities, for it is the quali ties of a b uddha  that primarily work  to fulfill the 
welfare of sentient beings.  
 
“And [the Buddha activities that are] for the sake of causing realization” : In 
dependence on the Buddha qualities, one is able to work for the welfare of sentient 
beings . Because of these qualities , Buddha activities come about to engage sentient 
beings . These activities cause sentient beings to comprehend  and to reali se what the 
buddhas themselves have reali sed.   
 
The meaning of this verse is similar to what has been discuss ed earlier , i.e., that the 
tathagata  essence  or the basic constituent is the cause of enlightenment . 
Enlightenment itself, the Buddha qualities and Buddha activities are the conditions 
for th e achievement of enlightenment.  
 
PROOF THAT WE POSSES S THE TATHAG ATA ESSENCE  
 
Verse 27  
Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive,  
Because suchness is without differentiation,  
And because a [Buddha] lineage exists, all embodied  
Are always in possession of a Buddha essence.  
 
Verse 28  
 Because the exalted Buddha -wisdom dwells in the multitudes of 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 5 of 10 
 sentient beings  
And because the undefiled nature is non -dual  
And the Buddha lineage is designated [a Buddha, this being the name 
of] its  effect,  
It is said that all transmigrators have the Buddha -essence.  
 
Here we are trying to prove that all sentient beings possess the tathagata essence. In 
Verse  27, three reasons are posited to establish or prove that this is the case and the 
explanations are given from the perspective of:  
 the result  
 the nature  
 the cause   
 
From the perspective  of the result  
“Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive” : This is an explanation of how all 
sentient beings possess the tathagata essence from the perspective of the result.  
 
The first reason  that  is posited here to pro ve that  sentient beings have t he tathagata 
essence is that the enlighten ed deeds of the Buddha, the enlighten ed deeds of the 
dharmakaya , emanate out to and pervade all sentient beings. If they can emanate out 
to and pervade all sentient beings, then there must be something that is bein g 
pervaded . What this means is that sentient beings are suitable receptacles for 
receiv ing the enlighten ed activities of the Buddha , i.e., we are suitable to be engaged 
by the enlightened activities of a  buddha . 
 
Here t he result refers to the enlighten ed activities of the dharmakaya  that are said to 
be emanating  out to and pervading all sentient beings at all time s. If it is perva sive,  
there must be something that is being pervaded . Because it is emanating, someone 
must be receiving the emanation of these e nlightened activities. Who is being 
affected by these enlightened activities? It is the sentient beings who have the 
suchness with defilement. The point is th at there is something in us that make s us 
suitable to receive the enlighten ed deeds of the dharmak aya.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: I think that  is the logic . That’s it.  
 
From the perspective of the nature  
 “Because suchness is without differentiation ”: The suchness without defilement  (i.e., 
separated from defilements) and t he suchness with defilement have  the sa me nature.   
 
The second reason for proving that we all have the tathagata essence is because the 
nature of our tathagata essence ( the suchness with defilement) is no differen t from 
the nature of a buddha ’s mind  (the suchness without defilement) . Because th e 
suchness of a buddha’s mind and the suchness of a sentient being’s mind are the 
same in nature , as such , all sentient beings possess the tathagata essence.  
 
Because the suchness of sentient being’s mind s is accompanied with  defilement , so 
during that ti me, that suchn ess with defilement  is called the tathagata essence . The 
suchness with defilement that is possessed by all sentient beings , which is of  the 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 6 of 10 
 same nature as the suchness without defilements , is called the tathagata essence.  
 
From the perspectiv e of the cause  
“And because a [Buddha] lineage exists”: The third reason  proving that all sentient 
beings have the tathagata essence is this :  
 All sentient beings possess within  them the potential that is suitable to  be 
transform ed into the dharmakaya . This is called the naturally abiding lineage.  
 All sentient beings also possess within them the potential that is suitable to be 
transform ed into the form bodies of a b uddha . This is called the developmental 
lineage.  
Because all  sentient beings possess with in them th ese phenomen a that are suitable 
to be transformed  into  the dharmakaya and the rupakaya , therefore all sentient 
beings are said to possess the tathagata essence.   
 
Verses 27 and 28 see k to establish that all sentient beings possess the tathagata 
essence.  
 
1st reason 
from the 
perspective 
of the result  “Because a perfect 
Buddha’s body is 
pervasive .” Because sentient beings are pervaded by the enlightened 
activities of a buddha  
2nd reason  
from the 
perspective 
of the nature  “Because suchness 
is wit hout 
differentiation .” Because the suchness of sentient beings’ mind s is no 
different from the suchness of a buddha’s mind  
3rd reason  
from the 
perspective 
of the cause  “And because a 
[Buddha] lineage 
exists .” Because in the mental continua of sentient bei ngs, there are 
lineages that are suitable to be transformed into the 
dharmakaya (t ruth body) and the rupakaya (form b ody) of a 
buddha.  
 
In the Tathagata Essence  sutra, nine analogies are given to help explain  how the 
defilements are adve ntitious. Another sutra  offers a presentation of the ten aspects  
that establish the clear light nature of the mind.   
 
But b efore we move on, you should understand the main point s of Verses 27 and 28. 
Here three reasons are presented  that seek to establish the fact that all sentient 
beings possess  the tathagata essence.  
 The first reason is an explanation from the perspective of the result.  Since we 
sentient beings are suitable recipients of a buddha’s enlightened activities of the 
dharmakaya , as such , we are said to possess the tathagata essence.  
 The second reason is an explanation from the perspective of the nature.  Because  
the nature of the suchness of our mind is no differen t from the suchness of the 
mind of a b uddha , as such,  it is said that we possess the tathagata esse nce.  
 The third reason is an explanation from the perspective of the cause . We possess 
the Buddha lineage in us ; therefore , we possess  the tathagata essence.  
 
CLEAR LIGHT NATURE OF THE MIND: THE TEN ASPECTS  
 
Next is the presentation of the  ten aspects that explain the clear light nature of the 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 7 of 10 
 mind.  Verse 29 identif ies what these ten aspects  are. 
 
Verse 29  
The entity [of natural purity], the causes [that serve as means of 
purification], the effect [of separation from all defilements], the 
function  [of causin g adoption and discarding upon seeing the 
disadvantages of pain and advantages of  pleasure], the 
possession  [of the qualities of cause and effect], manifestation 
[of differences in reality by way of the persons on whom it 
depends],  
States [of difference],  and similarly the meaning of omnipresence 
[that is, reality pervading all],  
Immutability at all times [in terms of good qualities], and 
undifferentiability [of the final] qualities  
Are said to be the intended meaning of the ultimate basic element.  
 
The te n aspects are:  
1. the entity  
2. the causes  
3. the effect  
4. the function  
5. the possession  
6. manifestation  
7. states  
8. the meaning of omnipresence  
9. immutability at all times  
10. undifferentiability  [of the final] qualities  
 
1 & 2. The e ntity and the causes  
Verse 30 talks about the first two aspects , the entity and the causes.  
 
Verse 30  (a,b)  
Like the [natural] purity of a jewel, space, and water,  
The nature [of the basic constituent] is always unafflicted.  
 
This is the aspect of the enti ty or  nature . 
 
“Like the [natural] purity of a  jewel, space, and water ”: Here in Verse 30, there are 
these three things: jewel, space and water.  
 
~ Jewel  
Earlier  on, we had seen through the perspective of the result, the perspective of 
nature and through the perspective of the cause , how all sentient  beings are  said to 
possess  the tathagata essence .  Of the three, the first explanation from the 
perspective of the result  shows how the enlightened activities of the dharmakaya 
emanate to and pervade all sentient beings.  “Jewel ” here is analogous of the 
dharmakaya  (or truth body) . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 8 of 10 
 ~ Space  
The second reason that was posited for all sentient beings possessing the tathagata 
essence is the undifferentiable nature of the suchness of the minds of sentient beings 
mind and the suchness of a buddha’s mind . This is explained through the analogy of 
space.  
 
~ Water  
The fact that we have the tathagata essence is because we possess the buddha 
lineage . This is explained through the analogy of water.   
 
These analogies are supposed to help us understand the first aspect, e ntity. The point 
of understanding them is to arrive at the understanding that the nature of mind is 
clear light.  
  
Verse 30 (c,d)  
It arises from (1) devotion to the [Great Vehicle] doctrine, (2) the 
higher wisdom [realizing selflessness],  
(3) [The immeasu rable] meditative stabilization [endowed with 
bliss], and (4) compassion [for sentient beings].  
 
This is the aspect of the causes , of which there are four:   
“(1) D evotion to the [Great Vehicle] doctrine ”: The doctrine here is the Mahayana 
doctrine.  
“(2) The higher wisdom [realizing selflessness]”  
“(3) [ The immeasurable] meditative stabilization  [endowed with bliss]”: Here it is 
the meditative stabili sation of the space  treasure . I guess you can posit this 
meditative stabili sation to be the meditative stab ilisation of a bodhisattva.  
“(4) Compassion [for sentient beings]” refer s to great compassion.   
 
One needs a stable devotion to the  presentation of causality as explained in the 
Mahayana. Based on that , one generates great compassion and the mind of 
enlig htenment . After which one meditate s on and develop s calm abiding and special 
insight.  
 
This is just a brief presentation of the entity and the causes. The elaborate 
explanation s will come later.  
 
There must be something that serves  as the means  of purifi cation  of the mind . That  
does  not happen without applying the antidotes . Therefore , the four causes are 
discussed here.  
 
Although the mind is pure by nature , it is accompanied with the defilements. 
Similarly , suchness is naturally pure but it is accompani ed with defilement , so it is 
suchness with defilement . However, t he defilements are adventitious . Although it is 
naturally  pure , it is accompanied by these adventitious defilements. If we do not 
remove these adventitious defilements , we will not actuali se the d harmakaya.  
 
So w hat do we need to do to get rid of these adventitious defilements? These are the 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 9 of 10 
 four causes given here.  
 
~ More on the entity  
Verse 31 is  a slightly more extensive explanation of the first aspect , the entity.  
 
Verse 31  
Because of [h aving] the power [of fulfilling hopes], of not changing 
to anything other [in nature],  
And of being a nature whose entity is moist [with compassion],  
[The basic constituent] is qualitatively similar to the features  
Of a precious [wish -granting] jewel, spac e, and water.  
 
“Because of [having] the power [of fulfilling hopes] ”: The dharmakaya is said to 
possess  the power to fulfill the wishes and welfare of all the sentient beings. 
Likewise, from the side of sentient beings, they a lso have th e power and ability  to be 
touched by or receive the enlightened activities of the dharmakaya.  
 
“Of not changing to anything other [in nature]” : The nature of suchness will never 
change into something of a different nature.  Just as uncompounded space is nothing 
more than the mere absence of obstructiveness , suchness is nothing more than the 
mere negation of true existence . This mere negation of true existence i s suchness , 
nothing more and nothing less. Whether it is the suchness with defilement or 
suchness without defilement, the nature of suchness is the mere negation of true 
existence.  
 
“And of being a nature whose entity is moist [with compassion]” : Just as it is the 
nature of water to be moist , in the same way, all sentient beings  by nature  have 
within them the potential to  become enlightened. There are something within every 
sentient being  that is suitable to be transform ed into the dharm akaya and the 
rupakaya. It is also said that just as water is moist, all sentient beings by nature are 
compassionate.  
 
If you think about  this, logically speaking, you have to say that there has never been a 
time whe n we have not developed compassion towards  every sentient being. There 
isn’t a sentient being in existence that  has not been an object of our compassion . If 
you think along the lines of the seven -fold cause and effect instruction s where it says 
there isn’t a sentient being who has  not been our mother  or our loved one, th e 
reasoning here is similar to that.  
  
The reason why our compassion  does not manifest towards all sentient be ings is 
because whatever compassion we have is obstructed and destroyed by our anger. 
Also  it is because we do  not cultivate the mind of compassion by bringing  together all 
the causes and conditions for it to arise. If we can bring th ose causes and conditi ons 
together and generate compassion for one sentient being , there is no reason why we 
cannot extend that compassion  to every sentient being.  
 
First, logically  speaking, there isn’t a sentient being whom we have never felt any 
compassion for. This means that we have felt compassion for every sentient being 
Amitabha Buddhist Cent re                                                                                Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 12  
Page 10 of 10 
 sometime in the past. If the causes for this compassion  to diminish are not present, 
there is nothing to stop this compassion f rom manifesting . Then one would ha ve to 
say that one can develop compassion for all sentient beings . Since there isn’t a 
sentient being for who m we have never felt compassion , that means we all have the 
capacity  to feel compassion. That means by nature we are compassionate . If we can 
feel compassion for one sentient being , logical ly by extension , we can feel 
compassion for all sentient beings.  
 
So because of having the power to fulfill  hopes, of not changing in its nature  and 
being a nature that is moist with compassion,  the basic constituent is qualitatively 
similar to the featur es of the analogies used earlier —the jewel, space and water.  
   
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 29 MARCH 2015  
 
1. Among the seven vajra topics, the first three are objects of attainment. How does 
the remaining four vajra topics act as causes and conditions f or achieving these 
objects of attainment?  
2. The Buddha Jewel possesses eight qualities. How are the first three qualities 
related to the fulfilment of one’s own purpose and the next three qualities related 
to the fulfilment of the purpose of others?  
3. With ref erence to Verse 9, how is “Obeisance to the sun of excellent doctrine, not 
non-existent, / Not existent, not existent and non -existent, and not analyzable as 
other/ than existent and non -existent, devoid of description, / Known by oneself 
individually, qui escent” an explanation of true cessations and how is the 
remainder of this verse an explanation of true paths?  
Verse 9  
Obeisance to the sun of excellent doctrine, not non -existent,  
Not existent, not existent and non -existent, and not analyzable as 
other th an existent and non -existent, devoid of description,  
Known by oneself individually, quiescent, undefiled, illumined with 
the light rays of exalted wisdom,  
And thoroughly destroying desire, hatred, and obscuration with 
respect to all objects of observation.  
 
4. With reference to Verse 13 and the first six qualities of the Sangha Jewel, identify 
the words in this verse that relate to each of the qualities.   
Verse 13  
Obeisance to those who, having thoroughly realized the limit or 
quiescence of selflessness in al l transmigrators  
Through perceiving the non -[inherent] existence of the entities of 
the afflictive emotions due to the natural clear light of the mind,  
Perceive perfect Buddhahood as residing in all, to those whose 
intelligence is unobstructed,  
And who are  endowed with sight of the exalted wisdom that has as 
its objects the purity and infinity of sentient beings.  
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  