Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L15 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:43.924085
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 15                              9 April 2015  
 
 
Buddha lineage according to the four Buddhist tenets.  
 
 
Question:  The Sangha J ewe l possesses the knowledge of the mode  of phenomena 
because it directly perceive s the clear light nature of the mind and that afflictions  are 
adventitious. Is a true path then essentially a direct realisation  of the clear light 
nature of the mind?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. 
 
Question : Is the wisdom of subsequent attainment the mind that realises the variet ies 
of phenomena ?  
 
Answer:  Yes.  
 
Question:  What kind of mind is that? Among the seven types of mind w e learnt in 
Lorig , I am wondering which one it is.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you wonder?  
 
Student 1 : Are we not supposed to wonder?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : If you say you are wonder ing, when  I answer yes, immediately you must 
have something to say. Otherwise, y ou a re not wondering. Wonder ing means that if I 
said yes  to your question , you must say something  in response . Yes or no , whatever I say , 
you have to say something. But w hen I ask you further , you just keep quiet . Then you 
are not wondering.  
 
This topic is di fficult . Are y ou enjoy ing it or feeling bored? Y ou want to challenge 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 2 of 11 yourself or not ? It is challenging  for me too. ( Laughs). It is even more challenging than 
when I was studying . It is really difficult  even for me .   
 
At the same time , you can’t say , “I don’t understand ,” because it depends on  how much 
effort you pu t in. So you must be real istic  with regard to what  you can understand. If 
you hear the teachings once and you expect to understand everything,  then  that is not 
possible. Even when I read the tex t ten times, I still don’t get everything.  So this is not an 
easy topic.  
 
In the monastery , we had many different teachers, not just one teacher. E ach teacher  
taught differently. We read . We  memori sed. We had to put in a l ot of effort. For 
example, the qua lities of the Sangha Jewel,  the Buddha J ewel  and so forth. I n the 
monastery , we ha d to memorise every single word.  
 
Of course here we are not studying in that way but we should try our best to understand 
the meaning as much as possible. You need to read t he transcript s repeatedly, maybe 
ten, twenty times .  
 
Do not think  it is like reading the Diamond Cutter Sutra  or the Sanghata S utra . I am not 
referring to that type of readi ng. But here, take your time to read, think  about what you 
have read, then ask que stion s. I think even reading this text need s a lot of effort  on your 
part.  
  
In the first Basic P rogram , at that time, I talk ed a lot , encourag ing the students to 
study.  I know this topic  is difficult . But if you really want to study, if you have the stro ng 
wish to study, I think you need  to put in m ore effort. Reading, listening, with the 
recognition that this is something important. Some of the quotation s, parts of the root 
text should  be memori sed. But it is difficult I know . What yo u are learning here is 
almost , more or less, like what monks studying to be g eshe s are studying .  
  
Even t he words  are difficult . Some of the Tibetan word s are difficult even for me. Even 
the commentaries  are difficult. S ometimes I don’t know what they are talking about , 
what  they are getting at.  
 
Then when you translate int o English , of course , the words and the terms used are 
totally new to you . In the first place, you are not getti ng the word s. Second ly, you are 
not getting the ir meaning. So I understand the challenge is t here . But as I have 
mentioned before, you should get the word s first . The word s, whatever they may be,  
should be memori sed. Then after  that , the second thing is to understand the meaning of 
the word s. So first, you are just learning the word s. After that , you learn the ir meaning. 
So it is important to put  in some effort.  
 
Last time , I used to talk a lot. T hat is how we came to have this book , Daily Reflection s. 
But for this Basic P rogram , I thought maybe there was no need to  talk so much. Anyway  
from what I can see, the first batch of students and this group are different .   
When I start ed the first Basic P rogram, most of the students have already been with 
ABC for a long time . But among t his group , many people are new to ABC  and are mainly 
beginner s. So th ere is bound to be some ch alleng es and d ifficult ies.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 3 of 11 But what I a m saying is that if you really want to study, then you need to put in some 
effort. You need to r ead the root text, all the transcript s and so forth. If yo u read  the text 
five, ten times, yo u will get something  out of it. So do put in some effort.  
 
Of course , as I mentioned before, sometimes when we don’t understand , we also need to 
do some prayer s. There are many obstacles  so sometimes , you may feel  discouraged  and 
you s top coming for class es. Then you l ose all the opportunit ies to study. So you need to 
make prayer s all the time.  
 
I have mention ed before  that for me the prayer s work. When I was studying in Sera, 
every morning , when we  had puja at 5.30  am, I would go to the gompa and the first 
thing  I did was to go to the altar, seeing all the holy objects  and the Hayagriva statue 
there . Then I made a strong prayer every morning for success in my stud ies. I did that 
all the time . Every morning I would go to pray like that. For me, that helped  me to 
continue  and to complete my studies.  
 
So here we need to make strong prayer s also . Each time you make strong prayer s, you 
are encouraging yourself to study more. Sometimes when you don’t have the  
encouragement from such p rayer s, the moment you enco unter some  difficult ies, you 
just stop. Once you stop , it is quite difficult to come back and to continue  with your 
studies . 
 
So it is extremely important not to break  your class  attendance, not to discontinue your 
studies and not to give up your interest in your studies. So for those  of you who  wish to 
study , then you must do th is—make prayer s, work hard and  don’t be discourage d. Of 
course , these topic s are not easy, but you can achieve some  understanding . Once you 
understand a little bit, you will be able  to appreciat e the Buddha’s teachings so that 
means  you are appreciating  the Buddha. This is important. That  is what I have 
mentioned before many times .  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Today , I am going to try a slightly differe nt approach . Maybe it will be better . I don’t 
know . (Laugh s). Sometimes I don’t know how to make things simple r. 
 
BUDDHA LINEAGE ACCORDING TO THE FOUR TENETS   
 
When we talk about lineage  or rig in Tibetan, what exactly is it? Th is depends on 
your perspective . You know there are different Buddhist ten ets.  
 
Great Exposition School (GES)  
According to the Vaibashika s or the proponents  of the Great E xposition  School  (GES), 
lineage is the virtuous mental factor of non -attachment , which is the substantial 
cause for the reali sations  in the continuum of a sup erior . This is posited as the 
lineage  and it can be explained as to how this lineage moves to the buddha ground . 
 
The proponents of the GES  are followers of and depend on the sutras  so they cite the 
sutras . For example , in the Vinaya , which are the instruc tions for the ordained 
community:  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 4 of 11  It is mentioned that contentment, the mind of no -need, is the superior’s lineage.  
The import of that is  basically  non -attachment  since c ontentment is non -
attachment .  
 It stipulates the number of articles , robes  and so fort h that one  should have , the 
point being that one should be content with few needs .   
 It says also being content with receiving  alms is the lineage of the superiors. 
Again, the import is not to be attached to objects of enjoyment  such as food and 
so forth.  
 It mention s that one should be content with one’s living abode and even the 
mattress  one has, i.e., one should be  content with  a simple and humble abode.  
 It says that abandonment and meditation is the lineage of the superior. 
Abandonment means abandoning  the afflictions and then cultivating a liking for 
meditation .   
 
In short, one should have contentment with regard  to one’s robes, place of abode  and 
food. This means to have a mind of non -attachment , the mental factor of non -
attachment  and it is t his min d that is the cause for the generation of reali sations in 
the continuum of a superior.   
 
The first three —being content with one’s robes, one’s abode  and one’s food —are the 
indirect causes for the generation of the qualities of reali sations in the continuum  of 
the superior.  
 
The abandonment of the afflictions and the liking for meditation directly relate to the 
mental factor of non -attachment  and these are the direct causes for the generation o f 
reali sations in the continuum of a superior.  Living a simple an d contented life —a life 
where one does not have much wants  and needs —make s it possible for one to be 
able to strive in abandoning the afflictions and in one’s medi tation  practice .  
 
For the proponents of the GES , whether someone possess es the lineage or no t 
depends very much on whether the things that we have mentioned  exist in the 
person’s mind :   
 Does the person have few needs?  
 Is the person content?  
 Does the person have a liking for working with the afflictions and abando ning 
them?  
 Does the person have a liking for meditation?  
 
If th ese are present in the mind of a person , then the person is said to possess the 
lineage , which means  to say that  the GES  does not assert that all sentient beings have 
the lineage.  
 
From the perspective of the GES , how do you know whether a person has lineage or 
not? If a person has many need s, much desire  and is not content ed, obviously th at 
person is nowhere near to becoming a buddha . As such, according to this view, most 
ordinary folks do not have th e lineage.  
There  is some sense to this assertion of the GES . There i s a point to living a simple 
content ed life. This is important before you can even talk about enlightenment  or 
becoming a buddha.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 5 of 11  
The case made by the GES  is that the lineage is the mental factor of non -atta chment, 
which is the cause for the generation of reali sation s in the continuum of a superior. 
When a  person is content ed—in the case of ordained people , with simple robes,  
simple food and a simple abode —that mind of contentment is helpful in turning 
away the concept of things belonging to  ‘me,’ as being ‘ mine, mine, mine ’. It is said 
that th e mind of contentment in relation to those three things can turn away th e 
manifest apprehension of ‘min e’.  
 
Without working with our attachment, without lessening and turning our back 
agains t desires and attachment s, there i s no way to be liberated from cycl ic 
existence. A s such, there i s no way to become a buddha. The whole point is to turn 
our back to attachment  and not to follow attachment  from the beginning . In orde r to 
turn away attachment, we need to practi se contentment. So i n this case, if one is 
content  and satisfied with simple clothes, food and abode , that can help in turning 
away manifest desire or attachment.  
 
Here, when we talk about attachment or craving , it is either attachment to the ‘I’ , the 
self or attachment to that which belongs to this ‘I’, i.e., attachment to  that which is  
‘mine ’. By living a simple life with regards to those three things, one can turn away 
the manifest attachment  or clinging to ‘mine’.   
 
If we think about this well and are honest  with ourselves , how is it possible to 
develop the qualities and reali sations of a superior if we do not turn away from 
attachment?  No matter how we look at it, there  is no way we can achieve anything 
without giving up desire and attachment. If that i s the case , then for a person who 
does not give up attachment  or desire, how can we say that this person possesses the 
lineage of a superior? You need to think about this.  
 
In a previous lesson, we had look ed at the three types of person s, i.e., those who 
possess the different kinds of obscurations.  
 
Within the first category —those w ho love samsara —there are  those who love 
samsara  and do not desire liberation  even though they accept that liberation exists .  
But it doesn’t matter wheth er one accept s liberation or not. One may want liberation , 
but if one love s samsara, there  is no way one can achieve liberation , no matter how 
much one may believe in its existence. Such people happily enter into samsara 
because t hey love samsara  but t here i s no way to generate the reali sation s of a 
superior if one does not turn away from or give up attachment.  
 
 As such, to be content with a simple life , specifically to have simple clothes, 
simple food and a simple abode , countera ct the manifest attachment to ‘mine ’.  
 In order for something to be a lineage of a superior, it must be a producer of a 
reali sation in the continuum of a superior. Having a liking for abandoning the 
afflictions and for meditation is that which enables th e individual to overcome the 
attachment to the self once and for all .  
Contentment arises from seeing tha t there i s no point in having many possessions, 
that there is no point in having a life that is not simple. It is a mind of non -
attachment. But c ontentme nt doesn’t happen just because one has nothing.  Having 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 6 of 11 nothing doesn’t mean that one is content.  But contentment comes about through 
seeing that the re is no point to having many possessions. Then one would have no 
issues  and be h appy to abandon such things  and not cling to them . One will have a 
liking for a simple life, and a liking for abandoning attachment. One will like to 
meditate  and t hrough that one can cut , once and for all , the attachment to the self.   
 
This makes so much sense  and is summari sed by Je Rinpoche (Lama Tsong khapa ) in 
the last verse of the Three Princip les of the Path:   
 
In this way, you realise exactly  
The vital points of the three principal aspects of the path.  
Resort to seeking solitude, generate the power of effort,  
And quickly acco mplish your final goal, my child.  
 
It is only by going into isolation  or solitary retreat that one can distance oneself from 
all the hustle and b ustle of life . Only with such a lifestyle  will there be the 
opportunity for the mind to settle down naturally. The afflictions —anger, attachment 
and ignorance —will weaken  and subside . Through practic e and by cultivating  the 
mind, one will then have a chance of achiev ing one’s final goal. We are talking here 
about the goal of definite goodness , i.e., liberation from  samsara and the attainment 
of full  enlightenment.   
 
All these conditions will make a huge difference in enabling you to be able to develop 
experiences and reali sations of the path. The place  you live in make s a difference . Not 
only that . You must exert jo yous effort  with a real liking for what you have to do , 
supported by your strong remembrance of death and impermanence  and that death 
can come quickly . W hen such conditions come together, I think that you will 
definitely achie ve some experi ences and reali sations.   
 
If we look at the kind of lif estyle that we lead as city dwellers, h ow is it possible to 
say that we possess the lineage of the superior s? It is not possible . Obviously then 
there is no enlightenment . Not working with attachment means that  there  can be no 
reali sation s. Therefore , we don’t find people with reali sation s. The situation is such 
that all the teachers don’t have reali sation s and all the students don’t have 
reali sation s. That is the reality.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: We are all in samsara  together . 
 
It should be like th is: A s Lama Tsongkhapa said , you  have to study the teaching s well 
and th ink about them with some conviction . Then you enter into an isolation retreat . 
You cultivate your mind and gain some experiences and reali sations . Only then can 
you emerge and impart your  knowledge to others .  Only then are you talking from 
your own experience.  
 
However, i n this day and age, such practitioners are practically non -existen t. They 
are very rare. Those who are teaching are teaching from mere knowledg e, i.e., they 
are only imparting their intellectual knowledge  of the teachings . That is the reality  
today.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 7 of 11  
Sutra School  
The proponents of the Sutra  School  (SS) also have their own take on what the lineage 
is. For them, the lineage  is the potential  or th e capacity that can produce an 
uncontaminated mind  in the continuum of a sentient being.  
 
Mind Only School   
The proponent s of the Mind  Only School (MOS) posit something similar . For the MOS, 
the lineage is th e seed in the continuum of a sentient being th at produces the 
uncontaminated mind. But according to the MOS, there are three characteristics:   
1. This uncontaminated mind has existed since time without beginning , transit ing 
from one uncontaminated mind to another.  
2. The potential has also existed from the very beginning , i.e., by nature , it has 
always been there.  
3. This potential exists on the sixth consciousness , the mental consciousness.  
 
For the MOS  that assert s the four bodies, the lineage is posited as the seed existing in 
the mind that has the potential  to bring forth the arising of the uncontaminated mind . 
This lineage is divided into two: - 
1. the naturally abiding lineage , which is posited as the lineage that exists at the 
time when it is not nourished or activated by hearing, reflection and meditation.  
2. the develop mental lineage , which is posited as the lineage that exists during the 
time when it is nourished or activated by hearing, reflection and meditation.  
 
There  is a reason why the MOS  calls the seed that can produce the uncontaminated 
mind as the lin eage . Because of th at seed , then the uncontaminated wisdom can be 
generated . Through that , one achieves the wisdom of a buddha. As such , for the MOS, 
that seed is called the lineage.  
 
Middle Way School  
For the proponents of the Middle Way School (MW S), the  lineage is the mind’s 
emptiness of true existence. They talk about the mind being in the nature of clear 
light. This clear light nature of the mind or the mind’s emptiness has never been 
polluted by the adventitious defilements  but the mind is obscured by  the 
adventitious defilements.  
 
Since the nature of the emptiness of a buddha’s mind is no differen t from the nature 
of the emptiness of a sentient being’s mind, as such, the emptiness of true existence 
of a sentient being’s mind is called the lineage.  Both are the same in that the 
adventitious defilements have never abided or resided within the nature of those 
minds .  
  
There is the naturally abiding lineag e and the developmental lineage.  The mind and 
the mind’s emptiness of true existence are not the sam e thing . The m ind that is clear 
and knowing has th e capacity  and nature to cogni se (or be aware) . It is an awareness. 
As such , can we call : 
 the mind  the developmental lineage  and   
 the mind’s emptiness of true existence as the naturally abiding lineage ?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 8 of 11 The mind and th e mind’s emptiness of true existence are one entity. They are 
different but not separate.  
 
From the very beginning of th is root  text , when we were looking at the f ourth vajra 
topic —the basic constituent —we s aw how we can look at it from the  perspective of 
the conventional and  from  the perspective of the ultimate : 
 What  is posited as the conventional basic constituent  is the mind itself . 
 From the ultimate point of view, it is the mind’s emptiness of true existence.  
 
If it is the buddha l ineag e, it must necessarily go  on to enlightenment.  Having said 
that , if we take : 
 the developmental lineage to be the mind itself and  
 the naturally abiding lineage  to be the mind’s emptiness of true existence   
are we saying that all minds go  on to enlightenme nt?  No. Obviously , not all minds go 
on to enlightenment. How can afflictions go  on to enlightenment?   
 
So w hen we say that the mind is the conventional buddha lineage  or the 
developmental lineage, we are not talking about all minds . We are only referring to 
the mind in general. You must understand  this.  
 
Since a sentient being  possesses a mind —we can take that to be the developmental 
lineage or the conventional buddha lineage —and the ultimate nature of that mind is  
its emptiness of true existence —we can take that to be the naturally abiding 
lineage —therefore , it follows that sentient beings necessarily possess the buddha 
lineage  (or buddha nature) . 
 
Sentient beings’ minds are currently obscured by adventitious defilements. Can the 
adventitious defilements  be removed? Yes, they can be removed because they are  
adventitious . 
 
The nature of the mind  is clear light  and is empty of true existence . The mind’s 
emptiness of true existence —the naturally abiding lineage —is currently covered or 
accompanied by adventit ious defilement s. But because the mind is by nature empty 
of existing truly , therefore , these defilements that accompany  this emptiness (or 
suchness) can be removed. So a gain it goes back to the tathagata essence , the mind’s 
emptiness of true existence.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Are y ou following this or is it too difficult?  
 
When you compare the MOS'  assertion of lineage and the MWS’  assertion of lineage, 
is there a ny difference  between the two ?  
 
What the MOS  assert s to be the lineage is the seed  that produces the uncontaminated 
mind and this seed has three characteristics. Then the naturally abiding lineage is 
that  lineage which exists when there is no  enhancement , activation or nourishment 
by hearing, reflection and meditation.   
 
But a ccording to the MWS, tha t ass ertion does not fulfil the meaning of naturally 
abiding lineage. The MWS asserts that a seed that has the capacity to generate an 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 9 of 11 uncontaminated wisdom  is the result of causes and conditions . As such , it is freshly 
or newly produced. As such , it does not abide naturally , i.e., it is not there by nature .  
 
Then what do the  MWS  assert to be the naturally abiding lineage?  It is t he mind’s 
emptiness of true existence. The mind’s emptiness of true existence is the ultimate 
nature of the mind  and has existed wit h the mind from when time existed, i.e., for 
beginningless lifetimes .  
 
Emptiness is a permanent phenomenon. A s such , it is not freshly  or newly produced. 
According to the MWS , when you search for th e truly  existen t mind, when you are 
trying to look for th e imputed object, what you find at the end of the day is not the 
truly existent mind. What you find at the end of your correct analysis is the mind’s 
emptiness.  But that does  not mean that the mind is non -existen t. Obviously t he mind 
exist s.  
 
The natural conclusion that arises from that  analysis is that the mind is none other 
than that which is merely imputed by mind. The mind exists in mere name.   
 
When the mind of a sentient being is completely free  of the adventitious defilements, 
that mind acquires a n ew name, th e wisdom truth body.  
 
You have the m ind of a sentient being . This mind is currently obscured by 
adventitious defilements . W hen those adventitious defilements are completely 
removed , then the mind is not accompanied by adventitious defilement s any more . 
That mind is no  longer called  the mind of a sentient being. It acquires a new name , 
the wisdom truth body. T he wisdom truth body’ s emptiness of true existence is the 
nature body.   
 
During the time when he is not a buddha, as a sentient being, his mind ’s emptiness is 
called suchness with defilement , the tathagata essence. At the time of enlightenment , 
when the mind is free of all adventitious defilements , that wisdom truth body’ s 
emptiness  of true existence is call the nature body.   
 
This means tha t the re exist s in every sentient being ’s continuum th e very capacity or 
potential to achieve the wisdom truth body and the nature body. Why  is that so ? 
Because if we are a sentient being, we naturally have a mind , which has the potential 
to transform into the wisdom truth body of a buddha . If we have a mind, whether we 
reali se it or not, the mind by nature is empty of true existen ce. The mind’s emptiness 
of true existence  is that which will become the nature body  when all the defilements 
have been eliminate d. Since all sentient beings possess a mind and since the ultimate 
nature of th at mind is the emptiness of true existence , from th is, can we then agree 
from this that all sentient beings possess  the tathagata essence? If we think along 
these lines, we can have some idea o f how all sentient beings possess the lineage.  
This is basically  how  all sentient beings can become buddha s.  
 
In the earlier discussion  on the fourth topic —the basic constituent —which is the 
tathagata essence or the lineage, you can talk a bout it from the conventional point of 
view and the ultimate  point of view; e ssentially one is a conventional truth and one is 
an ultimate truth.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 10 of 11  
Therefore, the MWS says that since all sentient beings  possess the buddha lineage , 
there isn’t a sentient be ing who will not become a buddha. So all sentient beings who 
are waiting to become buddhas  will become buddhas.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Question:  Are t he terms  buddha lineage, buddha nature, tathagata essence  and basic 
constituent exactly the same? I  am wonder ing whether there is only one term in 
Tibetan.  
 
Answer : In Tibetan, the basic constituent  is kham ; the tathagata essence  is de zhin  
nying po; and the buddha lineage  is rig. We can think of the se three —basic 
constituent ( kham ), the tathagata essence ( de zhin  nyin gpo) and the lineage ( rig)—as 
referring to the same thing but it depends on how we explain  them . Generally,  you 
could say that they are talking about the same thing.  
 
But if you talk about the basic constituent or the t athagata essence, sometimes in 
Tibet an, the two terms go together , kham de  zhin nyingpo. In English , this is ‘ the 
essence of the one thus gone ’. But t hose words —whether you put them together or 
apart —primarily  refer to the mind’s emptiness of true existence .  
 
The word, lineage , can refer to  the naturally abiding lineage but primarily , it is 
referring to the developmental lineage , whereas the basic constituent and the 
tathagata essence primarily refer to the naturally abiding lineage.  
 
But I don’t think there is any issue if you were to take  them all to mean the same  
thing. It is just a matter  of how you phrase it or how you explain the term . If you 
explain ‘lineage ’ to include the naturally abiding lineage besides the developmental 
lineage, it is driving at the same thing. If you were to say that they are all the same, 
there is no problem .  
 
If some one were to ask  you about  the tathagata essence , then you can say, “The 
tathag ata essence is divided into two . There i s the naturally abiding lineage  and there 
is the developmental lineage. ” Or if some one were to ask you about lineage, you can 
say. “There are two lineages: th e naturally abiding lineage and the developmental 
lineage. ” 
 
(In response to a student’s qualm) We are not saying that the tathagata essence is the 
developmental lineage. We are  not saying that. But w hen the y are divided into two, 
then there are two lineages.   
 
Question : In the Heart S utra , when it says “How should any son of the lineage  train 
who wishes to practi se the activit y of the profound perfection of the wisdom ?” does 
that refer to the tathagata essence?  
 
Answer:  The son or the daught er of the lineage mentioned in the Heart of the 
Perfection of Wisdom S utra  does not refer to all sentient beings.  The lineage here 
refers to the one who p ossesses the Mahayana lineage  and whose Mahayana lineage 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
Lesson 15  
Page 11 of 11 has been awaken ed. Essentially we are referring to the bodhisattvas.  
 
Question : Tonight I heard the mind being in the nature of clear light is emptiness and 
that emptiness is permanent since beginningless time. Previously  I had asked if the 
clear light  was permanent or impermanent . The answer was that it was 
impermanent. Tonight I hear something different  being mentioned .  I would like to 
clarify where I have gone wrong.  
 
Answer:  The statement is that the nature of the mind is clear lig ht. The mind’s nature 
is clear light . The mind’s nature here is referring to its ultimate nature, i.e., its 
emptiness of true existence. S o that is clear light  because the adventitious 
defilements have never resided within the nature of th at mind.  
 
Student : Is that not permanent?  I was asking about clear light mind being permanent 
or impermanent  in Lesson 1 . 
 
Answer:  The mind’s factor of luminosity  and knowing  (or clear and knowing ) is a 
composite phenomenon , i.e., an imp ermanent phenomenon.  
 
Student : But I was asking about clear light.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : OK. We will t alk about this next time.  
 
LINEAGE ACCORDING TO THE FOUR BUDDHIST TENETS  
Great 
Exposition 
School  Lineage is the virtuous mental factor of non -attachment , which is the substantial 
cause for the r ealisations in the continuum of a superior. This is that which moves 
to the Buddha ground . 
Sutra School  Lineage is the potential for the generation of an uncontaminated mind in the 
continuum of a sentient being . 
Mind Only 
School  Lineage is the seed in th e continuum of a sentient being that produces the 
uncontaminated mind with three characteristics:  
1. This uncontaminated mind has existed since time without beginning , transiting 
from one uncontaminated mind to another.  
2. The potential has existed from the beg inning and by nature has always been 
there.  
3. This potential exists on the sixth consciousness , the mental consciousness.  
The lineage is divided into:  
1. the n aturally abiding lineage  that exists at the time when it is not nourished or 
activated by hearing, ref lection and meditation.  
2. the d evelop mental lineage  that exists during the time when it is nourished or 
activated by hearing, reflection and meditation  
 Middle Way  
School  Lineage is the mind’s emptiness of true existence . Since the nature of the emptiness 
of a buddha’s mind is no different from the nature of the emptiness of a sentient 
being’s mind, as such, the emptiness of true existence of a sentient being’s mind is 
called the lineage. Both are the same in that the adventitious defilements have 
never abid ed or resided within the nature of those minds.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng  & Aki Yeo ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  