Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L25final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:43.574111
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 1 of 13 Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana, Chapter One: The 
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter, translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007).  
 
Lesson 25                            23 June 2015  
 
 
Awakening the lineage. Mani festation of the tathagata essence. Chapter One: The Essence of a 
One Gone Thus.  Verses 1 54—158: The person who realises the tathagata essence.  Sharing by 
a student.  
 
 
AWAKENING THE LINEAGE  
 
I have mentioned that in order for us to awaken the lineage , we have to focus on two 
things : 
 We have to engage in hearing, reflection and meditation .  
 We need to work hard at accumulating merit and purify ing the mind of  
negativities and obscurations.  
 
In order to be able to do a good practice of accumulating merit and purify ing the 
mind of obscurations and negativities, we need to have a good practice of going for 
refuge to the Three Jewels. If we have good refuge in our heart, then the practice s of 
accumulating merit and purifying the mind of obscurations and negativit ies will be 
done well . This means we need to have faith in and devotion to the Three Jewels.  
 
Many different kinds of faith can be engendered in our mind . Here we are talking 
about the faith that comes from understanding and believing in the qualities of the 
Three Jewels.  If we have faith in and devotion  to the Three Jewels that come from 
knowing wh at their qualities  are, then we will also be able to develop trust  and faith 
in the workings of karma and its effects.  
 
With a strong  conviction in the working s of karma and its effects, we will be able to 
undertake  the proper practice of abandoning what needs to be abandoned and 
cultivating what need s to be cultivated. When we are able practise this well, naturally 
all the worries , fears , frustrations  and discu rsive thoughts that are associated with 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 2 of 13 the attachment to th e happiness of this life alone will naturally weaken and subside . 
This will in turn give us the mental space to really think about where we will be 
reborn in our next life. We will gradually devel op a sincere wish  and interest in 
having a good rebirth. Only then can we say that our Dharma practice has started . 
The beginning of our Dharma practice is like the entry level to the process of 
awakening the lineage in ourselves.  
  
It all comes back to our practice of refuge . If one has proper refuge, the thought of 
practi sing Dharma will arise in the mind. The various practices of a person of small 
capacity are the methods to help us develop a good practice of refuge . Then our  
Dharma practice can start a nd we  can begin to awaken our l ineage.   
 
But a fter reflecting on and generating an experience of all these points, much 
remains to be done. On the basis of th e practices mentioned above, then we can think 
of the various problems and sufferings of cyclic ex istence . We must recall again and 
again the problems of being in samsara, the general problems  and sufferings and the 
specific sufferings of the various realms . Then we can come to an understanding that 
any existence within the three realms of cyclic exist ence is in the nature of suffering.  
 
We also have to reflect on and understand the benefits of freedom from cyclic 
existence , i.e., the benefits of being liberated from cyclic existence . These points 
would help us to develop a yearning to achieve liberati on.  
 
Through the s ustained reflection on the faults of cyclic existence and the benefits of 
achieving liberation  from cyclic existence , having thought about these topics well, 
signs will manifest. F eeling that samsara is suffering  and yearning to be free from 
samsara, strong emotions may arise. One may cry or one’s bodily hairs may stand on 
end.  Such signs could mean that one is beginning to awaken the Hinayana lineage.  
 
When people who engage in sustained reflection generate a feeling for the emptiness 
of inherent existence, enlightenment, or the wish to develop the paths and grounds 
and so forth, these could be special signs indicating the awakening of the ir Mahayana 
lineage.  
 
The awakening of the lineage has to lead that individual into the path .  
 For a person who is awakening he r Hinayana lineage, th e awakening of that 
lineage should lead her into the Hinayana path, closer to liberation.  
 Likewise , for a person who is awakening he r Mahayana lineage, that awakening 
of the Mahayana lineage should bring her closer into entering the Mahayana path 
and thus closer to enlightenment.  
 
The Hinayana scriptures are taught for the person who has awakened the Hinayana 
lineage to enable him to move towards and achieve liberation. Likewise , the 
Mahayana scriptural collections are  taught to those who have awakened the ir 
Mahayana lineage in order to help them enter the path  and traverse the paths and 
grounds with the intention to lead the m towards enlightenment.   
 
For a person who is of definite Hinayana lineage, if he has awaken ed his Hinayana 
lineage, then one has to guide him by showing him the Hinayana scriptural collection 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 3 of 13 of teachings and lead him to the Hinayana path towards liberation. For such a person , 
if one was to show him the Mahayana teachings , it is said th at they will only become 
an obstacle for him. It is said that show ing him the Mahayana teachings will actually 
make him take a much longer time to achieve enlightenment.  
 
For the person of definite Hinayana lineage, even if he was show n the Mahayana 
teach ings and he manage d to generate bodhicitta, it is said that his bodhicitta  will 
degenerate and this becomes an obstacle for him to achieve enlightenment. So the 
way to help th e person  of definite Hinayana lineage achieve enlightenment in the 
long run  is to  show him the Hinayana path  for the time being and help him enter the 
Hinayana path.  
 
As can be seen from our discussion s so far, until we develop a real yearning for a 
good rebirth, it is extremely difficult for our activities to become Dharma practice . As 
we have seen, the entry -level meaning of awakening the lineage  can be taken to mean 
developing a real yearning from the heart to have good rebirths in the future.  
 
When you look at the treatises, you will find terms like , “awakening the Hinayana 
lineage ” and “the awakening  of the Mahayana lineage .” That is it . They don’t talk 
about awakening the lineage in the sense of developing a yearning for a good rebirth. 
But I guess by extrapolating from what is usually said , one can say that the minimum 
entry level  of awakening the lineage  is developing an interest in the happiness 
beyond this life.   
 
If one awakens the lineage of practi sing the Dharma —if that is really awakened — 
one’s yearning for good rebirth s and one’s yearning for  the happiness of future lives 
will become very stable  and unshake able. When one’s yearning for good rebirths is 
very stable, that becomes the basis  for one’s joyous effort in achieving good rebirths. 
That joyous effort will increase more and more.  It is said tha t with a stable heartfelt  
yearning —when one really care s about the happiness of one’s  future lives —that will 
become a foundation for one’s  effort to achieve that goal  to increase more and more.   
 
With that kind of effort, one prioriti ses Dharma practice above everything else . One 
prioriti ses Dharma practice to achieve good rebirths to be one’s main mission in life.  
When we are able to reach that level, then the expression , ‘to be free from the lower 
realms ’ carries some real meaning  and is really achievable.   
 
Likewise , when someon e who has awakened the Hinayana lineage is able to develop 
a very stable yearning for liberation from cyclic existence , that b ecomes the basis for 
his effort to increase more and more . It becomes possible for him to prioriti se the 
achievement of liberation  above everything else , focus sing on just that goal. When 
that happens , then he will quickly be  liberated from samsara.   
 
It is the same for those who have awakened the Mahayana lineage . They will develop 
a very strong yearning for full enlightenment. With  that strong and stable yearning 
for full enlightenment , that will lead to an increase in their effort . They will prioriti se 
the achievement of enlightenment above everything else , making it t heir main 
mission in life. T he result  then comes quickly.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 4 of 13 The buddha lineage consists  of two  lineages : 
1. the naturally abiding lineage in dependence on which one achieves the nature 
body at the end of the path.   
2. the developmental lineage  in dependence on which one achieves the form 
bodies —the complete enjoyment body a nd the emanation body —at the end of 
the path.  
  
Practices of the three types of persons  
In the stages of the path to enlightenment, we talked about the three types of person s: 
1. The person of small  capacity  
2. The person of  middling  capacity  
3. The person of great  capacity  
 
If you examine all the practices of a person of small capacity, essentially they help the 
individual to develop a sincere  and genuine interest in practi sing the Dharma , i.e., 
they awaken the lineage for practi sing the Dharma . This means that all  the practices 
are done initially  to help the individual to start think ing in this way, “The Dharma is 
something I need to do . I need to practi se the Dharma.”    
 
In order to develop such a thought from the heart —“The Dharma matters . I must 
practi se it.”—one has to meditate on the various levels of practices that are taught for 
a person of small  capacity . One should do them gradually in stages. Without going 
through those stages, without thinking about th em, it becomes extremely difficult to 
develop the genu ine thought of practi sing real Dharma.   
 
If we don’t eliminate our preoccupation with the happiness of this life, our 
attachment to this life, and we don’t develop a real yearning from the heart for the 
happiness of our future lives, it is very difficult to have th e real wish to practi se the 
Dharma.  
 
The practices for a person of medium capacity essentially are to help her awaken the 
Hinayana lineage and to lead her into the path towards liberation.  
 
Likewise , the practices for person of great capacity are  meant to awaken the 
Mahayana lineage and then lead her into the Mahayana path and towards full 
enlightenment.  
 
Why the lineage can be awakened  
All sentient beings can develop the thought to practi se the  Dharma . We can call th is 
awakening the lineage of pr acticing the Dharma. If such a lineage can be awakened, i t 
follows that such a lineage must exist already in all sentient beings , because without  
the lineage in the first place, one can’t  awaken it. That is the point.  
 
The fundamental essential point is th at our mind is empty of existing truly . The mind 
has never existed inherently . Because it does not exist inherently,  when favo urable  
conditions and positive causes are put in place, positive change can happen . If the 
mind has always been inherently existen t, it won’t matter what kind of positive 
conditions are encountered. C hange can never happen. Precisely because positive 
changes do happen when we put in place the correct positive causes and conditions , 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 5 of 13 this show s that the most fundamental nature of the m ind is its emptiness of existing 
inherently. As such , the mind’s emptiness of true existence is posited to be b uddha 
nature, the lineage  or the tathagata essence.   
 
Because  the mind is dependently arisen  (or dependently originated), it is empty of 
existing  inherently.  If the mind is not dependently arisen , it would mean that the 
mind exist s in and of itself. If that is the case, then there is nothing we can do with the 
mind for it will never change .   
 
Although the mind is accompanied by defilements (o r afflictions ), the defilements 
thems elves are also dependently arisen . As such , if the causes and conditions for the 
arising of the defilements are removed, the y cease to exist  and they will not arise. 
Because the defilements  do not exist inherently, therefore  the mind can be separated 
from the defilements.   
 The mind does not exist inherently . The mind is dependently arisen.   
 The d efilements do not exist inherently . They are dependently arisen.   
 As such , if one meets with the correct positive causes and condit ions, the 
defilements can be removed.  
 
The defilements are likened to the clouds that move temporar ily across the sky .  The 
sky is likened to the tathagata essence, the mind’s emptiness of true existence.  When 
the conditions come together for the clouds to dissipate , the clouds will dissipate . 
Then what is revealed is the sky itself . You see the clear blue sky  clearly .  
 
Likewise, with the gathering of proper causes and conditions, when the defilements 
are removed, what is revealed is th e fundamental natu re of the mind, the mind’s 
emptiness of true existence. When the defilements are removed, that basic nature  of 
the mind is no  longer accompanied by defilements . What we have is the mind’s 
emptiness of true existence ; in this case , a b uddha’s mind emptiness  of true existence. 
The buddha that we can become is not to be found somewhere outside . When the 
mind is accompanied by defilements, we are not a buddha, but when the defilements 
are removed, what is revealed is the  fundamental purity of the mind , the mind ’s 
emptiness of true existence . That is buddha hood . There is no need to point to 
anything else; that is buddha hood .  
 
As such , these are the ways to think about the lineage , the tathagata essence  and how 
the defilements are adventitious. When we talk about  the tathagata essence , this is 
the very essence . If w e understand th is, that is  it. 
 
Khen Rinpoche: So it is not so difficult . You can understand with just two sentences !  
 
MANIFESTATION OF THE TATHAGATA ESSENCE  
 
Question:  Is the ‘manifestation ’ of the buddha lineage the same as the ‘awakening ’ of 
the buddha lineage or does one ha ve a bigger pervasion? For example, without the 
three activities  of hearing, reflection and meditation, an animal gives rise to a 
virtuous thought  such as the c ompassion to protec t its young , would that be 
considered some kind of manifestation of the lineage?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 6 of 13  
Answer:  I have explained earlier what t he awakening of the lineage is .  
 
As for the manifestation of the lineage, when it is fully manifest, it is no longer called 
the lineag e. When the lineage is fully transformed  at the time of enlightenment , it is 
called the nature body. It is no longer  called  the lineage , the tathagata e ssence.  I 
guess this is what we can say . When the tathagata essence is fully manifest , it 
becomes the nature body. We don’t call the nature body the tathagata essence 
anymore  as it is not the lineage anymore.  
 
Earlier on , we talked about the different kinds of defilements such as the path of 
seeing abandonments and  the p ath of meditation abandonments. When o ne achieves 
the uninterrupted path  that is  the antidote to the path of seeing abandonments , then 
one achieve s the path of release of the path of seeing . Perhaps we can say that one 
achieve s the  manifestation of the tathagata essence that is the abandonment  of the 
path of seeing abandonments. When one achieve s the path of release of the path of 
seeing, one has  achieve d the cessation of the path of seeing abandonments.  
 
When one becomes  a foe destroyer, one has  abandoned all the afflictions  and one 
achieve s a true cessation , i.e., a n abandonment of the afflictions. I guess you can call  
the true cessation that is the abandonment of the afflictions to be a manifestation of 
the tathagata essence  that is an abandonment of the afflictions. Likewise, when one 
has achieve d the abandonment of the path of seeing  abandonments , a true  cessation, 
you can call that a manifestation of the tathagata essence , which is an abandonment 
of the path of seeing abandonments.  
 
This is debat able and is something for us to think about . For example, the true 
cessation that is achieved by the foe destroyers is the abandonment of the afflictive 
obscurations. Can we call that abandonment a manifestation of the tathagata essence  
that is an abandonment of the afflictive obscurations?  
 
When you debate, you can debate about the ch oice of words . For example, you can 
argue  that the true cessation that is achieved by foe destroyer is a manifestation of 
the tathagata essence  that is an abandonment of the afflictive obscurations but it  is 
not a man ifestation of the tathagata essence  because you can stick to your original 
thesis, the starting point of the debate . Your thesis  is something that you can never 
give up . Earlier on, we said that the manifestation of the tathagata essence only 
happens when you have achieve d the nature body, i.e., when the nature body is 
actuali sed. That i s the fundamental position you start with. Anyway, if you want 
debate , this is how you go about it.  
  
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, we have no time to debate.  
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
THE PE RSON WHO REALISES THE TATHAGATA ESSENCE  
 
Verse 154  
The ultimate [essence] of self -arisen [Buddhas, spontaneous and 
uncompounded]  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 7 of 13 Is to be realized through just faith [by common beings, Hearers, 
Solitary Realizers, and Bodhisattvas who have newly entered 
their vehicle and is not realized by them just as it is.  
For example] the blazing light of the disc of the sun  
Is not seen by the eyeless.  
 
It is said that ordinary beings who have not entered the paths  and even those beings 
who have entered the paths , such as the h earers , solitary realisers and the ordinary 
bodhisattvas , do not reali se the tathagata essence.  
 The ordinary beings who have not entered the paths  do not reali se the tathagata 
essence because they hold on to the ‘I’ and ‘mine’ very strongly. They do  not 
reali se emptiness .  
 The hearers  and solitary realisers have not reali sed the emptiness of true 
existence because they only reali se the coarse selflessness of persons  so th ey also 
do not reali se the tathagata essence.  
 Then there are some bodhisat tvas who have entered the path but have yet to 
reali se emptiness . These bodhisattvas also do not reali se the tathagata essence.  
 
The last two lines of verse 154 —“the blazing light of the disc of the sun / Is not seen 
by the eyeless ”—I am  not exactly sure w hat that means . Perhaps  it is saying that the 
tathagata essence is not reali sed by these four types of persons  who are ordinary 
beings .  These four specific types of ordinary beings do not reali se the tathagata 
essence. However, this is not the same as say ing that an ordinary being necessarily 
will not reali se emptiness or  the tathagata essence. That  is not the case.  
 
Verse 155  
This [basic constituent of the pure nature] has no [previously 
existent faults of afflictive emotions] to be removed,  
And not the  least [factor of good qualities] to be [newly] 
established.  
The reality [which is the mode of subsistence devoid of 
superimposition and deprecation] is to be viewed as reality [by 
means of the ultimate wisdom].  
When [upon developing familiarity with medit ative equipoise] 
reality is seen [just as it is], there is release [from the two 
obstructions].  
 
“This [basic constituent of the pure nature] has no [previously existent faults of  
afflictive emotions] to be removed,  /And not the least [factor of good quali ties] to be 
[newly] established ”: The first two lines is delineating the mode of abiding of the 
basis. “This [basic constituent of the pure nature ]”: The basic constituent is naturally 
pure and has never been truly existent in that it has never been an obj ect grasped by 
the apprehension of true existence. As such, this basic constituent “has no 
[previously existent faults o f afflictive emotions] to be removed ” because its true 
existence has never existed in the first place.  
 
The basic constituent has been naturally pure from the time it exi sted. There i s 
nothing to be removed , i.e., there are no defilements to be removed from the 
beginning because it has always been pure from the beginning.  The emptiness of a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 8 of 13 truly existent person or phenomen on, or the self lessness of persons and phenomena, 
is not newly created or newly established. The person s and all other phenomena 
have always been devoid of a self since  beginningless time. This has been their 
nature  from the very beginning .  
 
The object  believed by ignor ance , i.e., the object grasped at by the apprehension of 
true existence , has never existed. It has always been empty. That  is why we talk 
about the emptiness of true existence. This emptiness is the ultimate truth.   
 
“When [upon developing familiarity wit h meditative equipoise] reality is seen  [just 
as it is], there is rele ase [from the two obstructions]” : This is referring to the view 
that reali ses emptiness. The mind that reali ses the emptiness of person s and 
phenomena  exactly as they are is a mind that has fully internali sed the view. The 
result of familiari sing with such a view is that there is release from the obscurations. 
By familiari sing oneself over and over again with the view of emptiness , conjoin ed 
with the factor of method , compassion and bodhi citta , one w ill be able to remove the 
two obscurations.  
 
The next verse is a proof establishing what I have said with respect to V erse 155.  
 
Verse 156  
The essential constituent is empty of the adventitious [defilements]  
Which have the character of being s eparable [from its entity].  
It is not empty of the unsurpassed [qualities of the powers and so 
forth]  
Which have the character of not being separable [from it].  
 
I think the first two lines of Verse 156 are saying that if one meditates on the 
antidotes, th e defilements can be removed .  The ultimate nature of the mind , i.e., its 
emptiness of true existence, has always existed since beginningless time . That 
ultimate nature of the mind is not newly created or newly established. It has always 
been like that.  
 
This emptiness of true existence carries the potential for any individual  to achieve 
enlightenment and to acquire all the different qualities of buddhahood , such as the 
ten powers and so forth.  
 
As said earlier, the mind’s emptiness of true existence has a lways existed. That has 
always been the nature of the mind. As such, the mind has th e capacity to develop the 
qualities of enlightenment.   
 
When we talk about separating the defilements from the mind, it is not a separation 
that is newly arisen  or newly c reated , for from the very beginning, the nature of the 
mind is unafflicted  as the defilements have not abided in the nature of the mind. As 
such, we do not talk about newly separating the defilements from the nature of the 
mind  as its nature has never been  afflicted. Therefore, the defilements are 
adventitious. They are suitable to be removed  and t hey can be removed.  
 
Verse 157 expresses a qualm.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 9 of 13 Verse 157  
Throughout [the scriptures of the middle wheel of the doctrine] it is 
said that  all objects of know ledge are empty in all respects  
Like clouds [which are unstable and lack inherent existence], 
dreams [which,  although experienced, lack inherent existence], 
and a magician’s illusions  [which, although appearing, lack 
inherent existence],  
But why has the Co nqueror said here [in the scriptures of the final 
wheel of  doctrine]  
That the essence of a Buddha exists [from the start spontaneously 
in the  continuums of] sentient beings?  
 
In the second turning of the wheel of Dharma, in the Perfection of Wisdom  Sutra , the 
Buddha said that all phenomen a, i.e., “ all objects of knowledge ,” are “like clouds, 
[which are unstable and lack inherent existence], dreams [which, although 
experienced, lack inherent existence], and a magician’s illusions  [which, although 
appearing, lack inherent existence].” All phenomena are adventitious.  
 
But in the third turning of the wheel of Dharma, in the Tathagata garbha Sutra , the 
Buddha said that all sentient beings possess naturally this tathagata essence,  the 
essence of Buddha.  
 
Isn’t th is a contradiction? On the one hand , the Buddha said that all phenomena are 
like clouds, dreams, and a magician’s illusions , which are adventitious. Then on the 
other hand, the Buddha said that by nature, there  is something in sentient beings 
called the ta thagata essence.  
 
Then there  is another qualm  that says there  is no point talking about the tathagata 
essence because, in the context for ordinary beings , no matter what you say, ordinary 
beings do  not reali se the tathagata essence. Why do you want to tal k about tathagata 
essence to ordinary beings?  
 
The answer is in Verse 158 . 
 
Verse 158  
It was set forth so that persons having the five faults might 
abandon them — 
[The fault of] a discouraged mind [and non -enthusiasm for the 
path, which is to think that en lightenment cannot be achieved; 
this is due to not knowing that the ultimate basic element exists 
in oneself, and such discouragement is an obstacle to generating 
the intention to become enlightened; the fault of non -respect] 
despising others as lowly, [th inking that these sentient beings 
are low; this is due to not knowing of its existence in others and 
is an obstacle to assuming the care of others;  
The fault of] incorrect conception [falsely holding that the 
adventitious defilements exist in the basic ele ment whereas 
from the start they do not; this is due to not knowing of its 
existence in all others and is an obstacle to  the wisdom realizing 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 10 of 13 the true mode of subsistence; the fault of] deprecating the true 
qualities [thinking that good qualities which are  indivisible in 
entity with the basic element do not exist whereas they do;  
And the fault of] excessive attachment to oneself [due to not 
knowing that the nature of the element of a Superior’s qualities 
is equal in oneself and others, this being an obstacl e to realizing 
oneself and others as equal].  
 
We wi ll just look at this on Thursday  when w e will finish th is module .   
 
~~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
SHARING BY STUDENT  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Today I have asked Kelvin to talk  to all of you . Last time, during the 
first Basic  Program , we used to have some kind of sharing . So I thought it  is good, 
maybe for ten minutes, for Kelvin to shar e his experience . It may be  helpful for some 
people.  
 
Kelvin:  Thank you Khen Rinpoche for giving me this opportunity to share. I’m very 
hono ured t o do so .  I’m Kelvin, a Malaysian from Penang  who is currently staying in 
Singapore. Before studying Buddhist philosophy, I was like the majority of 
Buddhists —going to temples, offering incense to statu es of the buddhas  and 
bodhisattvas and pray ing that so mehow they will look after me and my family. I even 
attended Sunday schools in church in Penang even thought I do not have much 
inclination towards Christianity.  
 
I guess I must have a very strong connection with Buddhism in my previous lives. My 
first co ntact with Buddhist philosophy is in a Chinese lam-rim class taught by Mr .  
Thor Peng Tiong. He encouraged me to attend classes at ABC because ABC is a very 
well -established Gelug centre. Therefore, I started attending classes , first by Ven 
Gyurme and subs equently the class es on special insight by Khen Rinpoche in 2010.  
 
What a special class to start with ! At the end of th at module, surprisingly , I survived. I 
thought I had learnt a lot about emptiness because to me emptiness means 
everything is merely labelled by the mind. How arrogant I was  at that time.  
 
After attending the Basic P rogram, I finally reali sed that I ha d no idea of what I was 
talking about at that time. So when I was asked to share the benefit that I have gained 
from attending the Basic Pr ogram, I started to reflect on how I was before and how I 
am now.  
 Before, I thought I ha d accumulated a lot of virtue by  doing charity, giving 
donation s or whatever. But now, I reali se that what I’ve accumulated is only non -
virtue because my motivation  is only for this life’s happiness alone.  
 Before , I thought that maybe in my next life , I will get a good rebirth. But now I 
reali se that the lower realm s are what await me if I don’t strive to purify my 
negativities and accumulate strong virtue.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 11 of 13  Before , the Three Jewels seem to be very far away like something high up in the 
sky looking upon me from afar. But now I feel much closer to the Three Jewels . 
They are something that we can achieve, realise and actualise if we make the 
effort.  
 Before , I thought kar ma was something we sa id and did. But now, I am more 
mindful of what I think because every single moment of my intention is karma. 
Every moment of feeling is a result I am experiencing now.  
 
In short, whatever I knew previously was very coarse and superfi cial mixed with my 
own bewilderment. But now, after attending the B asic Program, it  is like the opening 
of a  door that I never knew existed. How fortunate I am to be able to correct my 
misconception s while I am still alive.  
 
Not just that . I still have a sound mind, a fit body and all the conducive conditions to 
attend classes. It is said that the Buddha’s  teachings are extremely rare but to me, the 
Basic Program by ABC is even rare r. We have a perfectly qualified guru, Khen 
Rinpoche , who is more than qual ified to teach the Geshes in Sera, Ganden and 
Drepung. And I was told that the Kopan monks are willing to give up their hands just 
to listen to his teaching s. But he is here , guiding us. I, such an unworthy student, am 
indeed truly grateful .  
 
We also have  a wonderful translator who makes the difficult points of the root text 
extremely clear in such an interesting and lively way. Without him, we won’t 
understand anything at all, not to mention the subtle meaning s and differences in the 
teaching s. These mate rials we are studying now used to be available only within the 
high walls of the monasteries in India and Nepal. Now, it is easily available to us due 
to the kindness of Khen Rinpoche and Ven . Gyurme.  
 
We also have a group of very diligent seniors who pai nstakingly strive to prepare the 
transcripts so that we will never miss a single word by Khen Rinpoche. We also have 
very thoughtful students who raise questions that I would never have thought o f on  
my own and the very brave ones who engage Khen Rinpoche in debate. Th ese are the 
moments that I enjoy and learn the most from although I lack the courage to do so  
myself .  
 
We also have this wonderful building, huge and bright, fully air -conditioned , where 
we can sit comfortably to listen to the teaching s. Each  of these conditions alone is 
difficult to fulfil yet we have all of them now. Isn’t this something that is worth 
rejoicing in and worth making full use of while I’m still able to before impermanence 
grasp s me?  
 The immediate ben efit I had gained by attend ing the Basic P rogram is  that I am 
now able to understand teachings by other teachers as well, such as His Holiness  
the Dalai Lama, Lama Zopa Rinpoche  and even the Chinese Mahayana teachers in 
Taiwan , although they are mostly from the Mind Only School.  
 I come to appreciate that the teachings of the Buddha  are coherent and free of 
contradictions. It  is like being given a road map to enlightenment . I can map out 
all the teachings I receive by using this map to relate  to them.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 12 of 13  Also, my faith in karma and its  results ha ve increased as a result of studying the 
Basic Program . Before , I thought I could be lucky and get away with karma . To 
me, it was  like one plus one , i.e., if I d id something bad, I better do something 
good to negate it. But now I know that is ju st wishful thinking.  
 Also, I start ed to think of my future lives ’ happiness as well. Whatever I do know, I 
will sometimes consider my action so that it will bring me mainly  the happiness 
of future lives.  
 Due to studying in the Basic Program, my faith in the T hree Jewels has increased .  
Before that, I thought Buddha  was someone who ha d already passed away a long 
time ago . Dharma was just the teaching s whereas practice just meant meditation. 
But now, I reali sed the Dharma can be p racti sed daily. It is somet hing we can do 
for even achiev ing this life’s happiness, not to mention the happiness of all our 
future lives ,   including achieving liberation and enlightenment.  
 
In short, I’m happier now, having attended the Basic Program . I look forward to 
coming to t he classes, attending the discussions and even the exams, although they 
are a bit scary. In fact, I feel that the exam is a very important part of the Basic 
Program because it is through the exam that I put in the effort to study and it’s 
through the exam that I can check whether my understanding is correct or not.  
 
In most courses offered by other centres, there are no exams. So whatever I learnt 
from them hardly stay ed in my mind. But due to the constant reminder s from Khen 
Rinpoche and the pressure from the exam s, I some how  managed to remember some 
points, even from the very first module.  
 
Having no reali sations and having studied only a meag re amount , what I’ve just said 
may seem laughable to those intelligent ones. But if somehow these words managed 
to be of benefit , even for just one sentient being, may it be a cause of enlightenment 
for all sentient beings. Thank you.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: In the last Basic Program , we used to have some student s who will 
come and talk about their experience s. We hadn’t do ne this for some time. I thought 
maybe sometimes it is good to have these talks by Basic Program students . I may ask 
some of you to come and share. If you think BP is good, you say , “Good. ” If it is not good, 
you say , “Not good. ” So come and share your exper ience  when I ask you to come.  
 
When I mention exams, some people might be stressed . But like he said, he learnt 
something from the first module because of the exam s. So sometimes , it’s good when 
you have some pressure. If you really want to learn somethin g, sometime s we need this.  
 
Anyway , this time , you don’t have to be so scare d. I will leave it up to you how you want 
to write  your exam answers. But try your best , OK?  
 
Last time, also , we used to ask you to write . If you were t o give a talk to a Buddhi st who 
is just  a beginner, how you are going to present  the material? Then you write one page. 
Last time, we did that. So you th ought and wr ote one page or two pages.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 25  
Page 13 of 13 This time, it is also a similar idea but related to this topic. I may say , “Explain the 
tathagata essence in one or two page s.” You can write maybe two or three pages. That 
is just an example  but no t just three sentences. Three pages !   
 
It depend s on how y ou want to write. B y coming to class, learning  about the object s of 
refuge, the Three Jewels,  learning about the tathagata essence, how are they related ?  
 
Somebody may ask you, “You have been com ing to class for three months . What have 
you learn t? Write this down in three pages. ”  I mean it is something like that. You can 
write  whatever yo u like. Y ou can read the text. Anyway, we will decide on what we want 
you to write  about . We will talk about this on Thursday.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 