Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L09 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:36.123321
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 1 of 12 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 9                        12 March 2015  
 
 
Review of verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra : “A star.” “A visual aberration.” Chapter One: The 
Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verse 21: Only the Buddha is the final object of refuge.  
 
 
REVIEW OF VERSE FROM VAJRA CUTTER SUTRA  
 
In the last lesson, I briefly explained the meaning of the vers e from the Vajra Cutter 
Sutra : 
 
A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,  
An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,  
A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud – 
See conditioned things as such!  
 
Analogy of “a star”  
“A star ” is analogous of how any chosen e xisting phenomenon  (1) possesses the 
nature of emptiness and (2) is a mere appearance . These two characteristics can be 
found together on any one chosen basis.  
 The empty nature of that phenomenon —its emptiness —is an ultimate truth .  
 The phenomenon itself —its mere appearance —is a conventional truth 
(obscurational truth  or concealer truth ). 
 
So a lthough there are stars up in the sky in the daytime , we do  not see them. What 
appears to us is just space  or vacuity . Likewise , from the perspective of the 
meditativ e equipoise of the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness, what appears to 
this wisdom is this mere vacuity , the space -like emptiness. The emptiness here is the 
emptiness of inherent existence , inherent existence being the object of negation . So it 
is said t hat nothing else appears to such a wisdom except this emptiness .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 2 of 12  
From the perspective of  the meditative equipoise of the wisdom directly reali sing 
emptiness, only  emptiness appears and conventional phenomena do not appear  and 
are not seen . But t his is no t the same as saying that this particular wisdom sees the 
non-existence  of conventional phenomena.  
 
In the perspective of this meditative equipoise directly reali sing emptiness, nothing 
appears except emptiness.  
 
It is said  also that such a wisdom is a mind of non -duality , a mind where by all 
dualistic appearances have subsided .  
 Here t he subsidence of dualistic appearances  mean s the absence or non -existence 
of the objec t of negation.  
 Non -duality means that conventional phenomena do not appear . 
 It also me ans that experientially there isn’t this feeling of an object that is reali sed 
being over there and the mind reali sing it being over here.  There isn’t that sense 
of duality.  It is said that experientially this meditative equipoise directly reali sing 
emptin ess is like water mix ed with water . Experientially  the mind is merged in 
oneness with the object it reali ses, emptiness. There is  no duality of subject and 
object.   
 
The analogy of “a visual aberration”  
The meditative equipoise directly perceiving emptine ss is said to be an unmistaken 
mind because it is not polluted by the apprehension of true existence.   
 
One arises from th e meditative equipoise directly perceiving emptiness into the post -
meditative equipoise . The wisdom of post -meditative equipoise , or more specifically , 
the wisdom of subsequent attainment, is said to be polluted by the apprehension of 
true existence.  
 
Conventional phenomena appears to this wisdom of subsequent attainment , and 
because this wisdom of subsequent attainment is polluted by t he apprehension of 
true existence, whatever appears to this wisdom appears to exist from its own side  
and establish ed by its own nature .  
 
Let us take the example  of a conventional valid cogni ser, this wisdom of subsequent 
attainment : 
 Does the per son appea r to such a mind?  Yes, t he person appears to such a mind . 
 How does a person appear to such a mind? The person appears to exist truly .  
The person exists b ecause the person appears to such a mind . We must be able to 
posit the existence of a person. This is  something that we need to analy se and to 
think about for ourselves : There is the appearance of a person and there is the 
appearance of a truly exist ent person.  
 
If we look at this from the perspective of the Mind Only School , in relation to their 
explana tion of imprint s or predisposition s, when one arises from med itative 
equipoise into post -meditative equipoise, the p erson appears. This person appears 
through the force of past familiarity  with the object  itself, the person. That  particular 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 3 of 12 imprint i s resp onsible for the appearance of the person .  
 
How t hen do we account for the appearance of a truly existent person? That is due to 
the force of the seed, the apprehension of true existence.   
 
If we talk about the person as the main  object, although the pers on appears to the 
mind, th e person can appear in many different ways :  
 The person in question can appear to the mind to be permanent.  
 The same person can also appear to the mind to be established as self -sufficient.  
 The person can also appear to be truly  existent.  
 To some minds, the person appears just as a person ; nothing more, nothing less.  
 
So there are a whole range of possibilities as to how a person can appear to the mind . 
This is due to different imprints . Because of these different imprints  or 
predisposition s, therefore  you have these different appearances.  That factor  of 
appearance in relation to a person means that the person exist s. A person ap pearing 
as a person means that there i s a person  there . If there  is a person , then so mehow , 
one must be able to account for the existence of the person and posit how that  is the 
case.  This can be complicated .  
 
If something exists  in the way it appears , then that mind must be a valid cogni ser. In 
the case of the mind to which a person appears as he is, th en that mind is a valid 
cogni ser.  
 
But it i s not the case that whatever appears is necessar ily an accurate representation 
or depiction of its actual status. For example , if a person appears to be truly 
existent —although to the mind , there is an appearance  of a truly existent person —
that does  not mean that the person is truly existent. There i s a disparity between 
reality and appearance. So the mind that has this appearance of a truly existent 
person cannot be co nsidered to be  a valid cogni ser.  
 
Let’s r eturn t o the wisdom of subsequent attainment or the wisdom of post -
meditative equipoise . For the practitioner  who ha s a direct perception of emptiness, 
when he arise s from his meditative equipoise, because  his wisdom of subsequent 
attainment or wisdom of post -meditative equipoise is polluted by the apprehension 
of true existence , as such, whatever appears always appears to be truly existent.   
 
But that doesn’t mean that th is person who has already reali sed emptiness directly  
believes  that things are truly exis tent. Yes , conventional phenomena still appears to 
be truly existent , but this person who  has alrea dy reali sed emptiness directly does 
not believe that things exist truly even though they appear to exist truly . This person  
doesn’t believe that anymore.  
 
Student : I thought that  the apprehension of or grasping at true existence  means that 
even though there is the appearance of true existence, there is also a level of 
believing in and assenting  to this appearance .  
 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m not sure . I don’t know  so I am going to repeat again . 
When the person who h as reali sed emptiness directly arises from his meditative 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 4 of 12 equipoise, he arises into post -meditative equipoise . That mind is called the wisdom 
of subsequent attainment  and is p olluted by the predisposition o f ignorance . As such, 
this wisdom of subsequent attainment is a mistaken consciousness.  It is still a valid 
cogni ser according to the proponents of the Consequence M iddle Way School.  Since 
most of you have already studied the topic, Mind and Awareness , there should  not be 
any confusion that a mistaken mind can be a valid cogni ser. It is like waking up.   
 
The person appears as a person to this wisdom of subsequent attainment. This 
wisdom of subsequent attainment reali ses the person : 
 If you were  asked, “Does the person appear  to be truly existent to this mind ?” you 
have to say yes. The person does appear to be truly existent to this mind .  
 But d oes this mind grasp at or apprehend that person to be truly existent? The 
answer is n o. This mind perceive s the pers on as illusory, i.e., like an i llusion .  
 Although the person appears to be truly existent to this mind, does the person 
exist in the way it appears , i.e., is the person truly existent?  No , because the 
person is just mere appearance.  
 
I think we can just l eave it a t that.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Otherwise, there are more complication s. Is it c lear? If you understand  
the meaning , then that is OK.   
 
For o rdinary folks like us who have yet to reali se emptiness, do we reali se the 
person ? Are there minds in our contin uum that reali se a person? You have to say yes. 
This is quite straightforward because we do have valid states of mind or valid 
cogni sers that reali se food, reali se a car and so forth . We have valid states of mind 
that realise earth, fire, wind and water.  
 
When we think of a person, we reali se the person , but in the perspective of th is mind, 
the person appears to be truly existent , and n ot only that, we believe  the person is 
truly existent.  We have to think about this : While we say we reali se a person , yet at 
the same time , we apprehend the person to be truly existent . These two cannot be 
the same mind , which means  that : 
 there  is a mind that grasp s at or apprehends the person to be truly existent  
 there  is a mind that reali ses the person as a person ; nothing  more, nothing less.   
 
There  is a mind that reali ses the person, but if this mind is also apprehending the 
person to be truly existent, that would make this mind ignoran ce, i.e. referring to the 
apprehension of true existence. Then it cannot be a valid cog niser.  
 
For us ordinary folks : 
 Whatev er appears , including the person , appears to be truly existent .  
 Not only that, we assent to th at appearance, i.e., we believe that the person is 
truly existent  and that it exists  in the way it appears.  
For us, it  is like that.   
 
Although the person appears to be truly existent , the person does not exist as a truly 
existent  person . There  is no truly existent person. This appearance of a truly existent 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 5 of 12 person is just a mental construct, an appe arance to the mind. It i s not an accurate 
reflection of reality , for in reality , there isn’t a truly existent person. Although there is 
an appearance of a truly existent person but in reality , there is no truly existent 
person . The analogy of “a visual aberration ” is used to illust rate this.   
 
It is said tha t a person does not exist truly. A lthough whatever appears , including the 
person , appears to us to be truly existent , inherently existent and existing right there 
from its own side , such a person does not exist in reality . If in reality there is such a 
truly existent person, if the person exist s truly in the way it appears,  then it must be 
found by a mind distinguishing the ultimate.  
 
The person appears to us to be truly existent.  If that is an accurate depiction of 
reality —mean ing that there  is really a truly existent person  and that there is no 
disparity between appearance and reality —this means  that factor of true existen ce 
must be the final mode of abiding  of the person, his ultimate and deepest nature. If it 
is the truth , that  means there  is no disparity . It exist s in the way it appears. If that  is 
the case , then true existen ce must be its final mode of being. If that is the case, then it 
must be found by the valid cogni ser distinguishing the ultimate.  
 
With regard to the anal ogy of “a visual aberration ,” the text describes this 
appearance of falling hairs . To a  person who has a certain impairment to his eyes, he 
may have th e vision of seeing falling hairs.  The appearance of falling hair s appears to 
this particular mind.  
 
In reality, is there such a thing as falling hair s? No . In reality , there is  no such thing.  If 
falling hairs are an accurate reflection of reality, every one would be see ing them, 
even t hose people who have no problems with their eyes ight. If falling hairs exis t, 
they must be seen and reali sed. But most people do  not see falling hairs. Only people 
who have problems with their eyes  have such a vision. This is an analogy showing 
that things do not exist in the way they appear.  
 
The analogy of “a visual aberration ” is used to illustrate the point  that although 
phenomena appear  to be truly existent,  truly existent phenomena do not exist at all.  
 
Question:  You mentioned that the mind that arises from meditative equipoise  sees  
the person as an illusion .  During medita tive equipoise , the bodhisattva medi tates on 
the space -like emptiness. D oes that mean that when he arises from meditative 
equipoise,  that emptiness also becomes an illusion in post -meditative equipoise ?  
 
Answer : For th e person who has reali sed emptiness d irectly, when he arises from 
that meditative equipoise, all phe nomena appear as illusory , not illusion s but like 
illusions.  
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
Verse 21 says that the Buddha is , “Ultimately refuge of trans migrators ” or all sentient 
beings. The Dharma Jewel and t he Sangha Jewel are just temporary objects of refuge.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 6 of 12 Verse 21  
Ultimately the refuge of transmigrators  
Is just the sole Buddha,  
Because the Subduer has the Body of Doctrine [and thus is the 
doctrine]  
And because [a Buddha] is the finality of the Communit y. 
 
In the last lesson , we saw how all sentient beings , including the bodhisattva superior 
in his last moment as a sentient being, are not posited as the final object s of refuge . 
They have yet to become final object s of refuge because they have yet to atta in the 
ultimate  or final achievement, and for them, t here  is still something more to be 
achieved . 
 
Having said that, th is raises a qualm or doubt . Do you see what th is doubt could be?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Can y ou guess  what could be the doubt ?  
 
The last line o f Verse 21 is the answer t o the doubt. What then is the doubt? It says 
here, “And b ecause [a Buddha ] is the finality of the Community .” That is the answer 
to the doubt.  
 
The question now is, “Are you all thinking?”  
 
Student 1: How can the Sangha be an obje ct of refuge at all if they are only a 
temporary and not the final object of refuge?  
 
Student 2: The text said the Sangha  community has not overcome the obscuration s to 
omniscience so they cannot be  the final object s of refuge.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : There is no  need to doubt what you are taking refuge  in because it is 
posited right from the beginning that we go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and 
Sangha. When we talk about  the object s of refuge, we can talk about the ultimate 
Buddha Jewel, the u ltimate Dharma J ewel , the u ltimate Sangha Jewel , the 
conventional Buddha Jewel, the c onventional Dharma Jewel and the c onventional 
Sangha Jewel. That is quite clear. They are all suitable to be our object s of refuge.  
 
Having said that, we have also said that the Dharma J ewel and the Sangha Jewel are 
temporary  objects of refuge and that only the Buddha Jewel is the final object of 
refuge. That is clear . So the doubt cannot pertain  to this point.   
 
Student  2:  This is where the doubt comes  in. We may as well just take refu ge in the 
Buddha Jewel since that is the final object of refuge  and we do not need to take refuge 
in the Three Jewels.  
 
Student 3:  You said that the Buddha Jewe l is the final refuge  and that the Sangha 
Jewel is a temporary  refuge object . Then later you s aid that the Buddha is the finality 
of the Community , which means the Buddha Jewel is also the Sangha Jewel. So  the 
Sangha Jewel is not a temporary refuge  object . There is no pervasion to say that a 
Sangha Jewel is necessarily a temporary refuge  object . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 7 of 12 Khen Rinpoche: That is t rue. There is n o pervasion  if we were to say that . 
 
Student  3: I thought that was the doubt .  
 
In the last class, we saw how the Dharma Jewel —true path s and true cessation s— is 
a temporary object of refuge . It is not final. We have al ready explained why that is the 
case. The arhats who are the Sangha Jewel and who have achieved the nirvana with 
remainder  are also not the final object s of refuge. Only the Buddha is the final object 
of refuge.  
 
The doubt is this: If only  the Buddha is t he final object of refuge, does this mean that 
there is no final Dharma Jewel  and no final Sangha Jewel?  The last line of Verse 21 is 
the answer . Is it not the case that the bodhisattva existing in his last moment as a 
sentient being all the way everyone w ho is below him in the level of achievement , can 
still achieve the dharmakaya? The meaning then is that there is a final Dharma Jewel 
and there is a final Sangha Jewel.  
 
Yes, only the Buddha is the final object of refuge  but there is a final Dharma Jewel a nd 
there is a final Sangha Jewel. The final Dharma Jewel is the true paths and true 
cessations in the continuum of a buddha superior and an example of the final Sangha 
Jewel is the buddha superior. In general, th at is what we call  the three final objects o f 
refuge:  the final Buddha Jewel , the final Dharma Jewel  and t he final Sangha Jewel . 
They are all buddha s. 
 
If we talk about the Buddha, Dharma  and Sangha in general , then of course only the 
Buddha is the final object of refuge, not the Dharma and not the Sangha.  
 
If somebody were to ask you , “Is the Sangha Jewel  the final object of refuge or a 
temporary object of refuge? ” you would have to say  that it is a temporary  object of 
refuge . If somebody were to ask you  a similar question relating to the Dharma Je wel, 
you would also have to say , “It is a temporary  and not the final object of refuge. ”  
 
It depen ds on how the question is asked. I f somebody were to ask you , “Is the 
Dharma Jewel  necessarily  a temporary object of refuge?”  then what would you say? 
Yes or  no?  
 
(Student’s response is i naudible ).  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Are y ou sure?   
 
Doesn’t t he Dharma Jewel exist on the buddha ground?   
 
Khen Rinpoche:  This is the second question that people will ask.  
 
If yo u sa y that it is a temporary object of refuge , people  may  say, “I see . Therefore, on 
the buddha ground , there is no Dharma Jewel ?” 
 
Does sentient being s exist on the buddha ground?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 8 of 12 It depends on how the question is asked . 
 
The Dharma Jewel encompasses many things. There is a common locus of the 
Dharma Jewel  and a temporary object of refuge  but th ere is also a common locus of 
the Dharma Jewel and an ultimate object of refuge. But if one was asked , “So is  the 
Dharma Jewel a temporary object of refuge or an ultimate object of refuge ?” what 
would you say? The an swer is, “The Dharma Jewel is a c onventional object of refuge .” 
You have to say that.   
 
If we  were to adopt the viewpoint of the Prasangika s, is there something that is all 
three objects of refuge?  The three final objects of refuge obviously exist  but now,  the 
question is: Is there something that is all three final objects of refuge?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Some one come up and explain  this. Who ever says yes, give an example , 
then explain.  
 
Is there something that is all three final objects of refuge? You have to p osit an 
illustration.  
 
Student  4: Is it the guru , the spiritual teacher?  
 
Student  5: The Buddha is all  the three object s of refuge.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Your r eason  for saying this ?  
 
The Buddha is a very convenient answer. It covers a lot of things. Why is the  Buddha 
the f inal Buddha Jewel? Why  is the Buddha the f inal Dharma Jewel? Why is the 
Buddha the f inal Sangha Jewel? You need to explain why and , if it exists, you must 
have an illustration.  
 
Is Buddha a permanent or impermanent phenomenon?  
 
Student  5: Permanent .  
 
Khen Rinpoche : How can something that is permanent be a Sangha Jewel?  
 
Student 5: If Buddha is permanent, he cannot be the three final object s of refuge ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche: How could he be a Sangha Jewel?  
 
Student 5: If I were to say that Buddha is impermanent , then what is the problem?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Why do you think Buddha is impermanent?  
 
Student  5: A buddha has four bodies. The true path s and true cessation s in the mental 
continuum of a buddha is the final d octrine. Therefore , it is the f inal Dh arma Jewel. 
The b uddha superior , being the emanation bod y and enjoyment bod y, is the final 
Sangha Jewel. Therefore , Buddha is the three final object s of refuge.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 9 of 12 Khen Rinpoche : Is Buddha the wisdom truth body?  
 
Student  5: No.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  The answer i s yes because you have asserted t he Buddha possesses 
the four bodies.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : You are the one who g ave the pervasion.  
 
Student  6:  Buddha listening to the Dharma so there is no room for deception. Buddha 
is the Sangha community because he has no fe ar. And Buddha is Buddha.  
 
The Buddha impart ed the Dharma to Buddha so  there is no room for deception.  He is 
teaching the Dharma to himself as opposed to other sentient beings.  So the Dharma 
is the ultimate refuge  
 
If he teaches the Dharma to sentient be ings, the Dharma cannot be the ultimate 
refuge because there is room for sentient being s to have deception. They can 
misunderstand the Dharma but the Buddha himself cannot misunderstand what he is 
teaching.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : The term , ‘Buddha ,’ covers many t hings. The b uddha superior — for 
example , our kind founder , Guru Shakyamuni Buddha  who taught the Dharma — is 
not the Dharma Jewel.  
 
Shakyamuni Buddha is not a Dharma Jewel. Our kind founder , Guru Shakyamuni 
Buddha , is a Sangha Jewel. Why is he a Sangha Jew el? Because he is a superior.  
 
Shakyamuni Buddha is not a Dharma Jewel because , in order to be a Dharma Jewel, 
that would have to be either true path s or true cessation s, n either of which is 
Shakyamuni Buddha.  
 
 A Dharma Jewel is necessarily either true p aths and/or true cessation s.  
 A Sangha Jewel is necessarily a superior.  
 
So t he word , ‘Bud dha,’ encompasses many things. If we were to say, “a b uddha 
superior like Shakyamuni Buddha ,” then it is clear that Shak yamuni Buddha is a 
Sangha Jewel , not a Dharma  Jewel. There is no differen ce between Buddha and 
Buddha Jewel.  
  
Back to my question : Is there something that is all three objects of refuge?  
 
I think this is not the first time  that this question has been raised. It was raised 
already a while ago . Someti mes , you may mistakenly think that you have learnt or 
you know something , but when you face a  question like this , then your knowledge is 
suddenly gone and you can’t answer the question.  
 
Question: In term s of the function s of the final Buddha Jewel, final Dharma Jewel  and 
final Sangha Jewel, can we say that  for the  final Buddha Jewel , it i s blessing s; for the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 10 of 12 final Dharma Jewel , it is the attainment ; and for the final Sangha Jewel , it is the 
enlighten ed activities  or influences?  What is the difference in t erm s of the function of 
the final Buddha Jewel and the f inal Sangha Jewel?  
 
Answer : When we talk about being a b uddha, buddha hood  is often described as an 
existence or state that is attained when the afflictive obscuration s and know ledge 
obscuration s are a bandoned.  
 
When these two obscurations are abandoned, what is actuali sed or manifested?  
What is actuali sed is true path s and true cessation s, the d harmakaya.  
 
When the dharmakaya is actuali sed, we talk about the two purities.  When we talk 
about the natur e body, there is : 
 The n aturally pure nature body  
 The a dventitious pure nature body  
These are essentially the final true cessation s. 
 
The wisdom truth body is the final true path s. 
 
In the seven vajra topics, the fifth is enlightenment , follow ed by qualitie s and Bud dha 
activities.  
 
 Enlightenment here refers to Buddha.  
 
 Qualities refer to the qualities of the factor of natural purity and factor of 
adventitious purity.  These two factors of purit y are the description and 
explanation of true cessation s respecti vely .  
 
Qualities also refer to the knowledge of the mode of phenomena and knowledge 
of the diversity of phenomena. These two knowledges are related to true path s. 
 
If you think about what we have discussed so far, the essential point is that 
qualities her e are referring to the f inal Dharma Jewel.   
 
 I would think that the last vajra topic , Buddha activities , is talking about the 
Sangha Jewel.  
 
Of all the Buddha ’s enlighten ed activities, the principal enlighten ed activity is that 
of his speech  that reveal s the teaching s to sentient  beings. This is done primarily 
through the two form bodies —the complete enjoyment body and the supreme 
emanation body — that are the final Sangha Jewel.  
 
The final Dharma Jewel does not reveal the Dharma , so to speak.  Qualities here 
relate to true path s and true cessation s. When the dharmakaya is actuali sed, then one 
performs Buddha activities, i.e., primarily , revealing the teachings to sentient beings 
by emanating  bodies such as the supreme emanation body  or the complete 
enjoym ent body.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 11 of 12 So I guess the vajra topic of qualities is referring to the final Dharma Jewel and the 
last vajra topic , Buddha activities , is referring to the f inal Sangha Jewel.  
 
I ask question s only because I assume that they are useful for you  to think abou t.  I 
guess the questions are useful for some people. Otherwise, I don’t have to ask them.   
 
We have already discussed the final Three Jewels. Now  the question is this: I s there a 
buddha that is not any of the four bodies?  
 
If you have no answer for me , then you can ask me question s. If it makes a difference 
for me to ask you question s, if it helps you to t hink , then it is well and good . 
Otherwise , we don’t have to do this.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Is it helpful for me to ask question s or not? Yes or no?  
 
We are all learning . I myself am learning  and so are you. Nobody is perfect. When you 
say something, t here must be some reasons behind what you say. Also y ou cannot just 
stop there. You have to try and go three or four levels deeper.   
 
Question:  Is there Buddha tha t is not any of the four bodies?  
 
Student  5: It sounds similar to the example of the subsequent cogni ser that is none of 
the four? I just can’t remember how it works.  
 
So this answer will be the Buddha. There is Buddha that is neither of the four.  
 
Khen Ri npoche : Buddha encompasses many things. Can you do better than that? We 
are not saying whether your answer is right or wrong.  
 
What about the Buddha’s crown protrusion ? Is the Buddha’s crown prot rusion 
Buddha ? Is it the d harmakaya? Is the Buddha’s hand Bud dha?  
 
It is e vident that you have forgotten your t enets. Only the proponents of the G reat 
Exposition School (GES)  would say no to those questions. E very one else say s yes.  
  
Buddha’s form body is Buddha  but t he proponents of the GES assert that Buddha’s 
form aggregate is not Buddha. But the S utra School says yes . But the Sutra school is 
Hinayana tenets , not Mahayana tenets.  
 
What would the Mahayana tenets say? They would say y es. The Buddha’s form 
aggregate is Buddha. No, Prasangika s would say  that the Bud dha’s form body is not 
Buddha.  If that is the case , there is no doubt that Buddha’s hand is Buddha. You must 
not think that the word ‘Buddha ’ only refers to a specific buddha. The word ‘Buddha ’ 
means many things .  
 
The whole idea of what a buddha is  can be  explain ed by the two bodies: the t ruth 
body and the f orm  body. As such , a buddha does not necessarily refer to a person nor 
does it necessarily refers to a form since you have to account for the truth bodies  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata  Essence   
 
 
Lesson 9  
Page 12 of 12 So is the Buddha’s hand buddha? Can you find an example  of a b uddha that is not any 
of the four bodies?  Among the four bodies, which one is the Buddha’s hand? The 
whole form body  is only the Buddha’s hand?  
 
A person who has the direct perception of emptiness   
During meditative equipoise  In post -medi tative equipoise  
 To the wisdom directly reali sing emptiness,  
only emptiness appears.  
 Conventional phenomena do not appear but 
this does mean that this wisdom sees the non -
existence of conventional phenomena.  
 This wisdom is a mind of non -duality where  all 
dualistic appearances have subsided.  
 Experientially, it is like water mixed with 
water  as this mind is merged in oneness with 
the object it reali ses, that is, emptiness. There 
is no duality of subject and object.  
 The meditative equipoise directly perceivi ng 
emptiness is an unmistaken mind because it is 
not polluted by the apprehension of true 
existence .  To the wisdom of subsequent attainment,  
whatever  appears always appears to be 
truly existent because the wisdom of 
subsequent attainment is polluted by th e 
apprehension of true existence.  
 However , he does not believe that things 
exist truly.  
 Although convention al phenomen a 
appear to exist truly, they  do not exist as 
they  appear because they are mere 
appearance s. 
 The mind is polluted by the 
predisposition o f ignorance. As such, that 
mind is a mistaken consciousness.  
 
Fourth vajra topic: Enlightenment  
 Buddha hood  is a state that is attained when the afflictive obscuration s and knowledge 
obscuration s are abandoned. When these two obscurations are abandoned, wh at is actuali sed 
is true path s and true cessation s, the d harmakaya or the truth body.   
 When the dharmakaya is actuali sed, we talk about the two purities.  
 The nature body , the final true cessations, is defined as a final state endowed with the two 
purities : 
o The naturally pure nature body  
o The adventitious pure nature body  
 The wisdom truth body is the final true path s. 
 
Fifth vajra topic : Qualities   
 Qualities refer to the qualities of the factor of natural purity and factor of adventitious purity , 
which are the description and explanation of true cessation s.   
 It also refers to the knowledge of the mode of phenomena and knowledge of the diversity of 
phenomena , which are related to true paths.   
 Qualities refer to the final Dharma Jewel.   
 
Sixth vajra topic : Buddha activities  
Of Buddha activities, t he principal enlighten ed activity is that of speech , revealing the teaching s to 
sentient beings , which is done through the two form bodies —the c omplete enjoyment body and the 
supreme emanation body —which are the final Sangha Jewel.  
 
The final Dharma Jewel does not reveal the Dharma. Qualities here relate to true path s and true 
cessation s. When the dharmakaya is actuali sed, then one performs primarily the activit y of  
revealing the teachings to sentient beings by eman ating bodies like the supreme emanation body or 
the complete enjoyment body.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 