Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L06 final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:44.593666
================================================================================

Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , 
Chapter  One : The  Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on 
the Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins 
and Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs . 
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, 
Commentary to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © 
FPMT, Inc. January 2007) . 
 
Lesson 6         26 February 2015  
 
 
Question & Answer. Chapter One: The Essence  of a One Gone Thus.  Verses 13—17. 
Sangha Jewel.  
 
 
Question:  Is the term , Mahayana superior , applied  only to a buddha or does it 
include  the arya bodhisattva?  
 
Answer : The term , Mahayana superior , has a greater pervasion  than the term, 
bodhisattva superio r.   
 
There are five Mahayana paths —the path of accumulation, path of preparation, 
path of seeing, path of meditation and path of no-more -learning . These are 
called the Mahayana paths . They are not referred to as the five bodhisattva 
paths.  
 
The Mahayana path of no-more -learning is a Mahayana path and is achieve d 
when the two obscurations are removed  and o ne becomes  a buddha . Hence the 
term , Mahayana s uperior , includes a buddha.  As such, the term , Mahayana 
superior , has a greater pervasion whereas the term , bodhisattva superior , has a 
smaller  pervasion.  
 
A Mahayana superior is not nec essarily a bodhisattva superior  whereas a 
bodhisattva superior is necessarily a Mahayana superior.  
 
Question : There is a statement in tenets that says , “True cessations is 
nece ssarily an ultimate truth.” We usually refer to the ultimate truth as the 
emptiness of inherent existence. Now we learn that true cessation s have two 
purities.  
 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 2 of 11 Does that mean that an ultimate truth is not only referring to the emptiness of 
inherent exist ence  but there is also an in stance of an ultimate truth that refers 
to an abandonment of obscurations?  
 
If that is the case —if an ultimate truth is emptiness of inherent existence  and is 
also an abandonment of obscurations —does n’t that mean that the objec t of 
negation for an ultimate truth could  be an existent?  
 
We have always learnt that t he object of negation of emptiness has always been 
the inherent  existen ce of a person or phenomen on. That inherent existence has 
never existed and will never exist.   
 
On the other hand, in the case of the a bandonment of obscuration s—an absence 
of the obscuration s themselves —the object of negation  will be the obscuration s 
that exist in a person’s continuum . Wouldn’t that mean there would be a third 
object of negation for emptiness?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: I am not quite getting your question.  
 
In essence, you are asking whether there  are more than one object of negation ?  
         
Answer : The Prasangika s assert that true cessation s are emptiness and an 
ultimate truth. The Sautra ntika s does not assert that true cessation s are an 
ultimate truth.  
 
Remember the statement from Nagarjuna  that l iberation is the cessation of 
karma and afflictions ? So at the end of the day , if you want to point to something 
that is liberation, what exact ly is it? Liberation is not to be found outside of the 
mind. When karma and the afflictions are removed, what  is left is the reality of 
the mind .  The emptiness of that mind is posited as liberation.  
 
The apprehension of true existence is not part of the n ature of the mind  for 
when the wisdom realizing selflessness is generated, that apprehension of true 
existence  is destroyed. The wisdom realizing selflessness is an antidote against 
the apprehension of true existence. When the strength of the wisdom realiz ing 
selflessness increase s, that obscuration  is destroyed , in the same manner that 
darkness di sappears when there i s light. When th at obscuration  is removed, the 
reality of the mind  is revealed . What you have left is just that.  That is why we 
say that the nature of the mind is clear  light .  
 
The mind has never existed inherently. From the time the mind existed, it has 
always been empty of existing inherently. So when we talk about ‘natural 
purity ’, we are talking about the mind ’s emptiness of true existence .  
 
Although our mind has always been like that —i.e., empty of existing 
inherently —however , it is covered with the adventitious defilements. As such , 
we cannot say that there are true cessation s right from the beginning. The 
mind’s emptiness of true existe nce, the ultimate nature of the mind , has always 
been like tha t. That is the natural purity. But it is covered with the adventitious 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 3 of 11 defilements.  
 
So when one generates the wisdom realizing selflessness , when that wisdom 
becomes powerful enough  to act as an antidote to the apprehension of true 
existence , when any part of this apprehension of true existence has cease d, its 
cessation is achieved. This is an example of adventitious purity . Although  the 
end result is the emptiness of the mind, this unrave lling of the nature of the 
mind, th is achievement of adventitious purity , is the result of cultivating its 
antidote.  
 
Both purities —the natural purity and the adventitious purity —are emptinesses 
but you can not say that they are equivalent . Although  the ultimate  nature of the 
mind is emptiness , it is still covered with the adventitious defilements. By 
applying a  powerful antidote , when those defilements have cease d, what you 
achieve after that is the adventitious purity. Although that is an e mptiness, it is 
a ces sation  that c omes  about through the application of an antidote.  
 
As such,  liberation is the exhaustion or  the cessation of karma and  afflictions.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m not sure whether I am answering you r question. I didn’t get 
what your question was exactl y, what you are asking.  
 
Student : So basically the ultimate truth that is the purity of adventitious stain s 
will be true cessation s. But the ultimate truth that does not have the purity of 
adventitious stain s is not t rue cessation s.  
 
So t rue cessation s are necessarily an ultimate truth while the ultimate truth is 
not necessarily true cessation s per se ?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.  
 
Question:  We are now in the period of merit multiplying days.   
 
We have learn t that wisdom is a mind and that there  is the collectio n of wisdom.  
 
But in terms of the collection of merit , what is merit exactly and w hat are we 
actually collecting? I remember that when we talk ed about merit , we talk ed 
about meritorious karma . If merit is necessarily karma and the Buddha had 
accumulated three  countless great eons of merit, does that mean he created 
three countless great eons worth of karma? That is a bit….  
 
Khen Rinpoche: A bit too long?  
 
Student : We would end up say ing that  the Buddha has karma . I think many 
people can not accept th at. I d on’t remember h earing a definition of merit. Is 
merit equivalent to roots of virtue? What is merit and what does the collection 
of merit mean? We emphasize accumulating merit but when I ask around, 
people seem to interpret merit  in different ways. I have n ot come across a 
definition of merit apart from being told i t is a non -associated compositional 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 4 of 11 factor.  
 
Answer : In a way , merit and virtue are similar. In general, virtue is virtuous 
karma, which is a cause f or happiness , its fruitional effect . The thing that results 
in suffering is non -virtue or non -virtuous karma.  
 
As for accumulating merit, I would  think that that refers to doing something to 
accumulate merit and then an imprint is left on the mind. I think accumulating 
merit means that.  
 
In the lam-rim, there are four  permutations between karma that is created and 
karma that is accumulated . In the case of accumulating merit, one is creat ing 
merit  but for it to become an accumulation, something has to be left on the 
mental continuum.  So whether it  is a ccumulating the collection of merit or 
accumulating the collection of wisdom, the mind is of primary importance 
because something has to be left on the mental continuum.  
 
Whether it is accumulating prostrations or generating refuge, in order for a real 
impression to be left on the mind, in order for karma to be accumulated, as 
mentioned in the lam-rim, that activity has to be done with strength and over a 
long period of time. Then a real impression —an imprint —is left  on the mind . 
This applies to any merit or virtue you are accumulating.  
 
The collection of merit res ults in the form body. The collection of wisdom  
results in the truth body. 
 
The key point  I think  is that  in order for the activity to be an accumulation o r 
the collection of merit, we need to mak e sure that a real impression  or imprint 
is left on the mental continuum.  I would think that the meaning of the word , 
‘accumulate ’ as in the phrase , ‘accumulate the collection of merit ,’ means  to do 
something over and over again such that a real impression  or imprint is left on 
the mind . That is the meaning to accumulate.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think?  
 
Student : So when we say th e Buddha accumulated three  countless great eons of 
merit, he actually ha d three  countless great eons of imprints  as he had 
abandoned karma.  
 
Answer : Unless you posit this collection to be form  and I don’t think you would 
do that, then there  is no problem. No matter how you argue this point, there  is 
no problem because it is a non -associated compositional factor.  
 
Question : If an  imprint  is left behind after the action is done, since actions are 
impermanent phenomena  that disintegrates , when we talk about imprint s, are 
we referring to its factor of disintegratedness? If that is so, the n an imprint is 
that factor of disintegrat edne ss of the action itself ? 
 
Answer : That  is another complicated issue.  
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 5 of 11 Question:  We seem to be using the term s—‘Buddha ’ and ‘Buddha superior ’ —
interchangeably . Yet the definition of the final Buddha J ewel is the Buddha  or 
his four bodies  while t he definitio n of the final Sangha  Jewel is  the Buddha 
superior or the enjoyment body and emanation body.  That  means in terms of 
these bodies, there is a difference between Buddha and the Buddha superior ? 
Can I call the final Sangha Jewel, Buddha?   
 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.  
 
Question: So there  is no difference in the bodies? Can I also call t he final Buddha 
Jewel, Buddha superior?  
 
Answer:   In the first place, Buddha and Buddha superior are not the same. 
Buddha has a greater pervasion  while Buddha superior has a smaller p ervasion.  
All the four bodies are Buddha  and a ll the four bodies are also the Buddha J ewel  
that are :   
 the nature body that is the natural purity  and the nature truth body that is 
adventitious purity  
 the wisdom truth body  
 the enjoyment body  
 the emana tion body  
 
You have to understand that the Buddha superior is a person.  
 As such, can the nature body that is the natural purity and the nature body 
that is an adventitious purity  be a Buddha superior?  Can the wisdom truth 
body be a Buddha superior? No.  
 But are they Buddha? Yes.  
 
These three —nature body that is natural purity, the nature body that is 
adventitious purity and the wisdom truth body —are Buddha but they are not 
the Buddha superior.   
 
Why is that so? Because they are not persons.  
 The nature bo dy that is natural purity and the nature body that is 
adventitious purity  are permanent. Therefore  they cannot be person s.  
 The wisdom truth body is a consciousness. As such, it cannot be a person  
either .  
 
As for our founder, Shakyamuni Buddha, he  is a Bu ddha superior and an 
enjoyment body as well. Shakyamuni Buddha is not his aggregates. He is that 
which is merely imputed in  dependence upon his aggregates , the basis of 
designation. Shakyamuni Buddha’s form body is Buddha  but you can not say 
that his body a ggregates are Buddha superior. It  is the same  as saying that you 
are not your body.  
 
Question : Does the term ‘person ’ include an enlightened being as well?  
 
Answer:  Yes. 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 6 of 11 Question: Since Buddha is a ll four bodies, wouldn’t that make Buddha 
something that is b oth a permanent and impermanent phenomen on?  
 
Answer : Possessing something doesn’t mean it is that thing.   
 
Khen Rinpoche: Did y ou g et it?  
 
Answer : If you possess something, are you necessarily that thing?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes or no ? This is a q uestion fo r you. For example?  
 
A Buddha superior possesses the quality of true cessation s but it is not the same 
as saying that a Buddha superior is true cessation s. Likewise a Buddha superior 
possesses the quality of being uncompounded but it doesn’t mean that he is 
uncompounded. A B uddha superior possesses qualities that are both 
compounded and uncompounded  but a Buddha superior himself is not 
uncompounded.  
 
Question:  As the arya bodhisattva progresses along the path, the quality of his 
mind increases at every stag e. How do you measure the quality of that mind in 
term s of its clarity, depth and profundity?  
 
Answer:  Take for example , a bodhisattva’s mind that realizes emptiness as its 
object.  
 
 On the  path of accumulation , the mind in the continuum of a bodhisattva 
who understands emptiness is essentially a wisdom arisen from hearing and 
reflection.  
 When a  bodhisattva achieves the Mahayana path of preparation , then his 
mind realizing emptiness is a wisdom arisen from meditation. Within the 
path of preparation , there are four stages through which a bodhisattva is 
able to gradually deal with different layers of conceptions such as the 
conception of the apprehender and the conception of the apprehended.  
 Come s the time when a bodhisattva  realizes emptiness directly , he is on the 
path of seeing . His mind realizing emptiness is able to destroy the 
intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence.  
 After realizing emptiness directly , conjoined with his collection of merit , a 
bodhisattva familiarizes himself over and ov er again with that realization . 
He is now on the path of meditation .  
 Through that process of familiarization , as he moves towards the eighth 
ground, different levels of the apprehension of true existence  are removed . 
Finally on the eighth ground , the appr ehension of true existence is removed.  
 But th ere is still more to be done. He has yet to remove the knowledge 
obscuration s. The bodhisattva now progresses through  the eighth, ninth and 
tenth grounds and remov es the knowledge obscuration s.  
 
There is an extensive description of the many qualities achieved by the 
bodhisattva s on those ten grounds.  For example, the bodhisattva on the first 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 7 of 11 ground is able to emanate a hundred bodies ; on the second ground , he is able to 
emanate a thousand bodies ; and on the third ground , he is able to emanate a 
hundred thousand bodies and so forth. The  bodhisattva achieve s many such 
qualities  that are enhanced , becoming more and more greatly enhanced as he 
moves from a lower ground to a higher ground.  
 
Furthermore, these  ten gr ounds are associated with the achievement of the 
exalted practice of a particular perfection. For example , on the first ground , the 
bodhisattva achieve s the exalted practice of  the perfection of generosity and so 
forth.  
 
It is good to have questions to help make things clearer.  
 
This particular text is extremely difficult and challenging. It is really tough and 
difficult t o understand .  It is not possible to underst and each and every single 
word.  
 
What we can try to achieve here is for you to read the tex t on your own  and 
then , combine d with the explanation  I am giving , for you to get a rough idea of 
what it is trying to say. This is what we are aiming  for here. But i n order for that 
to happen , you have to read the root text on your own  so that  when  the 
explanation is given , you can refer to the root text , see what exactly is being said  
and look at the meaning of some of those words in the verses  and so forth.   
 
~~~~~~~~~~  
 
SANGHA JEWEL  
 
Verse 13  
Obeisance to those who, having thoroughly realized the limit 
or quiescence of selflessness in all transmigrators  
Through perceiving the non -[inherent] existence of the 
entities of the afflictive  emotions due to the natural clear 
light of the mind,  
Perceive perfect Buddhahood as residing in all, to those whose 
intell igence is  unobstructed,  
And who are endowed with sight of the exalted wisdom that 
has as its objects  the purity and infinity of sentient beings.  
 
Eight qualities of the Sangha Jewel  
1. The quality of the  knowledge of the mode of phenomena  
2. The quality of the k nowledge  of the varieties or diversity  of phenomena  
3. The quality of inner knowledge (or the internal exalted wisdom)  
4. The quality of being pure of attachment  
5. The quality of being pure of obstructi ons (or impediment s) 
6. The quality of being pure of the lower (or inferior) obscurations.  
7. The quality of knowledge  
8. The quality of freedom  
The first three can be subsumed under the  quality of knowledge . The latter 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 8 of 11 three can be subsumed under the  quality of freedom. If you enumerate the 
quality of knowledg e and the quali ty of freedom,  these are the eight qualities of 
the Sangha Jewel .  
 
 “Through perceiving the non -[inherent] existence of the entities of the afflictive 
emotions due to the natural clear light of the mind ” refers to the knowledge  of 
the mode of phenomena.   
 
“The natural clear light of the mind ”: This refers to the emptiness of the mind. 
The Sangha Jewel perceives this.  
  
The mind is in the nature of clear light because the mind is empty of existing 
inherently . The Sangha Jewel sees  this empty nature of the mind  and it also 
perceive s that the afflictions by nature are not established to be inherently 
existen t. In other words:  
 Because of the emptiness of the mind —i.e., the mind is empty of existing 
inherently —as such , the mind is in the nature of clear light.  The nature of 
the mind is emptiness and the Sangha Jewel sees this as it is.  
 Because the afflictive emotions are also not inherently established , they are 
adventitious. The afflictions are also in the nature of emptiness and the 
Sangha Jewel also sees th em as they are.  
 
The Sangha Jewel also recognise s that these emptinesses and the emptiness of 
the minds of sentient beings are the same. With their knowledge of the mode of 
phenomena —seeing that the mind is in the nature of emptiness and that the 
afflicti ons are in the nature of emptiness —they see that something similar 
abide s in the continu a of all sentient beings. This is the knowledge of the 
varieties or diversity of phenomena —“having thoroughly realized the limit or 
quiescen ce of selflessness  in all tr ansmigrators ,” they “perceive the perfect 
Buddhahood  as residing in all .” Seeing that , they know that all sentient beings 
possess within them from the very beginning th e quality that enables them to 
become s buddha s.  
 
Among all the qualities  possess ed by the Sa ngha Jewel, these two qualities —the 
qualit y of the knowledge of the mode of phenomena and  the qualit y of the 
knowledge of the varieties or diversity  of phenomena —are most important. By 
seeing that the nature of the mind  is emptiness and that the ultim ate nature of 
the afflictions themselves is also emptiness , they see that these  qualities exist 
also in the continu a of all sentient beings. They see that the buddha lineage  
pervade s the continu a of all sentient beings.  
 
“To those whose intelligence is un obstructed ”: T his refers to the quality of 
freedom from attachment, obstructi ons (or impediments) and lower  (or 
inferior)  obscurations.  
 
1. Knowledge of the mode of phenomena  
The next verse elaborat es on the quality of the knowledge of the mode of 
phenomena.  
 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 9 of 11 Verse 14  
Because the perception of [their] internal exalted wisdom  
Of the mode and of the varieties is pure,  
The community of irreversible intelligent ones  
Is endowed with unsurpassed qualities.  
 
Verse 15  
Due to realizing the quiescent nature of transmigr ating beings, 
[that is, all  persons and phenomena  
They [perceive] the very mode [of being of phenomena],  
This being because of the natural thorough purity  
And because the afflictive emotions are extinguished from the 
start.  
 
“Transmigrating beings ” refer t o person s. “Due to realizing the quiescent nature 
of transmigrating beings, [that is, all persons and phenomena / They [perceive] 
the very mode [of being of phenomena] ”: By realizing the empty nature of a 
person , this realisation also include s realising the  emptiness of phenomena 
other than person s, such as the aggregates that a re the basis imputation of a 
person : 
 This is “because of the natur al thorough purity ,” that is, they see the natural 
purity —the ultimate nature, the emptiness —of the mind . 
 “And becaus e the afflictive emotions are extinguished from the start ” means 
that they see that the afflictions are by nature empty and as such, they are 
adventitious.    
 
2. Knowledge of the varieties or diversity of phenomena  
Verse 16  
Because the awareness realizing ob jects of knowledge and [their]    
finality  
Sees that the nature of omniscience  
Exists in all sentient beings,  
They have [knowledge of] the varieties.  
 
The final object of knowledge is the final m ode of abiding of all phenomena , 
essentially emptiness. They have the knowledge that realizes the final mode of 
abiding of the Buddha’s mind , i.e., the emptiness of the Buddha’s mind . They see 
that something similar pervade s the continu a of all sentient beings.  
 
“Because the awareness realizing objects of knowledge and [their] finality sees 
that the nature of omniscience e xists in all sentient beings, ” as such , “They have 
[knowledge of] the varieties ” of phenomena.   
 
The wisdom that directly realizes the ultimate nature of all phenomena that 
exist in the continuum of  a buddha realizes the emptiness of his mind . This 
wisdom realiz ing that emptiness , sees that something similar exists in the 
continu a of all sentient beings.  
 
A buddha’s wisdom that directly realizes the mode of phenomena also realizes 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 10 of 11 the diversity/vari eties of phenomena . Only a buddha can do that. The wisdom 
of a n on-buddha  that realizes the mode of phenomena cannot realize the 
diversity of phenomena.  A sentient being can only directly perceive the ultimate 
nature of all phenomena  in meditative equipois e. On ly when he arises from the 
meditative equipoise can he realize the diversity of phenomena. A buddha does  
not need to do that.  
 
3. Quality of inner knowledge (or internal exalted wisdom)   
Verse 17 (a,b)  
Those realizations in that way  
Are just perceptions by their own consciousness individually.  
 
The superiors’ direct knowledge of the mode s and varieties of phenomena can 
only be e xperience d by them.  
 
4—5. Quality of being pure of attachment & quality of being pure of obstructiveness   
Verse 17 (c,d)  
In the basic element of non -defilement there are no passions  
And no obstacles, thus those are pure.  
 
 “Passion s” refer to attachment.   
 “Obstacles ” refer to the lower  (or inferior)  obstacles.  
 “Thus those are pure ” refer to the purities of these two.  
 “There are no passions”: The absence o f passion (or  attachment ) refers to 
the non -existence of the attachment holding on  to truth.  
 “No obstacles ”: Because they do not have any obstacles to engaging  with all 
phenomena as they are , they are free of obstacles and are pure in that sense.   
 
It is also mentioned that in general : 
 “Passion s” (or attachment ) refer to any of the afflictive obstructions .  
 “Obstacle s” (or obstructiveness ) refer to the knowledge obscurations.  
 
6.   Quality of being pure of the lower (or inferior) ob stacles  
Verse 18  
Because the sight of [these] wisdoms is pure,  
It is [close to being] the unsurpassed wisdom of a Buddha.  
Therefore, an irreversible Superior  
Is a refuge for all embodied beings.  
 
This verse talks about the quality of purity  or freedom from  the lower  (or 
inferior) obstacles.  
 
If you can, try to relate what I have said to the root text. What you have to know  
is that the Sangha Jewel is said to  possess eight qualities .  
 
 
 
 
Amitabha  Buddhist Centre                                                                     Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                     Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 6  
Page 11 of 11 THE EIGHT QUALITIES OF THE SANGHA  
1 Quality of the 
knowledge of the 
mode of 
phenomena  “Through perceiving the 
non-[inherent] existence 
of the entities of the 
afflictive emotions due to 
the natural clear light of 
the mind ,” (Verse 13).  The Sangha Jewel understands 
the true mode of existence of 
phenomena, that the nature of 
the mind is clear light and that 
the afflictions are empty of 
inherent existence and are, 
therefore, adventitious.  
“… natural clear light of the 
mind” means that the mind 
does not exist inherently and 
this accords with the way the 
mind exists in reality.  1.  
Quality of 
knowledge . 
The first 
three 
qualities are 
subsumed 
under this 
quality.  2 Quality of the 
knowledge of the 
diversity /varieties  
of phenomena  “Having thoroughly 
realized the limit or 
quiescen ce of 
selflessness in all 
transmigrators ,” the y 
then “perceive the 
perfect buddhahood as 
residing in all ,” (Verse 
13).  Through directly perceiving the 
final nature of the mind and its 
adventitious afflictions, the 
Sangha Jewel understands that 
all sentient beings are pervaded 
by buddha nature, the potential 
to attain enlightenment and 
become a buddha .  
3 Quality of inner 
knowledge  “Those realizations in 
that way are just 
perceptions by their own 
consciousness 
individually , “ (Verse 17).  The superiors’ direct knowledge 
of the mode and varieties of 
phenomena a re something that 
only the Sangha Jewel can 
experience.  
4 Quality of being 
pure of attachment   “There are no passions ,” 
(Verse 17).  “Passion s” refer  to the afflictive 
obstructions.  Because the 
Sangha Jewel possesses the 
knowledge of the mode of 
phenome na, it is free from 
passions ,  the non -existence of 
the attachment holding onto 
truth [BP1 L6]  
2.  
Quality of 
freedom . 
The fourth to 
the sixth 
qualities are 
subsumed  
Under this 
quality.  5 Quality of being 
pure of 
obstructiveness  “And n o obstacles ,” 
(Verse 1 7). ‘”Obstacle s” refer to  the 
knowledge obscurations. The 
Sangha Jewel possesses this 
quality because of its direct 
perception of the diversity of 
phenomena. Therefore, they do 
not possess any obstacles to 
engaging all phenomena as they 
are.   
6 Quality of being 
pure of the lower 
obscurations  “Because the sight of 
[these] wisdoms is pure, 
it is [close to being] the 
unsurpassed wisdom of a 
Buddha. Therefore, an 
irreversible Superior is a 
refuge for all embodied 
beings .” (Verse 18)  This verse talks about th e 
quality of purity or freedom 
from the lower (or inferior) 
obstacles.  
 
 
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo ; edited 
by Cecilia Tsong.  
 