Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L07 final .pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:27.313365
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 1 of 12 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe 
Chonyi on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  
One : The  Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs . 
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 7                         3 March 2015  
 
 
Question & Answer. Chapter One:  The Essence of a One Gone Thus.  Verses 15—18. Sangha 
Jewel.  Verse 19. General presentation of the Three Jewels: The Sangha Jewel must be a 
superior. Resultant and causal refuge. Conventional and ultimate refuge. Verse 20. Non -
buddhas are not the ultimate  objects of refuge.  
 
 
Question : What is the difference between the factor of clarity and knowing versus 
the potential of the mind  that makes it suitable to generate qualit ies? 
 
Answer:  We ha ve seen h ow we can discuss the basic constituent or tathagata 
essence from the conventional perspective and from the ultimate perspective . 
Therefore the tathagata essence can be considered as compounded or 
uncompounded :  
 The potential of the mind to transform into a buddha is its factor of being 
compounded.  
 The factor of being uncompounded  is basically the mind’s emptiness of tru e 
existen ce. From the ultimate perspective, that is the tathagata essence.  
 
When we consider the factor of clarity and awareness —the mind that is clear and 
knowing —there are many ways of lookin g at this.  
 
Viewpoint of tantra  
From the viewpoint of tantra, there is an explanation of the extremely subtle mind 
that is mounted on the extremely subtle wind. Th e factor of clarity and awareness of 
this extremely subtle mind goes all the way up to enlig htenment.  
 
What is the substantial cause of the wisdom truth body? It is this extremely subtle 
mind that is mounted on th e extremely  subtle wind.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 2 of 12 When we posit this factor of clarity and awareness —the extremely subtle mind that  
is mounted on the extreme ly subtle wind —it becomes very easy to explain. From 
the perspective of tantra, this is posited as the buddha lineage  that:  
 goes all the way up to enlightenment  
 acts as the substantial cause for the wisdom truth body  
 
As such , one can say that from the ti me sentient beings w ere in existence, the 
potential for enlightenment has always been there. Therefore we can say that every 
sentient being  has the potential to achieve enlightenment because every sentient 
being  has this extremely subtle mind.  
 
So if you look at it from the perspective of tantra , it is easier  to explain .  
 
Viewpoint of sutra  
However, if we were to look at this issue  from the perspective of sutra, when we 
refer to that  which is clear and knowing, essentially we are talking about th e mind 
that is able to experience, cognize and understand objects.  
 
Having said that, then a question arise s: Does the factor of c larity and awareness of 
ignorance go on to enlightenment? The factor of clarity and awareness of i gnorance  
knows,  cognizes and is awar e of its object . The discussion becomes  more difficult.   
 
There are many afflictions ; for example, the apprehension of tru e existen ce. That is 
a consciousness. If it is a consciousness, does it go on to enlightenment?  
 
Is the apprehension of tru e existen ce a consciousness  or not ?  
 
Isn’t t he very nature of this ignorance clear light? What  do you think? Is the nature 
of ignorance clear light  or not ?  
 
Student:  The nature of ignorance is  its emptiness.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Therefore it is in the nature of clear l ight.  You have n o choice  but to 
say that . 
 
Student : It is in the nature of clear light from the conventional perspective. The c lear  
light mind is a conventional truth.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Is the nature of ignorance clear light or not?  
 
Student:  I would have to  say yes because the nature of any phenomenon is in the 
nature of emptiness.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : So it follows that ignorance goes on to enlightenment.  
 
Student:  Its emptiness goes on to enlightenment  but i gnorance has been eliminated.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  The empt iness of ignorance and ignorance are one entity. They 
always go together. So for you, ignorance goes to enlightenment.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 3 of 12 Student:  I think it is the adventitious purity that goes on to enlightenment.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  Does ignorance go  on to enlightenment or no t? Does the 
apprehension of true existence go on to enlightenment or not?  
 
Student:  Of course not ! 
 
Khen Rinpoche : But i t follows that ignorance goes on to enlightenment because its 
nature is clear light . You asserted  this just now.  
 
Student : Then it would  be wrong  of me to make such an assertion  if that was what I 
was t hinking. What I think is this: I gnorance  is the defilements . If we remove that, 
then we will eventually see the nature of clear light , emptiness . We will eventually 
see t he adventitious puri ty of ignorance . 
 
Khen Rinpoche : The a pprehension of tru e existen ce is an adventitious stain?  
 
Student : Yes . 
 
Khen Rinpoche : So when that is purified, ignorance ceases.  
 
Student:  Yes. 
 
Khen Rinpoche : If it ceases, how then does it go on to enlightenment?  
 
Student:  The emptiness of the mind  ... 
 
Khen Rinpoche : The point we are look ing at is  this: Does the emptiness of ignorance 
go on to enlightenme nt or not?  
 
Student : If the emptiness of ignorance equals the adventitious purity or is equal to 
the emptiness o f any phenomena,  it would be the same emptiness  all the way 
through.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Forget about emptiness ! Because it itself is a stain , there is no 
adventitious purity yet. So now what we are left with is the emptiness of ignorance. 
Ignorance is empty b y nature. Does t he emptiness of ignorance go  on t o 
enlightenment or not?  
 
Student:  If the emptin ess of ignorance and the emptiness of any other phenomen on 
are in fact the same  emptiness , I would say ultimate nature would be one  thing . If 
that assumption is  correct, then that emptiness would go all the way up  to 
enlightenment . I always thought  that the ultimate nature and emptiness  of any 
phenomen on are the same whereas it is the variet ies of conventional truth  that are 
different.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : If you were  to say that all emptiness es are the same, then the 
emptiness of ABC,  the emptiness of the thangka and so forth would go on to 
enlightenment. You wouldn’t say that a stone has the potential to become a buddha , 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 4 of 12 would you?  
 
Student:  Of course not ! The stone  is perceived by a consciousness . Otherwise  it 
would not be a stone.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : But a ccording to what you have said  earlier , it follows that a stone 
has buddha nature.  
 
Student : No , no! The perceiver has buddha nature, not the object.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : For you, i t follo ws that the stone has b uddha nature because the 
stone ’s emptiness is the tathagata essence.  
 
Student : I understand what you are saying . But I was concentrating on the perceiver , 
the consciousness . For any object or phenomenon, it has to be  perceived  by the 
mind .  
 
If ignorance is like a stone , of course it does not go on to enlightenment. It is t he 
consciousness  that would go on to enlightenment.  
 
If ignorance were to go on t o enlightenment, then every  one of us would be 
enlightened by now ! 
 
Khen Rinpoche:  But f or you , ignorance does go on to enlightenment because the 
nature of ignorance is clear light ! 
 
What the teachings say about the tathagata essence is that it is the suchness of  the 
mind . It doesn’t sa y the suchness of a particular mind . It refers to  the emptiness of 
the mind together with the mind  itself. T hese two f orm the lineage that goes on to 
enlightenment.  
 
Most of the proponent s of Buddhist tenets all the way up to the Autonomy Middle 
Way School (AMWS) assert  that the person is t he mental consciousness . Thus t hey 
would say that for those who believe in enlightenment, it is the mental 
consciousness that goes on to enlightenment because it is the person.  
 
There are many different kinds of mind . Ignorance or the apprehension of tru e 
existen ce is just one of them.  
 
I think one would have to say that the apprehension of tru e existen ce does not 
continue up to enlightenment because the apprehension of tru e existen ce is not the 
nature of the mind. It is an adventitious mind  and as such, t he apprehension of tru e 
existen ce is not the mode of apprehension of  the mind.   
 
Whether t he statement —the nature of mind is clear light —can be applied to every 
single instan ce of mind or not, that is a big question.  
 
As I have said , when w e look at this from the perspective of tantra, it is much easier 
when we relate it to the extremely subtle mind . This mind has no beginning and has 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 5 of 12 no end. It doesn’t die , nor was there a first moment of birth. This is the mind that 
goes on to enlightenment.   
 
The propon ents of the S utra  school , the Saut rantikas , assert  that the mental 
consciousness is the person  so for them,  they would posit the mental conscio usness 
to be the tathagata essence . The mental consciousness would  be the buddha lineage .  
 
For the proponent s of the Mind Only school, there is a sub-school  that , through their 
own analysis , conclude that there must be a separate consciousness  that is called 
the mind -basis -of-all. Here w hen we talk about the buddha lineage, can this mind -
basis -of-all be  suitable to be transform ed into a buddha ?  
 
The discussion about clear light nature of the mind and the meaning of the factor of 
clarity and awareness will be coming up soon. There are many things to think about.  
 
Student : I had the mental con ception of the basic con stituent to be like space and the 
instances of the mind are like the objects that are appearing and disappearing from 
this space.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : If you refer  to that space to be emptiness , that is fine because 
everything is in the nature of emptiness. All conventional phenomena are in the 
nature of emptiness and they arise from emptiness.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: One question becomes  many questions ! 
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
 
SANGHA JEWEL  
 
We have looked at the eig ht qualities of the Sangha Jewel. They are:   
1. The quality of th e knowledge of the mode of phenomena  
2. The quality of the knowledge of the varieties  of phenomena  
3. The quality of  inner knowledge  
4. The quality of being pure of attachment  
5. The quality of being pure of obstructi ons  
6. The quality of being pure of the lower obscur ations  
7. The quality of knowledge  
8. The quality of freedom  
 
Six qualities can be subsumed into the quality of knowledge and the quality of 
freedom :  
 The first  three —the quality of knowledge of the mode of phenomena , the quality 
of the knowledge of the varietie s of phenomena and the quality of in ner 
knowledge —come  under the quality of knowledge.  
 The next three —the quality of being pure of attachment , the quality of being 
pure of obstructi ons and the quality of being pure of the lower obscurations —
come under the  quality of freedom.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 6 of 12 Quality of the knowledge of the mode of phenomena  
Verse15  
Due to realizing the quiescent nature of transmigrating beings, 
[that is, all  persons and phenomena  
They [perceive] the very mode [of being of phenomena],  
This being because of the natural thorough purity  
And because the afflictive emotions are extinguished from the 
start.  
 
“Due to realizing the quiescent nature of transmigrating beings”: “Transmigrating 
beings ” generally refer to person s but here it refer to both  the person s and their 
aggregates . In other words, the Sangha Jewel directly realizes “ the quiescent nature ” 
of these two . 
 
Two reasons are given that explain why the Sangha Jewel have the quality of the 
know ledge of the mode of phenomena : 
1. “This being b ecause of the na tural thorough purity ,” that is, the emptiness of the 
mind .  
2. “And because the afflictive emotions are extinguished from the start ”:  
The afflictive emotions are by nature empty  and have always been empty of 
existing inherently.  Because the afflictive emoti ons are in the nature of 
emptiness , they were never established to be inherent ly existent right from the 
beginning .  As such , afflictive emotions are adventitious.  
 
Quality of the knowledge of the varieties of phenomena  
Verse16  
Because the awareness reali zing objects of knowledge and [their] 
finality  
Sees that the nature of omniscience  
Exists in all sentient beings,  
They have [knowledge of] the varieties  
 
We posit “the awareness realizing objects of knowledge and [their] finality” to be 
the exalted knower of all. This exalted knower of all —the omniscient mind —the 
final wisdom that sees the emptiness of a buddha’s mind , sees that something 
similar to this exist in the continua of all sentient beings . This exalted knower of all, 
the omniscient mind, is able t o directly perceive or know the varieties of 
phenomena while in the state of perceiving the  mode of phenomena. This is the 
meaning of Verse 16.  
 
Based on what I have just said, now when you look at Verse 16, do you understand 
what it is saying? If you have  read this verse prior to my explanation  and you didn’t 
understand  it but a fter my explanation , when you now read Verse 16 , you get 
something  out of it , then we have accomplished what we have set out to do.  
 
This method of expla nation of the qualities of t he Sangha Jewel is in relation to a 
buddha. If the object is not a buddha but a sentient being , is th is manner of 
explanation  correct or  incorrect ? 
 If you were to say that a sentient being  could  see the diversit ies of phenomena 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 7 of 12 while directly perceiv ing the mode of phenomenon , that is incorrect  as o nly a 
buddha can do that.  
 But i f you were to say that a Sangha  Jewel , who is a sentient being, perceives the 
mode of phenomenon while in meditative equipoise and perceives the varieties 
of phenomenon  when he ari ses from that meditative equipoise  and that this 
sentient being has buddha nature , then that is OK. 
 
Quality of inner knowledge  
Verse17 a,b 
Those realizations in that way  
Are just perceptions by their own consciousness individually.  
 
These lines relate to  the quality of inner knowledge .  
 
Quality of being pure of attachment  
Verse17 c,d  
In the basic element of non -defilement there are no passions  
And no obstacles, thus those are pure.  
 
“In the basic element of non -defilement ”: This wisdom directly sees the mode of 
phenomena , so in this mind , “there are  no passions ” or attachment. Another way of 
saying  this: Because the mind directly perceives the mode of phenomena, there fore 
there are no passions or attachment.  
 
“And no obstacles, thus those are pure” : “Obstacles” here refer to the stains of 
obstructiveness.  Because the wisdom that perceives the varieties or diversity of 
phenomena directly as they are, this mind encounters no obstructiveness in 
engaging with all phenomena. In that sense, there are “no obstac les.”  
 
It is easy to explain this in relation to the final Sangha Jewel , a buddha :  
 A buddha’s omniscient mind  directly perceives the mode of phenomena. 
Because this wisdom directly perceives the mode of phenomena  that is t he 
ultimate nature of phenomena,  it directly perceives the tathagata  essence as it is . 
For such a mind, “there are no passion s.” Here “passion s” mean the 
apprehension of true existence. So for such a mind, there is no apprehension of 
true existence .  
 Because a buddha’s wisdom directly pe rceives the varieties of phenomena —that 
is this wisdom faces no obstructiveness in engaging with all phenomena —it 
perceives the tathagata essence abiding in the continu a of all sentient beings .  
 
Therefore, “in this basic element of non -defilement, there a re no passions and no 
obstacles , thus those  are pure .”  
“In the basic element of 
non-defilement there are 
no passions  …” “Passion s” refer to the stain 
of attachment . The wisdom that  directly perceives the 
mode of phenomena has no passions or 
attachment .  
“And no obstacles  …” “Obstacles ” refer to the 
stain of obstructiveness . The wisdom that perceives all  the 
varieties of phenomena directly  faces no 
obstructiveness or obstacles in engaging 
with all phenomena .  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 8 of 12 Quality of being pure of obstructions  
Verse 1 8  
Because the sight of [these] wisdoms is pure,  
It is [close to being] the unsurpassed wisdom of a Buddha.  
Therefore, an irreversible Superior  
Is a refuge for all embodied beings.  
 
“Because the sight of [these] wisdoms is pure” : We can t ake the “wisdom ” here to 
refer to the mind of a buddha that is pure because it has the quality of knowing the 
mode  of phenomena , the quality of knowing the varieties of phenomena and the 
quality of inner knowledge.  
 
The cause of this wisdom  is the bodhisattvas abiding on t he pure grounds , that is, 
the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds. They are close to enlightenment,  “Therefore, an 
irreversible Superior / Is a refuge for all embodied beings. ”  
 
If you look at the qualit ies of a Sangha Jewel from the perspective of the 
Consequ ence Middle Way School  (CMWS) , we are talking about a sentient being, not 
a buddha . A bodhisattva on the eighth ground has already a bandon ed the afflictive 
obscuration s so s uch a bodhisattva is purified of “passion s.”  If we take the word  
“passion s” to mea n the afflictive obscuration s, since the bodhisattva on the eighth 
ground  has already been liberated  from or are free  of the afflictive obscuration s, 
you could say that such a bodhisattva is free of “passion s,” that is , it is purified of 
passion s. In that sense, it is “pure. ”  
 
If we take “obstacles ” to mean the knowledge obscuration s, the bodhisattva on the 
eighth ground has start ed the process of removing the knowledge obscuration s. In 
that sense , there are no obstacles  as he has started the process of re moving the 
knowledge obscurations . 
                
You have to understand these terms correctly:  
 The word “passion s” mean the afflictive obscurations . 
 “Obstacles” mean the knowledge obscurations . 
 The bodhisattva  has start ed the process of removing the kno wledge 
obscurations from the eighth ground onwards . As such, there are no obstacles.  
This is not to say that the bodhisattva on the eighth ground does not have any more  
knowledge obscurations. Only that h e has started the process of removing the m.  
 
The bodhisattva on the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds progressively remove s 
different levels of the knowledge obscurations , achiev ing the cessation of those 
knowledge obscurations as he moves along. Depending on which ground he is on, he 
has definitely removed some level of knowledge obscurations.  You have to 
understand it in that way. We are not saying that the bodhisattva superior do es not 
have any knowledge obscurations . 
 
Quality of being pure of the lower obscurations  
An example of a lower (or inferior ) obsc uration  would be t he obscuration of 
wanting to experience the bliss of peace oneself alone.  This is how my teacher  
explain ed it. This is what is usually said when these are taught . I have not seen 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 9 of 12 anything written on them specifically in the text s.  
 
In th e commentary on this Sublime C ontinuum , the inferior obscurations are posited 
to be those obscurations that  are abandoned before the eighth ground : 
 They are ‘inferior ’ because t hese obscurations are purified before the eighth 
ground .  
 Because these obscura tions that are to be abandoned prior to the achievement 
of the eighth g round obstruct the achievement of the eighth  ground,  therefore 
they are ‘obscurations ’.  
Putting them together , then they are inferior obscurations.  
 
“Because the sight  of [these]  wisd om is pure ”: If we explain this wisdom to be the 
wisdom that realizes the modes and varieties of phenomena in the continu a of the 
bodhisattvas on the pure ground s as the cause of enlightenment, then  these 
bodhisattvas abiding on the pure ground s “is a refu ge for all embodied things .”  
 
THE THREE JEWELS: GENERAL PRESENTATION  
 
Verse 19  
In order to [show the qualities of] teacher, teaching, and learners  
The Three Refuges were posited  
In terms of those of the three vehicles  
And those devoted to the three observ ances [of the individual 
refuges].  
 
There is a way of positing the Three Jewels  (or the Three Rare Sublime Ones) in 
relation to the three lineages : 
1. the hearers ’ lineage  
2. the solitary realizers ’ lineage and  
3. the Mahayana lineage  
 
 For those of the hearer s’ lineage, they are principally looking to achieve the state 
of the f oe destroyer Sangha. As such, the Sangha Jewel is shown and taught.  
 For those of the solitary realizer s’ lineage, they are principally looking for 
liberation. As such, the ultimate Dharma J ewel —true path s and true 
cessation s—is shown  and taught . 
 For those of the Mahayana lineage, their principal object of achievement  and 
their main goal is omniscience , full enlightenment  or b uddhahood. For them, the 
resultant refuge, the Buddha Jewel , is shown and taught .   
 
For those who have  yet to enter the path, how  are the Three Jewels explained to 
such people ? One can make offerings in relation to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. 
As such, the Three Jewels —the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha —are taught  as well.  
 
Why is there a presentation of the Three Jewels ? In one way, it is because of the 
aspirations of the persons belonging to the different lineages : the Mahayana, the 
solitary realizers and the h earers . Because of their aspirations and their goals, there 
is a presentation of the Three Jewels for them.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 10 of 12  
The Sangha Jewel must be a superior  
There  is a system of strictly positing th e Sangha Jewel to be a superior . It cannot be 
an ordinary being. Why  is this so ? Because only a superior does not have any doubts 
with regard to refuge  in the Three Jewels. Because a superior is never separated 
from the Three Jewels , as such , the Sangha Jewel has to be a superior. An ordinary 
being can never be posited to be a Sangha Jewel because it  is possible for an 
ordinary being to follow a teacher other than the Buddha.  
 
Having said that, are the bodhisattvas on the path of accumulation and the path of 
preparation necessarily Buddhists?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Do they h ave to be Buddhist s or not ? Does a  
bodhisattva have to be a Buddhist?  Yes or No?  
 
Student : Maybe not . For example , Mother Teresa.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: I thought you were going to give the example , me!  
 
The bodhicitta of the bodhisattvas is focusing on the state of full enlightenment. 
They are aspiring to become buddha s. Can you aspire to be something that you do 
not know? If you don’t have faith in the Buddha, you can not possibly aspire to be a 
buddha.  If you don’t have a wish to be a buddha, there  is no way bodhicitta can be 
generated. If you have faith in  the Buddha, then you are a Buddhist.  
 
It is stated here that the Sangha Jewel has to be a superior because a superior does 
not have any doubts about the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. In that sense, h e will 
never change . It is possible that an ordinary being may follow after a teacher or 
founder other than the Buddha.  
 
The object of refuge to which we entrust ourselves has to be stable and unchanging . 
It would be strange if we were to entrust oursel ves to or take refuge in an object 
that changes. Going by thi s, then the bodhisattvas on the path of accumulation and 
the path of preparation do not fit the criteria.   
 
More about refuge  
~ Causal refuge and resultant refuge  
You should remember t hat you can consider refuge from a causal point of view or 
from a result ant point of view.  
 
The resultant Three Jewels are the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha that you have yet to 
achieve , i.e., they are what you will become i n the future. In your mind if you hold on 
to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha as the object s of refuge that yo u will become in 
the future, if you mentally accept that and also verbalize it, that is going for resultant 
refuge.  
 
The causal refuge refers to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha that are already 
established in the continuum of someone other than yours elf. If you have faith in the 
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha that is already established in some one e lse’s mental 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 11 of 12 continuum, when you acknowledge and entrust yourself to them, and you also 
verbalize  this, that is what we call going for  causal refuge or taking causal r efuge. 
You accept  that : 
 the Buddha that is established in some one else’s continuum to be the founder, 
the person who shows refuge  
 the Dharma that is established in some one else’s continuum as the actual refuge  
 the Sangha that is established in some one else’s continuum as the helper  or the 
person who helps you with your practice of refuge  
 
In the prayer that is commonly recited —“I go for refuge until I am enlightened / To 
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha” —that indicates causal refuge. The last two lines —
“By my practice of giving and the other perfections, / M ay I  become a buddha to 
benefit all sentient beings ”—shows resultant refuge.  
 
~ Conventional refuge and ultimate refuge  
You also need to know that refuge can be classified as conventional refuge or 
ultimat e refuge.  
 
The s uperiors such as the b odhisattva superiors  are not ultimate refuge  objects ; 
they are conventional object s of refuge. Likewise the true path s and true cessation s 
in the continuum of such superiors are also not  ultimate refuge  objects.  
 
These superiors and the true path s and true cessations in their continuum are 
objects of refuge but they are not the final refuge  objects . They are conventional 
refuge objects because they are temporary in that they have yet to reach their fullest 
potential. For example, the true path s and true cessation s in the continuum of a 
superior are not at their highest possible level. As such , they are not final  and i n that 
sense, are still temporary. The true path s and true cessation s in the continu a of 
these superior s can still be improved upon . As such, they are not ultimate  or final  
but just temporary.  
 
The ultimate refuge object  is only the Buddha.  
 
Non-buddhas are not the ultimate refuge objects  
Verse 20 is saying that all non -buddhas are not the ultimate refuge  objects . 
 
Verse 20  
Because [the verbal doctrine is] abandoned, because [the 
realizational doctrine  in the continuum of a Bodhisattva 
Superior] has the quality of deception,  
Because [a cessation is] a [mere] non -existence, and [non -Buddhas] 
have fright,  
The two forms of doctrine and the community of Superiors  
[Respectively] are not the supreme eternal refuge.  
 
There are a few reasons or proofs that show why non -buddhas are not the final or 
ultimate objects of refuge. The reasons all start with the word , “because  …” of this, 
and “because  …” of that. Those are the reasons.  
“Because [the verbal doctrine is] abandoned” : What is abandoned is the collection of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                               Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                               Tathagata Essence                                                                                                                                                               
 
 
Lesson 7  
Page 12 of 12 words  or text s that we can see and the sounds we can hear , which are  usually 
considered to be  the Dhar ma Jewel . These are not ultimate object s of refuge for they 
are abandoned when we become enlightened. We only rely on them to reach our 
goal  for w hen we have achieved enlightenment, the final object of achievement, we 
do not need to depend on them anymore.   
 
Just like a person who crosses a vas t ocean on a boat, once he reaches the shore, he 
doesn’t need the boat anymore  unless he decide s to return to the other side of the 
ocean again ! But a fter achieving enlightenment, you will need to teach your 
disciples  by using words.   
 
“Because the [realisational doctrine in the continuum of a Bodhisattva Superior] has 
the quality of deception”: Although the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the 
conti nuum of a bodhisattva superior is a true path and it is an obje ct of refuge, but 
not a final object of refuge. It is not ultimate because it has the quality of deception.   
 
~~~~~~~~~~~  
Question : Are the subtle knowledge obscurations that motivate pure karma the 
same as the knowledge obscurations abandoned by the b odhi sattva superior on the 
eighth to the tenth grounds ?  
 
Answer:  This is s omething that we can think about. According to the proponents of 
the Consequence Middle Way School,  the Prasangika s, a knowledge obscuration is 
not a consciousness . Rather it is a predi sposition.  
 According to them, the apprehension of a self  or person and the apprehension of 
phenomena are not posited to be knowledge obscurations. These two are 
consciousnesses and are posited to be afflictive obscurations.  
 Knowledge obscurations are pos ited to be the predispositions or imprint s of the 
apprehension of true existence.  
 
When we discuss the twelve links of dependent origination, the usual presentation 
is from the perspective of the afflictive obscurations . But there is also the twelve 
links  of dependent origination  that are included in the knowledge obscurations . In 
that discussion, there is something that motivates the accumulation of 
uncontaminated  karma. The very thing that motivates the accumulation of 
uncontaminated karma is subtle effo rt. This accumulation of uncontaminated karma  
does not come about as the r esult of the coarse  afflictive obscurations . Subtle effort 
is required. This subtle effort arises through the force of the knowledge 
obscurations.  
 
The question then arises: I s this subtle effort that gives rise to the accumulation of 
uncontaminated karma equivalent to the knowledge obscurations? This is one 
discussion. If effort is consciousness and if subtle effort is posited to be the 
knowledge obscurations, would that not make  the knowledge  obscurations 
consciousness es too ?  
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited 
by Cecilia Tsong.  