Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L23final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:44.277830
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 1 of 13 Transcript of the oral commentary  by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana , Chapter  One : The  
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission  for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter , translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen  © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007) . 
 
Lesson 23                            16 June 2015  
 
 
Question & answer session.  The contaminated and the uncontaminated: relating it to 
karma & the four maras. Does the Buddha have karma? Meaning of exertion.  
Realisation of emptiness and meditative equipoise.  Do seeds of afflictions increase 
like karma ? Intellectually acquired afflict ions vs. innate afflictions.  
 
 
Question : Khen Rinpoche mentioned that the level of predisposition s of ignorance 
could be taken to be the imprints of the apprehension of true existence, and this 
lead s the bodhisattva  to creat e uncontaminated karma. In term s of the 
uncontaminated karma, what is it not contaminated by , i.e., what’s  the difference 
between contaminated karma and uncontaminated karma?  
 
The problem is that I see the apprehension  of true existence  and its imprints as 
obscuration s and some thing neg ative .  I can’t understand how something negative 
can lead to karma that is not contaminated.   
 
Khen Rinpoche: Can someone answer  her question ? If anybody knows the answer, 
please say  so. 
 
Student  2: Is the k arma of an arhat uncontaminated?  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  You have a question?  
 
Student  2: No, t hat is the answer . An arhat still has those imprints but maybe his 
karma is uncontaminated.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  That  is true but you are not answering her question. You all need to 
think . We have stud ied so if somebody as ks this question, how are you going to answer  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 2 of 13 it?  
 
Student 3: The karma is uncontaminated in the sense that the arhat or whoever ha s 
this uncontaminated karma does not have afflictions like attachment and anger in the 
mind already. But he still ha s the appearance of true existence that creates th ose 
imprint s. As a result they accumulate uncontaminated karma.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: What you say is correct . Now here is a nother question for you.  
 
The question by the first s tudent  is this: How is the karma that is ac cumulated 
uncontaminated when the individual still has knowledge obscuration s?  The answer 
is not difficult.  
 
Khen Rinpoche (to Student 3) : Since  you said something , now here is another question  
for you . How are you going to answer it? So far so good  so don’t make a mistake .  
 
Student 3: Even though he has knowledge obscurations, the karma that he produces 
does not cause hi m to circle in cyclic existence  because he has no more grasping. I 
think it has to do with the 12 links. Because th e wheel  of life is br oken, whatever 
karma he produces does  not cause him to circle in cyclic existence.  
 
THE CONTAMINATED AND THE UNCONTAMINATED  
 
Relating it to karma  
Khen Rinpoche : It is actually not difficult to answer th is question . Basically you have 
to know what a contami nated and an uncontaminated phenomenon are. There are a 
few enumeration s of contaminated  phenomen a but they primarily refer to the 
afflictions. As such , the karma that is motivated by these afflictions is contaminated.  
 
Uncontaminated  karma  is not motivat ed by ignorance . Rather it is accumulated in 
dependence upon the subtle exertion  that happens due to the level of the 
predisposition s of ignorance.  Arhats and bodhisattva s on the eighth ground onwards  
do accumulate karma  but the karma they accumulate is uncontaminated  karma. The 
level of the predisposition s of ignorance is the condition for having subtle exertion  
and in dependence on  that, the arhats and the bodhisattva s on the pure grounds 
accumulate uncontaminated karma .  
 
It is the same with the contamin ated aggregates. Why are our appropriated 
aggregates contaminated? Because our contaminated aggregates arise  from karma 
and afflictions ; primarily , the afflictions. Since it is a product of our afflictions, our 
aggregates are contaminated.  
 
Relating it to the four maras  
We also talked about the m ara of aggregates .  
 The coarse m ara of the aggregates refer s to the contaminated aggregates that 
come about as a result of karma and afflictions.  
 The subtle mara of the aggregates refers to the mental body that arises due t o the 
level of the predispositions of ignorance and subtle exertion. Since the mental 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 3 of 13 body arises from uncontaminated karma, perhaps we can call the mental body an 
uncontaminated aggregate or an uncontaminated body.  
If we divide the mara of the a ggregates into coarse and subtle, since the arhats and 
the bodhisattva s on the pure grounds still have this uncontaminated body, as such , 
they are not liberated from the mara of the aggregates yet.  
 
With regard to the mara of the Lord of Death :  
 The coarse  mara of the Lord of Death is the death that happens due to karma and 
affliction s, i.e., the death t hat happens without choice because it is a product of 
our karma and afflictions. As such , we can also call such a death a contaminated 
death.  
 Although the a rhats and  the bodhisattva s on the pure grounds have liberated 
themselves from the coarse mara of the Lord of D eath, since they have the mental 
body, they still experience the inconceivable transference of death. I wonder 
whether we can call that death an u ncontaminated death.  
I have  not seen it expressed in this way  with terms such as ‘ contaminated death ’ or 
‘uncontaminated death .’ But i f we think about contaminated karma and 
uncontaminated karma  and t he meaning of ‘contaminated ’ in that context, then I 
won der if it is alright t o label the death that  happens due to karma and afflictions as 
contaminated death.  
 
As for the mara of the afflictions : 
 The coarse mara of the a fflictions refers to the manifest afflictions .  
 The subtle mara of the afflictions refers  to the seeds deposited by the afflictions.  
An arhat or foe destroyer is so called because he has destroyed the foe  of the 
afflictions  and the ir seeds as well.  
 
The mara of Devaputra  commonly refers to this being , Gerak Wangchu k, who 
disrupts the practice  of virtue by others.  Je Rinpoche wrote in his Golden  Rosary of 
Excellent Explanation s that when one achieves the path of seeing , one overcomes the 
mara of Devaputra . This is b ecause once one achieve s the path of seeing , then all 
doubt s with regard to the Three Jewels are eliminated  along with t he intellectually 
acquired afflictions , i.e., the coarse afflictions are eliminated.  When one achieves the 
path of seeing , the intellectually acquired afflictions cannot arise. One becomes a 
Sangha Jewel  because when  the p ath of seeing  is achieved , one has eliminated all 
doubt s with respect to the object s of refuge.  
 
In short, this is the essence behind contaminated karma and uncontaminated karma.  
 Karma that is contaminated by the afflictions is a contaminated karma . 
 Karma that is not accompanied by the contaminants, the afflictions, is an 
uncontaminated karma.  
 
DOES THE BUDDHA HAVE KARMA?  
 
In order to accumulate karma, exertion is needed , whether it be coarse exertion or 
subtle exertion. As such , does the Buddha ha ve karma? If you look at it in this way, 
then it seems like the answer is no. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 4 of 13 Khen Rinpoche: Does the Buddha ha ve karma or not? No? Are y ou sure?   
 
Isn’t there virtuous karma in the continuum of the Buddha? Doesn’t the Buddha 
accumulate virtuous karma?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: If the Buddha offer ed you a piece of chocolate, doesn’t he create good 
karma?  
 
Student  3: Buddha doesn’t have conceptual thought so there is no exertion on his part  
and therefore, no karma is created.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you are saying that if the Buddha g ives you a piece of chocolate, the 
Buddha does  not create good karma?  
 
Student  3: He creates virtue but he does not create virtuous karma. So we must create 
a special category for him  that is beyond cyclic existence ! 
 
Khen Rinpoche: What are you say ing? The Buddha c reates virtue but not virtuous 
karma?  
 
Student  3: Karma applies to sentient beings . So we must create a special category for 
the virtuous actions  of the buddhas . I don’t think they accumulate karma like we do, 
because they do not hav e conceptual thoughts.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Whatever you call it, is  it virtue or not?  
 
Student  3: I would think it is virtue.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: If a buddha accumulates virtue —if there is a cause —then that virtue 
must issue forth a result.  
 
Student  3: Maybe whate ver virtue the  buddhas create are the re sults of their past 
prayers when they were  bodhisattva s. Whatever virtue they create is already a result 
of their past prayers.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: When we say , ‘accumulate merit ’, that expression implies exertion , be 
it coarse  exertion or subtle exertion. As such , we do  not say that the buddha s 
accumulate karma. Whatever needs to be accu mulated has already been accumulated , 
i.e. a buddha  has finished his job !  
 
Therefore, a b uddha ’s enlightened activities are spontaneous  and effortless . There is 
no need for him to accumulate  karma and p robably , you can say that he doesn’t 
accumulate karma.  I am n ot sure if one can explain  it in this way but anyway , since 
you need exertion to accumulate karma , as such , the b uddha s do not accumulate 
karma.  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 5 of 13 MEANING OF EXERTION  
 
Student 4:  What does exertion mean? Does it mean the movement of the mind?  
 
Answer : I guess basically  it is motivation. Whatever exertion may be, wh ether you 
exert yourself to do something physically or mentally, there must be a force that is 
motivat ing the action.  
 
Student 4: So does that refer to the mental factor of intention?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Are you saying that motivation and intention are the same  thing ? But 
isn’t intention karma?  
 
Student 4: Yes.  
 
Khen Rinpo che: So ka rma and motivation are the same?  
 
Student 4: Before accumulating ka rma, do you not have to have intention ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : Before we do any action, there must be a thought  that we call 
‘exertion ’. You are motivated to do something. There is somet hing that drives you to 
do something . Then you will do it.  
 
The mental factor of intention moves the mind towards an object. Your mind will 
only move  towards an object after you have been motivated by something. It is your 
motivation that motivates you to have the intention of mov ing your mind towards 
the object.  
 
REALISATION OF EMPTINESS & MEDITATIVE EQUIPOISE  
 
Student 5: We have always been told that when we reali se emptiness, that is done in 
a state of meditative equipoise. Before we become a buddha, dur ing that state of 
meditative equipoise, only emptiness appears and there is no appearance of 
conventional phenomena. When we become a buddha, we remain in meditative 
equipoise but the unique characteristic of a buddha is that he can reali se both 
convention al and ultimate phenomena at the same time.  
 
My first question is this: D oes th is mean that the ultimate truth necessarily has to be 
reali sed in a state of meditative equipoise?   
 
My second question is this : Khen Rinpoche asked in an earlier lesson  “What is the 
fallacy if it was said that the Buddha will arise from meditative equipoise ?” To me, 
buddhahood is a permanent state, so if the buddha were to arise from meditative 
equipoise, doesn’t that mean  that the state of buddhahood is not constant?  
 
Answer : We never said that emptiness can only be reali sed in meditative equipoise.  
 
In general , we talk  about three kinds of wisdom : 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 6 of 13 1. the w isdom arisen from hearing  
2. the w isdom arisen from reflection  
3. the w isdom arisen from meditation  
These three wisdoms can be dev eloped with respect to any phenomena.  
 
 With regard  to emptiness, the very first time you realize emptiness, it is not 
reali sed directly, and it  is not reali sed in meditative equipoise. Rather it is 
reali sed by an inferential cogni ser, i.e., the wisdom ari sen from reflection. The 
point is that the first reali sation of emptiness is not necessarily in meditative 
equipoise.  
 That wisdom arisen from reflection then transforms in to the e ntity of the wisdom 
arisen from meditation. This happens when one enter s the path of preparation . 
On the path of preparation , there is a lot of familiari sation meditation on 
emptiness . This is the wisdom arisen from meditation.  
 Then comes the time when you see emptiness directly for the first time . That  
reali sation occurs within a  state of meditative equipoise.  The very first time one 
reali ses the true path directly is when one enters the path of seeing . One enters 
the path of seeing via the uninterrupted path of the path of  seeing  after which one 
achieve s the path of release of th e path of seeing .  
 
During the meditative equipoise on the path of seeing , when one reali ses emptiness 
for the very first time , during that meditative equipoise, conventional phenomena do 
not appear.   
 
When one achieves the path of seeing for the first tim e, one becomes a Sangha Jewel  
and a superior. I have a question  for you: If one is a Sangha Jewel , does one 
necessarily possess the eight qualities of the Sangha Jewel ? 
 
So there are quite a few things to think about. Usually , we just say Dharma Jewel and 
Sangha Jewel, but we should do more than that. This text is challenging . If you are 
asked such a question , “If it is a Dharma Jewel , does it necessarily possess the eight 
qualities of the Dharma  Jewel? If it is a Sangha Jewel, does it necessarily possess t he 
eight qualities of the Sangha Jewel? ” in order to give an answer , first you have to 
know what the eight qualities are . So there is much to think about.  
 
The eight qualities of the Sangha Jewel  can be condensed into two —the qualit y of 
freedom and the qua lity of knowledge . There are also inner qualities and so forth.  
 
In fact , there  are many things to think about if you were asked , “If it is a Sangha Jewel, 
does it necessarily possess the eight qualities of the Sangha Jewel?” The reason  why 
the Sangha Jewe l is a befitting object  of refuge for us  is be cause the  Sangha Jewel 
possesses  those qualities . If we know what those qualities are, then we will also 
know why the Sangha Jewel is a befitting object of refuge . This can help with our faith 
as well.  
 
Studen t 5: I am sorry . I have phrased my question incorrectly. I was actually asking 
about the direct  reali sation of emptiness. So just to reconfirm —the direct reali sation 
of emptiness necessarily has  to occur within a state of meditative equipoise ? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 7 of 13 Khen Rinpoch e: Why are you ask ing this question? What  is behind th is doubt ? Now I  am 
not pointing at you alone but addressing everyone here. When you come forward with a 
question, there must be a reason why you are asking  the question .  
 
Student  5: Because Khen Rinpoc he stated in one of the lessons , “The unique ability of 
a buddha is to reali se the ultimate truth and the conventional truth simultaneously. 
Once one becomes a buddha , one is in a permanent state of meditative equipoise  
from which one does not arise.”  Then you posed the question , “What is the fallacy if 
we were to say that a buddha does arise from meditative equipoise ?” Thinking along 
those lines, I thought, “Being a buddha is a permanent phenomenon . That cannot  
mean one second one is a buddha and somehow in the n ext second , one wakes up , i.e., 
arise from meditative equipoise, and is no longer a buddha .”  
 
Khen Rinpoche : You mean that after a buddha meditates and wake s up, he is no longer 
a buddha? Why  do you think he becomes a non-buddha  when he wakes up?  That’s why 
you think he doesn’t wake up from his meditation  because you think that if he was to 
wake up , he become s a non-buddha ! 
 
Student  5: I think it is related to the reali sation of the ultimate truth. Seeing 
conventional truth is no big deal . Even we can see conventional truth. The problem is 
ultimate truth. Seeing phenomen a in a conventional sense, that is not a big deal. The 
big deal is being able to see the ultimate truth.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Reali sing conventional truth is a big deal ! It is not easy to  reali se 
what a conventional truth is. Please explain the manner of what it mean s to reali se a 
conventional truth.  
 
Student  5: Oops! I recall Khen Rinpoche said before that , first you reali se the ultimate 
truth .  Only then can you re alise the conventional truth but I cannot recall the details. 
Maybe  the term , conventional truth , which  I have used  is incorrect .  I was thinking of 
seeing conventional phenomena . That to me is not so difficult but reali sing the 
ultimate truth of what we see is the big deal . That is how my question came about . I 
was thinking that the direct reali sation of ultimate truth can only occur within 
meditative equipoise.  
 
If we are talking about the paths and grounds,  when the  bodhisattva on the path  
come s out of meditative equipoise, t hen conventional phenomena appear . But of 
course , the mind is no longer grasping at the true existence of such phenomena 
anymore unlike an ordinary being who believes that phenomena exist truly.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : The mind that directly reali ses emptiness —is it necessarily a 
meditative equipoise?  
 
Student  5: No? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : You said no? You said that a wisdom directly perceiving emptiness is 
not necessarily a meditative equipois e? Then give me an illustration.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 8 of 13 Student  5: Sorry, my answer is yes.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: I need to clarify your question. To answer your question, first I need to 
clarify what you are really asking :   
 
If it is a wisdom directly reali sing emptiness , is it necessarily  a wisdom of meditative 
equipoise?  
 
Student  5: Yes.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Why? This  question  is not only for you. Those who have some 
understanding must ask “Why?”  Then  you must think of the reason. Don’t think I am 
only asking her. This is not a punishment. I’m asking everyone  equally .  
 
Student  5: I think the answer is yes.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Why?  
 
Student  5: The answer is yes because the direct reali sation of emptiness cannot be 
achieved outside of meditative equipoise. That  is why when one become s a buddha , 
one never arises from a state of meditative equipoise. That i s how my question came 
about in the first place.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : What about the rest of you? Did y ou all get the question?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Yes or no?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : If you don’t have a  rough idea of the manner of traversing through 
the paths and grounds —the uninterrupted path, the path of release, the wisdom of 
subsequent attainment and so forth —this m ay be difficult.  
 
So if it is a wisdom directly perceiving emptiness , is it necessarily a wisdom of 
meditative equipoise?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: If you say no, then you must give an example.  
 
Student  5 (consults a classmate and answers ): If I were to say no, m y consultant here 
says an illustration will be the wisdom of subsequent attainment.  But I don’t 
understand why!  
 
What I do know is that the bodh isattva on the paths and grounds meditate s and 
reali ses emptiness . After that, they arise from meditative equipoise . Then they have 
to accumulate more merit  in order to abandon more afflictions . Then they go back 
into the state of meditative equipoise . Along the entire paths and grounds, their 
direct reali sation of emptiness is becoming more and more powerful until it become s 
so powerful  that they become a buddha . That was my understanding. Then y ou not 
only directly reali se emptiness but you can reali se co nventional truth simultaneously.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 9 of 13 Khen Rinpoche: I don’t understand what you are talking  about .  
 
Khen Rinpoche : The w isdom of meditative equipoise is achieved on the uninterrupted 
path and the path of release. If it is  a wisdom of meditative equipoise , it is either on 
the uninterrupted path or on the path of release. It is necessar ily one of these two .  
 
So when one reali ses emptiness directl y for the first time, one is  on the 
uninterrupted path . Then one move s on to the path of release. When one arises from 
that meditative equipoise, one enters the post -meditative state. In that person’s 
mental continuum, does the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness exist or has he 
lost it?  
 
Student  5: It exists but it is not manifest.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : We didn’t ask whet her it is manifest or not. Does that wisdom exist ?  
 
Student  5: Yes because obviously he must remember that he has th is direct 
reali sation.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Is that an uninterrupted path or the path of release?  
 
Student  5: That’s the path of release alread y because one abandons something on the 
path of release . Sorry , I cannot remember my uninterrupted path and path of release 
properly.  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Based on what you have just said , this is a wisdom of meditative 
equipoise because it  is a wisdom directl y perceiving emptiness . Because you said 
that if it is a wisdom directly reali sing emptiness , it is necessar ily a meditative 
equipoise.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t forget what you  have said earlier. This is v ery basic . Your 
commitment is that. You remember what  you said in the earlier part?  
 
 On the path of accumulation, one seeks to delineate emptiness through hearing 
and reflection.  
 When he achieves the wisdom arisen from meditation with  regard to emptiness, 
he enters the path of preparation. On the path of preparation, that reali sation of 
emptiness is via a generic image.  
 Then comes the time when one reali ses emptiness directly . This can only happen 
within the state of meditative equipoise . Here, we  are referring to someone who 
is reali sing emptiness directl y for the very first time. That reali sation is 
necessarily  a wisdom of meditative equipoise.  
 But apart from that, this is not necessarily the case. For example, during post -
meditative equipoise, in the continuum of a person who has already reali sed 
emptin ess directly, there is the wisdom directly reali sing emptiness . 
 
When we talk about meditative equipoise, must it  occur with one sitting in the 
meditation posture for some period of time?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 10 of 13 Khen Rinpoche : No? So you think when you are in meditative equipois e, you can walk 
around  and go shopping? When you don’t see anything , how are you going to shop? You 
said just now you can walk around Orchard Road. But (in meditative equipoise) you see 
only emptiness . You don’t see any conventional truth.  
 
You don’t see t he road . How are you going to walk? You can see the road? We are not 
talking about the Buddha  here.  You are reali sing emptiness for the first time. So you 
must  be sitting down  and you cann ot move .  
 
Just now you said no , no, no . Now you sa y yes!  
 
The mate rial is indeed challenging. But if you want to study these treatises, then you 
really have to think about the material. Otherwise, you are not going to  understand 
anything  and t he material does  not stay in your mind. You have to be able to make 
the connect ion between what is mentioned in the earlier part of the text and what is 
mentioned in the later part . When you are able to see this relationship , only then will 
the material stay in your mind  and you will gain some understanding.  
 
Otherwise, you listen t o the first part . Then as you move to the next part, you forget 
what you  have heard earlier . When that happens , I think it  is extremely difficult to 
understand or to learn anything.  
 
I only ask you question s because I think the y may be of some benefit. So metimes , I 
think if I were to talk all the time, I wonder if there  is any benefit. Sometimes , if we 
can have some discussion like this , perhaps there is more benefit.  
 
But in the first place, in order for you to have questions, you must have some doubts . 
You must have thought about the text and then wonder , “Why is it like this? Why is it 
like that?”  You shouldn’t be asking questions just because it  is question time . That  is 
not the point.  
 
Look at the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra . It is said to be a teaching by the 
Buddha  but most of it is question & answer between Avalokiteshvara and Shariputra. 
The Buddha didn’t really contribute much other than saying , “Well said, well said .”  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Next time, as the teacher , I should do that. If people ask question s, I 
listen . If they are good , I will say, “Well said , well said .” Then that will be an easy job for 
me. I am j oking.  
 
DO SEEDS OF AFFLICTIONS INCREASE LIKE KARMA?  
 
Student  6: The seed s of afflictions that are non-associated compositio nal factor s—is 
that the disintegratedness of the afflictions? My qualm is: Do the seed s of the 
afflictions multiply the same way as karmic propensit ies over time?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : The seed s?  
 
Student 6:  The see ds of afflictions . I am thinking that if ther e are the seed s of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 11 of 13 afflictions , there should be seeds of the virtuous mind  too. So if karma multiplies , 
then afflictions will also multiply. W ould it  multiply for  the virtuous mind  as well ? 
 
Khen Rinpoche : If you remember our discussion o f the Consequence Middle Way 
School’s (CMWS) explanation of  the disintegratedness of karma, it  is not that the 
CMWS  does n ot assert seeds and predispositions. Rather, they say that you don’t 
have to explain karma issuing forth its effect later in time by using the explanati on of 
the ripening of the seeds of karma. They explain ed this through the disintegratedness 
of karma.  
 
The very concept of seed s and predispositions is accepted by proponents of Buddhist 
tenets . But t hey are always coming from the viewpoint of phenomena having their 
own intrinsic existence , i.e., t here  is something  right there  from the side of the 
phenomena . Karma is created and in order for it to give rise to a result, there must be 
something right there from the side of the cause having the intrinsic abi lity that 
definitely give s rise to  its result.  
 
The Prasangika s say that you don’t have to  rely on such an explanation as in reality, 
phenomena do not exist inherently. In fact, if you are looking for a real cause,  the real 
karma, there  is nothing there t o point to.   
 
The CMWS  explains an action issuing forth an effect in the future through the 
explanation of the disintegratedness of karma :   
 
You finish ed accumulating karma   that karma ceases , i.e., it disintegrate s  
that disintegratedness produces the  next moment of disintegratedness until 
such a time when it ripens as an effect.  
 
That is how they connect the cause to its effect.  
 
As for your question about the seed s of afflictions  being the disintegratedness of the 
affliction s, it may be ca lled diff erent name s but perhaps it  is no t wrong to give it such 
a term .  
 
In the general presentation of karma, one of the four characteristics of karma is that 
karma increases. How do you explain that?  
 
When karma ceases, it doesn’t last for more than a moment . How then does karma 
increase? When the karma disintegrates, its disintegratedness also last s for one 
moment only . Then it produces another moment that lasts for a moment.  
 
When karma is accumulated  and when it finishes , a seed , a potential, is left on the  
mind . That capacity to issue  forth a result can increase .  
 
This is something to think about. Yes, it is said that karma increases  but it can not 
increase without any reason or condition . Perhaps, for us , ordinary beings , our mind 
are full of the three men tal poisons  thus providing so many conditions in our mind to 
increase the capacity or power of th ose karmic seeds.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 12 of 13 When we talk about the buddha lineage, there is the naturally abiding lineage and the 
developmental lineage.  
 The naturally abiding lineage is naturally present in all sentient beings. If you are 
a sentient being , then you necessarily have the naturally abiding lineage because 
that is the mind’s emptiness of true existence.  
 The developmental lineage refers to the time when that potential is n ourished, 
increased  and developed through hearing, reflection and med itation.  
 
For the lineage  to be awaken ed, many conditions must come together —hearing, 
reflection, devotion, compassion and so forth. It  is insufficient to have just the 
naturally abiding lineage . The developmental lineage must  also exist. In order for th e 
developmental lineage to develop, many conditions must come together for its 
awakening.  
 
Back to the seeds of the afflictions . We can say that the power o r the strength of the 
seeds of th e afflictions can increase with the afflictions and other conditions. I’m not 
sure whether the capacity of the seed s of afflictions or the seed s of karma can 
increase or decrease from their own side without any other conditions . I’m not sure if 
that  is wha t is meant but if there are conditions for the strengthening of the seed s of 
afflictions, then the power of the seed s of the afflictions will increase.  
 
But if one applies the antidote, due to the force of the antidote, the stronger the 
antidote , the weak er will be the capacity of those seeds. As such, we can talk about 
the seeds of the afflictions increasing in strength.  
 
INTELLECTUALLY ACQUIRED AFFLICTIONS VS. INNATE AFFLICTIONS  
 
Student  6: The i ntellectually acquired affliction s are taught. But they ar e affliction s. 
So one leave s behind the seed s of these afflictions as well. I n future lives, for th ose 
seed s to ripen, do you need to be taught again or can they ripen due to other reasons? 
My qualm is that this seed can continue for countless lifetimes an d it can actually 
multiply . I’m  just wondering after countless lifetimes , will the intellectually acquired 
afflictions become innate.  I’m not sure at which point do you consider them  
intellectually acquired and at which point do you consider them  innate?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : Earlier in the classification of the path of seeing abandonments, it 
was mention ed that the intellectually acquired afflictions an d the ir seeds are 
established by the intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence.  
 
What i f I were to say that I don’t know  (the answer to your question). I f I say that the 
afflictions induced by the seeds that are established by the intellectually 
apprehension of true existence are all p ath of seeing abandonments , then w hat are 
you going to say? Do y ou agree?  
 
I wonder if there are any innate forms of afflictions that are induced by the seeds 
established by the intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence. The 
straightforward reasoning is this:  
 First , you have the intellectually acquired appr ehension of true existence.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 23  
Page 13 of 13  The seeds that are established by that affliction must be seed s that are 
established by the int ellectually acquired affliction . 
 As such, since it is a seed that is established by the intellectually acquired 
apprehension of true  existence, the arising of the afflictions induced by those 
seeds must be intellectually acquired afflictions.  
 
Yes, it is complicated. If you ask the question in this way, we can turn it around and 
ask this: Y ou have innate afflictions . There are seeds e stablished by the se innate 
afflictions . Is it possible for intellectually acquired afflictive obscurations to arise 
from those seeds , i.e., i s it possible for intellectually acquired affliction s to arise from 
the seeds that are established by the innate ap prehension of true existence?  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Is your mind working?  
 
Student  6: Let’s  say that is not possible. This means that it will be like the cause 
producing its effect —intellectually acquired affliction s through conception of true 
existence will p roduce intellectually acquired affliction s. Let’s say I d on’t  have any 
antidote to them. So these seed s will continue from lifetime after lifetime. So in e very 
lifetime , I don’t need to be taught them again.   
 
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t need to call  them. T hey will call you !  
 
Student  6: They will arise base d on other reasons and conditions. So they do not have 
to be intellectually acquired in every single lifetime ?  
 
Khen Rinpoche : They will continue from lifetime to lifetime, but in order for th em to 
arise,  one must meet with some conditions for th ose intellectually acquired 
affliction s to arise.  
 
Khen Rinpoche:  Sorry, today , I don’t know if the class has been helpful or not.   
 
We will finish this module in  the next  three lessons.  
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. T enzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Patricia Lee & Julia Koh ; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 
 