Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/BP2 M6 L26final.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:28.226185
================================================================================

Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 1 of 11 Transcript of the oral commentary by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi 
on Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana, Chapter One: The 
Tathagata Essence   
 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating th e Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra -ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation 
Jeffrey Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and 
Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs.  
  
Oral commentary based on Gyaltsa b Je’s Commentary to the First 
Chapter, translated by Gavin Kilty ( The Tathagata Essence, Commentary 
to the First Chapter  by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen © FPMT, Inc. January 
2007).  
 
Lesson 26                            25 June 2015  
 
 
Chapter One: The Essence of  a One Gone Thus.  Verses 157 —168. Verses 15 7—158: The 
person who realises the tathagata essence.  Verse 157: The qualms. Verse 158: Persons 
having the five faults.  Verses 159 —160: Answers to the qualms in Verse 157. Verse 161: 
Purpose of teaching the tatha gata essence in the second and third turnings of the wheel of 
Dharma. Verses 162 —166: Expanding on the five faults.  Verses 167 —168: The qualities that 
are developed.  
 
 
THE PERSON WHO REALISES THE TATHAGATA ESSENCE  (CONT’D)  
 
Verse 157  
Throughout [the scrip tures of the middle wheel of the doctrine] it is 
said that all objects of knowledge are empty in all respects  
Like clouds [which are unstable and lack inherent existence], 
dreams [which, although experienced, lack inherent existence], 
and a magician’s illu sions [which, although appearing, lack 
inherent existence],  
But why has the Conqueror said here [in the scriptures of the final 
wheel of doctrine]  
That the essence of a Buddha exists [from the start spontaneously 
in the continuums of] sentient beings?  
 
A qualm is raised  in Verse 157 :  In “the middle ,” i.e., the second , turning of the wheel 
of Dharma, the Buddha mentioned in the Perfection of Wisdom  Sutra  that phenomena 
are like clouds, dreams and a magician’s illusions that are empty of existing 
inherently.  As such, all phenomena are adventitious . In “the final ,” i.e., the third , 
turning of the wheel of Dharma, the Buddha said in the Tathagatagarbha Sutra  that 
the essence of a buddha exists and penetrates the very nature of the mind  of all 
sentient beings.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 2 of 11 Isn’t there  a contradiction? On the one hand, the Buddha said that things do not exist 
inherently . Then on the other hand , the Buddha said that the essence of a buddha 
exists and penetrates  the very nature of the mind of sentient beings. So this is one 
qual m. 
  
The other qualm is  this: S ince ordinary beings do not reali se the tathagata  essence , 
what  is the purpose of  teaching ordinary beings about the tathagata essence?  
 
Persons having the five faults  
The answer is in the next verse. There are five reasons for teaching that the tathagata 
essence exists in all sentient beings . 
 
Verse 158  
It was set forth so that persons having the five faults might 
abandon them — 
[The fault of] a discouraged mind [and non -enthusiasm for the 
path, which is to think that enlighte nment cannot be achieved; 
this is due to not knowing that the ultimate basic element exists 
in oneself, and such discouragement is an obstacle to generating 
the intention to become enlightened; the fault of non -respect] 
despising others as lowly, [thinking  that these sentient beings 
are low; this is due to not knowing of its existence in others and 
is an obstacle to assuming the care of others;  
The fault of] incorrect conception [falsely holding that the 
adventitious defilements exist in the basic element w hereas 
from the start they do not; this is due to not knowing of its 
existence in all others and is an obstacle to  the wisdom realizing 
the true mode of subsistence; the fault of] deprecating the true 
qualities [thinking that good qualities which are indiv isible in 
entity with the basic element do not exist whereas they do;  
And the fault of] excessive attachment to oneself [due to not 
knowing that the nature of the element of a Superior’s qualities 
is equal in oneself and others, this being an obstacle to r ealizing 
oneself and others as equal].  
 
~ Reason No. 1  
“[The fault of] a discouraged mind [and non -enthusiasm for the path, which is to 
think that enlightenment cannot be achieved; this is due to not knowing that the 
ultimate basic element exists in onesel f, and such discouragement is an obstacle to 
generating the intention to become enlightened .”  
 
One of the obstacles to genera ting the mind of enlightenment is n ot understanding 
that the tathagata essence exists in all sentient beings. If one thinks that one has no 
capacity  or the potential to achieve enlightenment, one will get discouraged and will 
not cultivate the mind of en lightenment.  
 
One of the reasons for teaching the existence of the tathagata essence in all sentient 
beings is that it is an antido te to such a  discouraged mind , i.e., the first reason is to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 3 of 11 stop any sense of discouragement , thinking that it is not possible to achieve 
enlightenment.  
 
All sentient beings possess the tathagata essence . This will include oneself . So one 
knows that one p ossesses the tathagata essence . It has always been there , existing 
naturally . The essential point is to stop discouragement  in generating the mind of 
enlightenment . If there are tim es when we feel discouraged , if we can understand 
well how we ourselves pos sess the tathagata essence , it will be helpful in 
counteracting this discouragement.   
 
You will find  similar advice in Shantideva’s  Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds where 
he said that even insects can achieve enlightenment.1 If that is so, then why not us ?  
The line of reasoning is the same!  
 
~ Reason No. 2  
“The fault of non -respect ] despising others as lowly, [thinking that these sentient 
beings are low; this is due to not knowing of its existence in others and is an obstacle 
to assuming the care of other s.” 
 
The second reason for teaching the existence of the tathagata essence in all sentient 
beings is to abandon the fault of looking down on others. Even if one has generated 
bodhicitta  but if one does not understand or realise that the tathagata essence e xists  
in all sentient beings, it is possible to think , “I can achieve enlightenment but there 
are others who cannot make it .” In that sense, one looks down  on and despises  others .  
 
If that happens, that becomes an obstacle to the cultivation of the bodhis attva 
practice  and i t is also an impediment for one’s bodhisattva practice to increase.  By 
knowing that the tathagata essence exist s in all sentient beings, one abandon s the 
fault of looking down on others . This will help with one’s practice of the bodhisa ttva 
deeds.   
 
~ Reason No. 3  
“The fault of ] incorrect conception [falsely holding that the adventitious defilements 
exist in the basic element whereas from the start they do not; this is due to not 
knowing of its existence in all others and is an obstacle to the wisdom realizing the 
true mode of subsistence .” 
 
The next reason for teaching the tathagata essence is that it helps us to understand 
the mode of abiding of phenomena  in that i t helps to remove the obstacles that 
prevent us from understanding the ul timate nature of phenomena.  
 
There is a  “fault of incorrect conception ” that incorrectly holds  the adventitious 
defilements  to exist.  While the afflictions are incorrect , there is the apprehension  that 
views the affliction s to be correct. That kind of view  is a n exaggeration or 
superimposition.   
 
                                                           
1 “If they develop the strength of their ex ertion, / Even those who are flies, mosquitoes, bees and 
insects/ Will win the unsurpassable Awakening,/ Which is so hard to find.” (Verse 18, Chapter 7).    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 4 of 11 We can take the apprehension of true existence  as an example . Most tenets assert 
that such a mind and phenomena are truly existent. Holding on to the view of true 
existence, i.e., that a phenomenon is  truly existen t, is a superimposition or 
exaggeration of reality. This obstructs one’s understanding and reali sation of the 
mode of abiding of phenomena.  
 
~ Reason No. 4  
“The fault of ] deprecating the true qualities [thinking that good qualities which are 
indivisible in  entity with the basic element do not exist whereas they do .” 
 
Next is the fault o f deprecating the tathagata  essence , i.e., denying that it exists in 
sentient being s.  
 
There is a purpose to teaching the tathagata essence in that it eliminates the fault o f 
superimposition  (or exaggeration) and the fault of denial (or deprecation ). Also, it 
helps to delineate pro perly  the two facets of reality. On the one hand, the mind is 
empty of existing truly , yet it is still feasible for us to posit an action and the actor. 
Through understanding the tathagata essence , one eliminates the faults of 
exaggeration and deprecation. Through that, one comes to understand how the two 
truths exist and how they can exist as a unit.   
 
~ Reason No. 5  
“The fault of] excessive attachm ent to oneself [due to not knowing that the nature of 
the element of a Superior’s qualities is equal in oneself and others, this being an 
obstacle to realizing oneself and others as equal ].” 
 
In order to generate the mind of enlightenment, we need to medit ate on exchanging 
self and others. So , in order to remove any obstacles to cultivating that, the tathagata  
essence is taught.  If we reali se that the tathagata essence exists in all sentient beings, 
that means oneself and all sentient beings are equal in ha ving the tathagata essence . 
If we are able to see and feel that sameness , that provides the basis f or one to be able 
to meditate on exchang ing oneself with others. Through that, bodhicitta , the mind of 
enlightenment , can be generated.  
 
Through understandi ng the tathagata essence , one comes to abandon these five 
faults . Through that, one is able to meditate on exchanging self and others. Through 
that, o ne is able to generate the mind of enlightenment . Through that, o ne is able to 
engage in the bodhisattva d eeds in general and in particular to train in the last two 
perfections.  
 
ANSWERS TO THE QUALMS IN VERSE 157  
 
Verse 159  
The limit of reality [the naturally pure basic element] is devoid  
Of compounded phenomena in all respects.  
[The three phenomena of which  it is empty —] the afflictive 
emotions, actions [of non -virtue and so forth], and the fruitions 
[of those, these being the mental and physical aggregates and so 
forth —] 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 5 of 11 Are said to be like clouds and so forth.  
 
Verse 160  
The afflictive emotions are said to  be similar to clouds [in that 
they pervade and adventitiously obstruct the basic element of 
sentient beings].  
Contaminated actions [which are motivated by those afflictive emotions] are 
like objects used in a dream [since they are generated by an erroneou s 
awareness and are objects of a mistaken consciousness].  
The [mental and physical] aggregates which are the fruitions of 
afflictive emotions and [contaminated] actions  
Are like a magician’s illusions, emanations, [and so forth in that 
although they appear  variously in dependence upon conditions, 
when analyzed they are not true].  
 
These two verses are essentially the answer to the first qualm about how there 
seems to be a contradiction between about what was said in the middle turning of 
the wheel of Dharma  and the final  turning of the wheel of Dharma. In the middle 
turning of the wheel of Dharma, the Buddha said that all phenomena are adventitious  
in that they don’t exist truly. T hen in the last turning the wheel of Dharma, the 
Buddha said that the tathagat a essence exist s in all sentient beings , within the very 
nature of their mind.  
  
“The limit of reality ” is another way of saying emptiness. In this context  here , the 
limit of reality refers  to the natural purity of the minds of sentient beings , i.e., the 
tathagata essence . 
 
“This limit of reality  [the naturally pure basic element] is devoid of comp ounded 
phenomena in all respect s.” This means that i t is devoid of all phenomena that are 
included within t rue suffering s and true origins. The defilements  have never resided 
within the very nature of the mind. As such, the limit of reality, the tathagata essence , 
is devoid of these compounded phenomena  and a s such, the defilements are 
adventitious.   
 
What has to be understood is that true suffering s and true orig ins are empty of 
existing truly . The principal true origin s are the affliction s and th e principal among 
all the afflictions is the  apprehension of true existence , ignorance. Ignorance has 
never existed truly  and like any other phenomen on, does not exist tr uly. Ignorance —
the apprehension of true existence —has never resided with in the very nature of the 
mind , i.e., it is not the nature of the mind to be ignorant. As such, ignorance is 
adventitious.  
 
You need to think about what this means. How is it that the  apprehension of true 
existence has never resided with in the very nature of the mind? How does ignorance 
apprehend its object ? What does ignorance apprehend ? The thing that ignorance is 
holding on  to has never existed on the mind.   
 
We say the mind is affl icted but the nature  of the mind is not afflicted  and is pure by 
nature . The defilements are adventitious  and have never resided  within the very 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 6 of 11 nature of the mind. The chief  among the defilement s is ignorance , i.e., the 
apprehension of true existence. So when we say that the nature of the  mind is 
unafflicted, it is akin to saying that the nature of the mind is unafflicted by ignorance . 
Ignorance, t he apprehension of true existence , has never resided  within the very 
nature of the mind . 
 
Why is it that ignor ance, the apprehension of true existence, has never resided within 
the very nature of the mind? Thi s is what we need to think about  and t his is how we 
can go about doing so:   
 Ignorance is grasping at something ; it conceives phenomena to exist in a certain 
way.  
 Whatever is conceive d by ignorance , the very thing that ignorance is holding on 
to or believes in, has never existed in  the mind.  
 
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand?  
 
It is said that we are pure by nature ; that by nature, w e are not afflicted . The 
afflictions are temporary  and adventitious . There  is hope that all of us can become 
buddha s. This is what is said . But saying all of this is one thing . Can we prove it?  
 
 We say that the defilements are adventitious  but t here are many defilements . 
Obviously , we have to look at the most critical defilement , i.e., ignorance, the 
apprehension of true existence.  
 If defilements are adventitious, that means ignorance must also be adventitious.  
 If ignorance is adventitious , this  means that the apprehension of true existence 
has never resided within the very nature of the mind.  
 How can that be? That can only be the case if what ignorance conceives of is not 
the nature of the mind.  
 
The main thing to be established i s that what ignorance conceives is  inherent 
existe nce but inherent existence has never existed  and it will never exist. That is 
what we need to underst and. If we can pro ve that  whatever ignorance conceives 
does not exist , then we can see that all phenomena , including the mind , has never 
existed truly and are not truly existent.  
 
Summary  
We are looking at th e first two lines of Verse 159: “The limit of reality [the naturally 
pure basic element] is devoid of compounded phenomena in all respects. ”  
 “The limit of reality ” means emptiness in general , but speci fically  here , we are 
talking about the mind ’s emptiness of true existence, the tathagata essence .  
 This tathagata essence “is devoid of compounded phenomena in all respect s.” 
“Compounded phenomena ” here refer s to everything that is included within true 
suffering s and true origins , the principal being  true origin s.   
 Among true origins, the main one s are the afflictions.  
 Among the afflictions, the principal affliction is the apprehension of true existence.  
 
If we were to c ondense these two lines of the tex t, we can rephrase it by saying , “The 
tathagata  essence (or the limit of reality ) is devoid of the apprehension of true 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 7 of 11 existence .” What we have to establish is that the apprehension of true existence  has 
never resided  within the nature of the mind , i.e., it is not in the nature of the mind to 
be ignorant .  
 
 The point is that whatever ignorance conceives is not within the nature of the 
mind , i.e., it is not the nature of the mind to be that which is conceive d by 
ignorance.  
 What then is the conceived object  of ignorance? It is  inherent existence  or true 
existence . What we are trying to pro ve is that the conceived object of ignorance, 
inherent existence , has never existed. It is not an existent and it will never exist.  
 If one can see how ignorance, the appreh ension of true existence , has never 
resided within the nature of the mind, then we can come to understand that 
ignorance, the apprehension of true existence , is adventitious.  
 If we can establish that ignorance is adventitious, then we can also establish t hat 
the afflictions that are induced by ignorance and the  effects of the  karma that is 
accumulated  or motivated by the afflictions  are also adventitious.  
 
What we need to understand is that ignorance, the apprehension of true existence , is 
adventitious. I f we can establish that ignorance is adventitious, then we can establish 
that the karma that is motivated by ignorance  must be adventitious. We can also 
establish that the ripening  or f ruitional effects  that we experience must be 
adventitious as well.  
 
Normally we  think that  there is no way out of samsara . Samsara is fixed, permanent, 
and unchanging . It is so real that we cannot free ourselves from suffering as there is 
nothing we can do about suffering.  This is the heart of the matter.  
 
But b ecause the lineage exists , therefore the defilements are adventitious. How are 
the defilements adve ntitious? The key to understand ing that defilements are 
adventitious is to first focus on the chief affliction, ignorance , and see how that is 
adventitious.  
 
We can see that ignorance, the apprehension of true existence , is adventitious when 
we establish that the conceived object of ignorance, the object that ignorance 
believes in  and hold s on to, has never existed  and will never exist. Then we can posit 
that ignorance is  adventitious  and it can be removed.   
 
This means that it is imperative to have some understanding of the ultimate nature of 
reality,  the emptiness of inherent existence. This is said in the middle turning of the 
wheel of Dharma —that the afflictions, karma  and its  fruitional effects , are empty of 
existing truly. They are like clouds, dreams, illusions and so forth . Furthermore, the 
mind is also empty of existing truly.  
 
The point is this . In the middle turning of the wheel of Dharma, it is established that 
all phenomena are empty of existing truly . This m eans that the mind must be 
included . So, the mind is also empty of existing truly. If the mind is empty of existing 
truly, it follows that the defilements are adventitious.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 8 of 11 In the final  turning of the whee l of Dharma, what is referred to as the tathagata 
essence  is none other than the mind’s emptiness of true existence.  
 
Therefo re, there is no contradiction between what was said in the middle turning of 
the wheel of Dharma and the last turning of the wheel  of Dharma. The intent  of the 
Buddha behind those statements is the same.  
 The afflictions are said to be like clouds  because afflictions are adventitious .  
 Since  karma is motivated by an erroneous mind, therefore, it is like a dream.  
 The fruition of karma  motivated by the afflictions, the aggregates  (the body and 
mind ), are like illusions conjured by a magician  in that although they appear to 
exist truly , in fact, they do not exist truly.   
 
Verse 161  
Having made the presentation earlier [in the middle whe el of 
doctrine that all phenomena, though appearing, are empty of 
inherent existence],  
Again here [on the occasion of teaching] the sublime continuum 
[the unbroken continuum of the element of a Superior’s 
qualities],  
It was taught [with many variants in verbali zation and with many 
examples and reasons that] “The basic constituent just exists,”  
In order that the five faults might be abandoned.  
 
So, if you were  asked, “W hat is the purpose of the Buddha teaching in the middle 
turning of the wheel of Dharma t hat all phenomena are empty of existing truly and , in 
the last turning of the wheel of Dharma , that the tathagata essence exist s in all 
sentient beings ?”, the purpose of those teaching s is so that the five faults mentioned 
earlier can be abandoned.  
 
EXPAN DING ON THE FIVE FAULTS  
 
What follow s is an expanded explanation o f the five faults .  
 
Verse 162  
For, not hearing in this way that [the basic constituent exists],  
Some —whose minds are discouraged due to the fault  
Of deriding oneself [thinking, “How coul d one such as I attain 
enlightenment!”] —  
Do not generate the intention to become enlightened [in which one 
thinks, “I will actualize the nature, the ultimate Buddha.”]  
 
What the verse says here is the same as what was said earlier.  If one understand s 
that the tathagata essence exists in all sentient beings , this would include oneself , i.e., 
it means that one has the tathagata essence. If one has the tathagata essence , one 
understands  that one can become enlightened. If one understand s that one can 
become enlightened , that mean s one can dispel any discouragement , thinking , “There 
is no way that I will become a buddha .” 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 9 of 11 The next verse is an explanation of how , by understanding that the tathagata essence 
exists in all sentient beings, one can then remove the  impediments to the 
development and increase of one’s practice of the bodhisattva deeds after one has  
generated bodhicitta.  
 
Verse 163  
Some who have generated the intention to become enlightened  
Fancy, “I am supreme [a Bodhisattva],”  
Whereby they discri minate [others] who have not generated  
The intention to become enlightened as lower [than themselves].  
 
After generating bodhicitta , in order for one’s practice of the bodhisattva deeds to 
develop  more and more, one must understand the mode of abiding of  phenomena . As 
such , one needs  to eliminate or dispel the impediments to that  understanding .  
 
The impediments to reali sing the final mode of abiding of phenomena are mentioned  
in Verse 164 .  
 
Verse 164  
In those who think thus [that the Buddha -essence doe s not exist],  
Knowledge of reality [the mode of subsistence free from 
superimposition and deprecation] is not generated.  
Thereby, they hold [a view superimposing] the unreal  
And, not knowing the meaning of reality, [deprecate it].  
 
If one apprehends the afflictions such as the apprehension of true existence to be real 
and truly exist ent, this becomes  an obstacle to reali sing that phenomena are “unreal ” 
and that all phenomena do not exist truly. What is mentioned in Verse 164 is the 
same as what I mention ed earlier . If one has the view of superimposition or 
deprecation (i.e., denying certain facets of reality ), these will be obstacle s to reali sing 
the mode of abiding , the ultimate nature of reality.  
 
In verse 165, the methods to dispel those impediments a re mentioned.  
 
Verse 165  
Because of being fabricated [by conditions] and being adventitious,  
The faults [i.e., the afflictive emotions and so forth] of sentient 
beings do not [exist as they own] reality.  
In reality those faults are selfless  
[And thus t he basic constituent has from the start] a pure nature of 
good qualities.  
 
Afflictions such as attachment, anger and so forth do not exist truly because they 
arise due to certain causes and conditions . As such, the afflictions themselves are 
adventitious.  The tathag ata essence has this “pure nature of good qualities ” from the 
beginning . This r efer s to the natur al purity of the mind , i.e., the mind is by nature 
pure because it does not exist truly.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 10 of 11 Again, this i s the same  as what w as said earlier. The natu ral purity of the mind refers 
to the mind’s emptiness of true existence. The mind has never existed truly . This 
includes the defilements .  Whatever  is conceived of by ignorance has never been the 
nature of the mind. Another way of saying  this is that the m ind has never been truly 
existen t. As such , the mind is by nature pure.  
 
The next verse talk s about the impediments  to the generation of love and 
compassion.  
 
Verse 166  
[The Bodhisattva] who possesses an attitude of holding unreal 
faults [as the reason fo r viewing that the basic constituent does 
not exist]  
And who deprecates the true qualities [of the powers and so forth]  
Does not attain the [great] love seeing  
Oneself and sentient beings as equal.  
 
THE QUALITIES THAT ARE DEVELOPED  
 
Verse 167  
From hea ring in this way [that the naturally pure realm exists 
without difference in all],  
One generates enthusiasm [for the path upon seeing that 
Buddhahood can be achieved], respect [for other sentient beings 
that values them even] like the Teacher [Buddha],  
The wisdom [knowing that the conventional defilements do not 
inherently exist], the exalted wisdom [realizing the entity of the 
basic constituent in which the basic element and knowledge are 
indivisible], and the great love [which is  the equality of oneself  
and others].  
Due to generating those five [beneficial] phenomena [in the mental 
continuum] , 
 
 From hearing that the tathagata essence exists in everyone , one generates 
enthusiasm  and perhaps the wish  and desire to achieve enlightenment.  
 Also, it is said that if one reali ses that the tathagata essence —the potential to 
develop the qualities of buddhahood —pervades all sentient beings , one will be 
able to respect other sentient beings as if they are l ike the Buddha.  
 One can also develop the wisdom that reali ses the emptiness of true existence.  
 It is said that if we reali se how all sentient beings possess the tathagata essence , 
this can help  also in the achievement of great love . The highest bliss is the bliss of 
full enlightenment. Great love  is wishing that  all sentient beings have the bliss of 
enlightenment.   
 
Verse 168  
There is no unseemliness [because of being free from 
discouragement of mind and so forth; one views] self and other 
as equal [without low and high;  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                                                                                 Second Basic Program – Module 6  
                                                                                                                                                                Tathagata Essence   
 
 
 
Lesson 26  
Page 11 of 11 One knows the fact that the adventitious  defilements of] faults do 
not exist [by way of their own entityness] and that good qualities 
are [naturally] possessed;  
[And one attains the great] love which is the equality of oneself and 
sentient beings [as having the essence of a Buddha].  
From [those  five] Buddhahood is quickly attained.  
 
Thus ends  the first chapter, The Essence of a One Gone Thus , in Maitreya’s Great 
Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum, Discriminating the Lineage [of the Three 
Jewels].  
 
 If we despise ourselves, putting ourselve s down in  a negative and unproductive 
way , this is actually a fault.  So the first quality that is achieved is that one is freed 
from the fault of despising oneself.  
 The second quality: O ne is able to see how oneself and others as equal.  
 The third quality : One  comes to understand that the defilements do not exist 
inherently.  
 The fourth quality: Due to that understanding , one understand s that good 
qualities can be achieved.  
 The fifth quality: One also comes to understand that one and others are the same 
in being able to become a buddha.  
 
It is said that through understanding these points  and acquiring these qualities , then 
one enters the Mahayana path . By meditating and familiari sing oneself with the 
lineage , one will come to be a buddha.  
 
We have come to  the end of the first chapter o f this Sublime Continuum . 
 
Khen Rinpoche: Now you are enlightened ! 
 
 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Aki Yeo; edited by 
Cecilia Tsong.  
 
 