Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tathagatas Essence/uttaratantra.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:43.214456
================================================================================

The Mahayana Uttaratantra Shastra
by Arya Maitreya
Arya Maitreya
Snow Lion Publications
Ithaca, New YorkBuddha Nature
The Mahayana Uttaratantra Shastra
by 
Arya Maitreya
written down by
Arya Asanga
commentary by
Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thayé
“The Unassailable Lion’s Roar”
explanations by
Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche
translated by
Rosemarie FuchsF
Snow Lion Publications
P .O. Box 6483
Ithaca, New York 14851 U.S.A.
T
elephone: 607-273-8519
www.snowlionpub.com
Copyright © 2000 Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche  
and Rosemarie Fuchs
Illustrations by R.D. Salga
All rights r eserved. No portion of this work may be repr oduced by any 
 
means without written permission from the publisher.
Printed in Canada on acid-fr ee r
ecycled paper.
ISBN 1-55939-128-6
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ratnagotravibh›ga. English. Buddha Nature:  
the Mahayana Uttaratantra Shastra / by Arya Maitreya;  
with commentary by Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thayé,  
The Unassailable Lion’s Roar , and explanations by  
Khenpo T
sultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche; translated by Rosemarie Fuchs.
p.     cm.
Includes bibliographical r eferences.
ISBN 1-55939-128-6 (cloth)
1. Yog›c›ra (Buddhism) I. Koº-spr ul Blo-gr
os-mtha’-yas, 1813-1899.  
II. Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso, 1934-  III. Fuchs, Rosemarie, 1950-
BQ3022.E5 F83 2000      294.3’85--dc21     
00-008017 CIP
Contents
Foreword by Tenzin Dorjee 8
Preface by Rosemarie Fuchs 10
Introduction by Acharya Lodrö Namgyal 12
PART ONE: Root Text 17
1. Tathagatagarbha 19
 Intr
oduction 19
 The First Three Vajra Points: The Three Jewels 20
  Buddha 20
  Dharma 20
  Sangha 21
 The Three Refuges 22
 The Last Four Vajra Points 22
 The Fourth Vajra Point: The Element 23
2. The Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment 43
3. The Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities 53
4. The Seventh Vajra Point: Activity 59
5. Beneﬁt 73
PART TWO: Commentary, The Unassailable Lion’s Roar 79
Table of Contents 81
1. Tathagatagarbha 97
 
Introduction 97
 The First Three Vajra Points: The Three Jewels 101
  The First Vajra Point: Buddha 101
  The Second Vajra Point: Dharma 105
  The Third Vajra Point: Sangha 108
 The Three Refuges 112
 The Last Four Vajra Points 114
 The Fourth Vajra Point: The Element 117
2. The Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment 182
3. The Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities 218
4. The Seventh Vajra Point: Activity 238
5. Beneﬁt 283
PART THREE: Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim  299
 Gyamtso Rinpoche 
PART FOUR: Translator’s Notes 391
Namo Guru
As time goes by, with your blessingmay time itself reveal itself as timeless.In timeless time and endless spacemay tr uth be felt as it beholds its face.
May the lotus of compassion bloom,fostering all beings in time and space.May all suf fering and torment be ended
and all Enlightened Ones come to rest.F   F   FDedicated to
Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche
in deep gratitude and love
May your noble activity continue 
as long as there is anyone in need.
8      Buddha Nature
Foreword
This book presents the commentary by Jamgön Kongtrül the Great, 
Lodrö Thayé, on Arya Maitreya’s Mahayana Uttara Tantra Shastra  
(Tib. theg pa chen 
po rgyud bla ma’i bstan bcos). This is the ﬁrst time an 
English translation of this commentary has been published. The book is the fruit of twenty years of study by Rosemarie Fuchs, a member of the Marpa Translation Committee and a devoted student of the very Venerable Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche. This commentary has been taught by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche to many Buddhist students around the world. In 1997, he taught it at the Rigpe Dorje winter program in Pullahari, Nepal, the main seat of His Eminence Jamgön Kongtrül Rinpoche. At the end of the teachings Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche gave the respon-sibility of ﬁnding ways 
to publish this commentary to the Jamgon 
Kongtrul Labrang, with his heartfelt wish that the activity of the Fourth Jamgön Kongtrül Rinpoche, Lodrö Chökyi Nyima, would ﬂourish auspiciously. Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche has been the spiritual ad-viso
r of Pullahari since His Eminence the Third Jamgön Kongtrül 
passed away in April 1992, and has clearly fulﬁlled the Third Jamgön Kongtrül’s wish in establishing Pullahari as a place for the study and practice of Buddhadharma. The
 Jamgon Kongtrul Labrang is profoundly grateful to Khenpo 
Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche, Rosemarie Fuchs, and Snow Lion Publi-
 Foreword      9
cations for making this teaching available to students and practitioners 
today and in the future. May this book beneﬁt countless beings through the proper understanding of the ultimate Buddhist view.
Tenzin Dorjee
General Secretary to H.E. Jamgön Kongtrül RinpochePullahari Monastery, NepalJuly 16, 1999, the auspicious day of the ﬁrst turning of   the Wheel of Dharma.
10     Buddha Nature
Preface
This is a translation of the Mahayana Uttara Tantra Shastra (root text by 
Arya Maitreya, written down by the noble Asanga, with commentary 
by the ﬁrst Jamgön Kongtrül Rinpoche Lodrö Thayé) as explained by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche in 1978 in La Poujade, France, and in 1979 in Brussels, Belgium. It is the ﬁrst translation of this par-ticular commentary into a 
Western language. Throughout Buddhist 
history, the words of the Buddha and the scriptures explaining their meaning were translated when they were imported into different cul-tures. Though the 
ﬁrst translation was never a ﬁnal or ﬂawless one, 
it constituted a basis for better ones to come in the future. I hope that this present text may continue this tradition. As it has been created at the advice and under the guidance of a truly accomplished master, there should be some virtue in it, and I wish that it may be of utmost beneﬁt to any reader. The introduction to Jamgön Kongtrül Rinpoche’s commentary is not translated here, but can be found in S.K. Hookham’s book The 
Buddha Within (Albany: 
State University of New York Press, 1991), pp. 
263-288. I w
ould like to express my deep gratitude to Dzogchen Pönlop 
Rinpoche, Sangjä Nyenpa Rinpoche, Ringu Tulku Rinpoche, Acharya Lama Tenpa Gyaltsen, the late Acharya Tenpa Gyaltsen Negi, and Burkhard Quessel for their kind and invaluable help in the transla-tion
 of passages that I found myself unable to do on my own. My 
further thanks go to Ani Jinpa for kindly proofreading the root text, to Lama Alaisdar MacGeaugh, and to Alexander Wilding for his  
 Preface      11
incessant willingness to share his knowledge of dharma, improve my 
command of English, and to eliminate my old-fashioned reluctance to use computers. Special heartfelt thanks are owed to Katia Holmes who translated Khen Rinpoche’s teachings on the root text in 1978 and thus made his instructions accessible for me and was my ﬁrst teacher of his native language. Finally, I would like to thank Chris Hatchell for his careful and considerate help in editing the text. The stanzas of the root text are presented in accordance with their explanation in the commentary. To stay as closely as possible to the original, the translation keeps the number of lines of the Tibetan text. As to the use of brackets, the content therein was added when it seemed necessary to facilitate understanding. In the case of the root text, these interpolations are derived from the commentary by Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thayé; in the case of the commentary they are based on the explanations given by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche. One ﬁnal point should be noted. Unlike Tibetan, the English lan-guage frequently r
equires the introduction of a pronoun, so a choice 
between “he” and “she” seemed necessary to avoid clumsiness. As buddha nature is neither male nor female, the term “he,” when used for a buddha or bodhisattva, should be understood as meaning “he or she.” Being a woman myself and convinced of the possibility of reaching enlightenment in female appearance, I thought it permissible to make this decision and hope it will not cause offense.
Rosemarie Fuchs
Hambur g, 23rd of July , 1999
12     Buddha Nature
Introduction
I.
The content of this volume is of the following essence: the teacher who 
explains the ground, path, and fruition of practice is the perfect Bud-dha, and fr om 
among all philosophies in the world his words are the 
highest and most genuine. The greatest commentary on their intention is the Mahayana Uttara Tantra Shastra, the Treatise on Buddha Nature, 
which is translated here. This text can be considered as being the speech of the Buddha him-self for the following 
two reasons: Firstly it was spoken by Maitreya, 
whom the Buddha empowered to be his regent in Tushita Heaven by placing his crown on Maitreya’s head before he left this realm for the human world. Secondly it is stated in the Sutra Compendium:
All the rivers in the world, carrying the waters that ripen ﬂowers 
and fruit and cause forests to thrive, ﬂow due to the power of the Naga King who resides in Lake Madröpa. Similarly any explana-tion
, debate, composition, practice, and attainment of fruition 
achieved by his retinue of disciples depends solely on the power of the Victorious One himself.
For these reasons the Uttara Tantra Shastra can be considered either 
as the words of the Buddha spoken with his permission, or as those 
uttered by the power of his blessing. However, since according to Lord Maitreya’s own words the Uttara Tantra Shastra contains a commen-
tary on the intended 
meaning of the perfect speech of the capable and 
mighty Buddha himself, it is formally accepted as such. Furthermore, we should bring to mind that there is not the slightest difference be-twee
n the pure speech of the Buddha on one hand, and that of Maitreya, 
 Introduction      13
the Lord of the Tenth Level, or of Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara, and 
Vajrapani, the Lords of the Three Families, on the other. From among all the innumerable commentators on the Buddha’s words, their likes have never been seen in this world. For these reasons all the scholars and meditation masters of India and Tibet revere this great commen-tary called the Uttara Tantra 
Shastra and place it respectfully on the 
crowns of their heads.
II.
As to the question of which of the Buddha’s sutras are commented upon by the Uttara Tantra Shastra, numerous scholars make many different 
assertions. The glorious Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorjé, however, clariﬁes that it is mainly a commentary on the Tathagatagarbha-sutras explaining buddha nature, which the Buddha expounded during his third turning of the Wheel of Dharma and which express the deﬁnitive meaning of all his teachings. Rangjung Dorjé explains that the Bud-dha in his omniscience 
saw that complete enlightenment is within all 
sentient beings in terms of their true nature. Yet, due to their ignorance they cannot see this and thus continue to wander through the cycle of existence. To provide the means to clear away the stains of this igno-rance, the Buddha taught 
the Dharma, doing so in a gradual way that 
corresponded to his disciples’ faculty of comprehending the meaning of his words. Initially the Buddha did not expressedly reveal the true nature of reality. Eventually he spoke directly of it, until ﬁnally he revealed it in full clarity, as it truly was. The ﬁnal and supreme among all the Buddha’s countless teachings are those that express the deﬁnitive meaning and will ripen bodhisat-tvas with sharpest faculties 
whose mindstreams are thoroughly puri-
ﬁed. These teachings ar
e to be found in several sutras containing the 
profound and secret words of the most evolved philosophical tenet imaginable. Four of these elucidate the Chittamatra philosophy. They are the Sutra Unraveling the Intention  (Tib. dgong pa nge par ’grel pa’i mdo ), 
the Travel to Lanka Sutra (Tib. lang kar gshegs 
 pa’i mdo), the Sutra Taught 
in the Highest Pure Land “Greatly Adorned” (Tib. rgyan stug po bkod pa’i 
mdo), and the Flower Ornament Sutra  (Tib. phal po chen). Further sutras 
conveying the highest view are the Sutra on Buddha Nature (Tib. bde 
gshegs snying po’i mdo
), the Sutra of the Great Drum (Tib. rnga po che’i 
mdo), the Sutra For the Benefit of Angulimala (Tib. sor mo’i phreng wa la 
phen pa’i mdo), the Sutra Requested by the Goddess “Glorious Garland”  
(Tib. lha mo dpal phreng gis zhus pa’i mdo ), and others.
 
People like us, 
however, are of dull wits and our wrong views and 
14     Buddha Nature
lack of realization prevent us from being able to understand these 
sutras directly. In order to sustain the likes of us, Maitreya clearly taught their full content in the Seven Vajra Points that form the Uttara 
Tantra Shastra.
III.
Commentators on the words of the Buddha are classiﬁed by the scholars as being of three types: those of superior, middling, and faint qualiﬁcations. The author of the Uttara Tantra Shastra is not only 
renowned for possessing the highest qualities, such as profound learn-ing in all sciences 
and direct vision of the truth of pure being. He is 
furthermore the undeﬁable Lord Maitreya who resides on a Dharma-cloud on the tenth bodhisattva level, who is the Buddha’s great regent wielding all the powers and mastery that go along with that rank, who has inﬁnitely excelled in the practice of the ten perfections, and who due to these achievements stands ready to become the ﬁfth Buddha of this fortunate eon. The one who 
preserved and spread these teachings of the Uttara 
Tantra Shastra within 
the world of humans was the master of learning 
Asanga. He was born as the son of the former nun Salwe Tsultrim, who out of her superior and altruistic motivation of beneﬁtting the Dharma gave up her robes in times of a severe decline of the Buddha’s teachings, married, and had two sons who she prayed would become great masters. Following his mother’s wishes, Asanga ﬁrst studied the Great Vehicle’s teachings on “Manifest Knowledge.” He found these studies incredibly difﬁcult, however, and eventually turned to the practice of meditation on the deity Maitreya. He went into retreat and continued this practice for twelve years, during which he met with great difﬁculties again and again, as is related elsewhere in detail. After that time, though, Maitreya appeared to Asanga, accepted him as a disciple, and took him to Tushita Heaven. Asanga stayed there at Maitreya’s feet for ﬁfty human years, receiving many teachings, especially those now known as Maitreya’s “Five Treatises.” Bringing these back to the human world he wrote them down, and propagating them widely caused them to ﬂourish. He himself wrote a commentary on the Uttara Tantra Shastra  and, as was predicted by the Buddha in The 
Root Tantra of Manjushri  (Tib. ’jam dpal rtsa rgyud ), he became one of the 
two most sublime proponents of the teachings of the Great Vehicle. In 
view of his wondrous deeds, all true scholars and meditation masters 
 Introduction      15
of India and Tibet would have deepest devotion for Asanga and place 
him respectfully on the crowns of their heads.
IV.
There are many commentaries on the Uttara Tantra Shastra written in 
India and Tibet from the perspectives of both the Empty of Self and the Empty of Other views of the Middle Way philosophical traditions. Especially outstanding is the commentary written by Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö Thayé. He was a saintly being prophesized by the Buddha in many sutras and tantras. His wisdom and achievement were such that he knew and assimilated every aspect of the philosophies and pith instructions of the eight practice lineages. His commentary is called the Unassailable Lion’s Roar.
V.
In the unequaled tradition of the Dhagpo Kagyü, there are three lines of teachings on the Great Seal or Mahamudra. These are Sutra, Mantra, and Heart-Essence. Sutra-Mahamudra is the name the incomparable Dhagpo Rinpoche, Gampopa, lent to the view expressed in the Uttara 
Tantra Shastra. He did so 
in order to soothe the hearts of those who 
wanted to receive Mahamudra instructions but were not capable of fully comprehending the meaning behind them. He presented Sutra-Mahamudra as a means to guide these disciples towards the under-standing of its latter two types. In a similar 
way, the Venerable Jamgön Lodrö Thayé presents the 
Uttara Tantra Shastra as a background and context for the Mahamudra teachings. He explains it in the light of the Empty of Other School and makes its view quite easy to understand. Through his activity he has provided utmost beneﬁt to all practitioners of Mahamudra. Especially nowadays, when centers for the study and practice of the teachings of the Kagyü Lineage have spread to all parts of the world, his instructions become equally important. In order to help the practitioners in these centers worldwide, Lodrö Thayé’s commentary has been translated into English and been printed in this book.
F  At the request of Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche this was 
written by Drupön Khenpo Acharya Lodrö Namgyal, at Pullahari Mahamudra Retreat Centre, Kathmandu, Nepal.
16     Buddha Nature
Arya Asanga

 Root Text      17
PART ONE
Root Text
18     Buddha Nature
 Root Text      19
CHAPTER  ONE
Tathagatagarbha
Introduction
I bow down to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
If condensed, the body of the entire commentary
[consists of] the following seven vajra points:Buddha, Dharma, the Assembly, the element,enlightenment, qualities, and then buddha activity.
In the above or der
, which presents them in a logical sequence,  
these [vajra points]
should be known to be derived fr om the Sutra Requested by King 
Dharanishvara.
The [ﬁrst] thr ee stem from its introductory chapter and the [latter] 
four fr om [its chapters]
on the pr
operties of those who possess understanding and the Victo-
rious One.
From the Buddha [stems] the Dharma, from the Dharma the  
Assembly of noble ones,
from the 
Assembly the attainment of buddha nature, the element of 
primor dial wisdom.
This wisdom ﬁnally attained is supr
eme enlightenment, the powers 
and so on,
[thus] possessing the pr operties that fulﬁll the beneﬁt of all sentient 
beings.
20     Buddha Nature
The First Three Vajra Points: The Three Jewels
Buddha
Buddha is without beginning, middle, or end. He is peace itself, 
fully self-awakened and self-expanded in buddhahood.
Having r eached this state, he shows the indestructible, permanent 
path so that those who have no realization may r ealize.
W
ielding the supreme sword and vajra of knowledge and  
compassionate love, he cuts the seedling of suf fering 
and destroys the wall of doubts along with its surrounding thicket 
of various views. I bow down to this Buddha.
Being uncr eated and spontaneously present,
not a realization due to extraneous conditions,
wielding knowledge, compassionate love, and ability ,
buddhahood has [the qualities of] the two beneﬁts.
Its natur
e is without beginning, middle, or end;
hence [the state of a buddha] is uncreated.
Since it possesses the peaceful dharmakaya,it is described as being “spontaneously pr esent.”
Since it must be realized through self-awar eness,
it is not a r
ealization due to extraneous conditions.
These three aspects being realized, there is knowledge.Since the path is shown, there is compassionate love.There is ability since the mental poisons and sufferingare relinquished by primordial wisdom and compassion.Through the ﬁrst three there is beneﬁt for oneself.Through the latter three there is beneﬁt for others.
Dharma
The Dharma is neither non-existent nor existent. It is not both exis -
tent and non-existent, nor is it other than existent and  
non-existent.
It is inaccessible to such investigation and cannot be deﬁ ned. It is 
self-aware and peace.
The Dharma is without deﬁlement. Holding the brilliant light rays 
of primor dial wisdom,
it fully defeats attachment, aversion, and dull indif
ference with 
regard to all objects of perception. I bow down to this sun of the sacred Dharma.
 Root Text      21
Inconceivable, free from the two [veils] and from thought,
being pure, clear, and playing the part of an antidote,it is free from attachment and frees from attachment.This is the Dharma with its features of the two truths. 
Freedom from attachment [as fruit and means]
consists of the truths of cessation and path.Accordingly these should also be knownby means of three qualities each.
Not being an object of conceptual investigation, being inexpressible,
and [only] to be known by noble ones, the Dharma is inconceivable.Since it is peace, it is fr ee from the two [veils] and free from thought.
In its thr
ee [aspects of] purity and so on it is similar to the sun.
Sangha
This mind being by nature clear light, they have seen the poisons to 
be essenceless
and therefore truly r ealize [the natur
e of] every being as peace, the 
ultimate non-existence of a self. They perceive that the Perfect 
Buddha pervades them all.
They possess the understanding that is fr ee from the veils. Thus 
seeing that beings are utterly pur e and that [this purity pervades] 
their limitless number
, 
they are endowed with the vision of primordial wisdom. I bow 
down to this [Sangha].
The assembly of those who have understandingand thus do not fall back has unsurpassable qualities,since their vision of inner primor dial wisdom,
which knows correctly and knows completely, is pur e.
Realizing beings in their state of peace[the noble ones] know corr
ectly,
for [the mind] is by nature utterly pur e
and the poisons wer
e always exhausted.
Their understanding, which realizes the knowableas well as [its] ultimate condition, seesthat the state of omniscience is within all beings.Thus the [noble ones] know completely .
Such realization is the vision of wisdom
22     Buddha Nature
that is self-aware. This wisdom is pure, 
since it [sees] the undeﬁled expanse,free from attachment and obstruction.
Their vision [of] primordial wisdom is pure
and [nears] unsurpassable buddha wisdom.The noble ones who do not fall backare therefore a r efuge for all beings.
The Three Refuges
There being the teacher, his teaching, and his disciplesleads to respective aspirations towards three vehiclesand to three different activities [of veneration].Viewing this, the refuge is shown as threefold.
[The Dharma] will be abandoned and is of an unsteady nature.
It is not [the ultimate quality], and [the Sangha] is still with fear .
Thus the two aspects of Dharma and the Assembly of noble onesdo not represent the supreme refuge, which is constant and stable.In a true sense only the Buddha is beings’ refuge,since the Great Sage embodies the dharmakaya,and the Assembly also reaches its ultimate goalwhen these [qualities of dharmakaya are attained].
Their occurence is rare, they are free from deﬁlement,
they possess power, they are the adornment of the world,they are sublime, and they are unchanging.Thus [they are named] “rare and sublime.”
The Last Four Vajra Points
The virtuous Three Jewels, which are rare and sublime,arise from suchness bound up with pollution, from the one free 
from pollution,
from the qualities of unpolluted buddhahood, and from the deeds of 
the Victor.
This is the object of those who see the ultimate truth.
The disposition of the Three Rare and Sublime Ones
is the object [of vision] of those who see everything.
Furthermor e, these four aspects in the given order
are inconceivable, for the following four r easons:
 Root Text      23
[The buddha element] is pure and yet has afﬂiction.
[Enlightenment] was not afﬂicted and yet is puriﬁed.Qualities are totally indivisible [and yet unapparent].[Activity] is spontaneous and yet without any thought. 
Constituting what must be r ealized, realization,
its attributes, and the means to bring it about,
accordingly the ﬁrst is the cause to be puriﬁedand the [latter] three points are the conditions.
The Fourth Vajra Point: The Element
The perfect buddhakaya is all-embracing,suchness cannot be differentiated,and all beings have the disposition.Thus they always have buddha natur e. 
The Buddha has said that all beings have buddha nature“since buddha wisdom is always present within the assembly  
of beings,
since this undeﬁled natur
e is free from duality ,
and since the disposition to buddhahood has been named after 
 
its fr uit.”
Essence, cause, fruit, function, endowment, manifestation,phases, all-pervasiveness of suchness, unchangingness,and inseparability of the qualities should be understoodas intended to describe the meaning of the absolute expanse.
Just as a jewel, the sky , and water are pur e
it is by natur e always fr
ee from the poisons.
From devotion to the Dharma, from highest wisdom, 
and from samadhi and compassion [its realization arises].
[Wielding] power, not changing into something else,
and being a nature that has a moistening [quality]:these [three] have properties correspondingto those of a precious gem, the sky, and water.
Enmity towards the Dharma, a view [asserting
an existing] self, fear of samsara’s suffering,
24     Buddha Nature
and neglect of the welfare of fellow beings
are the four veils of those with great desire,of tirthikas, shravakas, and pratyekabuddhas.The cause that puriﬁes [all these veils]consists of the four qualities [of the path],which ar e outstanding devotion and so on.
Those whose seed is devotion towards the supreme vehicle,whose mother is analytical wisdom generating the buddha qualities,whose abode is the blissful womb of meditative stability ,
and whose nurse is compassion, ar
e heirs born to succeed  
the Muni.
The fr uit is the perfection of the qualities
of purity, self, happiness, and permanence.Weariness of suf fering, longing to attain peace,
and devotion towar
ds this aim are the function.
In brief, the fruit of these [purifying causes]fully divides into the remedies [for the antidotes],which [in their turn] counteract the four aspectsof wr ong beliefs with regard to the dharmakaya.
The [dharmakaya] is purity , since its natur
e is pure
and [even] the remaining imprints are fully removed.It is true self, since all conceptual elaboration in terms of self and non-self is totally stilled.It is tr ue happiness, since [even] the aggregates
of mental nature and their causes ar e r
eversed.
It is permanence, since the cycle of existenceand the state beyond pain ar e realized as one.
Their analytical wisdom has cut all self-cherishing without  
exception.
Yet, cherishing beings, those possessed of compassion do not adher e 
to peace.
Relying on understanding and compassionate love, the means to 
enlightenment,
noble ones will neither [abide] in samsara nor in a [limited] nirvana.
If the buddha element wer e not pr
esent,
there would be no r emorse over suf
fering.
 Root Text      25
There would be no longing for nirvana,
nor striving and devotion towards this aim.
That with regard to existence and nirvana their respective fault and 
quality are seen,
that suffering is seen as the fault of existence and happiness as the 
quality of nirvana,
stems
 from the presence of the disposition to buddhahood. “Why 
so?”
In those who ar e devoid of disposition, such seeing does not occur.
Like the great sea it holds qualities
immeasurable, pr ecious, and inexhaustible.
Its essence holds indivisible pr
operties.
Thus [the element] is similar to a lamp.
Unifying the elements of dharmakaya,
a victor ’s wisdom, and great compassion,
it is shown as being similar to the seaby the vessel, the gems, and the water .
Clairvoyance, primordial wisdom, and absence of pollutionare totally indivisible and native to the unstained abode.Thus it has pr operties corr
esponding
to the light, heat, and color of a lamp.
Based upon the manifestation of suchness dividing
into that of an or dinary being, that of a noble one,
and that of a perfect buddha, He who Sees Thatnesshas explained the natur e of the Victor to beings.
[It manifests as] perverted [views in] ordinary beings,[as] the r eversal [of these in] those who see the tr
uth,
and [it manifests] as it is, in an unperverted way,and as freedom from elaboration [in] a tathagata.
The unpuriﬁed, the both unpuriﬁed and puriﬁed,
and the utterly puriﬁed [phases]are expressed in their given order[by the names] “being,” “bodhisattva,” and “tathagata.”
The element as contained
26     Buddha Nature
in the six topics of “essence” and so on
is explained in the light of three phasesby means of three names.
Just as space, which is by nature free from thought,
pervades everything,the undeﬁled expanse, which is the natur e of mind,
is all-pervading.
As the general featur e [of everything], it embraces [those with] 
faults,
[those with] qualities, and [those in whom the qualities are]  
ultimate
just as space [pervades everything] visible,
be it of inferior , average, or supreme appearance.
Having faults that are adventitiousand qualities that ar e its natur
e,
it is afterwards the same as before.This is dharmata ever unchanging.
[Though] space permeates everything,
it is never polluted, due to its subtlety .
Likewise the [dharmadhatu] in all beingsdoes not suf fer the slightest pollution.
Just as at all times worlds ariseand disintegrate in space,the senses arise and disintegratein the uncr eated expanse.
Space is never burnt by ﬁr es.
Likewise this [dharmadhatu]is not burnt by the ﬁresof death, sickness, and aging.
Earth r ests upon water and water upon wind.
Wind fully r ests on space.
Space does not r est upon any of the elements
of wind, water
, or earth.
Likewise skandhas, elements, and senses
 Root Text      27
are based upon karma and mental poisons.
Karma and poisons are always basedupon improper conceptual activity.The improper conceptual activityfully abides on the purity of mind.Yet, the nature of the mind itself
has no basis in all these phenomena.
The skandhas, entrances, and elements
are to be known as resembling earth.Karma and the mental poisons of beingsshould be envisaged as the water element.Impr oper conceptual activity is viewed
as being similar to the element of wind.[Mind’s] natur e, as the element of space,
has no ground and no place of abiding.
The impr oper conceptual activity
rests upon the natur
e of the mind.
Improper conceptual activity brings about
all the classes of karma and mental poisons.From the water of karma and mental poisons
the skandhas, entrances, and elements arise.As this [world] arises and disintegrates,they will arise and disintegrate as well.
The natur e of mind as the element of space
does not [depend upon] causes or conditions,
nor does it [depend on] a gathering of these.It has neither arising, cessation, nor abiding.
This clear and luminous natur e of mind
is as changeless as space. It is not afﬂicted
by desire and so on, the adventitious stains,which are spr ung fr
om incorrect thoughts.
It is not brought into existenceby the water of karma, of the poisons, and so on.Hence it is also not consumed by the cr uel ﬁres
of dying, falling sick, and aging.
The thr ee ﬁres of death, sickness, and aging
28     Buddha Nature
are to be understood in their given sequence
as resembling the ﬁre at the end of time,the ﬁre of hell, and an ordinary ﬁre.
Having realized thatness, the nature of the [dharmadhatu], just as it 
is,
those of understanding are released from birth, sickness, aging, and 
death.
Though free fr om 
the destitution of birth and so on, they demonstrate 
these,
since
 by their [insight] they have given rise to compassion for be-
ings.
The noble have eradicated the suf fering
of dying, falling ill, and aging at its root,
which is being born due to karma and poisons.There being no such [cause], there is no such [fruit].
Since they have seen r eality as it is,
they ar
e beyond being born and so on.
Yet, as the embodiment of compassion itself
they display birth, illness, old age, and death.
After the heirs of the V ictorious One
have realized this changeless state,
those who are blinded by ignorancesee them as being born and so forth.That such seeing should occur is tr uly wonderful and amazing.
When they have attained the ﬁeld of experience of the noble,they show themselves as the ﬁeld of experience of the children.Hence means and compassion of the friends of beings are supreme.
Though they ar
e beyond all worldly matters,
these [bodhisattvas] do not leave the world.
They act for the sake of all worldly beingswithin the world, unblemished by its defects.As a lotus will gr ow in the midst of water,
not being polluted by the water’s [faults],these [noble ones] ar e born in the world
unpolluted by any worldly phenomena.
 Root Text      29
Viewing the accomplishment of their task,
their understanding always blazes like ﬁre.And they always rest evenly balancedin meditative stability, which is peace.
By the power of their former [prayers]
and since they ar e free from all ideation,
they do not exert any deliberate ef fort
to lead all sentient beings to maturation.These [heirs of the V ictorious One] know pr
ecisely
how and by what [method] each should be trained—through whatever teachings, form kayas, conduct,and ways of behavior are individually appropriate.Always [acting] spontaneously and without hindrancefor sentient beings whose number is limitless as space,such [bodhisattvas] who possess understandingtruly engage in the task of beneﬁtting beings.
The way the bodhisattvas [unfold activity]in the post-meditative phaseequals the tathagatas’ [action] in the worldfor beings’ tr ue liberation.
Though this is true, indeed, whatever differ ence lies
between the earth and an atom or else between[the water in] the sea and in an ox’s hoofprint,is the dif fer
ence between a buddha and a bodhisattva.
[The dharmakaya] does not change into something else, since it has 
inexhaustible pr operties.
It is the refuge of beings, since [it pr otects them] without any limit of 
time, until the ﬁnal end.
It is always fr ee fr
om duality, since it is foreign to all ideation.
It is also an indestructible state, since its nature is uncreated.
It is not born, and it does not die.
It suf fers no harm and does not age
since it is permanent and steadfast,the state of peace and immutability.
30     Buddha Nature
It is not [even] born in a body of mental nature,
since it is permanent. Steadfast it does not die,not [even] through the death and transmigrationthat constitute an inconceivable transformation.Since it is peace, it does not [even] suf fer harm
from illnesses caused by subtle karmic imprints. Since it is immutable, there is not [even] aginginduced by compositional factors fr ee fr
om stain.
[Combining] sentences from the foregoingtwo by two, the uncreated expanse should be known[as possessing] in the same sequencethe attributes of being permanent and so forth.
Since it is endowed with inexhaustible qualities, [the dharmakaya]
is unchangingness itself and thus [has] the attribute of permanence.Equaling the uttermost end it is r efuge itself
and thus [holds] the attribute of steadfastness.Since absence of thought is its natur e, it is dharmata
free from duality and thus [has] the attribute of peace.Hosting uncr eated qualities, it is immutability itself
and thus [possesses] the attribute of indestr
uctibility.
Why is it the dharmakaya, the tathagata,the noble tr uth, and the absolute nirvana?
Its qualities are inseparable, like the sun and its rays.Thus other than buddhahood there is no nirvana.
Since the unpolluted expanse has, put brieﬂy ,
four dif
ferent types of meaning,
it should be known in terms of four synonyms:
the dharmakaya and so forth.
Buddha qualities ar e indivisible.
The disposition is attained as it is.
The true state is [always] free from any ﬁckleness and deceit.Since beginningless time the nature has been peace itself.
 Root Text      31
Direct perfect enlightenment [with regard to] all aspects,
and abandonment of the stains along with their imprints[are called] buddha and nirvana respectively.In truth, these ar
e not two different things.
Liberation is distinguished by indivisibilityfrom qualities present in all their aspects:
innumerable, inconceivable, and unpolluted.Such liberation is [also called] “tathagata.”
Suppose some painters master ed their craft,
each with respect to a dif ferent [part of the body],
so that whichever part one would know how to do,
he would not succeed with any other part.Then the king, the r uler of the country
,
hands them a canvas and gives the order:“You all together paint my image on this!”
Having hear
d this [order] from the [king]
they carefully take up their painting work.While they are well immersed in their task,one among them leaves for another country.Since they are incompletedue to his travel abroad,their painting in all its partsdoes not get fully perfected.Thus the example is given.
Who ar e the painters of these [parts of the image]?
They are generosity , morality
, patience, and so on.
Emptiness endowed with all supreme aspects
is described as being the form [of the king].
Illuminating, radiating, and purifying,
and inseparable fr om each other, analytical wisdom,
primordial wisdom, and total liberationcorrespond to the light, rays, and orb of the sun.
32     Buddha Nature
One will therefore not attain nirvana
without attaining the state of buddhahood.Just as one could not see the sunif one wer e to eliminate its light and its rays.
In this way the nature of the Victorious Oneis expr essed [by] the “T
enfold Presentation.”
This [tathagatagarbha] abides within the shroud of the afﬂictions,as should be understood through [the following nine] examples:
Just like a buddha in a decaying lotus, honey amidst bees,
a grain in its husk, gold in ﬁlth, a treasure undergr ound,
a shoot and so on spr
outing from a little fruit,
a statue of the Victorious One in a tattered rag,a ruler of mankind in a destitute woman’s womb,and a precious image under [a layer of] clay,this [buddha] element abides within all sentient beings,obscur ed by the deﬁlement of the adventitious poisons.
The deﬁlements correspond to the lotus,the insects, the husk, the ﬁlth, the earth,the fruit, the tatter ed rag, the pr
egnant woman
direly vexed with burning suffering, and the clay.The buddha, the honey, the grain, the gold,the treasure, the nyagrodha tree, the precious statue,the continents’ supreme ruler, and the precious imageare similar to the supreme undeﬁled element.
Seeing that in the calyx of an ugly-colored lotus
a tathagata dwells ablaze with a thousand marks,a man endowed with the immaculate divine visiontakes it fr om the shroud of the water-born’s petals.
Likewise the Sugata with his buddha eye per ceives his own tr
ue 
state even in those
who must abide in the hell of direst pain.Endowed with compassion itself, which is unobscured and endures 
to the ﬁnal end,
he relieves them fr
om their obscurations.
 Root Text      33
Once his divine eye sees the Sugata abiding within the closed  
ugly lotus,
the man cuts the petals. Seeing the perfect buddha nature  
within beings,
obscured by the shr oud of desire, hatr ed, and the other mental 
poisons,
the Muni does likewise and thr
ough his compassion defeats all  
their veils.
Honey is surrounded by a swarm of insects.
A skillful man in sear ch of [honey]
[employs], upon seeing this, suitable meansto fully separate it fr om the host of bees.
Likewise, when his eye of omnisciencesees the honey-like element of awar eness,
the Gr eat Sage causes its bee-like veils
to be fully and radically abandoned.
Aiming to get honey that is obscur ed by millions and millions of 
honeybees,
the man disperses all these bees and pr ocures the honey, just as he 
wishes.
The unpolluted knowledge pr esent in all sentient beings is similar 
 
to the honey,
and the Victor skilled in vanquishing the bee-like poisons r esembles 
the man.
A grain when still in its husk
is not ﬁt to be eaten by man.
Those seeking food and sustenanceremove this [grain] fr om its husk.
[The nature of] the V ictorious One, which is pr
esent within beings
[but] mixed with the deﬁlement of the poisons, is similar to this.While it is not freed from being mingled with the pollution of these 
afﬂictions,
the deeds of the Victor will not be [displayed] in the three realms of 
existence.
34     Buddha Nature
Unthreshed grains of rice, buckwheat, or barley, which not having 
emerged from their husks
still have husk and beard, cannot be turned into delicious food that 
is palatable for man.
Likewise the Lor d of Qualities is present within all beings, but his 
bod
y is not liberated from the shroud of the poisons.
Thus his body cannot bestow the joyous taste of Dharma upon sen-
tient beings stricken by the famine of their afﬂictions.
While a man was traveling, gold he owned 
fell into a place ﬁlled with r otting refuse.
This [gold], being of indestructible natur e,
r
emained for many centuries just as it was.
Then a god with completely pure divine vision saw it thereand addressed a man: “Purify this supremely precious goldlying here in this [ﬁlth], and [then convert it into something]that is worth being made from such a precious substance!”
Likewise the Muni sees the quality [of] beings,
which is sunken in the ﬁlth-like mental poisons,and pours his rain of sacr ed Dharma upon them
to purify the muddiness of their afﬂictions.
Once the god has seen the gold that has fallen into the place full of 
rotting refuse,
insistently he directs the man’s attention to this supr emely beautiful 
thing so he may completely cleanse it.
Seeing within all beings the pr ecious perfect buddha that has fallen 
into the gr
eat ﬁlth of the mental poisons,
the V ictorious 
One does likewise and teaches the Dharma to persuade 
them to purify it.
If an inexhaustible tr easure were buried
in the gr ound beneath a poor man’s house,
the man would not know of it, and the tr
easure
would not speak and tell him “I am here!”Likewise a precious treasure is contained in each being’s mind. This 
is its true state,
which is free from deﬁlement. Nothing is to be added and nothing 
 Root Text      35
to be removed.
Nevertheless, since they do not realize this, sentient beings
continuously undergo the manifold sufferings of deprivation.
When a precious treasure is contained within [the ground beneath] a 
poor man’s house,
the tr easure cannot tell him “I am here!” [and] the man does not 
know of its pr esence.
Like the poor man, beings ar
e [unaware] that Dharma’s treasure lies 
in the house of their minds
and the gr eat Sage truly takes birth within the world to cause them 
to attain [this treasur e].
The seed contained in the fr
uit of a mango or similar trees
[is possessed of] the indestructible property of sprouting.
Once it gets plowed-earth, water, and the other  
[conditions],
the substance of a majestic tr ee will gradually come about.
The fruit consisting of the ignorance and the other defects of beingscon
tains in the shroud of its peel the virtuous element of the 
dharma[kaya].
Likewise, through relying on virtue, this [element] alsowill gradually turn into the substance of a King of Munis.
By means of water , sunlight, wind, earth, time, and space, the neces-
sary conditions,
the tree grows from within the narr ow shr 
oud of the fruit of a ba-
nana or mango.
Similarly the fertile seed of the Perfect Buddha, contained within the 
fruit-skin of the mental poisons of beings,
also grows from virtue as its necessary condition, until the [shoot of] 
Dharma is seen and augmented [towar ds perfection].
An image of the V
ictorious One made from precious material
lies by the road, wrapped in an evil-smelling tattered rag.
Upon seeing this, a god will alert the [passersby]to its pr esence by the road to cause its retrieval.
Likewise, being possessed of unhinder ed vision
[the Buddha] sees the substance of the Sugatawrapped in the multitude of the mental poisons,
36     Buddha Nature
even in animals, and teaches the means to free it.
When his eye perceives the statue of the Tathagata, which is of pre-
cious nature
but wrapped in a stinking rag and lying by the road, the god points 
it out to passersby, so that they r etrieve it.
Likewise the V
ictor sees that the element, wrapped in the tattered 
garments of the poisons and lying on samsara’s road,
is present even within animals, and teaches the Dharma so that it 
may be released.
A woman of miserable appearance
who is without protection and abides in a poorhouseholds in her womb a glorious king,not knowing that a lor d of man dwells in her own body.
Birth in an existence is similar to the poorhouse.Impure beings ar
e like the woman bearing [a king] in her womb.
Since he is present within her, she has protection.The undeﬁled element is like [the king] who dwells in her womb.
A ruler of the earth dwells in the womb of a woman who has an  
unpleasant appearance and whose body is dr essed in dirty 
clothes.
Nevertheless she has [to abide] in a poorhouse and under go the 
experience of direst suf fering.
Likewise, beings deem themselves unshelter
ed though a protector 
resides within their own [minds].
Thus they have to abide in the ground of suffering, their minds being 
unpeaceful under the pr edominating drive of the mental poisons.
An artistically well-designed image of peaceful appearance,
which has been cast in gold and is [still] inside [its mold],externally has the natur e of clay. Experts, upon seeing this,
will clear away the outer layer and cleanse the gold therein.
Likewise those of supr eme enlightenment
fully see that ther
e are deﬁlements [on] the luminous nature,
but that these stains are just adventitious,
 Root Text      37
and purify beings, who are like jewel mines, from all their veils.
Recognizing the nature of an image of peaceful appearance,  
ﬂawless and made from shimmering gold,
while it is [still] contained in its mold, an expert removes the  
layers of clay .
Likewise the omniscient know the peaceful mind, which is  
similar to pur e gold,
and remove the obscurations by teaching the Dharma, [just as  
the mold] is str uck and chipped away.
The lotus, the bees, the husk, the ﬁlth,
the earth, the skin of the fruit, the tatter ed rag,
the woman’s womb, and the shr
oud of clay
[exemplify the deﬁlements], while [the pure nature]is like the buddha, the honey, the kernel, the gold,the treasure, the great tree, the precious statue,the universal monarch, and the golden image.It is said that the shroud of the mental poisons,[which causes the veils] of the element of beings,has had no connection with it since beginningless time,while the natur e of mind, which is devoid of stains,
[has been present within them] since beginningless time.
The nine aspects of deﬁlement: desire, aversion,
and mental blindness, their ﬁer ce active state,
the r
emaining imprints [of unknowing], the deﬁlements
to be abandoned on the paths of seeing and meditation,and the deﬁlements based upon the impur e levels
and the pure levels respectively , ar
e fully taught
by the shroud of the lotus and the other examples.[When] classiﬁed, the shroud of the secondary poisonsis beyond any end. But when it is comprised concisely,the nine deﬁlements of desire and the other afﬂictionsare well explained in the given order by the nine similesof the shroud of the lotus and the subsequent examples.
These deﬁlements cause in their given sequence
the four impurities of children, the impurity of arhats,the two impurities of followers of the path of training,
38     Buddha Nature
and the two impurities of those with understanding.
When a lotus [just] born from the mud
appears to [a beholder], it delights his mind.Yet later it changes and becomes undelightful.The joy born from desire is similar to this.
Bees, when extr emely agitated,
will ﬁer
cely use their stings.
Similarly, hatred, once arisen,
brings suffering to the heart.
The kernel of rice and so on
is obscur ed by its outer husk.
Likewise the vision of the [true] meaningis obscured by the eggshell of ignorance.
Filth is r epugnant.
Being the cause for those bound up with gr
eed
to indulge in sense pleasures,
the active state [of the poisons] resembles it.
When wealth is hidden, one is ignorant of it
and ther efore does not obtain the treasur e. 
Likewise self-spr
ung [wisdom] is veiled in arhats
by the ground of remaining imprints of ignorance.
As by gradual growth from bud to shoot
the skins of the seed are cut,the vision of thatness averts[the stains] to be abandoned by seeing. 
Through their junction with the noble path
they have overcome the essential part of the transitory collection.
What their wisdom must abandon [on] the path of meditationis explained as being similar to tattered rags.
The stains based on the seven [impure] levels
resemble the deﬁlements of the shr ouding womb.
Concept-fr
ee primordial wisdom [is released]
like the mature [prince] from the womb’s conﬁne.
 Root Text      39
The deﬁlements connected with the three [pure] levels
should be known as being similar to the layer of clay.They must be overcome by the vajra-like samadhiof [those] who are the embodiment of greatness.
Thus desire and the further of the nine deﬁlements
correspond to the lotus and the following examples.
Its nature unifying three aspects, the element has properties
that correspond to those of the Buddha and the other similes.
Its nature is dharmakaya, suchness,
and also the disposition. These are to beknown by the [ﬁrst] three examples,the [fourth] one, and the [following] ﬁve.
The dharmakaya is to be known [in] two aspects.
These ar e the utterly unstained dharmadhatu
and the cause conducive to its [realization],which is teaching in the deep and manifold way.
[The dharmakaya] being beyond the worldly ,
no example for it can be found in the world.
Ther efor
e the element and the Tathagata
are explained as being [slightly] similar
.
Teaching in the deep and subtle wayis like the one single taste of honey,while teaching through various aspectsresembles grain in its variety of husks.
Since the nature is unchanging,
full of virtue, and utterly pure,suchness is said to correspondto the shape and color of gold.
Similar to the tr easure and the fruit of a tree,
the disposition is to be known in two aspects,
as it has existed [as] the natur
e since beginningless time
and has become supreme [through] right cultivation.
40     Buddha Nature
The attainment of the three kayas of a buddha
is seen to stem from the twofold disposition.By the ﬁrst aspect there is the ﬁrst [kaya],through the second there are the latter two.
The beautiful svabhavikakaya
is like the statue of pr ecious material,
since [it exists] naturally, is not created,and is a tr easur
e of gem-like qualities.
Wielding the sublime majesty of the Great Dharma,the sambhoga[kaya] resembles the Chakravartin.Being of the nature of a [mere] representation,the nirmana[kaya] is similar to the golden image.
This tr uth of the Self-Sprung Ones
is to be realized thr ough faith.
The orb of the sun blazes with light,
[but] is not seen by the blind.
Nothing whatsoever is to be r emoved.
Not the slightest thing is to be added.
Truly looking at truth, tr uth is seen.
When seen, this is complete liberation.
The element is empty of the adventitious [stains],
which ar e featur
ed by their total separateness.
But it is not empty of the matchless properties,which ar e featur
ed by their total inseparability.
[The sutras of the second turning of the wheel of Dharma] state in 
numer ous places
that all knowable [phenomena] are in all ways empty like a cloud, a 
dream, or an illusion.
Why is it then, that in [the sutras of the thir d turning of the wheel of 
Dharma]
the Buddha, having said this, declar ed that buddha natur
e is present 
within beings?
With r
egard to faintheartedness, contempt for inferior beings,
perceiving the untr
ue, disparaging the true nature,
 Root Text      41
and exceeding self-cherishing, he said this to persuade those
who have any of these ﬁve to abandon their defects.
The ﬁnal truth is in every respect
devoid of anything compounded.The poisons, karma, and their productare said to be like a cloud and so on.
The mental poisons are like a cloud.
Karma r esembles a dr
eam experience.
The skandhas produced by the poisons and karmaare similar to an illusion or a deceptive apparition.
For the time being it was thus expounded.
Additionally in this unsurpassable continuityit was then taught: “The element is pr esent,”
so that the ﬁve evils would be abandoned.As long as they have not heard this,bodhichitta will not be born in thosewhose minds ar e feeble and fainthearted,
stirred by the evil of self-contempt.Having engendered [a little] bodhichitta,some pr oudly imagine: “I am supr
eme!”
Towards those who have not developed itthey are imbued with notions of inferiority.In those who entertain such thoughts,true understanding will not arise.
They hold the untrue [to be true]and thus will not r ealize the tr
uth.
Being artiﬁcially produced and adventitious,these faults of beings are not truly [existent].In truth these evils do not exist as self,but exist as the qualities by nature pure.While they hold the evils, which are untrue, [to be true]and disparage the true qualities, [denying their presence,]even those of understanding will not attain the lovethat per ceives the similarity of oneself and others.
Once one has heard this, joy will be born.Respect as towards the Buddha, analytical wisdom,primor dial wisdom, and gr
eat love will arise.
42     Buddha Nature
Through the arising of these ﬁve qualities,
one is rid of the faults and sees similarity.[By realizing] the absence of defects and the presence of qualities,and through love, [seeing] the equality of oneself and [all] beings,buddhahood will be quickly attained.
♦ This was the section “Tathagatagarbha,” the ﬁrst [chapter] of The 
Commentary on the Highest Continuity 
of the Mahayana Dharma which 
Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare and Sublime Ones.
 Root Text      43
CHAPTER  TWO
The Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
With its purity, attainment, freedom,
beneﬁt for oneself and others, [their] basis, depth, vastness, and greatness of nature,duration, and suchness [it has eight qualities].
By [the topics] essence, cause, fr uit,
function, endowment, manifestation,
permanence, and inconceivability,the level of a buddha is presented.
[Enlightenment, of which the Buddha] said: “It is by nature clear 
light,” is similar to the sun and space.
It is fr ee from the stains of the adventitious poisons and hindrances 
to knowledge, the veils of which obscured it [like] a dense sea of 
clouds.
Buddhahood is permanent, steadfast, and immutable, possessing all 
the unpolluted buddha qualities.
It is attained on the basis of [two] primor dial wisdoms: [one is] free 
from ideation with r egar
d to phenomena, [the other is] discrimi-
native.
Buddhahood is indivisible, yet can be dividedaccor ding to its property of [twofold] purity.
[Thus] it has two featur es, which ar
e abandonment
and primordial wisdom, similar to space and the sun.
44     Buddha Nature
Luminous clear light is not created.
It is indivisibly manifest [in the nature of beings] and holds all the buddha propertiesoutnumbering the grains of sand in the river Ganges.
By natur e not existent, pervasive,
and adventitious, the veils of the poisons
and of the hindrances to knowledgeare described as being similar to a cloud.
Twofold wisdom causes release fr om the two veils.
Since ther
e is the one that is free from ideation
and the one ensuing from this in post-meditation,
it is held that there are [two] primordial wisdoms.
Like a lake ﬁlled with unpolluted water gradually overspread by 
lotus ﬂowers,
like the full moon released from Rahu’s mouth and the sun liberated 
from a sea of clouds,
it is free from afﬂiction. Being free from pollution and possessing 
qualities,
[buddhahood] is endowed with the brilliant light rays [of corr ect 
and complete vision].
Being similar to the [statue of the] Muni, the leader of beings,
and to the honey, the grain, the precious gold, the treasur e, the 
mighty tr
ee,
the Sugata’s statue [made from] immaculate precious material,the ruler of the earth, and the golden image, [a buddha] has gained 
victory.
Purity from the adventitious afﬂictionsof desire and the other mental poisonsis like the water of the lake and so forth.When put concisely it can be fully shownas the fr uit of wisdom free from ideation.
The actual attainment of the buddhakaya,which has all supr eme aspects, is explained as the fruit
of primordial wisdom ensuing fr om this after meditation.
 Root Text      45
Having eliminated the silt of desire,
he lets the waters of meditative stabilityﬂow onto the lotus[-like] disciples,and thus r esembles the lake of pure water.
Having fr eed himself fr
om the Rahu of hatred,
he pervades beings with the light raysof his great love and compassionate concern,and thus is similar to the immaculate full moon.Totally freed from the clouds of unknowing
and dispelling [its] darkness within beingsthrough the light rays of primordial wisdom,
buddhahood is similar to the unpolluted sun.
Since [enlightenment has] peerless pr operties,
since it bestows the taste of sacred Dharma,
and since it is fr ee from the peel [of the veils],
it is like the Sugata, the honey
, and the grain.
Since it is puriﬁed, since [beings’] povertyis dispelled by the wealth of its qualities,and since it grants the fr uit of total liberation,
it is like the gold, the treasure, and the tr ee.
Repr
esenting the jewel of the dharmakaya,
and [the attainment of] the supreme lord of humans,and [manifesting in] the likeness of a precious image,they are like the bejeweled, the king, and the golden.
Rid of pollution [and] all-pervasive, [true buddhahood] has  
an indestr uctible nature
since it is steadfast, at peace, permanent, and unchanging. As  
the abode [of qualities]
a tathagata is similar to space. For the six sense-faculties of a  
saintly being
it forms the cause to experience their r espective [pur
e] objects  
[of per ception].
It is the cause for visible objects, which ar
e non-arising, to be seen,
for good and pure speech to be hear d,
for the pur
e scent of the moral conduct of the Sugata to be smelled,
for the ﬂavor of sacred Dharma [of] the great noble ones to be tasted,
46     Buddha Nature
for the blissful touch of samadhi to be felt,
and for the mode [of the Dharma], which is by essence deep, to be 
realized.
Whe n
 reﬂected upon in a very ﬁne way, a sugata bestowing true 
bliss
is like space, devoid of any r easons.
In brief, [two kayas] are to be understoodas functions of the two primordial wisdoms:the vimuktikaya [r epr
esenting] perfection,
and the dharmakaya [representing] reﬁnement.Vimuktikaya and dharmakaya are to be knownin terms of two aspects and [a common] one,as they ar e free from pollution and all-pervasive,
uncr eated and thus embody the gr
ound [of virtue].
Since the mental poisons along with their remaining imprints are 
ended,
[the vimuktikaya] is free from any pollution.Since there is no attachment and obstruction,[the dharmakaya] is considered as pervasive primordial wisdom.Being of a nature forever indestructible[neither kaya] is something that is created.While “indestructibility” is the [concise] explanation [of uncreated-
ness]
,
it is taught in more detail through [the topic] “steadfast” and so 
forth.
“Destr uctibility” is to be understood [in terms of] four aspects,
since it constitutes the contrary of “steadfastness” and so on.These ar e decay, drastic change, being cut-off, and transmigration,
which is inconceivable [and] a transformation [in various] ways.Since
 [the vimuktikaya and dharmakaya] are free from these [fea-
tures],
they are to be known as steadfast, peaceful, permanent, and  
unchanging.
As absence of pollution and [primor dial] wisdom are the support 
for the unstained properties
[to come forth in the disciples], they ar e [also] the abode [of the best 
possible beneﬁt for others].
 Root Text      47
Space is not a cause, and yet the cause
for all visible things to be seen,for sound, odor, ﬂavor, touch,and phenomena to be heard and so on.Just so, they cause the unstained qualitiesto arise as objects sensed by those[whose vision is] stable by junctionwith the unveiled [seeing of] the two kayas.
Buddhahood is inconceivable, permanent, steadfast, at peace, and 
immutable.
It is utterly peaceful, pervasive, without thought, and unattached 
like space.
It is fr ee from hindrance and coarse objects of contact ar
e eliminated.
It cannot be seen or grasped. It is virtuous and free fr
om pollution.
As was explained, the vimuktikaya and the dharmakaya
[accomplish] beneﬁt for oneself and beneﬁt for others.These [kayas], being the support of this twofold beneﬁt,possess the qualities of being inconceivable and so forth.
Being the object of the omniscient primor dial wisdom,
buddhahood is not an object for the three types of insight.
So even those with a wisdom body must realizethat [buddha enlightenment] is inconceivable.
Being subtle it is not an object for study .
Being absolute it cannot be reﬂected upon.
Dharmata is deep. Hence it is not an objectfor any worldly meditation and so on.
Why [is it har d to realize]? Like the blind with regar d
to the visible, the childr
en have never seen it before.
Even noble ones [see it] as babies [would glimpse] 
the sun from within the house where they are born.
Since it is fr ee fr
om being born, it is permanent.
Since it is without cessation, it is steadfast.
Since these two are not present, it is peaceful.It is immutable, for the dharmata [ever] remains.
48     Buddha Nature
It is utter peace, since the truth of cessation [is revealed].
Since everything is realized, it pervades [all the knowable].Since it does not dwell upon anything, it is without ideation.Since the mental poisons ar e eliminated, it has no attachment.
Since the veil of the hindrances to knowledge is cleansed,it is in all ways unobstr ucted [with r egard to complete insight].
Being fr ee fr
om its two [obstacles], it is suited for [samadhi]
and thus relieved from the touch of coarse objects of contact.
Since it is not something visible, it cannot be seen.
Since it is fr ee from features, it cannot be grasped.
It is virtuous, [the dharmadhatu] being by natur e pur
e,
and it is free from stains, since pollution is abandoned.
What is the nature of dharmadhatu? It is without beginning, middle, 
and end.
It is totally indivisible and far away fr om the two [extremes],
rid of the three [veils], unpolluted, and not an object of thought.
Its realization is the vision of a 
Yogi who Dwells in Meditative Equi-
poise.
The unpolluted spher e of a tathagata possesses the [four] qualities 
[of realization].
It cannot be fathomed and [in number] is beyond the grains of sand 
in the river Ganges.
It is inconceivable and peerless and ther e is furthermore
elimination of all faults along with their remaining traces.
Through various aspects of the sacr
ed Dharma, through bodies shot 
with light rays,
and thr ough its readiness to accomplish the task of the total  
liberation of beings,
its deeds r esemble the activity of a king of wish-fulﬁlling jewels.
[It appears as] a variety of things, yet is not of the nature of these.[The nirmanakaya persuades] the worldly beings to enter the path 
towar ds peace.
He fully matur
es them and, granting prophecy , [becomes] the cause 
[of their r
elease].
These form [kayas] remain forever in this [world]
 Root Text      49
like the realm of form within the realm of space.
The Omniscience of All the Self-Sprung Ones is given
the name of “Buddhahood.” Its meaning is [also termed]:“Most Supremely Beyond Torment,” “The Inconceivable,”“Foe-Vanquisher ,” and “Quintessence of Self-A 
wareness.”
When these are categorized, they can be fully dividedinto [three] properties, which are the qualities of depth,vastness, and greatness, or the nature [kaya] and so on.[The beneﬁts] are fulﬁlled through these three kayas.
Of these, the svabhavikakaya
of the buddhas is to be knownas having ﬁve characteristicsand, if condensed, ﬁve qualities:
It is uncr eated and totally indivisible.
The two extremes are completely abandoned.
It is deﬁnitively fr eed fr
om the three veils—
the mental poisons and the obstructionsto knowledge and meditative equipoise.It is unpolluted and not an [object of] thought.Being the ﬁeld of the yogis and the dharmadhatu,being by essence pur e, it is luminous clarity.
The svabhavikakaya truly hasthe ﬁnal and ultimate qualitiesof being unfathomable, countless,inconceivable, unequaled, and pur e.
Since it is vast, not to be number
ed,
not an object of reasoning, and unique,and since the r emaining traces ar
e eliminated,
it is in the same order unfathomable and so on.
It perfectly enjoys the various aspects of Dharma
and appears [in the form] of natural qualities.Corr esponding to the pure cause of its compassion,
the beneﬁt of sentient beings is uninterrupted.Totally without any thought and spontaneously
it wholly grants all wishes exactly as they ar
e
by miraculous powers, like a wish-fulﬁlling gem.It therefore fully abides in Perfect Enjoyment.Since the stream of verbal expression, display [of form],
50     Buddha Nature
and action [of mind] is uninterrupted and not a product,
and since it shows that it is not of the essence of these,it is taught here in ﬁve aspects, as “various” and so on.
Due to the various colors [of its background] a gem appears [in 
manifold colors],
[but] is not a thing fulﬁlling their function.
Likewise the All-Pervasive [Ones] appear due to the manifold con-
ditions [set by beings]
without being a thing fulﬁlling their function.
[The 
Supreme Nirmanakaya] knows the world and having gazed 
upon
all worldly [beings demonstrates] out of his great compassion
[twe
lve wondrous deeds]. Without moving away from the dhar-
makaya
he manifests thr ough various [aspects] of an illusory nature.
Having [ﬁrst] been born spontaneously in a [divine] existencehe then leaves the realm of T ushita and passes [into this world].
He enters [his mother
’s] womb, takes birth, and gains perfect skill,
mastering all the various ﬁelds of handicraft, science, and art.He mirthfully enjoys amusement among his spouse and her retinue.Feeling weariness and renunciation he practices as an ascetic.Then he goes to Awakening’s Heart and defeats the hosts of Mara.[He ﬁnds] perfect enlightenment and turns the wheel of Dharma.He passes into nirvana [the state beyond any torment and pain].Within all the [endless] ﬁelds totally infested with impurity
he shows these deeds as long as [beings] abide in existence.
With the wor ds “impermanent,” “suffering,” “selﬂess,” and “peace”
[the Buddhas] who know all means persuade sentient beings
to generate weariness with the thr ee r
ealms of existence
and to fully enter into the state beyond torment and pain.
Those who have perfectly followed the path of peace
believe that they have attained the state of nirvana.By the White Lotus of Dharma Sutra  and similar aspects
of his sacr ed teaching he explains the natur
e of phenomena.
Thus he causes them to refrain fr om their former belief,
 Root Text      51
to fully adopt skillful means and discriminative wisdom,
and gain maturity on the [path of the] supreme vehicle.
Then he grants them prophecy of their supreme enlightenment.Since [these kayas] constitute depth, best possible power,
and supreme guidance in tune with the aims of the children,they should be known in accordance with this numberas being deep, vast, and the embodiment of greatness.
Here the ﬁrst is the dharmakaya, 
and the latter are the form kayas.As the visible abides in space,the latter abide in the ﬁrst.
Ther e is permanence [since] the causes are endless and sentient be-
ings inexhaustible [in number].
They have compassionate love, miraculous power , knowledge, and 
utter [bliss].
They ar e masters of [all] qualities. The demon of death has been 
vanquished.
Being not of the essence [of the compounded] it is the [tr ue]  
pr
otector of all worldly [beings].
Having offered bodies, lives, and goods
they [pur ely] uphold the sacr
ed Dharma.
In order to beneﬁt all sentient beingsthey fulﬁll their vow as initially taken.Buddhahood supremely expresses itselfas compassion both cleansed and puriﬁed.Appearing on the feet of miraculous powersthey [can] act for ever by means of these.
By knowledge they are freed fr om the belief
ﬁxed on the duality of samsara and nirvana.They always possess the best possible blissof samadhi, beyond ideation [and end].While acting in the world [for other ’s good]
they ar
e unsullied by all worldly phenomena.
52     Buddha Nature
Free from dying, it is the attainment of peace.
In this sphere the demon of death cannot roam.The state of the Muni being of uncreated naturehas been fully paciﬁed since beginningless time.For all those who are bereft of permanent shelterit provides the most delightful refuge, and so on.
The ﬁrst seven reasons clarify
the permanence of the form kayas,while the latter thr ee illustrate
why the dharmakaya lasts forever.
It is not an object of speech and is embraced by the absolute.
It is not a ﬁeld for ideation and is beyond any example,unexcelled and not embraced by existence and peace.Even the noble cannot conceive the spher e of the Victor.
It is inconceivable since it cannot be verbally expr essed.
It is inexpr
essible since it consists of the absolute [truth].
It is absolute since it cannot be [intellectually] scrutinized.It is inscrutable since it cannot be inferentially deduced.It is not deducible since it is peerless, the highest of all.It is the highest of all since it is not comprised by anything.It is uncomprised since it does not dwell [on any extr eme].
This is because there is no dualistic idea of quality and fault.
For the [ﬁrst] ﬁve reasons the dharmakaya is subtle
and thus beyond the r each of thought. For the sixth
the form kayas ar
e inconceivable. [They show appearance]
but are not something that fulﬁls the function of this.
Since through peerless primordial wisdom, great compassion, and 
further attributes
all qualities ar e ﬁnally perfected, the Victor is inconceivable.
Thus the last mode of the Self-Sprung Ones is not even seen
by those Gr eat Sages who have r
eceived “the Empowerment [of 
Splendorous Light Rays].”
 Root Text      53
♦ This was the section “Enlightenment,” the second chapter of The 
Commentary on the Highest Continuity 
of the Mahayana Dharma which 
Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare and Sublime Ones.
CHAPTER  THREE
The Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
Beneﬁt for oneself and beneﬁt for others are equivalent
to the ultimate kaya and the relative kayas based upon it.Being the fruits of freedom and complete maturationthese are [endowed with] sixty-four types of qualities.
The abode adhering to [beneﬁt] for oneself
is the kaya being [wisdom’s] sacred object.The symbolic kaya of sages is the groundof best possible [beneﬁt] for other beings.The ﬁrst kaya has the qualities of freedom,which are the qualities of power and so on.The second has those of full maturation,which ar e the marks of a great being.
Power is like a vajra against the veil of unknowing.Fearlessness acts like a lion amidst [any] assembly.Like space are the unmixed features of the T athagata,
like a water
-moon the two facets of the Muni’s teaching.
Knowing what is worthwhile and worthless,knowing the ripening pr oduct of all action,
knowing faculties, temperaments, and wishes,knowing the path r eaching the entire range,
knowing meditative stability and so on—when it is afﬂicted or without pollution—
54     Buddha Nature
memory of past states, divine sight, and peace
are the ten aspects of the power of knowledge.
[Knowing] the worthwhile and worthless, complete ripening, the 
various temperaments, paths, and aspirations of beings,
their manifold faculties, the deﬁled and the utterly pure,  
remembrance of previous states [of existence], divine sight,
and [knowing] the way in which [all] pollution is exhausted  
piercingly destroys the armor of ignorance, fells its trees
and smashes its unshakable walls, laying them in utter r uin. Such 
power
, therefore, resembles an [indestructible] vajra.
Perfectly enlightened [in] all phenomena,
setting an end to [all] hindrances,teaching the path, and showing cessationare the four aspects of fearlessness.
Knowing and causing [others] to know all the different aspects of 
things that ar e to be known of oneself and others,
having abandoned and causing abandonment of all things that ar
e 
to be abandoned, having relied on what is to be relied upon,
having attained and causing attainment of the Peerless and Stainless 
to be attained,
they r elate their own truth to others. Thus the Great Sages ar e un
-
hindered anywhere.
The lord of animals is ever fearless to the far ends of the jungle,undauntedly r oaming amongst the [other] animals.
In [any] assembly the Lor
d of Munis is a lion as well,
remaining at ease, independent, stable, and endowed with skill.
There is no delusion and no idle talk.
The Teacher’s mindfulness is unimpaired.Never is his mind not resting evenly.There is no harboring of various ideas.There is no equanimity without analysis.His aspiration, diligence, mindfulness,and discriminative wisdom ar e unimpaired,
as are total r elease and its eye of wisdom.
All action is pr
eceded by primordial wisdom
and this is unobscured with regard to time.
 Root Text      55
Thus these eighteen features and others
are the unmixed qualities of the Teacher.
Delusion, idle talk, forgetfulness, mental agitation, ideation of dual-
ity, and indifferent equanimity:
the Sage does not have any of these. His aspiration, diligence, and 
mindfulness,
his utterly pur e and unstained discriminative wisdom, his constant 
total release,
and his primordial wisdom of liberation seeing all ﬁelds of the 
knowable do not suf fer any impairment.
His thr
ee activities are preceded [by primordial wisdom] and dis-
play themselves in its likeness.
He manifests his vast deﬁnitive knowing, always unhinder ed in its 
vision of the three times.
By such insight he is fearless and supremely turns the Gr eat Wheel 
of Pur
e Dharma for beings.
Endowment with great compassion and quintessence of victory are 
what all buddhas will ﬁnd.
The nature of any of the properties native to earth and so on is not 
the nature of space.
Any of the features of space, such as being non-obstructive and so 
on, is not a feature of the visible.
Earth, water, ﬁre, air, and space, being equally [elements], have 
something in common in the world.
The unmixed qualities and worldly 
beings have nothing in common, 
not even as much as a single atom.
His perfectly even [soles] ar e marked with wheels.
His feet are broad and his ankles ar e not visible.
His ﬁngers and toes ar
e long and the digits
of his hands and feet are entwined by a web.
His skin is soft and his ﬂesh remains youthful.His body has seven elevated and rounded parts.His calves are like those of an antelope andhis secret parts are hidden as are an elephant’s.His [mighty] torso is similar to that of a lion.[The hollow] between his clavicles is well ﬁlled.The curve of his shoulders is perfect and beautiful.
56     Buddha Nature
His hands and arms are rounded, soft, and even.
His arms are long and his utterly immaculate bodyis enfolded in the mandala of an aureole of light.His neck, unblemished [in hue], resembles a conch.His cheeks are like those of the king of all animals.His forty teeth are equal [in number in both his jaws].His teeth are supremely pure and most beautifully set.They are totally immaculate and aligned in even rows.The eye-teeth are of supreme and excellent whiteness.His tongue is long, his speech unlimited and inconceivable.His sense of taste is supr eme, and the Self-Sprung’s voice
is like the kalavinka’s call and the melody of Brahma.His pur e eyes are like blue lotuses, his eyelashes [dense]
as those of an ox. He has the stainless white urna hairembellishing his face and the ushnisha cr owning his head.
His skin is pure and delicate and of the color of gold.Extremely ﬁne and soft, each of the hairs on his bodycurls fr om one por
e to the right and upwards to his crown.
His immaculate hair resembles [in color] a deep-blue gem.Well-proportioned in stature like a perfect nyagrodha tree,the Great Sage who is all-good and without any examplehas an unbreakable body possessed of Narayana’s strength.These thirty-two marks, which one cannot conceive or graspand which ar e resplendent [in their brightness and beauty],
the Teacher has described as the signs of a lor d of humans.
Just as in autumn the form of the moon is seenin a cloudless sky and in the deep blue water of a lake,the form of the All-Embracing is seen by the V
ictor’s heirs 
in the perfect buddha mandala [and in the world].
These sixty-four qualities
each combined with its causeshould be known in their or der
to follow the Ratnadarikasutra.
Being unchangeable and never weakened,
dissimilar and unmoving, they ar e taught
by the examples of the vajra, the lion,space, and the moon in sky and water .
 Root Text      57
Of the powers, six powers, three, and one,
in this sequence, have totally dispelled
[the veils of] knowledge and meditation,along with that of the r emaining imprints.
Resembling armor, a wall, and a tree,they wer e pier
ced, shattered, and felled.
Being ﬁrm, essential, steadfast, and unchangeablethe powers of the Great Sage are similar to a vajra.Why are they ﬁrm? Because they are essential.Why essential? Because they are steadfast.Why steadfast? Because they are unchangeable.Being unchangeable, they are like a vajra.
Since he is not intimidated, is independent,
stable, and [possessed of] best possible skill,the Muni is like a lion. The Lion [of Mankind]does not have fear in any assembly whatever .
Knowing everything directly, he always r emains
totally fearless of anyone, no matter of whom.Seeing that even pur e beings ar
e not his equal,
he is unimpressed and not daunted [by others].His mind being one-pointed as to all phenomena,[his samadhi] is the quintessence of stability .
He possesses skill, having crossed the earthof the latencies of unknowing, ever so [subtle].
The understanding of worldly beings, of listeners,
of biased practitioners, of those who have insight,and of self-spr ung buddhas getting ever subtler
and progressively r eﬁned, ther
e are ﬁve similes:
Sustaining the life of all worldly beings, [buddhas]are likened to earth and water and to ﬁre and air.
Away fr
om the features of the worldly and of those
being beyond the world, they are similar to space.
So the dharmakaya fully divides
into these thirty-two qualities,indivisible like a pr ecious gem
58     Buddha Nature
in its light, radiance, and shape.
Granting satisfaction whenever they are seen,
the qualities called “the thirty-two [marks]”adhere to two kayas, being the illusory kayaand the kaya perfectly rejoicing in Dharma.
Those far from and close to purity [see them]
as the mandalas of the world and the V ictor
,
like the form of the moon in water and sky.Thus these [kayas] are beheld in two ways.
♦ This was the section “Qualities,” the third chapter of The Commentary 
 Root Text      59
on the Highest Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma which Analyzes the 
Disposition of the Rare and Sublime Ones.
CHAPTER  FOUR
The Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
An All-Embracing One always has spontaneous accessto the disciples’ temperaments, the means of training,the [various] trainings that suit their temperaments,and to seeking them wher ever they are, at the right time.
Having multitudes of supremely pr ecious qualities and the waters 
of the ocean of primor
dial wisdom, possessing the sunlight of 
merit and wisdom,
it is the deﬁ nitive accomplishment of all vehicles without exception. 
[Enlightenment] is vast, without middle or end, and thus all-per -
vasive like space.
Fully seeing that buddhahood, the tr easure of the unpolluted quali-
ties, is [pr esent] within all sentient beings without the slightest 
distinction,
the wind of the Buddhas’ sublime compassion totally dispels the 
clouds of afﬂictions and hindrances to knowledge, which have spun their net about it.
For whom? How? By which training?Wher e? and When? Since ideation
as to such [questions] does not occur
,
the Muni always [acts] spontaneously.
The temperaments of the disciples,
which of the many means for each,which training at what place and time:
60     Buddha Nature
[He is not mistaken as to any of] these.
Since, with regard to the deﬁnitive revelation of release,
its support, its fruit, those being fully sustained, their obscurations, and the condition cutting these veils,there is no ideation, [buddha activity is uninterrupted].
The ten levels deﬁnitively reveal r elease.
The two accumulations pr
ovide their cause.
Supreme enlightenment is the fruit of these.Enlightenment in beings is fully sustained.These ar e obscured by the endless afﬂictions,
the secondary afﬂictions, and the latencies.A buddha’s gr eat compassion is the condition
that, at all times, vanquishes these [veils].
These six points: being similar
to an ocean, the sun, space,a treasur
e, clouds, and wind
are to be grasped accor dingly
.
Holding wisdom’s waters and qualitieslike gems, the levels ar e like an ocean.
Closely sustaining all sentient beings,the two accumulations ar e like the sun.
Being vast and without any middle or end,enlightenment is like the element of space.Genuine perfect awakening is dharmata,hence beings’ natur e is like a treasure.
Adventitious, pervasive, and not existent,its afﬂictions ar e like a host of clouds.
Always ready to dispel these [afﬂictions],compassion is similar to a merciless wind.
Their r elease [is accomplished] for the sake of others.
They see the equality of themselves and sentient beings
and their activity is not completed to its full extent.Thus their deeds will never cease while samsara exists.
A tathagata is similar to Indra,
to the dr
um [of the gods], clouds,
to Brahma, the sun, a precious gem,
 Root Text      61
to an echo, to space, and the earth.
If the surface of the ground here changed
into the nature of immaculate lapis lazuli,because of its purity one would see in itthe [appearance of] the Lord of All Godswith his following of many young goddesses.One would see his sublimely beautiful palace“the All-Victorious” and other divine abodes,
the gods’ various palaces and manifold wealth.
Once the assembly of men and women
who inhabit the surface of the earthsaw this appearance, each would say:“Befor e a long time passes, may I too
become like this Lord of the Gods!”Prayers like these they would utterand to achieve this feat would adoptgenuine virtue and r emain within it.
“This is just an appearance!” There would not beany such understanding. Still their virtuous deedswould lead them to be reborn in a divine existenceafter they departed from the surface of the earth.These appearances are totally fr ee fr
om ideation
and do not involve the slightest movement at all.Ther e is nothing of this kind, and yet nevertheless
they are accompanied by great beneﬁt on the earth.
Those endowed with unpolluted faith and so forth,
having cultivated the qualities of faith and so on,will see in their own minds the Buddha’s appearance,which is perfect and has special signs and marks.They will see the Buddha while he is walking,while he is standing, sitting, or r esting in sleep.
They will see him in manifold forms of conduct:when explaining the teaching leading to peace,when silently r esting in meditative equipoise,
or when displaying various forms of miracles.Possessed of gr eat splendor and magniﬁcence,
62     Buddha Nature
[the Buddha] will be seen by all sentient beings.
Once having seen this, they too will wish
to fully join what is named “buddhahood,”and adopting its causes in a genuine waythey will attain the state they longed for.
These appearances are totally free fr om ideation
and do not involve the slightest movement at all.
Ther e is nothing of this kind, and yet nevertheless
they ar
e accompanied by great beneﬁt in the world.
“This is the appearance of my own mind.”Worldly beings do not have such insight.
Yet, their seeing of this visible kayawill become meaningful for these beings.Relying on gradually beholding this form,all those who follow the [Gr eat] Vehicle
will see their genuine inner dharmakayaby means of the eye of primor dial wisdom.
If the whole earth became rid of fearful placesand turned into an even surface of lapis lazulithat was ﬂawless, radiant, and beautiful,having a gem’s qualities and unstained luster ,
various divine abodes and the form of their Lor
d
would shine forth within it because of its purity .
Then, as the earth gradually lost these pr operties,
they would be invisible again and appear no mor
e.
Yet, for their real attainment the men and womenwould side with the vows of individual release,with penitence, authentic giving, and so forth,scattering ﬂowers and so on with longing minds.
Likewise, to attain the state of a Lor d of Munis shining forth in their 
minds, which is similar to pure lapis lazuli,
the heirs of the Victor , their vision ﬁlled with sheer delight, give rise 
to bodhichitta in the most perfect manner
.
Just as mirrored by the puriﬁed lapis lazuli ground
the physical appearance of the Lord of Gods is seen,
 Root Text      63
likewise the kaya of the Lord of Munis is reﬂected 
in the puriﬁed ground of sentient beings’ minds.
Whether these reﬂections will rise or set in beingsowes to their own minds being sullied or unstained.Like the form [of Lor d Indra] appearing in the worlds,
they are not to be viewed as “existent” or “extinct.”
By the power of the gods’ former virtue
the Dharma drum [arose] among them.Involving no effort, origin, or thought,no vibration and no intention at all,the dr um resounds again and again
with “impermanence” and “suffering,”“non-existence of self” and “peace,”admonishing all the car eless gods.
Likewise, though free from ef fort and so on,
the buddha speech of the 
All-Pervading Ones
permeates sentient beings without exception,teaching Dharma to those of karmic fortune.
Just as the sound of the dr um arises
among the gods from their own deeds,
the Dharma spoken by the Muni arisesin the world from beings’ own deeds.Just as the sound [of the drum] accomplishes peacewithout ef fort, origin, visible form, or intention,
likewise the Dharma causes accomplishment of peacewithout deliberate ef fort or any other such feature.
The sound of the drum in the city of the gods acts as the cause, 
yielding the gift of undauntedness and granting them victory
over the host of the asuras, when these, driven by their poisons, 
make war upon them, and it dispels the gods’ r eveling in play.
Likewise, arising in 
the worlds from the cause of meditative stability, 
formless dimension, and so on, it expresses the mode
of the unsurpassable path, which will fully overcome all afﬂiction 
and suffering and thus lead all sentient beings to peace.
Universal, of beneﬁt, bestowing bliss,and endowed with threefold miracle,the Muni’s melody is by far superior
64     Buddha Nature
to the cymbals treasured by the gods.
The mighty sound of the drum in the divine realms
does not reach the ears of those dwelling on earth,whereas the drumming sound of Buddha’s [speech]even reaches the subterranean worlds of samsara.Millions of divine cymbals resound among the godsto set the ﬁre of lust ablaze and to fan its ﬂames.The single melody of Those of Compassionate Beingmanifests to fully quench all the ﬁr es of suffering.
The beautiful and bewitching sound of the cymbalscauses among the gods incr ease of their distraction,
whereas the speech of the compassionate Tathagataexhorts [us] to r eﬂect and commits the mind to samadhi.
Any cause of happiness for earthly beings and godsin whichever spher e of the world without exception,
brieﬂy spoken, fully depends upon this melodythat pervades all the worlds, not forsaking one.
Without [an intact sense of] hearing
one cannot experience subtle sound,
and all [its manifold variations]do not even r
each the ears of a god.
Likewise, as the ﬁeld of experienceof the very ﬁnest primor dial wisdom, 
the subtle Dharma only reaches the earof someone whose mind is rid of poison.
The monsoon clouds in summertime
continuously and without any ef fort
pour down their vast masses of water,causing on earth the best possible crops.Just so, fr om the cloud of compassion
the rain of the V
ictor’s pure teaching
pours down its waters without ideation,causing a harvest of virtue for beings.
Just as the wind-born clouds cause rain to fall
when the worldly beings follow the path of virtue,from the buddha cloud called by compassion’s wind,
pure Dharma rains to nurture the virtue of beings.
 Root Text      65
Through great knowledge and compassionate love with regard  
to existence
it abides in the midst of space unsullied by change and  
non-change.
Holding the essence of the unpolluted waters of dharani and sama -
dhi,
the cloud of the Lor d of Munis is the cause of the harvest of virtue.
Water that is cool, delicious, soft,
and light when it falls from the cloudsacquir es on earth very many tastes
by touching salty and other gr
ounds.
When the waters of the noble eightfold [path]rain fr om the heart of the vast cloud of love,
they will also acquire many kinds of tastesby the differ ent gr
ounds of beings’ make-up.
Those of devotion towards the supreme vehicle,those who are neutral, and those with animosityare three groups [of beings] who are similarto humans, peacocks, and craving spirits.
At the end of spring, when ther e are no clouds, human beings and 
the birds that rar ely ﬂy
[ar
e unhappy or neutral, respectively]. When rain is falling in sum-
mertime, the craving spirits suffer.
Similar to this example, the arising and non-arising of the Dharma-
rain fr om the host of clouds of compassion
also [leads to opposite reactions] in worldly beings who long for 
Dharma or are hostile to it, r espectively
.
When releasing a deluge of heavy drops or hurling down hailstones 
and thunderbolts,
a cloud does not heed any tiny beings or those who have sought 
shelter in the hills.
Likewise the cloud of knowledge and love does not heed whether 
its vast and subtle dr ops
will purify the afﬂictions or [increase] dormant tendencies towards 
holding the view of a self.
66     Buddha Nature
In this cycle of beginningless birth and death ﬁve paths are open for 
sentient beings to tread.
Just as no sweet scent is found in excrement, no happiness will be 
found among the ﬁve types of beings.
Their suffering resembles the continuous pain arising from ﬁre and 
weapons, or [from a wound] being touched by salt, and so on.
The great rain of sacred Dharma pours down in cascades from the 
cloud of compassion, fully soothing and appeasing this [pain].
“[Even] gods have the suf fering of death and transmigration, and 
man suffers from desperate strife!” Realizing this,
those endowed with discriminative wisdom have no desir e for even 
the highest [state] of a lor
d of humans or gods.
There is wisdom [from the past] and they faithfully follow the sub-
lime wor ds of the Tathagata,
so insight makes them see: “This is suffering! This is its cause! And 
this is cessation of misery!”
In the case of disease, one needs to diagnose it, r emove its cause,
attain the happy state [of health], and r
ely on suitable medicine;
similarly one needs to recognize suf fering, r
emove its cause,
come in touch with its cessation, and rely on the suitable path.
Just like the way in which Brahma,
without departing fr om his abode,
effortlessly shows his appearancein all the residences of the gods,without moving fr om dharmakaya
the Muni ef
fortlessly demonstrates
illusory appearances in every realmto beings who have karmic fortune.
When Brahma, never departing fr om his palace, has manifested in 
the desire realm, he is seen by the gods.
This vision incites them to emulate him and to abandon their delight 
in [sensuous] objects.
Similarly , without moving from dharmakaya, the Sugata is seen in 
all spheres of this world
by beings of karmic fortune. This vision incites them to emulate him 
and to dispel all their pollution.
 Root Text      67
By his own former wishing prayers
and the power of the virtue of the godsBrahma appears without deliberate effort.So does the self-sprung illusory kaya.
He moves from [T ushita] and enters the womb, gets born, and goes 
to his father
’s palace.
He enjoys amusement and then seeks solitude, undergoes austerity, 
and defeats all evils.
[In Bodhgaya] he ﬁnds gr eat enlightenment and shows the path to 
the citadel of peace.
The Muni, having shown [these deeds], becomes invisible to those 
of no karmic fortune.
When the sun blazes down, lotuses and so on open
while simultaneously kumuta ﬂowers totally close.On th
e beneﬁt and fault of the water-born ﬂowers’ opening and clos-
ing
the sun does not shed any thought. The sun of the Noble acts like -
wise.
As the sun shining its own lightsimultaneously and without thoughtmakes lotus ﬂowers open their petalsand brings ripening to other [cr ops],
so the sun of the Tathagata manifests,shedding its rays of the sacred Dharmaon the lotus-like beings to be trainedwithout harboring any thought or idea.
By the dharmakaya and the visible kayas
the sun of omniscience rises in the sky ,
which is the very heart of enlightenment,to shed light beams of wisdom on beings.
In all disciples, as in water vessels,
simultaneously the sun of the Sugatais mirr ored in countless reﬂections
owing to the purity [of these beings].
68     Buddha Nature
[From] within the space of dharmadhatu,
which continuously pervades everything,the buddha sun shines on the disciples[like] on mountains, as merited by each.
Just as the rising sun with thousands of far -reaching beams
illuminates all the worlds and then gradually sheds its light
on the highest mountains, then the medium-sized, and the small,the buddha sun gradually shines on the assembly of beings.
The sun does not radiate to the depth of space in every ﬁ eld, nor  
can it show
the meaning of the knowable [to those] conﬁned to the darkness of 
unknowing.
Appearing in clarity thr ough a multitude of light emitting various 
colors,
Those of Compassionate Natur e show the meaning of the knowable 
to beings.
When a buddha goes to the city [of the disciples], people without 
eyes become sighted.
Being fr eed fr om all meaningless things they see the meaningful and 
experience [happiness].
When blinded by delusion they fall into existence’s sea and ar e 
wrapped in the darkness of views,
the light of the buddha sun illumines their vision and they see the 
very point they never saw befor e.
A wish-fulﬁlling gem, though free fr om thought,
grants all those who dwell in its ﬁeld of activity
each of their desir
es simultaneously,
doing so in the most perfect manner.Likewise beings of different ways of thinking,when they rely on the wish-fulﬁlling Buddha,will hear various kinds of teachings,though he generates no ideas of these.
As a pr ecious gem, which is free from thought, fully bestows
the desir ed riches on others, doing so without any ef
fort,
the Muni always stays for others’ sake, as merited by each
 Root Text      69
and as long as existences last, doing so without any effort.
The good jewel lying underground or in the ocean
is very hard to ﬁnd for beings wanting it.Likewise, one should understand that beings held in the grip of the 
poisons,
and whose karmic gifts ar e poor, will hardly see the Sugata in their 
minds.
Just as the sound of an echo arisesdue to the per ception of others,
without thought or purposeful laborand neither abiding without or within,so the speech of the T athagata arises
due to the per ception of others,
without thought or purposeful laborand neither abiding without or within.
Space is nothing at all and does not appear .
It is neither an object [of the senses] nor a support.
It is totally beyond being a path for the eye.It has no form and is not to be demonstrated.Nevertheless it is seen as being high and low ,
but it is not at all like that.Likewise all [his appearances] ar e seen as Buddha,
but he is not at all like that.
Everything that gr ows fr
om the earth
will incr ease and become ﬁrm and vast
on the support of its thought-fr ee soil.
Likewise, r
elying on the Perfect Buddha,
who [like] the earth is free from thought,
every root of virtue of sentient beingswithout exception will ﬂourish and grow.
It is not obvious that one could act
without exerting deliberate ef fort.
Therefore nine examples ar e taught
to cut the doubts of the disciples.
70     Buddha Nature
The place where these nine examples
were explained in very great detailis the sutra which through its very nameteaches their necessity and purpose.Adorned with the far -reaching light
of knowledge arisen from hearing it,those of insight will quickly enterthe ﬁeld of experience of a buddha.
This point is made clear in the nine examples
of Indra’s r eﬂection in lapis lazuli and so on.
Their concise meaning, when grasped precisely,is to [illustrate] display [of physical form],speech, and the all-pervasiveness [of mind],illusory emanation, radiation of wisdom,the secr et aspects of body, speech, and mind,
and the fact that compassion itself is attained.
All str eams of effort being fully appeased
and the mind being free fr om all ideation
is similar to Indra’s r
eﬂection appearing
within stainless lapis lazuli and so forth.
Appeasement of ef fort is the proposition;
mind free fr om ideation its justiﬁcation.
In or
der to establish the meaning of this nature
the similes of Indra’s form and so on are given.
Here the meaning of the chapter is as follows:
The nine aspects of physical display and so on[show] that the T eacher has no birth and death,
and yet perfectly manifests without any effort.
Something that, similar to Indra, the drum, clouds, Brahma,
the sun, the pr ecious king of wish-granting gems, an echo, space,
and the earth, ef
fortlessly and as long as existence may last
fulﬁls others’ beneﬁt is only conceived of by [supreme] yogis.
[Kayas] are displayed like the Lord of Gods appearing [in] the gem.
Explanation being well bestowed resembles the drum of the gods.With cloud-hosts of insight and deep concern, the All-Embracingpervades the limitless number of beings up to existence’s peak.
 Root Text      71
Like Brahma, not moving from his sphere devoid of pollution,
he perfectly displays a manifold number of illusory appearances.Like a sun, primordial wisdom perfectly radiates its brilliance.Buddha mind resembles a pure and pr ecious wish-fulﬁlling jewel.
Buddha speech has no letters, like an echo r
esounding from rock.
Similar to space, his body is pervasive, formless, and permanent.Like the earth, a buddha is the gr ound holding without exception
and in any way all medicinal herbs of beings’ unstained qualities.
The cause for the Buddha to be seen in the mind
similar to pure lapis lazuliis the purity of this gr ound,
[achieved] by a ﬁrm faculty of irreversible faith.Since virtue arises and ceases,the form of a buddha arises and ceases.Like Indra, the Muni who is dharmakayais free from arising and ceasing.
Effortlessly , like [Indra] he manifests his deeds,
displaying [physical appearance] and so forth,fr
om birthless and deathless dharmakaya
for as long as samsaric existence may last.
The condensed meaning of the examples is [contained] her ein.
Their order is also [not arbitrary], as they are abandoned such
that pr operties not in tune ar
e eliminated
[progressing] from the former to the latter.
A buddha is like the reﬂection, and yet dissimilar,
since the reﬂection is not endowed with his melody.He is like the drum of the gods, and yet dissimilar,since the drum does not bring beneﬁt everywhere.He is similar to a vast cloud, and yet dissimilar,since a cloud does not eliminate worthless seeds.He is like the mighty Brahma, and yet dissimilar ,
since Brahma does not continuously cause maturity.He is like the orb of the sun, and yet dissimilar,since the sun does not always over come darkness.
He is like a wish-granting gem, and yet dissimilar
,
since the gem’s appearance is not so rarely found.He is similar to an echo, and yet dissimilar,
72     Buddha Nature
since an echo arises from cause and condition.
He is similar to space, and yet dissimilar,since space is not a ground of pure virtue.Being the lasting basis for every goodness,the best possible for all without exception,for worldly beings and those beyond the world,[activity] is similar to the mandala of earth.Because based upon all buddhas’ enlightenment,the path beyond the world will arise, as willthe path of virtuous deeds, mental stability , and
the immeasurable and formless contemplations.
♦ This was the section “Unfolding the Activity of the Tathagata,” the 
fourth chapter of The Commentary on the Highest Continuity of the Ma-
 Root Text      73
hayana Dharma which Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare and Sublime 
Ones.
CHAPTER  FIVE
Benefit
Buddha element, buddha awakening,buddha qualities, and buddha activitycannot be thought, not even by puriﬁed beings.They ar e the ﬁeld of experience of their guides.
Those of insight who have devotion to this buddha domainwill become vessels for the multitude of all buddha qualities,while those truly delighting in these inconceivable propertieswill exceed in merit [the good actions of] all sentient beings.
Someone striving for enlightenment may turn to the Dharma kings, 
offering golden ﬁelds adorned with gems
of equal [number] to the atoms in the buddhaﬁelds, and may con-
tinue doing so every day .
Another may just hear a word of this, and upon hearing it become 
ﬁlled with devotion.
He will attain merits far greater and mor e manifold than the virtue 
spr
ung from this practice of giving.
An intelligent person wishing for enlightenment may by body, 
speech, and mind
guar d a ﬂawless moral conduct and do so effortlessly, even thr ough 
many eons.
Another may just hear a wor d of this, and upon hearing it become 
ﬁlled with devotion.
He will attain merits far gr
eater and more manifold than the virtue 
74     Buddha Nature
sprung from this discipline.
Someone here may ﬁnally achieve the divine meditative stabilities 
and Brahma’s abode, thus quenching all afﬂiction’s ﬁre
with
in the three realms of existence, and may cultivate these as a means 
to reach unchanging and perfect enlightenment.
Another may just hear a word of this, and upon hearing it become 
ﬁlled with devotion.
He will attain merits far greater and more manifold than the virtue 
sprung from this meditation.
Why [is it so beneﬁcial]? Generosity only yields wealth,
discipline leads to the higher states of existence, and meditation 
removes afﬂiction.
Discriminative wisdom fully abandons all afﬂictions and  
[hindrances to] knowledge.
It is ther efore supreme, and its cause is studying these.
The pr esence [of the element], its r
esult,
its qualities, and the achievement of beneﬁtare the objects of understanding of a buddha.When towards these four, as explained above,one of understanding is ﬁlled with devotionto their presence, ability, and qualities,he will be quickly endowed with the fortuneby which one attains the state of a tathagata.
Those who r ealize: “This inconceivable object is present
and someone like me can attain it;
its attainment will hold such qualities and endowment”will aspir e to it, ﬁlled with faith.
Thus becoming vessels of all qualities,such as longing, diligence, mindfulness,meditative stability , wisdom, and so on,
bodhichitta will be ever-present in them.
[Bodhichitta] being ever -pr
esent in them
the heirs of the Victor will not fall back.
The perfection of merit will be reﬁneduntil being transformed into total purity.Once these ﬁve perfections of meritare not ideated in threefold division,they will become perfect and fully pure,
 Root Text      75
as their opposite facets are abandoned.
The merit of generosity arises from giving,
that of morality arises from moral conduct.The two aspects of patience and meditative stabilitystem fr om meditation, and diligence accompanies all.
Whatever ideates [in terms of] the three circlesis viewed as the veil of the hindrances to knowledge.Whatever is the impulse of avarice and so onis to be r egarded as the veil of the mental poisons.
Since apart from discriminative wisdomthere is no other cause to r
emove these [veils],
this discriminative wisdom is supreme.Its ground being study, such study is supreme.
Based on the trustworthy words of the Buddha and on  
scriptur es of logic,
I have explained this for the sole purpose
of purifying myself and supporting all thosewhose understanding has the best of virtue and devotion.
As someone with eyes sees by r elying on a lamp,
or on lightning, a jewel, the sun, or the moon,
this has been truly explained by relying on the Muni,brilliant in meaning, words, phenomena, and power .
Whatever speech is meaningful and well connected with Dharma,which r emoves all afﬂictions of the thr
ee realms
and shows the beneﬁt of the [attainment] of peace,is the speech of the Sage, while any dif fer
ent speech is other.
Whatever someone has explained with undistracted mind,exclusively in the light of the V ictor’s teaching,
and conducive to the path of attaining release,one should place on one’s head as the wor ds of the Sage.
Ther
e is no one in this world more skilled in Dharma than the Vic-
tor.
No other has such insight, knowing everything without exception 
[and knowing] supr eme thatness the way it is.
Thus one should not 
distort the sutras presented by the Sage him-
self,
76     Buddha Nature
since this would destroy the Muni’s manner [of teaching] and fur-
thermore cause harm to the sacred Dharma.
Those blinded by poisons [and possessed of] the nature of ignorance
revile the noble ones and despise the teachings they have spoken.
Since all this stems fr
om a ﬁxated view, mind should not be joined 
with polluted vision.
Clean cloth is totally transformed by color , but never is cloth [to be 
treated] with oil.
Due
 to a feeble intellect, lack of striving for virtue, reliance on false 
pride,
a nature obscured by neglect of pure Dharma, taking the provisional 
for the deﬁnitive meaning—for thatness, craving for proﬁt,
being under the sway of [inferior] views, relying on those  
disappr oving [of Dharma], staying away from those who uphold 
the teachings,
and due to mean devotion, the teachings of the Foe-V anquishers are 
abandoned.
Skillful beings must not be as deeply afraid of ﬁr e and cruel  
poisonous snakes,
of mur der
ers or lightning, as they should be of the loss of the pro-
found Dharma.
Fire, snakes, enemies, and thunderbolts [can] only separate us  
from this life,
but cannot take us to the utterly fearful states of [the hells] of  
direst pain.
Even someone who has r
elied on evil friends again and again and 
thus heeded harmful intentions towards a buddha,
who has committed one of the most heinous acts—killing his father , 
mother , or an ar
hat, or splitting the sublime Assembly—
will be quickly released from these, once genuinely reﬂecting the 
dharmata.
But wher e would liberation be for someone whose mind is hostile to 
Dharma?
Having pr operly explained the seven [vajra] points of the jewels, the 
utterly pure element,
ﬂawless enlightenment, qualities, and activity, may any virtue I 
harvest fr om this
lead all sentient beings to see the Lor
d of Boundless Life who is 
 Root Text      77
endowed with Inﬁnite Light.
Upon seeing, may their stainless Dharma-eye open and may they 
reach highest enlightenment.
On what basis, for what reason, and in what way
[this has been given], what it explainsand what cause is conducive [to understanding it]have been taught by means of four stanzas.Two stanzas [show] the means to purify oneself
and one [shows] the cause of deterioration.Ther eupon, by means of two further stanzas
the fruit [spr ung fr om deterioration] is explained.
[Being born] in the mandala of a buddha’s r
etinue,
attaining patience and [then] enlightenment:expressing these qualities, the two aspects of fruit
are explained by the last in a summarized way .
78     Buddha Nature
Jamgön Kongtrül Lodrö Thayé
 Chapter Title      79
PART TWO
Commentary: The Unassailable 
Lion’s Roar
80     Buddha Nature
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      81
♦ This was the section “Beneﬁt,” the ﬁfth chapter of The Commentary 
on the Highest Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma which Analyzes the 
Disposition of the Rare and Sublime Ones.
Table of Contents
A. Part One: Introduction [not translated ]
B. Part Two: Words and meaning of the actual text expanded in 
detail
B.
I. 
Title and salutation corresponding to the meaning [ not trans-
lated ]
B.I.1. Title [not translated ]
B.I.1.1. Combination of the two languages [not translated ]
B.I.1.2. Explanation of their meaning [
not translated]
B.I.2. Salutation of the translator
B.II. The actual commentary, which has supreme meaningB.II.1. Presentation of the body of the textB.II.1.1. Explanation of the body of the commentary as consisting of 
seven vajra points
B.II.1.2. Refer ence to the sutras constituting their source
B.II.1.3. Explanation of their sequence by means of the given or der
B.II.2. Detailed explanation of the partsB.II.2.1. Detailed explanation of the Thr ee Jewels as being what is to 
be attained
B.II.2.1.1. The Buddha who is the teacherB.II.2.1.1.1. Pr
esentation of the natur e of the Buddha by means of a 
praise
B.II.2.1.1.2. Explanation of the meaning of the praise presented in 
82     Buddha Nature
categories
B.II.2.1.1.3. Detailed explanation by combining the praise and its 
meaning
B.II.2.1.2. The Dharma that is his teaching
B.II.2.1.2.1. Presentation of the subject matter by means of a praiseB.II.2.1.2.2. Explanation of the meaning of the praise presented in 
categories
B.II.2.1.2.3. Summary of the categories in terms of the truth of cessa-
tion and the truth of the path
B.II.2.1.2.4. Explanation of the reasons by combining the praise and 
its meaning
B.II.2.1.3. The essence of the 
Sangha whose members hold this teach-
ing
B.II.2.1.3.1. Presentation of the subject matter by means of a praiseB.II.2.1.3.2. The Sangha is established as having two or six qualities B.II.2.1.3.3. Detailed explanation by combining the praise and the 
presentation of the qualities
B.II.2.1.3.3.1. Explanation of the way they r ealize correctly
B.II.2.1.3.3.2. Explanation of the way they r ealize completely
B
.II.2.1.3.3.3. Explanation of the particularity of complete puriﬁca-
tion
B.II.2.1.3.3.4. Explanation of its being a sublime r efuge
B.II.2.1.4. Explanation of the three kinds of refugeB.II.2.1.4.1. The necessity to pr esent thr
ee types of refuge
B.II.2.1.4.2. Explanation of which is the ultimate refuge and which 
are not
B.II.2.1.4.3. Explanation of the meaning of the name “rare and sub-
lime”
B.II.2.2. Detailed explanation of the last four points describing the 
way the Thr ee Jewels are attained
B.II.2.2.1. General explanation of the four points considered togetherB.II.2.2.1.1. Explanation of the four points as being the object of 
perception of a buddha
B.II.2.2.1.2. Explanation that they ar
e inconceivable
B.II.2.2.1.3. Explanation why they are inconceivableB.II.2.2.1.4. Summary of the way r ealization takes place, by  
presenting the four points in terms of cause and conditions
B
.II
.2.2.2. Speciﬁc explanation of the four points considered sepa-
rately
B.II.2.2.2.1. The element is what needs to be r ealized
B.II.2.2.2.1.1. Short explanation of the meaning of the element
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      83
B.II.2.2.2.1.2. Detailed explanation of the intended meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.1. Short explanation by means of a brief surveyB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2. Detailed classiﬁcation of the meaning of the brief 
survey
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1. Essence and causeB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.1. Joint explanation of what is to be puriﬁed and the 
means of puriﬁcation
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2. Separate explanation of the essence of each
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2.1. The essence being what is to be puriﬁedB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2.2. The cause being the means of puriﬁcationB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2.2.1. The way the four veils to be abandoned ar e 
given up
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2.2.2. The way to become an heir of the Victorious 
One by means of the antidote
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2. Fruit and functionB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.1. Joint explanation of what is to be attained and 
what causes attainment
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2. Separate explanation of the essence of eachB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.1. The fruit being what is to be attainedB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.1.1. The way to eliminate whatever is incorr ect and 
thus needs to be abandoned
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.1.2. The way a fourfold fruit is attained by  
abandonment
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.1.3. The way this attainment liberates one fr om the 
two extremes
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.2. The function being what causes attainmentB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.2.1. Explanation of the disposition’s function by 
means of the contrary
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.2.2. Explanation of the particular feature being the 
power of the disposition by means of deduction
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3. EndowmentB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3.1. Joint explanation of the 
qualities of cause and fruit
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3.2. Particular explanation of the individual essence  
of each
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3.2.1. Endowment in terms of the causeB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3.2.2. Endowment in terms of the fruit
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.4. ManifestationB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.4.1. Short explanation of the reasonB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.4.2. Detailed explanation of the reasonB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.5. PhasesB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.5.1. The way a name is attached to three phases
84     Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.5.2. The way these three names contain six topics
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.6. All-pervasivenessB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.6.1. Explanation of the essenceB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.6.2. Explanation of the different typesB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7. Unchangingness
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.1. Concise explanation of the essenceB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2. Detailed explanation of unchangingness thr ough-
out the three phases
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1. Unchangingness in the unpuriﬁed phaseB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.1. The way the essence is not polluted by the 
deﬁlements
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.2. The way there is appearance of arising and 
disintegration as far as the subject is concerned
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.3. The way the tr ue state is not harmed by de-
struction
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4. Detailed explanation of interdependent origi-
nation
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1. Explanation of the way generation takes 
place, by combining an example and its meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1.1. ExampleB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1.3. Joint explanation of the example and its 
meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1.4. The way generation takes placeB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.2. Explanation that the essence is undeﬁ led 
and free from extremes
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.2.1. The way the essence is fr
ee from arising 
and cessation
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.2.2. The way its purity is not touched by deﬁ le-
ments
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.3. Summary of the example and meaning of 
arising and disintegration
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.3.1. Summary of the way the natur e of mind is 
free from arising and disintegration
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.3.2. Summary of the way disintegration takes 
place
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2. Unchangingness in the partly unpuriﬁ ed and 
partly puriﬁed phase
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1. Explanation of the fact that there is no change 
through birth and so forth
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1.1. The way bodhisattvas appear as being sub -
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      85
ject to change although they are not
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1.2. Detailed explanation of the foregoing 
section’s meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1.2.1. The way bodhisattvas are not subject to the 
change caused by suffering
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1.2.2. The way they appear as being subject to 
change out of their compassion
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2. Identiﬁ cation of the qualities of the heirs of 
the Victorious One who dwell on the ten bodhisattva levels
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.1. The qualities of a bodhisattva who has ﬁrst 
given rise to bodhichitta
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.2. The qualities of a bodhisattva who has 
gained access to supr eme conduct
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.3. The qualities of a bodhisattva who has at-
tained the level of non-r eturning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.4. The qualities of a bodhisattva who has 
r
eached the last birth
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.5. Explanation of the dif ference as far as the 
accomplishment of the two beneﬁts is concerned
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3. Unchangingness in the utterly puriﬁ ed phase
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.1. Concise explanation of the r
eason for its un-
changingness
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2. Detailed explanation of its meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.1. Pr esentation of freedom from birth and so 
forth in terms of statement and pr oof
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.1.1. Concise explanation of each individuallyB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.1.2. Detailed explanation combining themB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.2. Summary of its meaningB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.3. E
xpl
anation of the reason for its establishment 
as being permanent and so forth
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8. Inseparability of the qualitiesB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.1. Short explanation by means of namesB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2. Detailed explanation of their essenceB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.1. Detailed explanation of the synonymous namesB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.1.1. The fact that the 
names have been given due to 
the meaning [of the dharmadhatu]
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.1.2. Combination of the names and the meaningB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.2. Detailed explanation of their essential meaningB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.2.1. Detailed explanation of the fact [that a buddha 
and nirvana] ar e no different
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.2.2. Detailed explanation of the meaning of libera -
tion
86     Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3. Detailed explanation of these by means of ex-
amples
B.II.
2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.1. The ﬁctitious example of the painters 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.1.1. Example
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.1.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.2. Explanation by means of the non-ﬁctitious 
example of the sun
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.2.1. Presentation of the corr esponding qualities
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.2.2. Explanation of buddhahood as being nirvanaB.II.2.2.2.1.2.3. Summary of the meaning of the explanation B.
II.
2.2.2.1.3. Explanation of the way the deﬁlements are to be puriﬁed 
though the essence is unchanging, by means of examples
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.1. Concise summaryB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2. Explanation of the nature of the Victorious One and 
the deﬁlements by means of nine examples
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.1. Concise explanationB.II.
2.2.2.1.3.2.1.1. What is obscured and what causes obscuration alter-
nately expressed through an example followed by its meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.1.2. Both example and meaning expressed separatelyB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2. Detailed explanationB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.1. Example 
and meaning of 
the buddha and the lo-
tus 
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.1.1. Example B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.1.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.1.3. Both combinedB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.2. Example and meaning of the honey and the beesB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.2.1. ExampleB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.2.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.2.3. Both combinedB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.3. Example and meaning of the grain and the huskB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.3.1. ExampleB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.3.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.3.3. Both combinedB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.4. Example and meaning of the gold and the ﬁ lth
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.4.1. ExampleB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.4.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.4.3. Both combinedB.II.
2.2.2.1.3.2.2.5. Example and meaning of the treasure and the 
earth
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.5.1. Example
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      87
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.5.2. Meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.5.3. Both combinedB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6. Example and meaning of the shoot and the fr uit-
skin
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6.1. ExampleB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6.3. Both combinedB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.7. Example and meaning of the statue and the tat-
tered rag
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.7.1. ExampleB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.7.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.7.3. Both combinedB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.8. Example and meaning of the universal monar ch 
and the woman
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.8.1. ExampleB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.8.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.8.3. Both combinedB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.9. Example and meaning of the golden image and 
the clay
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.9.1. ExampleB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.9.2. MeaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.9.3. Both combinedB.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.3. Summary of the meaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.3. The way the deﬁlements ar e puriﬁed
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.1. Explanation of the nine deﬁlementsB.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.2. Explanation of the question: In which individual’s 
stream of being they are present?
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3. Detailed explanation of the way the deﬁlements ar
e 
puriﬁed
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.1. The three dormant tendenciesB.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.2. The defect of their ﬁercely active stateB.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.3. The fault of the ground of the remaining imprints 
of ignorance
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.4. The deﬁ lements to be abandoned on the paths of 
seeing and meditation of the common vehicle
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.5. The deﬁlements of the seven impure levels in 
particular
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.6. The deﬁlements to be overcome by vajra-like 
samadhi
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.7. Summary of the meaningB.II.2.2.2.1.3.4. The gradual stages of realization
88     Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.1. Short explanation of what is illustrated by the nine 
examples
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.2. Individual classiﬁcation of their meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3. Detailed explanation of the essence of the dif ferent 
kinds
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.1. Example and meaning of the dharmakayaB.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.1.1. Explanation of the dif ferent aspects of the dhar-
makaya
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.1.2. Combination of these with their examplesB.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.2. Example and meaning of suchnessB.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3. Example and meaning of the dispositionB.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3.1. Pr esentation of the two types of disposition by 
means of their examples
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3.2. Explanation of the way the thr ee kayas ar
e at-
tained from these
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3.3. Combination of these with their examplesB.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.4. The way these ar
e to be realized through faith
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.5. Explanation of the very natur e itself
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.5.1. EssenceB.II.2.2.2.1.3.5.2. The way it is empty and not emptyB.II.2.2.2.1.4. The necessity to explain the elementB.II.2.2.2.1.4.1. Short explanation of question and answerB.II.2.2.2.1.4.1.1. QuestionB.II.2.2.2.1.4.1.2. Answer
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2. Detailed explanation of their meaningB.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.1. The intention of the teaching of the second turning 
of the wheel of Dharma
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.1.1. Short explanationB.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.1.2. Detailed explanationB.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.2. The r eason for the teaching of the thir d turning of 
the wheel of Dharma
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.3. Detailed explanation of this r
eason
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.3.1. The way the ﬁve evils come aboutB.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.3.2. The way qualities are attained once the ﬁve evils 
are abandoned.
B.II.2.2.2.2. Enlightenment is the r ealization
B.II.2.2.2.2.1. Short explanation of the essence of the subject to be 
explained
B.II.2.2.2.2.2. Concise summary of the way of explanationB.II.2.2.2.2.3. Detailed explanation by combining these
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      89
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.1. Detailed explanation of essence and cause
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.1. Concise explanation of the way purity is attainedB.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2. Detailed explanation of its meaningB.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2.1. EssenceB.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2.2. The way it possesses qualitiesB.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2.3. The meaning of the stainsB.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2.4. The cause by which one becomes free from these 
[veils]
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2. Detailed explanation of the fruit
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.1. Concise explanation of freedom fr om stains by 
means of examples
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.1.1. The fr uit of liberation from the veil of the mental 
poisons
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.1.2. The fr uit of liberation from the veil of the  
hindrances to knowledge
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.2. Detailed explanation of the r eason for this
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.2.1. The fruit attained through meditative equipoise 
and the post-meditative phase
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.2.2. The fr uit of puriﬁcation from the three poisons
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.2.3. Combination of the meaning with the nine ex -
amples
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3. Detailed explanation of its functionB.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.1. Concise explanation of the way the two beneﬁ ts ar
e 
accomplished
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.1.1. The function of the essenceB.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.1.2. The function in terms of ther e being purity 
throughout all phenomena
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.2. Detailed explanation of the meaningB.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.2.1. Explanation of the way the two beneﬁts ar e ac-
complished, combined with their respective classiﬁcation
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.2.2. Particular explanation of the best possible beneﬁt 
for oneself
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.2.3. Particular explanation of the best possible beneﬁ t 
for others
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4. Detailed explanation of endowmentB.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.1. Concise explanation thr ough listing the names [of 
the qualities]
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2. Detailed explanation of the meaning [of the 
 
qualities]
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.1. Concise explanation of who is endowed with 
90     Buddha Nature
qualities
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2. Deﬁnition of the qualities that constitute  
endowment
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.1. Detailed explanation of the r eason why they  
are deep
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.1.1. General explanation of the way they ar e incon-
ceivable
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.1.2. Detailed explanation of the speciﬁcs
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.1.3. Combination of the r easons with an example
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.2. Explanation of the reason for the next [fourteen 
qualities]
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.2.1. The qualities of being unchangingB.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.2.2. The qualities of abandonment and r ealization
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.2.3. The qualities of purity and puriﬁcationB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5. Detailed explanation of its manifestationB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1. Concise explanation through listing the  
characteristics
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1.1. Explanation of who realizes the essence B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1.2. Concise explanation of the particularity of the 
dharmakaya
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1.3. Concise explanation of the particularity of the 
sambhogakaya
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1.4. Concise explanation of the particularity of the 
nirmanakaya
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2. Detailed explanation of their meaningB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.1. Common classiﬁcationB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2. Pr esentation of each individually
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1. Pr esentation of the dharmakaya or  
svabhavikakaya
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1.1. Concise explanation of the qualities and char -
acteristics
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1.2. Detailed explanation of their essenceB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1.2.1. Explanation of the ﬁ ve characteristics
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1.2.2. Explanation of the ﬁve qualitiesB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.2. Presentation of the sambhogakayaB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.2.1. Detailed explanation of the pr esentation
B.
II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.2.2. The five properties taught in summarized 
form
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.2.3. The way it appears due to conditionsB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3. Pr esentation of the nirmanakaya
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      91
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.1. The way the twelve deeds of the supreme 
nirmanakaya are demonstrated
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.2. The way the disciples are gradually guided, 
this being the function of the [twelve deeds]
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.2.1. The way the or dinary beings are guided to 
enter the lesser vehicles
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.2.2. The way those following the lesser vehicles 
are ripened by means of the Mahayana
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.2.3. The way those following the Great Vehicle 
are joined with complete liberation
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.3. Summary of their meaning
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.3.1. Summary into thr ee [kayas] with r
eference to 
reasons
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.3.2. Summary into two [kayas] with r
eference to  
the way they ar e
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6. Detailed explanation of its permanenceB.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.1. Concise explanation of the r eason
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.2. Detailed explanation of its meaningB.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.2.1. The seven r easons why the visible kayas ar e 
permanent
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.2.2. Explanation of the thr ee reasons why the 
dharmakaya is permanent
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.3. Summary of its general meaningB.II.2.2.2.2.3.7. Detailed explanation of inconceivabilityB.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.1. Concise illustration of the way it is inconceivableB.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.2. Detailed explanation of the r eason for this
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.2.1. Gradual explanation through eight logical  
reasonings
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.2.2. Summary into six causesB.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.2.3. Explanation of the way it is difﬁ cult to r ealize
B.II.2.2.2.3. The qualities are the attributes [of r ealization]
B.II.2.2.2.3.1. Concise explanation of their number combining them 
with the two kayas
B.II.2.2.2.3.1.1. Explanation classifying them in terms of kaya and 
primor dial wisdom
B.II.2.2.2.3.1.2. The qualities combined with these individuallyB.II.2.2.2.3.2. Detailed explanation of the dif ferent classes of qualities
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.1. Concise explanation combining the meaning with an 
example
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2. Detailed explanation pr esenting each individually
92     Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1. Illustration of the fruit of freedom
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.1. The ten powersB.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.1.1. Depiction of the essence of the point to be dem-
onstrated
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.1.2. Clariﬁcation thr ough examples as the means of 
demonstration
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.2. The four fearlessnessesB.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.2.1. Concise explanation of the essenceB.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.2.2. Detailed explanation of the functionB.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.2.3. Clariﬁcation by means of examples.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.3. The eighteen unmixed featur es
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.3.1. Concise explanation of the essenceB.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.3.2. Detailed explanation of the functionB.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.3.3. Clariﬁcation by means of examplesB.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.2. Explanation of the fr uit of maturation
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.2.1. The dif ferent kinds of signs intended to be illus -
trated
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.2.2. Summary thr ough examples, being the means of 
illustration
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.3. The way these ar
e to be realized from the wor ds of 
the T
eacher
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4. Explanation by once more summarizing meaning and 
example
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.1. General teaching of the r eason for the similarity of 
meaning and example
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2. Explanation of each individually by combining 
[meaning and example]
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1. Explanation of the fr uit of fr eedom
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.1. Illustration of the powers by means of examplesB.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.1.1. Illustration of the individual kindsB.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.1.2. Illustration of their common featureB.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.2. Illustration of the fearlessnesses by means of 
examples
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.2.1. Concise teachingB.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.2.2. Detailed explanationB.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.3. Illustration of the unmixed featur es by means of 
examples
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.4. Summary of the way they are indivisibleB.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.2. Explanation of the fruit of maturationB.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.2.1. The way the marks ar e based upon the two 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      93
kayas
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.2.2. The way the two kayas are illustrated by the 
example of the moon
B.II.2.2.2.4. Activity is the action [of realization]
B.II.2.2.2.4.1. Concise teachingB.II.2.2.2.4.1.1. Concise teaching [of activity] being spontaneousB.II.2.2.2.4.1.2. Concise teaching [of activity] being uninterruptedB.II.2.2.2.4.2. Detailed explanationB.II.2.2.2.4.2.1. Teaching of the summarized meaning of spontaneityB.II.2.2.2.4.2.1.1. Manifesting free fr om ideation
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.1.2. Manifesting unmistakenly as to place and time
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2. Explanation of the classiﬁed meaning of 
uninterr uptedness
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.1. Concise teaching enumerating namesB.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.2. Detailed explanation of the dif
ferent kinds of mean-
ing
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.3. Illustration of these by means of examplesB.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.4. Detailed explanation combining example and 
meaning
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.5. Summary of the way it is uninterr upted
B.II.2.2.2.4.3. V
ery detailed explanation in combination with  
examples
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.1. Concise teaching of the dif fer
ent kinds of examples
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2. Detailed explanation of the examples and their mean-
ing
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1. Combining each example and meaning in terms of 
its individual essence
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1. The body demonstrating illusory appearanceB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.1. Pr esentation of the example
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.1.1. The way it appearsB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.1.2. The functionB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.1.3. The way it becomes meaningfulB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.2. Explanation of the meaningB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.2.1. The way of appearanceB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.2.2. Striving [to achieve it]B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.2.3. Fr
ee from ideation and yet bringing about 
beneﬁt
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.3. Detailed explanation of the exampleB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.4. Precise depiction of the meaningB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.5. Summary of the way in which there is fr eedom 
94     Buddha Nature
from arising and cessation
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2. The speech expressing the oral instructions
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.1. Presentation of the exampleB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.2. Teaching the meaningB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.3. The function of the meaning and the exampleB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.3.1. Detailed explanationB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.3.2. Summary of the meaningB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.4. Expressing its specialtyB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.5. Explanation in combination with the three mi-
raculous displays
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.6. Where the power of speech does not enter and 
where it is unhindered
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3. T h
e way the mind is pervasive through knowledge 
and compassionate love
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.1. Short pr esentation of the example of clouds
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.2. Detailed explanation of the example
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.2.1. Presentation of the meaning and the exampleB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.2.2. Explanation of the meaning through  
corresponding properties
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.3. The way ther e is change in terms of the vessel
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4. Ef fortless manifestation
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4.1. Concise pr
esentation
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4.2. Detailed explanationB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4.2.1. Combination of example and meaning in 
terms of corr esponding properties
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4.2.2. The way it is not discriminatoryB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.5. Connection with the pr operty conducive to 
eliminating suffering
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.5.1. Depiction of suffering and its eliminationB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.5.2. Realizing in terms of changeB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.5.3. Seeing the way of the four tr uths
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4. Emitting illusory manifestationsB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4.1. Short pr esentation of the example and its mean
-
ing
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4.2. Detailed explanationB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4.3. Pr esentation of the cause of seeing
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4.4. Explanation of the twelve deeds of the 
nirmanakaya
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5. The way primor dial wisdom manifests
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.1. Pr esentation of the manifestation and non-mani -
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      95
festation of primordial wisdom
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.2. Explanation of its manifestation’s activity
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.3. They way primordial wisdom radiatesB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.4. The way there is manifold manifestationB.I
I.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.5. The gradual manifestation of primordial wis-
dom
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.5.1. Concise pr esentation
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.5.2. Detailed explanationB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.6. The special excellence of its functionB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.6.1. Pr esentation in terms of being beyond the 
example
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.6.2. Depiction of its speciﬁc function
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.6. The secr et aspect of mind
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.6.1. The way manifold wishes ar e accomplished 
without ideation
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.6.2. The way ther e is continuous manifestation with-
out deliberate effort
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.6.3. Presentation of similarity in terms of being dif-
ﬁcult to ﬁnd
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.7. The secr et aspect of speech
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.8. The secr
et aspect of body
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.9. The way compassion manifestsB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2. Summary of the meaning of this chapter by  
expressing its purpose
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1. The different kinds of the examples’ purpose and 
meaning
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1.1. The way the immediate purpose and the intrin-
sic purpose is achieved
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1.2. Pr esentation of a summary of the example and 
the meaning
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1.3. 
Applying the examples in three ways
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1.4. The meaning of the chapter is freedom fr om 
deliberate ef
fort
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.2. Speciﬁcally explaining the way it has been shown 
by examples
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.2.1. The dif ferent kinds of examples
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.2.2. Explanation in combination with their meaningB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3. Speciﬁc explanation through a very condensed 
summary
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.1. The way there is appearance and yet fr eedom 
from birth and death
96     Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.1.1. The example of [dependence on] faculties 
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.1.2. The way it is free from birth and death, since it 
is uninterrupted
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.2. The way there is special excellence superior to the 
corresponding property
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.2.1. Concise presentationB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.2.2. Detailed explanationB.II.3. Conclusion of the explanationB.II.3.1. BeneﬁtB.II.3.1.1. Pr esentation of the meaning being inconceivable
B.II.3.1.2. Short teaching of its qualitiesB.II.3.1.3. Explanation of its special excellence in comparison with 
generosity and two further [virtues]
B.II.3.1.3.1. Explanation in comparison with generosityB.II.3.1.3.2. Explanation in comparison with moral conductB.II.3.1.3.3. Explanation in comparison with meditative stabilityB.II.3.1.4. Pr esentation of the reason for this excellence
B.II.3.1.5. Very detailed explanation of the beneﬁtB.II.3.1.5.1. Attainment of enlightenment
B.II.3.1.5.2. Firm bodhichittaB.II.3.1.5.3. 
Attainment of complete perfection
B.II.3.1.5.4. Deﬁnition of the accumulationsB.II.3.1.5.5. Elimination of the veilsB.II.3.1.5.5.1. Depiction of the veils to be abandonedB.II.3.1.5.5.2. Explanation of wisdom being the supreme r emedy
B.II.3.2. The way the commentary was composedB.II.3.2.1. The reason for its compositionB.II.3.2.2. The basis on which it was composedB.II.3.2.3. Deﬁnition of the words of the BuddhaB.II.3.2.4. Explanation that everything according with the Buddha’s 
words should be accepted
B.II.3.2.5. One should not teach contradicting the Buddha’s wor ds
B.II.3.2.6. Explanation of the fault of contradictionB.II.3.2.6.1. Deﬁning how the Dharma is abandonedB.II.3.2.6.1.1. E x
pla
nation of how it is abandoned due to the condition 
of one’s stream of being
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      97
B.II.3.2.6.1.2. The ten direct causes for abandoning the Dharma
B.II.3.2.6.2. Deﬁning how not to abandon the profound DharmaB.II.3.2.6.3. Explanation that abandoning the Dharma is more grave 
than the immeasurably negative acts
B.II.3.3. Dedication and summary of the meaningB.II.3.3.1. Meaning of the beneﬁts combined with a dedication 
prayer
B.II.3.3.2. SummaryB.II.3.3.3. The way it was perfectedB.III. The way the meaning has been well pr esented [not translated ]
CHAPTER  ONE
Tathagatagarbha
INTRODUCTION
A. Part One: Introduction [not translated]
B. Part Two: Words and meaning of the actual text expanded in detailB.I. Title and salutation corresponding to the meaning [not translated]B.I.1. Title [not translated]B.I.1.1. Combination of the two languages [not translated]B.I.1.2. Explanation of their meaning [not translated]B.I.2. Salutation of the translator
I bow down to all buddhas and bodhisattvas.
For the term “buddha,” as he is called in his native language, in 
Tibetan the term sangs rgyas [pronounced “sanjay”] is used, which 
literally means “awakened and expanded.” This refers to two aspects: abandonment and realization. A buddha has awoken from the sleep of ignorance just as, for example, one wakes up from ordinary sleep. 
98     Buddha Nature
This is the aspect of abandonment. Similar to a fully blossomed lotus, 
his understanding has expanded with regard to the knowable. This is the aspect of realization.
The Tibetan equivalent for the Sanskrit term “bodhisattva” is byang 
chub 
sems dpa’  [pronounced “jang chub sem pa”], the three components 
of which can be literally translated as “enlightenment” (Tib.  byang chub ), 
“mind” (Tib. sems), and “courage” (Tib. dpa’). This refers to the fact that a bodhisattva has two objectives. By means of his discriminative wisdom he focuses on enlightenment, and by means of his compassion he focuses on beings [literally, “on those who have a mind”]. The term sems dpa’ can also be understood as “courageous mind” in terms of mental steadfastness, curative capacity, inner strength, and courage, which refer to the fact that a bodhisattva is capable of enduring great hardships for the sake of enlightenment. 
To all these buddhas and bodhisattvas I bow down respectfully with 
body, speech, and mind.
Before the great translators undertook a translation work, they ﬁrst 
paid homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas. Likewise, we should follow their example and also begin by bowing down to our yidam deity before we engage in an explanation or a similar task.
B.II. The actual commentary, which has supreme meaning
B.II.1. Presentation of the body of the textB.II.1.1. Explanation of the body 
of the commentary as consisting of seven 
vajra points
If condensed, the body of the entire commentary
[consists of] the following seven vajra points:Buddha, Dharma, the Assembly, the element,enlightenment, qualities, and then buddha activity.
In a condensed way, the entire content or body of the commentary to 
be explained is taught in terms of seven vajra points. The term “vajra” 
is used since a precious vajra is composed of indestructible material, and the subject to be expressed is difﬁcult to penetrate by means of the discriminative wisdoms resulting from study and reﬂection.
The ﬁrst point contains the explanation of perfect buddhahood, 
which constitutes what is to be attained—this being the ultimate level of the two beneﬁts, which are beneﬁt for oneself and beneﬁt for others.
The second point explains the 
sacred Dharma as having the charac-
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      99
teristics of the two truths, which are free from attachment.
The third point is the Sangha of the noble ones, the assembly of those 
who do not fall back since they possess the two types of primordial 
wisdom (Skt. jñ›na, Tib. ye shes).
The fourth point explains the 
expanse (Tib. dbyings) or the element 
of beings that is by 
nature completely pure. This is what needs to be 
truly realized, its realization constituting the way in which Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha are attained. 
The ﬁfth point is unsurpassable enlightenment, the essence of real-
izati 
on, the state in which this element is puriﬁed from all deﬁlements 
without the slightest remainder.
The sixth point describes the qualities accompanying great enlight-
enmen
t. They are the attributes of realization and consist of [two] fruits: 
those of freedom and complete maturation. 
Finally, the seventh point explains buddha activity, which is sponta-
neous and uninterrupted. This 
is the power or ability of the qualities, 
the means causing others to gain realization. (See also Part Three, 
annotation 1.)
B.II.1.2. Reference to the sutras constituting their source
In the above order, which presents them in a logical sequence, 
these [vajra points]
should be known to be derived from the Sutra Requested by 
King Dharanishvara.
The [first] three stem from its introductory chapter and the [lat-
ter] four from [its chapters]
on the properties of those who possess understanding and the 
Victorious One.
The order in which these seven vajra points are explained here, 
where they are presented in a logical sequence corresponding to their 
essence or characteristics, is the same as given in the sutra famed as The Explanation of the Great Compassion of the Tathagata, or the Sutra 
Requested by King Dharanishvara  
(Skt. Tath›gatamah›-karu˚›nirdeŸa-sÒ-
tra/ D
h›ra˚ıŸvarar›japarip¸cch›,  Tib. de bzhin gshegs pa’i thugs rje chen po 
bstan pa’i mdo / gzungs kyi dbang phyug rgyal pos zhus pa’i mdo). In this 
cont
ext the ﬁrst three vajra points, the explanation of the Three Jewels, 
should be known as being derived from the introductory chapter of this sutra. The bodhisattva Dharanishvararaja says there [in answer to a question of the Buddha]: 
100    Buddha Nature
O Bhagavan! He is directly and perfectly awakened and expanded 
within the equality of all phenomena. He faultlessly turns the wheel of Dharma. He possesses a limitless assembly of extremely well trained disciples...,
and so on.
As for the remaining four vajra points, ﬁrst the buddha element is 
elucidated by means of “The Explanation of the Sixty Methods of Com-
plete
ly Purifying the Qualities or Properties of the Path of a Bodhisattva 
who Possesses Understanding,” which follows upon the introductory chapter. In relation to this [Nagarjuna], in the Dharmadh›tustava (Tib. 
chos kyi dbyings su bstod pa), says: 
If the element is present and one labors, pure natural gold will be 
seen. If the element is not present, no matter how much one labors, one only exhausts oneself in weariness and pain.
Since a ground to be puriﬁed from the deﬁlements is present in the 
form of the tathagatagarbha or the dharmadhatu, which is by nature pure, it is justiﬁed to show ways of complete puriﬁcation for the sake of its direct manifestation. 
The sixty methods of complete puriﬁcation are the four ornaments 
of a bodhisattva, the eight aspects of appearance, the sixteen kinds of great compassion, and the thirty-two kinds of activity.
The last three vajra points should be understood as being derived 
from “The Explanation of the Eighty Types of Qualities of the Victorious One.” Following the explanation of the dharmadhatu, enlightenment is elucidated from the explanation of the sixteen kinds of great compas-sion. After that, the qualities 
are clariﬁed by means of the explanation 
of the ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, and the eighteen exclusive or unmixed features of a buddha. Subsequently, activity is elucidated by means of the explanation of the thirty-two aspects of the unsurpassable activity of a tathagata. With the passage: “O Son of Noble Family, the action of a tathagata consists of these thirty-two!” action and actor are expressed simultaneously.
Due to the formulation in the root text [the last syllable of the 
stanza (Skt. Ÿloka ) explained here being a particle that could either 
be understood as a ﬁnishing or a combining particle] some scholars hold that the way in which the seven vajra points are explained is derived from different sutras. According to this opinion the Three Jewels are derived from the Sutra Teaching Higher Reflection  (Skt. 
D¸�h›-parivarta, Tib. lhag pa’i bsam pa bstan 
 pa’i mdo). The element is 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      101
derived from the Sutra that is Free from Increase and Obscuration (Skt. 
Anunatv›pÒrnatv›-nirdeŸa-parivarta, Tib. ’phel ba dang ’grib pa med pa’i 
mdo). Enlightenment stems from the Lion’s Roar of Shrimaladevi Sutra  
(
Skt.
 �rım›l›devı-si˙han›dasÒtra,  Tib. lha mo dpal ’phreng gi seng ge’i sgra’i 
mdo), the qualities from the Sutra that is Free from Increase and Obscura-
tion (Skt. Anun-atv›pÒrnatv›-nirdeŸa-parivarta, Tib. ’phel ’grib med pa’i 
mdo), 
and activity from the Sutra Showing the Realm of the Inconceivable 
Qualities and Wisdom of the Tathagata (Skt. Tath›gata-gu˚a-jñ›n›cintya-
vi�ay›vat›ra-nirdeŸa-sÒtra, Tib. de bzhin bshegs pa’i yon tan dang ye shes 
bsam gyis mi khyab pa’i yul la ’jug pa bstan pa’i mdo). (See also Part Three, 
annotation 2.)
B.II.1.3. Explanation of their sequence by means of the given order
From the Buddha [stems] the Dharma, from the Dharma the 
Assembly of noble ones,
from the Assembly the attainment of buddha nature, the ele-
ment of primordial wisdom.
This wisdom finally attained is supreme enlightenment, the 
powers and so on,
[thus] possessing the properties that fulfill the benefit of all 
sentient beings.
From whoever is directly and perfectly awakened and expanded 
within the expanse of the equality of all phenomena stems the faultless 
turning of the wheel of Dharma. From the Dharma being practiced as it was taught stems the Assembly of the noble ones, a limitless num-ber of extremely well 
trained disciples. In their streams of being, the 
element or buddha nature, which has become the cause of primordial wisdom, is attained in the sense that it is [apparently] present. From having become [a member of] the Sangha, this primordial wisdom of a buddha is ﬁnally attained at the end of the process in which the deﬁlements obscuring the buddha nature are removed. This is the attainment of supreme enlightenment. This enlightenment possesses the qualities, which consist of the powers and so on. These qualities in their turn constitute the primary condition for the arising of the endowment with properties equivalent to activity, which fulﬁlls the beneﬁt of all sentient beings.
Acknowledging this sequence, the commentary is therefore pre-
102    Buddha Nature
sented in this order. (See also Part Three, annotation 3.)
THE FIRST THREE VAJRA POINTS: THE THREE JEWELS
The First Vajra Point: Buddha
B.II.2. Detailed explanation of the parts
B.II.2.1. Detailed explanation of the Three Jewels as being what is to be at-
taine
d
B.II.2.1.1. The Buddha who is the teacherB.II.2.1.1.1. Presentation of the nature of the Buddha by means of a praise
Buddha is without beginning, middle, or end. He is peace 
itself, fully self-awakened and self-expanded in  
buddhahood.
Having reached this state, he shows the indestructible, perma-
nent path so that those who have no realization may realize.
Wielding the supreme sword and vajra of knowledge and com-
passionate love, he cuts the seedling of suffering 
and destroys the wall of doubts along with its surrounding 
thicket of various views. I bow down to this Buddha.
Since buddhahood is free from an initial coming into existence, an 
abiding in the meantime, and a ﬁnal cessation, it is uncreated. Since 
all thoughts and conceptual elaborations are paciﬁed, it is spontane-ously 
 present. Since a buddha is fully self-awakened and self-expanded 
without a teacher by means of self-aware primordial wisdom, bud-dha-hood is not a r 
ealization due to extraneous conditions. These are 
the qualities constituting one’s own beneﬁt.
Since a buddha has awoken from the sleep of ignorance and 
his understanding has expanded to embrace the knowable, he has gained possession of the most excellent knowledge. By means of this knowledge he shows within samsara the permanent path, the mean-ing of the indestr uctible 
true state (Skt. dharmat›, Tib. chos nyid). This 
is compassionate 
love. Wielding the supreme sword of knowledge 
and compassionate love he cuts the shoot of “name and form,” which are the immediate causes of suffering. Wielding the supreme vajra of knowledge and compassionate love, he destroys the wall of doubts about the truth and about action and its fruit, which is surrounded by the thick forest of the various views that precede the formation of those views belonging to the fearful [or transitory] collection. This is ability or power. With these he possesses the qualities constituting the 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      103
beneﬁt of others.
Therefore I bow down to this Buddha with great respect. (See also 
Part Three, annotation 4.)
B.II.2.1.1.2. Explanation of the meaning of the praise presented in catego-
ries
Being uncreated and spontaneously present,
not a realization due to extraneous conditions,wielding knowledge, compassionate love, and ability,buddhahood has [the qualities of] the two benefits.
By the preceding section buddhahood is shown as having six or 
eight qualities: 
Since
 it is not engendered by causes and conditions, it has the quality 
of being uncreated and unchanging (1). Since it is free from deliberate 
effort, it has the quality of being spontaneously present (2). Since it is self-aware, it has the quality of not being realized due to extraneous conditions (3).
Since a buddha possesses these 
three qualities, he has the quality 
of knowledge (4). Since he leads the other beings to also attain this knowledge, he has the quality of great compassionate love (5). Since he brings about the relinquishment of the causes of suffering of all other beings, thereby eradicating the suffering that is the fruit of these causes, he has the quality of being endowed with ability (6). 
In terms of subject matter 
there are six different kinds of qualities. If 
classiﬁed according to aspects, the ﬁrst three form the quality of best possible beneﬁt for oneself, and the latter three form the quality of best possible beneﬁt of others. Considering these as a whole, buddhahood possesses eight qualities. (See also Part Three, annotation 5.)
B.II.2.1.1.3. Detailed explanation by combining the praise and its meaning
Its nature is without beginning, middle, or end;
hence [the state of a buddha] is uncreated.Since it possesses the peaceful dharmakaya,it is described as being “spontaneously present.”Since it must be realized through self-awareness,it is not a realization due to extraneous conditions.These three aspects being realized, there is knowledge.Since the path is shown, there is compassionate love.There is ability since the mental poisons and suffering
104    Buddha Nature
are relinquished by primordial wisdom and compassion.
Through the first three there is benefit for oneself.Through the latter three there is benefit for others.
Here buddhahood is explained in such a way that the statements 
made in the foregoing section on the different types of qualities are 
successively proven on the basis of the reasons taught in the praise:
(1) Whatever is compounded or created consists of the three aspects 
of beginning, middle, and end, or in other words, has the properties of coming into existence, of abiding, and then being destroyed. Since buddhahood is of a nature that is free from these, it is uncreated.
Generally speaking there are four teachings with regard to the term 
“uncreated.” Depending upon the following criteria, the subject in question is considered as being created or uncreated: The ﬁrst criterion is whether or not there is arising and cessation due to causes and con-ditions. The second is whether 
or not there is arising and cessation of 
karma and mental poisons. The third is whether or not arising through a body of mental nature and cessation in terms of an inconceivable death take place. The fourth is whether or not the subject in question appears to the disciples as something that arises and ceases.
In th
is context, Rongtönpa holds that in the light of these four 
criteria the dharmakaya of all buddhas is uncreated, in the sense of not appearing to the disciples as something that comes into existence and ceases. 
It is therefor e 
necessary to understand that buddhahood possesses 
the quality of being uncreated. Yet if one takes it as a whole as being uncreated, one needs to understand that this contradicts its having knowledge, compassionate love, and ability.
(2) Buddhahood is endowed with the dharmakaya itself, which is 
complete peace. It is peace in the sense of freedom from any deliberate effort in terms of the concept-bound activity of body and speech, the conceptual activity of the mind, and so on. Therefore it is described as “spontaneously present activity.”
(3) Since it must be realized by means of self-sprung primordial 
wisdom being self-aware, it is not a realization due to outer conditions such as other people’s utterances and so on.
(4) H
aving realized the dharmadhatu in its three aspects of qualities, 
which are uncreatedness and so on, a buddha [also] realizes that it is within all sentient beings alike. Thus he possesses the most excellent primordial wisdom of knowledge.
(5) In order to also lead all other beings who are to be trained to this 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      105
ultimate purity, he clearly demonstrates the path beyond the world in 
accordance with their respective karmic fortunes. Therefore he pos-sesses the most excellent love and compassion.
(6) By means of his 
primordial wisdom and his great compassion 
mentioned before, he is able to cause the relinquishment of the suffer-ing of beings, eradicating their 
skandhas, which attract suffering, and 
their mental poisons, which cause these skandhas, up to their very end. Therefore he possesses the most excellent activity or ability.
In this context it is explained that by the ﬁrst three qualities the 
best possible beneﬁt for oneself is accomplished, while the latter three accomplish the best possible beneﬁt of others. (See also Part Three, annotation 6.)
The Second Vajra Point: Dharma
B.II.2.1.2. The Dharma that is his teaching
B.II.2.1.2.1. Presentation of the subject matter by means of a praise
The Dharma is neither non-existent nor existent. It is not both 
existent and non-existent, nor is it other than existent and 
non-existent.
It is inaccessible to such investigation and cannot be defined. 
It is self-aware and peace.
The Dharma is without defilement. Holding the brilliant light 
rays of primordial wisdom,
it fully defeats attachment, aversion, and dull indifference 
with regard to all objects of perception. I bow down to this 
sun of the sacred Dharma.
(1) The sacred Dharma in terms of the truth of cessation does not 
fall into the extreme of nihilism, which is the belief in non-existence, 
since the absolute truth, or in other words, the dharmadhatu, such-ness, the true natur 
e, exists as the ﬁeld of experience of self-aware 
primordial wisdom. 
It does not fall into the extreme of eternalism, which is the belief in 
existence, since it has been free from arising as a relative adventitious thing since beginningless time.
It is also not the 
common basis of a collection of the two aspects 
“existent” and “non-existent,” since on one hand it is neither of these, both having been refuted, and since on the other hand they contradict each other.
Since it is impossible for something to be both existent and non-ex-
istent, it cannot be investigated as their contrary either , as something 
other than both existent and non-existent.
106    Buddha Nature
For this reason the Dharma is completely liberated from the concep-
tual elaboration consisting of the four extreme views (Tib. mu bzhi).
Since 
it is inexpr essible 
by means of symbols and terms and since it 
is truly beyond the ﬁeld of experience of speech, it cannot be verbally 
deﬁned.
It cannot be explained by means of examples, logical reasonings, and 
so on. Not being an object of experience of an other-aware perception, it must be perceived by the noble ones through self-awareness. For these reasons it is inconceivable.
Since karma and the mental poisons, the root of samsara, are paci-
ﬁed, 
it is free from these two aspects. Since their cause, improper men-
tal activity, has come to complete peace, it is freedom from thought.
(2
) The Dharma in terms of the truth of the path is utter purity, being 
free from the mental poisons along with their remaining imprints. 
It is clarity , 
since it is endowed with the brilliant light rays of the 
direct knowledge of all aspects. This is primordial wisdom, which is 
free from the veil of the hindrances to knowledge. 
With regard to the objects of perception, it fully overcomes desire 
and attachment towards agreeable objects, aversion and anger towards disagreeable objects, and the darkness of dull indifference, which is ignorance and delusion, when facing neutral objects. For this reason it acts as a remedy.
I faithfully bow down to this sacred Dharma, which in these three 
aspects is similar to the sun. (See also Part Three, annotation 7.)
B.II.2.1.2.2. Explanation of the meaning of the praise presented in catego-
ries
Inconceivable, free from the two [veils] and from thought,
being pure, clear, and playing the part of an antidote,it is free from attachment and frees from attachment.This is the Dharma with its features of the two truths. 
In the preceding section the rare and sublime Dharma is shown as 
having six or eight qualities. In terms of subject matter the Dharma 
has six qualities:
The ﬁrst three consist 
of the facts that it is inconceivable in that it 
cannot be grasped by a conceptual understanding (1), it is free from the two [veils] of karma and the mental poisons (2), and it is free from their cause, which is improper conceptual activity (3).
The latter three consist of the facts that it is pure, since the deﬁle-
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      107
ments that [obscured] the essence have been puriﬁed (4), it is clear, 
since it illuminates all phenomena (5), and it plays the part of the very antidote that counteracts the three poisons (6). 
If classiﬁed in terms of aspects, the ﬁrst three qualities constitute 
the fruit, the truth of cessation, which must be freed from attachment [and will then be revealed as being freedom from attachment] (7). The latter three constitute the cause, the truth of the path, which frees one from attachment (8). Thus it has the characteristics of the two truths, which comprise full puriﬁcation. Together with these two aspects, in total there are eight qualities.
That which possesses these eight qualities is called the sacred 
Dharma. (See also Part Three, annotation 8.)
B.II.2.1.2.3. Summary of the categories in terms of the truth of cessation and 
the truth of the path
Freedom from attachment [as fruit and means]
consists of the truths of cessation and path.Accordingly these should also be knownby means of three qualities each.
Freedom from attachment or desire is called the Dharma. This 
consists of the truth of cessation, which is the fruit—that which is free 
from attachment—and of the truth of the path, which is the means to free oneself from attachment. In the given order these two truths should also be known as being explained by means of three qualities each. The truth of cessation, when it has twofold purity, is explained by means of the three qualities of being inconceivable, free from the two veils, and free from thought. The truth of the path, which causes puriﬁcation, is explained by means of the three qualities of being pure, clear, and an antidote. (See also Part Three, annotation 9.)
B.II.2.1.2.4. Explanation of the reasons by combining the praise and its mean-
ing
Not being an object of conceptual investigation, being  
inexpressible,
and [only] to be known by noble ones, the Dharma is  
inconceivable.
Since it is peace, it is free from the two [veils] and free from 
thought.
In its three [aspects of] purity and so on it is similar to the sun.
Taking the reasons from the above section, where the Dharma is 
108    Buddha Nature
explained in the form of a praise, its different categories are succes-
sively proven and explained as follows:
The Dharma to be 
attained, the truth of cessation, is not an object to 
be investigated by means of an understanding that perceives in terms of the four extreme views of existence, non-existence, and so on. It is not an object to be expressed by means of words, terms, deﬁnitions, and so forth, and it has to be known by the noble ones through self-aware primordial wisdom, which is present during meditation. For these three reasons it is inconceivable for a worldly understanding.
Since the karma bound up with pollution and the mental poisons 
fully raising this karma have come to peace, the truth of cessation is free from these two [veils]. It is free from thought since the improper conceptual activity that acts as their cause has been paciﬁed.
The three aspects of purity and so on, that is, purity, clarity, and 
acting as an antidote, are the three qualities of the paths of seeing and meditation, which cause the attainment of this truth of cessation. These are to be understood as being like the sun in that there are three cor-respo
nding properties. Just as the orb of the sun is completely pure, the 
truth of the path is free from all the deﬁlements of [even] the secondary mental poisons. In the same way as the sun illuminates the visible, the truth of the path illuminates all the aspects of the knowable, or in other words, all phenomena. Just as the sun acts as an antidote that overcomes darkness, the truth of the path acts as the antidote against all obstructions preventing the seeing of suchness. (See also Part Three, annotation 10.)
The Third Vajra Point: Sangha
B.II.2.1.3. The essence of the Sangha whose members hold this teaching
B.II.2.1.3.1. Presentation of the subject matter by means of a praise
This mind being by nature clear light, they have seen the poi-
sons to be essenceless
and therefore truly realize [the nature of] every being as peace, 
the ultimate non-existence of a self. They perceive that the 
Perfect Buddha pervades them all.
They possess the understanding that is free from the veils. 
Thus seeing that beings are utterly pure and that [this pu-rity pervades] their limitless number, 
they are endowed with the vision of primordial wisdom. I bow 
down to this [Sangha].
Of the different types of Sangha, the bodhisattvas who do not fall 
back are an especially noble assembly. Since their own minds have 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      109
directly revealed themselves as being by nature clear light and function-
ing as the antidote itself, 
they have seen that the essence of the mental 
poisons to be abandoned has been free from arising since beginning-less time. Therefor e 
the bodhisattvas truly realize the nature of every 
being just as it is. They realize it as a state of peace or as freedom from any conceptual elaboration: the ultimate selﬂessness of persons and of phenomena. By means of this realization they have primordial wisdom that knows correctly. 
They see that the nature of a perfect buddha—the dharmakaya, 
the true state—has always been present within beings whose state is relative, such that it pervades them all. By means of this seeing they have the primordial wisdom that knows completely. 
These two types of primordial wisdom are the quality of aware-
ness.
In 
the given order, these are also an understanding that is free from 
the veil of attachment and one that is free from the veil of obstructions. 
With these understandings the bodhisattvas possess the discriminative wisdom beyond the worldly. By means of this discriminative wisdom, they have the perception that knows the utterly pure dharma-dhatu of beings, and furthermore knows that this dharmadhatu pervades their limitless number. Therefore they possess the completely pure vision of primordial wisdom with regard to the entire range of the knowable.
This is the quality of liberation.I bow down to these 
[bodhisattvas] with open faith. (See also Part 
Three, annotation 11.)
B.II.2.1.3.2. The Sangha is established as having two or six qualities 
The assembly of those who have understanding
and thus do not fall back has unsurpassable qualities,since their vision of inner primordial wisdom,which knows correctly and knows completely, is pure.
(1) By the preceding section the rare and sublime Sangha is shown 
as having two qualities: 
Focusing on the tr ue 
state as their object, noble ones perceive the 
presence of suchness just as it is. They see this in a way that is not held 
in common with other beings: by means of inner self-aware primordial wisdom. This vision is puriﬁed from the veil of attachment. For this reason they have the quality of primordial wisdom that knows cor-rectly.
Focusing on those 
whose state is relative as their object, noble ones 
110    Buddha Nature
perceive that the dharmadhatu is all-pervasively present within all 
sentient beings alike, no matter how many there are. This is also seen in a way that is not held in common with others: by means of inner self-aware primordial wisdom. This vision is puriﬁed from the veil of obstruction. For this reason they have the quality of primordial wisdom that knows completely.
Since they possess these qualities, the members of the rare and 
sublime Sangha, the assembly of bodhisattvas who have understand-ing and thus do not 
fall back from great perfect enlightenment, are 
superior to the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas. They are therefore said to possess the quality of unsurpassable primordial wisdom.
(2) Or, according to another explanation, the assembly of the bodhi-
sattvas who have understanding, the Sangha of the noble ones who do not fall back, is presented as having eight qualities: Since they have the visions of primordial wisdom that knows correctly, of primordial wisdom that knows completely, and of inner primordial wisdom, there are the three qualities of awareness.
Since they are puriﬁed from the two veils of attachment and obstruc-
tion, and since they have 
the quality of being unsurpassable, there are 
the three qualities of liberation.
Adding to these six qualities the two aspects of awareness and lib-
eration that are their 
basis, the bodhisattvas who have understanding 
possess eight qualities altogether.
The ﬁrst is the individual presentation as intended by the Sanskrit 
commentary, the latter corresponds to the usual explanation of the early Tibetan commentaries. (See also Part Three, annotation 12.)
B.II.2.1.3.3. Detailed explanation by combining the praise and the presenta-
tion of the qualities
B.II.2.1.3.3.1. Explanation of the way they realize correctly
Realizing beings in their state of peace
[the noble ones] know correctly,for [the mind] is by nature utterly pureand the poisons were always exhausted.
By means of their self-aware primordial wisdom the awakened noble 
ones realize directly that the nature of mind of all sentient beings has 
a state of peace beyond any conceptual elaboration. Therefore they possess the primordial wisdom that knows correctly. This is because they realize that the minds of beings are by nature utterly pure and luminous clarity, and that the adventitious mental poisons [obscuring] 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      111
their minds have never arisen [or existed] and are therefore exhausted 
and ceased.
B.II.2.1.3.3.2. Explanation of the way they realize completely
Their understanding, which realizes the knowable
as well as [its] ultimate condition, seesthat the state of omniscience is within all beings.Thus the [noble ones] know completely.
Their understanding, or in other words, the discriminative wisdom 
beyond the worldly, realizes all knowable objects and realizes such-
ness, their ultimate condition. By means of self-aware primordial wisdom this understanding sees directly that the state of omniscience, the tathagatagarbha, is all-pervasively present within all beings, no matter how many there are, as the nature [of their minds]. Therefore the awakened noble ones possess the primordial wisdom that knows completely—knowing all those whose state is relative.
As is stated in [Asanga’s own] commentary, this seeing arises from 
the ﬁrst bodhisattva level onwards, since the dharmadhatu is realized as being all-pervasive. (See also Part Three, annotation 13.)
B.II.2.1.3.3.3. Explanation of the particularity of complete purification
Such realization is the vision of wisdom
that is self-aware. This wisdom is pure, since it [sees] the undefiled expanse,free from attachment and obstruction.
Such realization is the vision of the noble ones. It is the realization 
of the path beyond the worldly achieved through the two types of 
primordial wisdom. This vision takes place in a way that is not held in common with others: through self-aware primordial wisdom. This wis-dom knows correctly since 
it perceives that the dharmadhatu, which 
is by nature undeﬁled, pervades everything, and since it is free from the veil of the mental poisons, which are bound up with attachment. It knows completely since it realizes that this dharmadhatu pervades all knowable things, and since it is free from the veil of the hindrances to knowledge, which are bound up with obstruction. Therefore these two types of primordial wisdom are of extreme and utter purity in comparison to a seeing by means of an ephemeral primordial wisdom. (See also Part Three, annotation 14.)
B.II.2.1.3.3.4. Explanation of its being a sublime refuge
112    Buddha Nature
Their vision [of] primordial wisdom is pure
and [nears] unsurpassable buddha wisdom.The noble ones who do not fall backare therefore a refuge for all beings.
Since they have the vision of the two types of primordial wisdom, 
thus possessing the quality of awareness, and since they are puriﬁed 
from the veils of attachment and obstruction, thus possessing the quality of liberation, they are near to the unsurpassable primordial wisdom of a buddha. Therefore the noble ones who directly see the true state and thus do not fall back from perfect enlightenment have become a refuge protecting all sentient beings from having to feel suffering within samsara.
THE THREE REFUGES
B.II.2.1.4. Explanation of the three kinds of refugeB.II.2.1.4.1. The necessity to present three types of refuge
There being the teacher, his teaching, and his disciples
leads to respective aspirations towards three vehiclesand to three different activities [of veneration].Viewing this, the refuge is shown as threefold.
For the following reason the refuge is presented as being three-
fold:
The f
act that the qualities of the Buddha who is the teacher are 
taught entails two different reactions. On one hand there are those 
[individuals] who see the qualities of this teacher and thereupon strive for the attainment of buddhahood. Of the three vehicles they follow the Mahayana. On the other hand there are those who of the three types of activities of veneration have the aspiration of venerating the Buddha as being supreme among gods and humans. Considering this, buddhahood is presented as the ﬁrst of the three refuges.
Likewise, the fact that the qualities of the sacred Dharma are taught 
leads to two reactions. On one hand there are those [individuals] who see the qualities of this teaching and thereupon wish to realize and attain the profound Dharma of interdependent origination on their own. They follow the Pratyekabuddhayana. On the other hand there are those who have the aspiration of venerating the Dharma as being supreme among that which is free from desire. Considering this, the Dharma is presented as the second refuge.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      113
The fact that the qualities of the Sangha, of the assembly of disciples, 
are taught leads to the following two reactions: On one hand there are 
those [individuals] who see the qualities of these disciples and there-upon wish to attain their 
state, [the state of an arhat], by practicing the 
teaching [of the Buddha] as taught by others. They follow the Shra-vakayana. On the other hand 
there are those who have the aspiration 
of venerating the Sangha as supreme among assemblies. Considering this, the Sangha is presented as the third refuge.
Put brieﬂy, the refuge is presented as being threefold in consideration 
of the fact that the three aspects [of teacher, teaching, and disciples] result in six types of individuals. This presentation is taught in order to enable beings to gradually gain access [to the path]. (See also Part Three, annotation 15.)
B.II.2.1.4.2. Explanation of which is the ultimate refuge and which are not
[The Dharma] will be abandoned and is of an unsteady nature.
It is not [the ultimate quality], and [the Sangha] is still with 
fear.
Thus 
the two aspects of Dharma and the Assembly of noble 
ones
do no
t represent the supreme refuge, which is constant and 
stable.
In a true sense only the Buddha is beings’ refuge,since the Great Sage embodies the dharmakaya,and the Assembly also reaches its ultimate goalwhen these [qualities of dharmakaya are attained].
One may wonder whether the three kinds of refuge explained above 
equally represent an ultimate refuge. This is not the case.
The Dharma in terms of teaching is to be abandoned like a boat is left 
behind once one has crossed the water. Of the two aspects of Dharma 
in terms of realization, the realization of those who travel the path of training proceeds from one level to the next and is therefore of an un-stead
y or changing nature. The truths of cessation of the lesser vehicles 
and of [bodhisattvas] traveling the path of training do not constitute the ultimate quality. The Sanghas of arhats of the lesser vehicles and of noble bodhisattvas who are on the path of training are still with the fear of the veils. As long as they have not arrived at the level of a buddha who is free from fear, they themselves will take refuge in the Buddha as well. For these reasons, neither the two aspects of Dharma, that is, teaching and realization, which constitute the training, nor the 
114    Buddha Nature
assemblies of the noble ones who are the trainees, are the constant and 
stable supreme refuge.
In a true or deﬁnitive sense only a buddha is the ultimate refuge of 
the limitless number of sentient beings, since the Great Sage, the Bud-dha, is the embodiment of 
the dharmakaya, which is the completion 
of freedom from desire and attachment, and since the members of the assembly, the Sangha, also reach their ultimate [goal] when they attain the qualities of this [dharmakaya]. 
Here [in the context 
of the Mahayana Uttara Tantra Shastra] the Bud-
dha is called “the inexhaustible 
refuge,” “the permanent refuge,” “the 
immutable refuge” (Tib. g.yung drung gi skyabs ), and “the absolute 
refuge.” In the given order this explanation refers to the fact that a buddha is free from death, free from birth, free from aging, and that he is unfailing. This is also the intention of the Aryashrimalasutra (Tib. 
’phags pa dpal phreng gi mdo). (See also Part Three, annotation 16.)
B.II.2.1.4.3. Explanation of the meaning of the name “rare and sublime”
Their occurence is rare, they are free from defilement,
they possess power, they are the adornment of the world,they are sublime, and they are unchanging.Thus [they are named] “rare and sublime.”
One may wonder what is the meaning of the term “rare and sub-
lime” (Tib. dkon mchog). 
It is derived from the term “ratna” [Skt. for 
“jewel”] and is here deﬁned by means of six aspects corresponding 
to the properties of a precious [wish-fulﬁlling] gem.
A [wish-fulﬁlling] jewel is difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Its essence is free from 
deﬁlements. It possesses the power to fulﬁll needs and wishes. Due to its beauty it becomes an adornment. It is more sublime than an artiﬁcial gem and it does not change through being praised, blamed, and so on. Likewise, the occurrence of the three refuges is also rare, since those who have not cultivated the roots of virtue will not even meet them in the course of many kalpas or eons. The three refuges are free from the pollution of the two veils. They possess the inconceivable power of the qualities of clairvoyance and so on. Since they are the cause of all virtuous thoughts and intentions of sentient beings in the world, they have become its adornment. Since they are beyond the world, they are more sublime than anything worldly. Since they are not created by karma, mental poisons, and so on, they are unchanging. For these reasons they are similar to a precious [wish-fulﬁlling] gem and are therefore expressed by means of the name “rare and sublime.”
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      115
THE LAST FOUR VAJRA POINTS
B.II.2.2. Detailed explanation of the last four points describing the way the 
Three Jewels are attained
B.II.2.2.1. General explanation of the four points considered together
B.II.2.2.1.1. Explanation of the four 
points as being the object of perception 
of a buddha
The virtuous Three Jewels, which are rare and sublime,
arise from suchness bound up with pollution, from the one 
free from pollution,
from the qualities of unpolluted buddhahood, and from the 
deeds of the Victor.
This is the object of those who see the ultimate truth.
In the phase of [ordinary] beings the dharmadhatu is not freed from 
the covering of the mental poisons. In that phase it is called “the tatha-
gatagarbha.” This is suchness bound up with pollution. In the phase of the level of buddhahood this dharmadhatu is called “the dharma-kaya of th
e Tathagata.” The level of a buddha is characterized by a complete 
change or transformation of state, in that through cultivating the path this tathagatagarbha has become free from all the adventitious deﬁle-ments up to their very 
end. This is suchness free from pollution. What 
is linked with this dharmakaya are the buddha properties such as the powers and so on, constituting the fruits of freedom and of complete maturation. These properties are the qualities of unpolluted buddha-hood. Through the power 
of these qualities there is unsurpassable 
activity accomplishing the beneﬁt of sentient beings, spontaneously and uninterruptedly, in ways corresponding to each individual. This activity consists of the deeds of the Victor.
These four points constitute the cause and the conditions for the 
arising of the fruit, of the virtuous Three Jewels, which are rare and sublime. The way in which this arising takes place is inconceivable to shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, noble ones, and so on. This is solely the object of perception of buddhas who possess the ultimate primordial wisdom that directly sees the true state of everything or the absolute truth. (See also Part Three, annotation 17.)
B.II.2.2.1.2. Explanation that they are inconceivable
The disposition of the Three Rare and Sublime Ones
is the object [of vision] of those who see everything.Furthermore, these four aspects in the given orderare inconceivable, for the following four reasons:
116    Buddha Nature
The [last] four [vajra] points are the disposition bringing about the 
accomplishment of the Three Rare and Sublime Ones, constituting 
the cause and the conditions that give rise to this fruit. Their actual correct meaning is the object of perception of the primordial wisdom of buddhas alone who directly see all the aspects of the knowable. Furthermore, as for the meaning of the element and so on, these four aspects are inconceivable to ordinary beings. This is due to four rea-sons 
which will be explained in the next section according to the given 
sequence [of the last four vajra points]. 
B.II.2.2.1.3. Explanation why they are inconceivable
[The buddha element] is pure and yet has affliction.
[Enlightenment] was not afflicted and yet is purified.Qualities are totally indivisible [and yet unapparent].[Activity] is spontaneous and yet without any thought. 
Our nature of mind has been completely pure since beginningless 
time, and yet at the same time it has the afﬂiction through the adventi-
tious deﬁlements which ar e 
temporarily present. For this reason the 
meaning of the element is inconceivable.
Previously, enlightenment was 
not afﬂicted at all by the adventi-
tious
 deﬁlements, and yet later it has become utterly puriﬁed from all 
deﬁlements up to their very end through the cultivation of the path. For this reason the meaning of enlightenment is inconceivable.
On one hand the absolute qualities exist in the true state, which 
is also completely indivisible during the phase of an ordinary being who is bound up with afﬂiction. On the other hand, these qualities do not become apparent since their power does not unfold until buddhahood i s re
 ached. For this reason the meaning of the qualities 
is inconceivable.
The activity of a buddha fulﬁls the wishes and hopes of the disciples 
in correspondence to their respective karmic fortunes, and does so in a way that is free from deliberate effort, spontaneous, and at all times uninterrupted. Nevertheless it is completely free from thought and consideration, such as “this or that needs to be done” and so on. For this reason the meaning of activity is inconceivable.
These [four points] are inconceivable, as seemingly two contradic-
tory statements are made 
in relation to the same basis. In fact there is 
no contradiction: The element is a completely pure nature empty of the essence of the deﬁlements. Its impurity consists of the fact that it has adventitious deﬁlements. 
“Previous freedom from deﬁlements” means that the deﬁlements 
do not exist as the nature of the element. “Later purity” means that puriﬁcation from the deﬁlements is to be considered like gold being 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      117
puriﬁed from the surrounding dross. Although there is an absence of 
purity during the phase of an ordinary being, whereas later complete puriﬁcation from the deﬁlements is achieved, this later purity is na-tive to the tr ue 
state in a completely indivisible way. For this reason 
there is no contradiction.
Since in the phase of an ordinary being there is no puriﬁcation from 
the deﬁlements, the qualities are not [apparently] present. Neverthe-less, 
 when later puriﬁcation from the deﬁlements is achieved, [it 
proves that] the qualities exist in the true state in such a way that they are not able to be separated from it. This is similar to the following example: Though in the phase in which gold is not puriﬁed from the surrounding dross there is no luster, later luster will manifest in an inseparable way. Therefore again there is no contradiction.
Activity will be explained below in its own chapter by means of 
nine examples. (See also Part Three, annotation 18.)
B.II.2.2.1.4. Summary of the way realization takes place, by presenting the 
four points in terms of cause and conditions
Constituting what must be realized, realization,
its attributes, and the means to bring it about,accordingly the first is the cause to be purifiedand the [latter] three points are the conditions.
Being explained in this way, these [last] four vajra points also com-
prise all objects of knowledge. 
In this context the element, bound up 
with pollution, constitutes what is to be realized. Enlightenment free 
from pollution is the very essence of realization. The qualities linked with enlightenment are the attributes of this realization. Activity is the power of these qualities causing all other [sentient beings] to realize this element as well. For this reason, the ﬁrst of the four vajra points in their given sequence, that is, suchness bound up with pollution, is the cause to be puriﬁed. This is because the Three Rare and Sublime Ones arise from the fact that this suchness has been completely puriﬁed from any deﬁlement. The last three vajra points are the conditions causing this puriﬁcation. (See also Part Three, annotation 19.)
THE FOURTH VAJRA POINT: THE ELEMENT
B.II.2.2.2. Specific explanation of the four points considered separatelyB.II.2.2.2.1. The element is what needs to be realizedB.II.2.2.2.1.1. Short explanation of the meaning of the element
The perfect buddhakaya is all-embracing,
suchness cannot be differentiated,
118    Buddha Nature
and all beings have the disposition.
Thus they always have buddha nature. 
The Buddha has said that all beings have buddha nature
“since buddha wisdom is always present within the assembly 
of beings,
since this undefiled nature is free from duality,and since the disposition to buddhahood has been named after 
its fruit.”
The dharmakaya of a perfect buddha embraces and pervades all 
phenomena. With regard to suchness or the true state of the entirety 
of samsara and nirvana, there is not the slightest differentiation. The disposition of the Tathagata is present within all sentient beings in terms of the dharmadhatu being by nature pure and its veils being able to be puriﬁed. For these reasons all sentient beings have had the nature of the absolute Buddha, always and uninterruptedly, since beginningless time. As it is said in the sutras: “The Buddha Bhaghavat has said ‘all sentient beings always have the tathagatagarbha.’”
With regar d 
to [the three reasons given above], the great translator 
from Ngog (Tib. rngog lo chen po, i.e. Lodän Sherab, who ﬁrst translated the Mahayana Uttara Tantra Shastra into Tibetan) states the following: 
In the given sequence they represent the sugatagarbha in terms 
of the fruit, the sugatagarbha in terms of the nature, and the sug-atagarbha in terms of the 
cause. The ﬁrst is the dharmakaya. This 
is the real Tathagata, whereas the nature of beings is only named after it. Since it is able to be attained by beings, it is explained as being all-pervasive. The second is the real nature of both a Ta-thagata and beings. When mer
ely considered from the aspect of 
suchness being by nature completely pure, the sugatagarbha [or tathagatagarbha] is really present within a Tathagata and beings alike. The third is the real nature of beings. Since it is the cause of the Tathagata, it has been named after it.
At this point the noble Asanga states [in his commentary]:
In brief, there are three reasons for which all beings have the nature of the Tathagata. The Bhagavan has said: “All beings have bud-dha nature, since buddha 
wisdom is always present within the 
assembly of beings, since this undeﬁled nature is free from duality and since the disposition to buddhahood has been named after its fruit.” These three reasons have been taught extensively in all the words of the Buddha. With respect to this they are explained as follows: due to the fact that the dharmakaya of the Tathagata em-braces all beings, that the 
suchness of the Tathagata is completely 
indivisible and that they have the disposition of the Tathagata...
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      119
In some commenting scriptures these lines do not appear. Yet they 
have been quoted and explained extensively by Golo (Tib. ’gos lo), 
Könchön (Tib. dkon gzhon), Rongtön (Tib. rong ston), and others, and they have been explained in detail by the Great Venerable Jonangpa (T›ran›tha) and others. Nevertheless they seem to have been omitted in present-day scriptures. (See also Part Three, annotation 20.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2. Detailed explanation of the intended meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.1. Short explanation by means of a brief survey
Essence, cause, fruit, function, endowment, manifestation,
phases, all-pervasiveness of suchness, unchangingness,and inseparability of the qualities should be understoodas intended to describe the meaning of the absolute expanse.
It should be understood that the intention behind the following ten 
points is to determine the meaning of the dharmadhatu, which is by 
nature utterly pure, being equivalent to the true state of everything or the absolute truth. They represent a systematic order that classiﬁes this meaning fully and properly:
The points “essence” and “cause” describe the features of purity and 
puriﬁcation. The points “fruit” and “function” describe the feature of accomplishment. The topic “endowment” describes the multitude of qualities. The topic “manifestation” describes the fact that there is [a difference in] manifestation due to different kinds of individuals. The topic “phases” describes the fact that there is only a classiﬁcation in terms of names. The topic “all-pervasiveness” describes the fact that suchness is all-pervasive like space. The topic “unchangingness” de-scribes the fact that the 
dharmadhatu is at all times free from change, 
and the topic “inseparability of the qualities” describes the fact that the qualities are completely inseparable [from it].
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2. Detailed classification of the meaning of the brief survey
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1. Essence and causeB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.1. Joint explanation of what 
is to be purified and the means 
of purification
Just as a jewel, the sky, and water are pure
it is by nature always free from the poisons.From devotion to the Dharma, from highest wisdom, and from samadhi and compassion [its realization  
arises].
120    Buddha Nature
Just as a precious jewel, the sky, and water are by nature pure, like-
wise 
the tathagatagarbha or dharmadhatu is by nature always free from 
the deﬁlement of the mental poisons and thus utterly pure. Whereas this 
is the meaning of the essence, the cause that completely puriﬁes the adventitious deﬁlements consists of devotion towards the Mahayana Dharma, of highest discriminative or analytical wisdom realizing the non-existence of a self, of limitless samadhi endowed with bliss, and of great compassion focusing on sentient beings as its point of reference. The realization arising from these [purifying causes] is to be known as enlightenment. (See also Part Three, annotation 21.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2. Separate explanation of the essence of each
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2.1. The essence being what is to be purified
[Wielding] power, not changing into something else,
and being a nature that has a moistening [quality]:these [three] have properties correspondingto those of a precious gem, the sky, and water.
When considered from the viewpoint of the speciﬁc characteristic 
of each, the three aspects of nature explained above are to be known 
[to have properties corresponding to the speciﬁc characteristics of a precious jewel, the sky, and water, respectively]. Since the dharmakaya wields the power to accomplish all wishes and intentions just as they are, and so on, it has a property corresponding to that of a precious [wish-fulﬁlling] gem. Since throughout all phases suchness does not change into another nature, it has a property corresponding to that of the sky. Since the disposition is a nature having a moistening quality, as it is endowed with compassion that pervades all beings, it has a property corresponding to the quality of water. 
When considered from the viewpoint of the general characteristic 
native to all three [there is also a common property]. Since they are permanently free from deﬁlement and by nature utterly pure, they have a property corresponding to the quality of a wish-fulﬁlling gem, the sky, and water, which are [also] by nature pure.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2.2. The cause being the means of purification
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2.2.1. The way the four 
veils to be abandoned are given 
up
Enmity towards the Dharma, a view [asserting
an existing] self, fear of samsara’s suffering,
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      121
and neglect of the welfare of fellow beings
are the four veils of those with great desire,of tirthikas, shravakas, and pratyekabuddhas.The cause that purifies [all these veils]consists of the four qualities [of the path],which are outstanding devotion and so on.
Generally speaking there are three types of sentient beings, namely 
those who desire existence, those who desire freedom from existence, 
and those who desire neither of these two. These individuals are the basis for four types of veils that arise in their streams of being and are to be abandoned. These four veils are hostility towards the Mahayana Dharma, a view asserting the person and so on to be an existing self, desire for personal happiness and peace that results from fear of the suffering of samsara, and unconcern about the accomplishment of the 
welfare of fellow beings. In the given sequence [these correspond to the following individuals]: Firstly there is a correspondence to those who desire existence. These are beings who have the disconnected disposition and beings of great desire who have deﬁnitely fallen into the cycle of existence. Secondly there is a correspondence to those who desire freedom from existence. These are the tirthikas [and so on] who desire freedom from existence but apply inappropriate means, and the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas who desire freedom from existence and apply appropriate means. Due to [the presence of these individu-als] there ar e 
four types of veils preventing the immediate manifesta-
tion of the tathagatagarbha. The 
ﬁrst obscures the aspect of the purity 
of the dharmakaya. The second obscures the aspect of its being true self. The third obscures the aspect of its being true happiness, and the fourth obscures the aspect that the dharmakaya is of true permanence. The cause that puriﬁes these veils consists of the four qualities of the path, which are outstanding devotion towards the sacred Dharma and so on, that is, the perfection of discriminative wisdom, immeasurable samadhi, and great compassion. (See also Part Three, annotation 22, and Part Four, note 2.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.1.2.2.2. The way to become an heir of the Victorious One by 
means of the antidote
Those whose seed is devotion towards the supreme vehicle,
whose mother is analytical wisdom generating the buddha 
qualities,
122    Buddha Nature
whose abode is the blissful womb of meditative stability,
and whose nurse is compassion, are heirs born to succeed  
the Muni.
There are four reasons due to which the son of a Chakravartin has 
the power to become the legitimate successor to the king. These are the 
seed of the king, his pure queen, the unimpaired abode of her womb, and the exceptional nurse who nourishes the child as he grows. Using this example it can be said that devotion towards the supreme vehicle is the seed of the Buddha. Discriminative wisdom that realizes the true nature of everything is like the mother, generating all buddha quali-ties. Since the happiness of 
meditative stability, such as “the treasury 
of space” and so on, augments these qualities, it is similar to the abode of the womb. Since great compassion nourishes whatever has been generated, it is like a nurse. Whoever arises from these four qualities is called a bodhisattva or an heir or child of the Victorious One, since he is born to succeed the Muni and has the power to be his successor. (See also Part Three, annotation 23.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2. Fruit and function
B.II.
2.2.2.1.2.2.2.1. Joint explanation of what is to be attained and what 
causes attainment
The fruit is the perfection of the qualities
of purity, self, happiness, and permanence.Weariness of suffering, longing to attain peace,and devotion towards this aim are the function.
The absolute expanse has two particular features, which are its fruit 
and its function. The particularity of the fruit consists of the perfection 
of four qualities, being true purity, true self, true happiness, and true permanence. Since it acts to induce weariness of the suffering of samsara, longing to attain the peace of nirvana, and devotion towards this aim, it has a particular function. (See also Part Three, annotation 24.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2. Separate explanation of the essence of each
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.1. The fruit being what is to be attainedB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.1.1. The way to eliminate 
whatever is incorrect and thus 
needs to be abandoned
In brief, the fruit of these [purifying causes]
fully divides into the remedies [for the antidotes],which [in their turn] counteract the four aspectsof wrong beliefs with regard to the dharmakaya.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      123
The causes purifying the dharmadhatu are devotion, discriminative 
wisdom, meditative stability, and compassion. Put brieﬂy, the fruit of 
these four [purifying] causes consists of four aspects: With regard to the dharmakaya, the children entertain a strong attachment in terms of the belief in purity, in the existence of a self, in happiness, and in permanence. Shravakas and pratyekabuddhas reverse these four aspects of an exaggerated view [of a view wrongly asserting reality where it is not present]. In doing so they get attached to [their vision of] impurity, non-existence of self, suffering, and impermanence. The four aspects of the [true] purity of dharmakaya and so on act as the remedies for this attachment. [The four purifying causes] are the means to bring about their perfection. Thus the full division [of the fruit] is achieved. (See also Part Three, annotation 25.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.1.2. The way a fourfold fruit is attained by abandon-
ment
The [dharmakaya] is purity, since its nature is pure
and [even] the remaining imprints are fully removed.It is true self, since all conceptual elaboration in terms of self and non-self is totally stilled.It is true happiness, since [even] the aggregatesof mental nature and their causes are reversed.It is permanence, since the cycle of existence
and the state beyond pain are realized as one.
Buddha-dharmakaya, which is the fruit, has the general character-
istic of having been by 
nature utterly pure since beginningless time, 
and it has the speciﬁc characteristic of the adventitious stains along 
with their remaining imprints being eliminated without any exception. Thus it constitutes the perfection of purity.
The conceptual elaboration consisting of the belief in the existence 
of a self as it is imputed by the tirthikas and so on, and the conceptual elaboration consisting of the belief in the non-existence of a self as it is imputed by the shravakas and so on, have been totally stilled and paciﬁed without any remainder. Thus it is the perfection of true self.
All suffering has been ceased without any exception. This is because 
karma and the mental poisons have been totally eliminated, up to the point that [even] the skandhas, which are of mental nature, and their causes have been exhausted. These causes are on one hand the subtle mental poisons present on the level of the remaining imprints of ig-norance, and on the other 
hand the undeﬁled karma. Since even these 
causes have been entirely reversed and exhausted, the dharma-kaya is the perfection of happiness.
Samsara and nirvana, the cycle 
of existence and the state beyond 
124    Buddha Nature
torment and pain, have been realized as being equal in that they are 
not two different things that should be rejected and adopted, respec-tively. Thus the two 
beneﬁts are uninterrupted and the dharmakaya 
constitutes the perfection of permanence.
In this context the gr eat omniscient Dolpopa has stated: 
Furthermore, since the absolute expanse is by nature completely 
pure, there is not even the slightest need to remove a fault in terms of the impermanence of samsara. Therefore it does not fall into the extreme of nihilism. Since it has been spontaneously present since beginningless time, there is not even the slightest need to add a quality in terms of the permanence of nirvana. Therefore it does not fall into the extreme of eternalism. Not falling into either of these, 
it is established as the nirvana free from the two extremes. 
(See also Part Three, annotation 26.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.1.3. The way this attainment liberates one from the two 
extremes
Their analytical wisdom has cut all self-cherishing without 
exception.
Yet, cherishing beings, those possessed of compassion do not 
adhere to peace.
Relying on understanding and compassionate love, the means 
to enlightenment,
noble ones will neither [abide] in samsara nor in a [limited] 
nirvana.
By means of discriminative wisdom realizing the non-existence of 
a self, bodhisattvas have cut, without any exception, all the cherish-
ing and attachment of viewing 
the skandhas as a self, along with the 
dormant tendencies of this attachment. Since this [craving] is elimi-nated, they do not fall 
into the extreme of existence as do those who 
are dominated by great desire. Yet, due to their great compassion they cherish all sentient beings. They feel linked and close to them all and therefore bring about their beneﬁt. For this reason bodhisattvas pos-sessi
ng compassionate love do not fall into another extreme either. They 
do not attain that state of peace that merely consists of the paciﬁcation of suffering, as do shravakas and pratyekabuddhas. Thus they rely on two particular means to attain unsurpassable enlightenment. These are the understanding or discriminative wisdom realizing the non-exis-tence of a self, and 
the great love and compassion focused on sentient 
beings as their point of reference. Relying on these particular means, the noble heirs of the Victorious One who cultivate their practice on this basis will not dwell in any extreme. Neither abiding in the extreme 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      125
of samsara in terms of existence, nor abiding in the extreme of nirvana 
in terms of [mere] peace, they have achieved the direct manifestation of non-abiding nirvana. (See also Part Three, annotation 27.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.2. The function being what causes attainment
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.2.1. Explanation of the disposition’s 
function by means 
of the contrary
If the buddha element were not present,
there would be no remorse over suffering.There would be no longing for nirvana,nor striving and devotion towards this aim.
[Here the presence of the disposition to buddhahood is proven 
by using the contrary, i.e. its supposed non-presence, as a means of 
proof.]
Supposing that the buddha element was deﬁnitely not present, not 
a single person would grow to feel sorrow and remorse over the suf-
ferin
g of samsara. No one would long to attain nirvana. No one would 
strive for this aim, exerting himself to apply the means to attain it, nor would anyone have devotion in terms of the wish: “If only I attained it!” Contrary to this, the generation of sorrow, remorse, and so on is present. Since these are the function of the disposition, the disposition 
to buddhahood is established as being present. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.2.2.2.2. Explanation of the particular feature being the power 
of the disposition by means of deduction
That with regard to existence and nirvana their respective fault 
and quality are seen,
that suffering is seen as the fault of existence and happiness as 
the quality of nirvana,
stems from the presence of the disposition to buddhahood. 
“Why so?”
In those who are devoid of disposition, such seeing does not 
occur.
There are individuals who possess the so-called four wheels. These 
consist of the fact that one relies on a saintly being, lives in a favorable 
place, has formerly practiced virtue, and makes genuine and pure wish-ing prayers. With r 
egard to samsara and nirvana, or to existence and 
peace, such an individual sees them for what they are. He perceives their respective fault and quality and sees that suffering is the fault of samsara and that happiness is the quality of nirvana. Upon seeing this, such a person feels weariness with the fault, which is the suffering of samsara, and joy over the quality, which is the happiness of nirvana. 
126    Buddha Nature
This weariness and joy arise from the presence of the disposition to 
buddhahood. One might wonder for what reason this can be said. The reason is that this understanding of what is to be adopted and what is to be rejected will not be present in someone who is subject to craving for what is wrong and does not have the awakened disposition. Such a person does not see the respective fault and quality of existence and peace until he has developed devotion towards the teaching of one of the three vehicles, depending upon which of these is suitable for this particular person. In this context [the root text speaks of there being no disposition]. Since it is impossible that the naturally present disposition is not there, this explanation is rather [to be understood] by means of the different kinds of disposition, and it seems that by the term “non-present disposition” the unawakened disposition is taught. (See also Part Three, annotation 28 and Part Four, note 1.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3. Endowment
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3.1. Joint explanation of the qualities of cause and fruit
Like the great sea, it holds qualities
immeasurable, precious, and inexhaustible.Its essence holds indivisible properties.Thus [the element] is similar to a lamp.
This element has two types of qualities: those in terms of the cause 
and those in terms of the fruit. 
The qualities in terms of the cause: As, for example, the great ocean 
contains in its vast vessel an immeasurable amount of jewels and water, 
likewise the element of the Tathagata is the abode that [uniﬁes] the ves-sel o 
f devotion, the immeasurable jewel-qualities of analytical wisdom 
and samadhi, and the inexhaustible waters of compassion.
The qualities in terms of 
the fruit: Its essence has qualities that are 
inseparable from it, these being the ﬁrst ﬁve kinds of clairvoyance, unpolluted primordial wisdom, and abandonment. Taking an example, it is therefore similar to a lamp in that the three properties of a lamp, which are light, warmth, and color, are inseparable from the lamp 
itself. (See also Part Three, annotation 29.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3.2. Particular explanation of the individual essence of each
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3.2.1. Endowment in terms of the cause
Unifying the elements of dharmakaya,
a victor’s wisdom, and great compassion,it is shown as being similar to the seaby the vessel, the gems, and the water.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      127
The dharmadhatu contains devotion, which is the cause of the 
completely pure dharmakaya, discriminative wisdom and samadhi, 
which are the causes for the attainment of the primordial wisdom of a Victorious One, and compassion, which is the element or the cause for the manifestation of the great compassion of a buddha. Since it hosts these without any exception, it has three properties corresponding to the e xamples of the vessel, the jewels, and the water. Due to this cor-
respondence the dharmadhatu 
is shown as being similar to the great 
ocean. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.3.2.2. Endowment in terms of the fruit
Clairvoyance, primordial wisdom, and absence of pollution
are totally indivisible and native to the unstained abode.Thus it has properties correspondingto the light, heat, and color of a lamp.
The sugatagarbha or the element, the abode which is by nature free 
from deﬁlement, possesses [seven] particular properties correspond-
ing, if one takes an 
example, to the particular properties of a lamp. 
These are the ﬁrst ﬁve kinds of clairvoyance, unpolluted primordial wisdom, and abandonment, which is freedom from deﬁlement. The ﬁrst ﬁve kinds of clairvoyance over
come the darkness of their opposites. 
Unpolluted primordial wisdom [overcomes] the veils, and through abandonment, in terms of freedom from deﬁlement, [the aspects of] purity and clear light [are present]. The sugatagarbha has [furthermore] a general property that also corresponds to that of a lamp. Just as the three particular properties of a lamp are inseparable from it, likewise the element possesses these seven properties of no-more-learning in such a way that they are completely inseparable from it. For these reasons it possesses properties corresponding to the light, heat, and color of a lamp, and to the fact that these are indivisible from the lamp itself. 
The seven properties of 
no-more-learning exist as the fruit aspect 
of the element and are therefore the endowment in terms of the fruit. (See also Part Three, annotation 30.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.4. Manifestation
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.4.1. Short explanation of the reason
Based upon the manifestation of suchness dividing
into that of an ordinary being, that of a noble one,and that of a perfect buddha, He who Sees Thatnesshas explained the nature of the Victor to beings.
128    Buddha Nature
The manifestation of suchness fully divides into three aspects: the 
suchness of an ordinary being, the suchness of a noble one, and the 
suchness of a perfect buddha. Taking these different manifestations as a basis, the Omniscient One who Directly Sees Thatness has explained the nature of the victorious Tathagata, or in other words, the completely pure dharmadhatu, in a very clear way to those fortunate beings who have become [suitable] disciples. (See also Part Three, annotation 31, and Part Four, note 3.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.4.2. Detailed explanation of the reason
[It manifests as] perverted [views in] ordinary beings,
[as] the reversal [of these in] those who see the truth,and [it manifests] as it is, in an unperverted way,and as freedom from elaboration [in] a tathagata.
There are three particular ways in which [suchness] manifests in 
terms of an understanding. Since ordinary beings who are children 
[in comparison to noble ones] believe in permanence, it manifests as a perverted or wrong sense-perception, as a wrong way of thinking, and as wrong views. Noble ones who follow [the path of] practice and thus see the Four [Noble] Truths have reversed this distortion. In them it manifests in the manner that the ﬁrm belief in permanence is abandoned. A tathagata has abandoned the two veils. Therefore it manifests as it is, in accordance with reality, in an unperverted way, and as freedom from any conceptual elaboration. In this way the individuals who constitute the basis divide into three different kinds. Accordingly, suchness or the dharmadhatu, which is supported by this basis, also gains three different aspects. It should be noted that the topic “manifestation” will be explained below in yet another manner by means of four aspects. (See also Part Three, annotation 32.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.5. Phases
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.5.1. The way a name is attached to three phases
The unpurified, the both unpurified and purified,
and the utterly purified [phases]are expressed in their given order[by the names] “being,” “bodhisattva,” and “tathagata.”
There are three different phases. The unpuriﬁed phase is the one 
in which the absolute expanse or the tathagatagarbha has not been 
puriﬁed from the adventitious deﬁlements even to a minute degree. The both unpuriﬁed and puriﬁed phase is the one in which the ta-thagata-garbha is not completely puriﬁed 
from all [deﬁlements]  to 
be abandoned through seeing and meditation, but is puriﬁed [from 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      129
these] to a certain degree. The utterly puriﬁed phase is the one in 
which the tathagatagarbha is completely puriﬁed from the two veils. These three phases are expressed and explained by means of three different names, which are “being,” “bodhisattva,” and “tathagata.” Considering the fact that there are three different ways of manifesta-tion, one might wonder whether 
there are different kinds of suchness. 
This section has been elucidated in order to dispel such doubts. (See also Part Three, annotation 33.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.5.2. The way these three names contain six topics
The element as contained
in the six topics of “essence” and so onis explained in the light of three phasesby means of three names.
In the foregoing sections the element that is by nature completely 
pure has been elucidated extensively by means of six topics: the topic 
“essence” and so forth, that is, the [further] topics “cause,” “fruit,” “function,” “endowment,” and “manifestation.” This element is only explained as being of different kinds inasmuch as there are three phases: the unpuriﬁed phase, the partly unpuriﬁed and partly puri-ﬁed phase, and the utterly 
puriﬁed phase. These are identiﬁed by 
means of the three names “being,” “bodhisattva,” and “tathagata.” With regard to the essence of the subject, however, there is not the 
slightest difference. (See also Part Three, annotation 34.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.6. All-pervasiveness
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.6.1. Explanation of the essence
Just as space, which is by nature free from thought,
pervades everything,the undefiled expanse, which is the nature of mind,is all-pervading.
Space, for example, which is by nature free from thought and un-
obscured, pervades and embraces everything visible in an undiffer-
entiated way. Likewise, the 
dharmadhatu, which has been free from 
deﬁlement since beginningless time, or in other words, clear light, the natur e of mind, also 
pervades all the phases of the individual in an 
undifferentiated and all-embracing way.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.6.2. Explanation of the different types
As the general feature [of everything], it embraces [those with] 
faults,
[those with] qualities, and [those in whom the qualities are] 
ultimate
130    Buddha Nature
just as space [pervades everything] visible,
be it of inferior, average, or supreme appearance.
The dharmadhatu, which is by nature completely pure, is the 
general feature (Tib. spyi’i mtshan nyid) or true state (Tib. chos nyid) of 
all phenomena. Therefore this dharmadhatu pervades all phases. It 
equally permeates the phase of an ordinary being who is beset with faults, the phase of a bodhisattva who has qualities, and the phase of a tathagata in whom the qualities are ultimate. Taking an example, this is similar to the way in which space pervades everything visible, permeating a visible object of inferior appearance, such as a vessel made of clay, in the same way as one of average appearance, such as a vessel made of copper, and one of supreme appearance, such as a 
vessel made of gold. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7. Unchangingness
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.1. Concise explanation of the essence
Having faults that are adventitious
and qualities that are its nature,it is afterwards the same as before.This is dharmata ever unchanging.
Although with regard to the dharmadhatu three phases are present, 
it does not have the fault of not being changeless. In the unpuriﬁed 
phase faults are present. These faults, however, do not truly exist. They are merely adventitious and able to be removed. In the puriﬁed phase, qualities have emerged. The nature of these qualities, however, is not something that has newly arisen. They are spontaneously present. For these reasons the dharmadhatu is afterwards, in the completely puri-ﬁed phase, the same as 
it was before in the unpuriﬁed phase. It does 
not undergo the slightest change. This changelessness is the nature or true state of the dharmadhatu.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2. Detailed explanation of unchangingness throughout the 
three phases
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1. Unchangingness in the unpurified phase
B.II.
2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.1. The way the essence is not polluted by the defile-
ments
[Though] space permeates everything,
it is never polluted, due to its subtlety.Likewise the [dharmadhatu] in all beingsdoes not suffer the slightest pollution.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      131
Uncompounded space, for example, permeates all compounded vis-
ible 
objects in an all-pervasive way. Yet space is subtle. It is not coarse as 
is a visible object. Due to this subtlety it is not in the slightest polluted 
by the faults of the visible, such as being impermanent and so forth. Likewise the tathagatagarbha, the dharmadhatu which is clear light, abides all-pervasively within all beings as the nature of their minds. Yet this dharmadhatu is by nature completely pure. For this reason it never suffers the slightest pollution from the faults of beings, such as their mental poisons and so on.
B.II.
2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.2. The way there is appearance of arising and disintegra-
tion as far as the subject is concerned
Just as at all times worlds arise
and disintegrate in space,the senses arise and disintegratein the uncreated expanse.
At all times and throughout all phases the worlds of the outer vessel 
rely on the opportunity provided by space. They appear on this basis 
as something that ﬁrst comes into existence and ﬁnally disintegrates. In the same way the sense faculties, here standing for the skandhas, elements, and entrances of beings, rely on the quality of the dharma-dhatu: the fact that the dharmadhatu is not created by causes and conditions. Though they appear on this basis as something that ﬁrst comes into existence and in the end disintegrates, with regard to the tathagatagarbha, or true state, arising and disintegration do not exist. (See also Part Three, annotation 35, and Part Four, note 4.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.3. The way the true state is not harmed by destruction
Space is never burnt by fires.
Likewise this [dharmadhatu]is not burnt by the firesof death, sickness, and aging.
All compounded things are burnt by three types of ﬁre, being the 
ﬁre at the end of time, the ﬁre of hell, and natural or ordinary ﬁre. 
Until now, however, space, being uncompounded, has never been burnt by any of these three types of ﬁre. As shown by this example, all sentient beings are burnt by the three ﬁres of death and so on. This dharmadhatu or buddha nature, however, is never even singed by any of these three ﬁres. It is not burnt by the ﬁre of death, corresponding to the ﬁre at the end of time, of sickness, corresponding to the ﬁre of hell, or of aging, corresponding to natural ﬁre. (See also Part Three, annotation 36.)
132    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4. Detailed explanation of interdependent origination
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1. Explanation of the way generation takes place, by 
combining an example and its meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1.1. Example
Earth rests upon water and water upon wind.
Wind fully rests on space.Space does not rest upon any of the elementsof wind, water, or earth.
At the time when the element of the world comes into existence and 
while it abides, the great circle of the earth is based upon the circle of 
water. Water is based upon the circle of wind. Wind fully rests upon space. Although they rely on it, space in its turn does not rest upon any of the elements of wind, water, or earth. This is because space does not depend upon causes and conditions.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1.2. Meaning
Likewise skandhas, elements, and senses
are based upon karma and mental poisons.Karma and poisons are always basedupon improper conceptual activity.The improper conceptual activityfully abides on the purity of mind.Yet, the nature of the mind itselfhas no basis in all these phenomena.
Corresponding to the example given above, the ﬁve skandhas, the 
eighteen elements, and the six sense-faculties, all of which are bound 
up with pollution, along with the six sense-objects are based upon karma and the mental poisons. Karma and the mental poisons are always based upon improper conceptual activity, such as perceiving as a self [what does not exist as a self] and so on. The improper con-ceptual activity is fully based 
upon the purity of the mind, which is 
by nature clear light. Yet, this luminous nature of mind is not based upon any of these adventitious phenomena. This is because this clear light, which is the nature of mind, is uncreated. (See also Part Three, 
annotation 37.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1.3. Joint explanation of the 
example and its mean-
ing
The skandhas, entrances, and elements
are to be known as resembling earth.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      133
Karma and the mental poisons of beings
should be envisaged as the water element.Improper conceptual activity is viewedas being similar to the element of wind.[Mind’s] nature, as the element of space,has no ground and no place of abiding.
The ﬁve skandhas, which attract suffering, the twelve entrances, 
and the eighteen elements form on the support of karma and the 
mental poisons. This is to be understood as being similar to the way in which the circle of earth comes into existence on the basis of water. The element of water acts as the condition bringing about the forma-tion of the cir cle 
of earth. Similar to this, the polluted karma and the 
mental poisons of beings should be known to constitute the condition for the formation of the skandhas, entrances, and elements. The ele-ment of wind acts as 
the basis for the circle of water. The improper 
conceptual activity should be viewed and understood as being similar to this, since it stirs up mental poisons and karma and fully activates 
them. The element of space acts as the basis for everything and yet is not based upon anything. In the same way the nature of mind, the tathagatagarbha, acts as the support for everything adventitious, yet its very own essence has no basis in any ground and does not abide anywhere. (See also Part Three, annotation 38.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.1.4. The way generation takes place
The improper conceptual activity
rests upon the nature of the mind.Improper conceptual activity brings aboutall the classes of karma and mental poisons.From the water of karma and mental poisonsthe skandhas, entrances, and elements arise.As this [world] arises and disintegrates,they will arise and disintegrate as well.
In the same way as the circle of wind rests upon space, the thoughts 
constituting an improper conceptual activity rest upon the luminous 
nature of the mind in such a way that they obscure it. As wind supports water, the improper conceptual activity creates all the different kinds of opportunity for the development of mental poisons and karma. In the same way as the ground of the earth emerges from the circle of water being churned, likewise the polluted skandhas, entrances, and elements, all the existences consisting of suffering, emerge from the wa-ter-l
ike karma and mental poisons. Therefore the skandhas, entrances, 
and elements bound up with pollution will arise and disintegrate, just as this vessel of the world arises and disintegrates.
134    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.2. Explanation that the essence is undefiled and free 
from extremes
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.2.1. The way the essence is free from arising and cessa-
tion
The nature of mind as the element of space
does not [depend upon] causes or conditions,nor does it [depend on] a gathering of these.It has neither arising, cessation, nor abiding.
Like the uncreated element of space, the nature of mind, which is 
luminous dharmadhatu, does not depend upon productive causes and 
it does not depend upon simultaneously active conditions. It therefore does not depend upon a gathering of these causes and conditions either. For this reason it does not have an initial arising nor a ﬁnal disintegration, nor does it abide in the meantime. Therefore it does not suffer the slightest change through the three properties native to everything created. (See also Part Three, annotation 39.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.2.2. The way its purity is not touched by defile-
ments
This clear and luminous nature of mind
is as changeless as space. It is not afflictedby desire and so on, the adventitious stains,which are sprung from incorrect thoughts.
The nature of space is not changed through clouds, smoke, and 
so on. In the same way, the tathagatagarbha, the clear and luminous 
nature of the minds of all beings, is changeless. It is not in the slightest altered by the fact that the veils are puriﬁed or unpuriﬁed, and so on. There are adventitious deﬁlements consisting of the afﬂiction of birth, the afﬂiction of karma, and the afﬂiction of the mental poisons such as desire, hatred, mental blindness, and so on, all of which are sprung from improper conceptual activity, from incorrect thoughts that conceive in a way not corresponding to reality. The true state is changeless since it is by nature utterly pure and will constantly remain unafﬂicted by these adventitious deﬁlements, which are able to be removed. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.3. Summary of the example and meaning of arising 
and disintegration
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.3.1. Summary of the way 
the nature of mind is free 
from arising and disintegration
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      135
It is not brought into existence
by the water of karma, of the poisons, and so on.Hence it is also not consumed by the cruel firesof dying, falling sick, and aging.
This nature of mind, or luminous dharmadhatu, is not generated 
and brought into existence by the wind of improper conceptual activity, 
by the waters of karma and the mental poisons, and so on. Hence it is also not consumed and destroyed by the cruel ﬁres of dying, falling sick, and aging, which [correspond respectively to] the ﬁre at the end of time, the ﬁre of hell, and ordinary ﬁre. This is because it is of an un-compounded natur e and thus does not change into something else.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.1.4.3.2. Summary of the way disintegration takes place
The three fires of death, sickness, and aging
are to be understood in their given sequenceas resembling the fire at the end of time,the fire of hell, and an ordinary fire.
In their given sequence the three ﬁres of death, sickness, and aging 
are to be understood as being similar to three ﬁres, which are the ﬁre 
at the end of time, the ﬁre of hell, and ordinary ﬁre. This is due to the following reasons: Just as the vessel of this world is destroyed by the ﬁre at the end of time, the skandhas of this life are destroyed by the ﬁre of death. Just as the ﬁre of hell generates suffering, so also does the ﬁre of sickness. Just as ordinary ﬁre causes the ﬁnal ripening of anything compounded, the ﬁre of aging causes the ﬁnal ripening of the skandhas.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2. Unchangingness in the partly 
unpurified and partly 
purified phase
B.II.
2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1. Explanation of the fact that there is no change through 
birth and so forth
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1.1. The way bodhisattvas appear 
as being subject to 
change although they are not
Having realized thatness, the nature of the [dharmadhatu],  
just as it is,
those of understanding are released from birth, sickness, ag-
ing, and death.
Though free from the destitution of birth and so on, they dem-
onstrate these,
since by their [insight] they have given rise to compassion  
136    Buddha Nature
for beings.
Noble bodhisattvas have directly realized thatness. They have real-
ized the nature or 
the way of existence of the tathagatagarbha, of the 
dharmadhatu, just as it is. Since they abide with this realization, they 
are liberated from birth, which brings new skandhas into existence, from death, which ends the stream of being, from sickness, which generates suffering, and from aging, which transforms the stream of being. With their insight they are free from the suffering and destitu-tion of birth and so 
on, which come about due to the predominating 
inﬂuence of karma and mental poisons. They are completely pure and not subject to change. Yet, due to their realization of the dharmadhatu just as it is, bodhisattvas who possess understanding have given rise to great compassion for all those beings who have not gained such insight. Their compassion leads them to wish that all sentient beings may be freed from their suffering to its last traces. Since they abide with this great compassion, they adhere to and stay within samsara. By the power of their wishing prayers for the beneﬁt of others, and so on, they are born into any existence corresponding to their intention. In order to reverse the belief in permanence, they die, fall ill, age, and so on. Thus they show themselves to the vision of others (Tib. gzhan 
snang) as someone who is impure as well, and subject to change. (See also Part Thr ee, annotation 40.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1.2. Detailed explanation of the foregoing section’s mean-
ing
B.I
I.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1.2.1. The way bodhisattvas are not subject to the change 
caused by suffering
The noble have eradicated the suffering
of dying, falling ill, and aging at its root,which is being born due to karma and poisons.There being no such [cause], there is no such [fruit].
The members of the Assembly of noble bodhisattvas have eradicated 
the sufferings of helplessly and powerlessly dying, falling ill, and ag-
ing at their r oot. 
The causes of these sufferings are improper mental 
activity, mental poisons, and karma, and the fact that one is born within samsara due to their predominating inﬂuence. Since bodhisattvas are free from these causes, they are also free from the change caused by suffering, which is their fruit.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.1.2.2. The way they appear as being subject to change 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      137
out of their compassion
Since they have seen reality as it is,
they are beyond being born and so on.Yet, as the embodiment of compassion itselfthey display birth, illness, old age, and death.
The noble heirs of the Victorious One see reality as it is. They directly 
perceive the dharmadhatu, which is unborn and changeless. For this 
reason they are beyond the sufferings of being helplessly delivered to a birth in samsara and so on. Although they are completely liberated from these sufferings, they show themselves in manifold appearances totally subject to change. For those beings who have not gained a realization such as theirs they have become the embodiment of great compassion. Out of this compassion they display the appearance of birth and are born in an existence corresponding to their intention. They demonstrate the appearance of death, sickness, and aging, and thus lead the disciples to complete maturation in correspondence with their respective karmic fortunes.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2. Identification of the qualities of the heirs of the Vic-
torious One who dwell on the ten bodhisattva levels
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.1. The qualities of a 
bodhisattva who has first given 
rise to bodhichitta
After the heirs of the Victorious One
have realized this changeless state,those who are blinded by ignorancesee them as being born and so forth.That such seeing should occur is truly wonderful and amazing.When they have attained the field of experience of the noblethey 
show themselves as the field of experience of the chil-
dren.
Hence means and compassion of the friends of beings are 
supreme.
The heirs of the Victorious One who dwell on the ﬁrst bodhisattva 
level have directly realized the changeless true state, the nature of 
mind which is luminous clarity. Having gained this realization they are liberated from the process of birth and death, which is engendered by karma and the mental poisons. In spite of this, the disciples whose eyes of discriminative wisdom are blinded by ignorance see them as being born, dying, and so on. That the bodhisattvas should be seen in this way and upon this basis bring about the beneﬁt of these disciples is an activity which is truly wonderful and amazing. They have attained 
138    Buddha Nature
the path on which the mind itself is seen directly. This is the object of 
experience of the noble ones, which is far away from sin, from any unvirtuous phenomenon. Having attained this path they are liberated from birth and death, which are caused by karma and mental poisons. Although they are liberated from these, they demonstrate manifold illusory appearances as the ﬁeld of experience of the children, or of ordinary beings. They show themselves as being born and so on, and thus lead the disciples to complete maturation. For this reason the bodhisattvas have become the best possible friends and relatives of all sentient beings without exception. Therefore their skill in method by which they accomplish the beneﬁt of others through the means of attraction, and their great compassion which is fully alerted towards 
this aim, are supreme. (See also Part Three, annotation 41.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.2. The qualities of a bodhisattva who has gained access 
to supreme conduct
Though they are beyond all worldly matters,
these [bodhisattvas] do not leave the world.They act for the sake of all worldly beingswithin the world, unblemished by its defects.As a lotus will grow in the midst of water,not being polluted by the water’s [faults],these [noble ones] are born in the worldunpolluted by any worldly phenomena.
Due to the power of their discriminative wisdom, bodhisattvas who 
dwell on one of the bodhisattva levels reaching from the second up 
to the seventh inclusively are completely beyond all worldly conduct. Yet, under the inﬂuence of their compassion they do not leave the world. Instead they enact amid the world the vast and powerful bodhisattva conduct. For the sake of the worldly beings, in order to lead the dis-ciples to full maturation, they 
adopt the course of action of being born 
within the world and so on. Yet, in doing so they are not in the slightest polluted by any deﬁlement, by the defects of the world. Though lotus ﬂowers, for instance, grow in the midst of water, they are not polluted by the water’s faults or deﬁlements and so on. Likewise these noble heirs of all Victorious Ones are born within the world for the sake of the other beings, and yet not in the slightest polluted by the worldly phenomena or faults, such as the mental poisons and so forth. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.3. The qualities of a 
bodhisattva who has attained the 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      139
level of non-returning
Viewing the accomplishment of their task,
their understanding always blazes like fire.And they always rest evenly balancedin meditative stability, which is peace.
With regard to the accomplishment of their task, the accomplish-
ment of beneﬁt for all 
other beings, bodhisattvas who dwell on the 
eighth bodhisattva level always manifest their own understanding 
without deliberate effort in a blazing manner. This is similar to the way in which a mighty ﬁre, for instance, will burn by its own force on dry and desiccated wood. Yet, what is more, simultaneously they are always and uninterruptedly absorbed in evenness. They evenly abide in the balanced state of the samadhi of meditative stability in which the conceptual elaboration in terms of characteristics is completely paciﬁed. This is because they have gained mastery of non-conceptual primordial wisdom (Tib. mi rtog pa’i ye shes). (See also Part Three, an-
notation 42.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.4. The qualities of a 
bodhisattva who has reached the 
last birth
By the power of their former [prayers]
and since they are free from all ideation,they do not exert any deliberate effortto lead all sentient beings to maturation.These [heirs of the Victorious One] know preciselyhow and by what [method] each should be trained—through whatever teachings, form kayas, conduct,and ways of behavior are individually appropriate.Always [acting] spontaneously and without hindrancefor sentient beings whose number is limitless as space,such [bodhisattvas] who possess understandingtruly engage in the task of benefitting beings.
Due to the powerful inﬂuence of the wishing prayers they formerly 
uttered and the further deeds they performed while traveling the 
ninth bodhisattva level and the levels below, bodhisattvas who dwell on the tenth bodhisattva level act spontaneously. They are free from all thoughts and ideation, having eliminated these in the process of a complete transformation of state (Tib. gnas yongs su gyur pa’i tshul gyis 
spangs). For these reasons, these bodhisattvas who have reached the 
140    Buddha Nature
last existence (Tib. srid pa tha ma pa) do not need to exert any deliberate 
effort in order to lead all beings who are their disciples to complete 
maturation. They also know the aspects of training. They know the ways and methods to train any disciple. They do so through the activ-ity of speech, teaching the 
Dharma in accordance with the respective 
wishes and mental dispositions [of the disciples], through the activ-ity of the body , 
showing many illusory appearances of form kayas in 
accordance with the karmic fortune of the disciples, through the vast and powerful conduct that brings about the beneﬁt of others, and through various ways of behavior such as sitting, standing up, and so on, using whichever of these is appropriate. In this way these heirs of the Victorious One have full, unmistaken, and precise knowledge of the activity as it is individually appropriate. 
They manifest without deliberate effort and in various ways. This 
is to be understood as follows: The actors are the bodhisattvas who possess understanding. Their objects of action are beings whose num-ber is as limitless as 
space. Towards this endless number of sentient 
beings they always act spontaneously, without deliberate effort, by 
means of actions that are unhindered and meaningful in every respect. The purpose of these actions is the complete maturation of all those beings who are their disciples. Towards this purpose they engage in the activity which by its very nature accomplishes the beneﬁt of these disciples, and they do so in a true and unmistaken way. (See also Part 
Three, annotation 43, and Part Four, note 5.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.2.2.5. Explanation of the difference as far as the accom-
plishment of the two benefits is concerned
The way the bodhisattvas [unfold activity]
in the post-meditative phaseequals the tathagatas’ [action] in the worldfor beings’ true liberation.Though this is true, indeed, whatever difference liesbetween the earth and an atom or else between[the water in] the sea and in an ox’s hoofprint,is the difference between a buddha and a bodhisattva.
The way in which a bodhisattva who dwells on the tenth bodhisat-
tva level engages in activity 
equals that of all tathagatas who embody 
ultimate abandonment and realization. With respect to leading others 
to complete maturation in the post-meditative phase they are equal. Such a bodhisattva has attained the particular qualities of the six types of clairvoyance, of the ten kinds of mastery (Tib. dbang bcu), and so 
forth. Therefore he also acts in the world spontaneously and without 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      141
deliberate effort in order to truly liberate all sentient beings who have 
become disciples from samsara’s ocean of suffering. Though it is true indeed that such a bodhisattva is like a buddha as far as the [fulﬁllment of] others’ beneﬁt is concerned, there is an extremely great difference with respect to personal beneﬁt, which consists of the qualities of abandonment and realization. Consider, for example, the difference between the great globe of the earth and an atom, or between the amount of water contained in the large ocean and in the hoofprint of an ox. In this measure, the difference between the ultimate qualities of a perfect buddha and the qualities of the path of a bodhisattva who dwells on the tenth bodhisattva level is extremely great.
The way reference is made here to the bodhisattva levels corresponds 
to the way in which the omniscient Dolpopa has clearly elucidated the intended meaning of Asanga’s great commentary. On the other hand the omniscient Rangjung Dorjé [the third Karmapa] makes a slight difference. He holds that the two stanzas “By the power of their former [prayers]...” and so on, explain the way in which a bodhisattva 
who dwells on the ninth bodhisattva level is free from deliberate effort and has attained true discriminative awareness. In Rangjung Dorjé’s opinion, the stanza “Always [acting] spontaneously and without hindrance. . .” and so on then explains the quality of the immeasur-able beneﬁt of others, as 
is native to a bodhisattva who dwells on the 
tenth bodhisattva level. (See also Part Three, annotation 44, and Part Four, note 6.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3. Unchangingness in the utterly purified phase
B.II.
2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.1. Concise explanation of the reason for its unchanging-
ness
[The dharmakaya] does not change into something else, since 
it has inexhaustible properties.
It is the refuge of beings, since [it protects them] without any 
limit of time, until the final end.
It is always free from duality, since it is foreign to all ideation.
It is also an indestructible state, since its nature is uncreated.
The dharmadhatu in the utterly puriﬁed phase is the dharmakaya. 
This dharmakaya has the attribute of permanence (Tib. rtag), being 
unchangingness itself. It does not 
change into something else in the 
sense of one physical form being abandoned to be replaced by another. 
This is because, even in the expanse of the nirvana free from any remainder of skandhas, it possesses immeasurable properties, these being the inexhaustible absolute qualities. Likewise it has the attribute of steadfastness (Tib. brtan). It is the supreme refuge of all sentient be-
142    Buddha Nature
ings, unfailing and undeceptive. This is because it possesses qualities 
protecting them without any limit of time, until the ﬁnal end, as long as samsara may last. This undeﬁled dharmadhatu has the attribute of peace (Tib. zhi). It is always free from the duality of samsara and 
nirvana. This is because it 
is without any ideation as to the punish-
ment and comfort r epr
esented by these. It also has the attribute of 
immutability (Tib. g.yung drung). It is a lastingly indestructible state, 
since it possesses the quality of being a nature not created by karma and mental poisons. (See also Part Three, annotation 45.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2. Detailed explanation of its meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.1. Presentation of freedom from 
birth and so forth in 
terms of statement and proof
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.1.1. Concise explanation of each individually
It is not born and it does not die.
It suffers no harm and does not agesince it is permanent and steadfast,the state of peace and immutability.
This completely pure and luminous dharmakaya is not initially born 
and does not ﬁnally die. It does not suffer the harm of sickness and 
does not undergo a process of change and aging in the meantime. This is because in the given sequence it is permanent, steadfast, peaceful, 
and immutable.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.1.2. Detailed explanation combining them
It is not [even] born in a body of mental nature,
since it is permanent. Steadfast it does not die,not [even] through the death and transmigrationthat constitute an inconceivable transformation.Since it is peace, it does not [even] suffer harmfrom illnesses caused by subtle karmic imprints. Since it is immutable, there is not [even] aginginduced by compositional factors free from stain.
There is hardly any need to mention that this buddha nature in 
terms of the dharmakaya does not undergo the slightest change due 
to an ordinary birth and so on. It is free from any initial birth, not even being born in a body of mental nature. This is because it is unchang-ing and permanent. Likewise this 
dharmakaya is free from a ﬁnal 
death. It does not even die due to the complete transformation caused by death and transmigration taking place in an inconceivable way. This is because it is unfailing and steadfast. In the meantime it is not 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      143
harmed by sickness. It is not even harmed by the sicknesses caused 
by the subtle veil consisting of the remaining imprints of ignorance. This is because it is peace, being free from dualistic perception and so forth. It is free from the property of aging. It does not even age due to the compositional factors constituting the undeﬁled karma. This is because it is of indestructible nature and thus immutable. (See also 
Part Three, annotation 46.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.2. Summary of its meaning
[Combining] sentences from the foregoing
two by two, the uncreated expanse should be known[as possessing] in the same sequencethe attributes of being permanent and so forth.
Of the foregoing verses the two sentences “[The dharmakaya] does 
not change into something else . . .” and “It is not [even] born . . .” refer 
to the attribute of 
permanence. Likewise the two sentences “It is the 
refuge of beings . . .” and “Steadfast it does not die . . .” refer to the 
attribute of steadfastness. The 
two sentences “It is always free from 
duality . . .” and “Since it is peace . . .” refer to the attribute of peace, 
and the two sentences “It is also an indestructible state . . .” and “Since it is immutable . . .” refer to the attribute of immutability. In the same sequence in which these four attributes are given in the foregoing sections, the true state, the expanse not created by causes and condi-tions, is to be known 
from the sutras [teaching the meaning of buddha 
nature] as being permanent and so on, that is, permanent, steadfast, peaceful, and immutable. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.7.2.3.2.3. Explanation of the reason 
for its establishment as 
being permanent and so forth
Since it is endowed with inexhaustible qualities, [the  
dharmakaya]
is unchangingness itself and thus [has] the attribute of perma-
nence.
Equaling the uttermost end it is refuge itself
and thus [holds] the attribute of steadfastness.Since absence of thought is its nature, it is dharmatafree from duality and thus [has] the attribute of peace.Hosting uncreated qualities, it is immutability itselfand thus [possesses] the attribute of indestructibility.
Even in the expanse of the nirvana without remainder, this dharma-
kaya by nature completely pure is endowed with an endless number of 
inexhaustible qualities. Therefore, not undergoing the slightest transfor-
144    Buddha Nature
mation into something else, it is unchangingness itself and thus possesses 
the attribute of permanence. It is protective and uninterrupted in a way that equals the uttermost end of samsara. Therefore it is refuge itself forever unfailing and thus possesses the attribute of steadfastness. Its nature is absence of thought. There is no ideation in terms of the two extremes. Therefore it is the dharmata, the true state free from the duality of existence and [mere] peace, and thus possesses the attribute of [true] peace. It has qualities that are not created, that are not an arti-ﬁce brought about by 
causes and conditions. Therefore it is lastingly 
indestructible and thus possesses the attribute of immutability. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8. Inseparability of the qualities
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.1. Short explanation by means of names
Why is it the dharmakaya, the tathagata,
the noble truth, and the absolute nirvana?Its qualities are inseparable, like the sun and its rays.Thus other than buddhahood there is no nirvana.
Why is this tathagatagarbha in the utterly puriﬁed phase the dhar-
makaya of all buddhas? Why 
is it also the tathagata, the noble truth 
and the absolute nirvana? This is because these are just synonymous 
terms. Just as, for instance, the orb of the sun and its rays cannot be separated, these four qualities are inseparable from the svabhavika-kaya (Tib. ngo bo nyid sku, “the essence body of buddhahood”). The 
svabhavikakaya is therefore stated as being equivalent to nirvana. And again, the absolute qualities such as the ten powers and so forth are completely inseparable. For these reasons, other than perfect buddha-hood, there is nothing 
else that is the actual or true nirvana. (See also 
Part Three, annotation 47.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2. Detailed explanation of their essence
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.1. Detailed explanation of the synonymous namesB.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.1.1. The fact that the 
names have been given due to the 
meaning [of the dharmadhatu] 
Since the unpolluted expanse has, put briefly,
four different types of meaning,it should be known in terms of four synonyms:the dharmakaya and so forth.
Put brieﬂy, the tathagatagarbha in terms of the unpolluted dharma-
dhatu has four different types or aspects of meaning, which will be 
explained below. In correspondence to these it should therefore be 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      145
known in terms of the four synonymous names mentioned above, 
which are the dharmakaya and so on.
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.1.2. Combination of the names and the meaning
Buddha qualities are indivisible.
The disposition is attained as it is.The true state is [always] free from any fickleness and deceit.Since beginningless time the nature has been peace itself.
The absolute qualities, the powers and so on, which are the proper-
ties 
of a buddha, are completely indivisible from the dharmadhatu free 
from deﬁlements. In the light of this meaning, this undeﬁled expanse 
is called the dharmakaya (Tib. chos sku, “ the body of qualities”). The 
disposition to [becoming] this buddha, which is the true state pres-ent since beginningless time, is 
directly attained as it is. In the light 
of this meaning, the undeﬁled expanse is called the Tathagata (Tib. de bzhin gshegs pa, “the One Gone to Suchness”). Its nature is the true state, which does not change into something else, is free from any deceit, and at all times free from ﬁckleness or unreliability. This true state has become the ﬁeld of experience of the primordial wisdom of the noble ones. In the light of this meaning, the undeﬁled expanse is called the Noble Truth. This dharmadhatu has been by nature utterly pure since beginningless time and the adventitious deﬁlements have been totally paciﬁed up to their very end. In the light of this meaning the undeﬁled expanse is expressed by the term “nirvana” (Tib. mnya 
ngan las ’das pa, “the state beyond any torment and pain”).
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.2. Detailed explanation of their essential meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.2.1. Detailed explanation of the 
fact [that a buddha and 
nirvana] are no different
Direct perfect enlightenment [with regard to] all aspects,
and abandonment of the stains along with their imprints[are called] buddha and nirvana respectively.In truth, these are not two different things.
All aspects of the knowable—all absolute and relative phenom-
ena— 
are directly known. Through this knowledge one is immediately 
and perfectly enlightened. This is the aspect of realization. All the 
adventitious deﬁlements—the two veils along with their remaining imprints—are abandoned without any exception. This is the aspect of abandonment. These two qualities have been led to ultimate perfection. They are therefore named “perfect buddha” [“perfectly awakened and 
146    Buddha Nature
expanded”] from the viewpoint of the former aspect, and “nirvana” 
[“gone beyond any torment and pain”] from the viewpoint of the latter aspect. These two aspects are contained in one and the same meaning, the meaning of the tathagatagarbha, whereas a difference only lies in the convention of the different terms. In the sense of the absolute ﬁeld of experience of the noble ones’ primordial wisdom the qualities of realization and abandonment are therefore completely inseparable and do not exist as two different things. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.2.2. Detailed explanation of the meaning of liberation
Liberation is distinguished by indivisibility
from qualities present in all their aspects:innumerable, inconceivable, and unpolluted.Such liberation is [also called] “tathagata.”
Since the qualities are not incomplete, all aspects are fully present. 
Since the types of qualities are beyond any end, they are innumerable. 
Since one cannot fathom their number and inherent power, they are 
inconceivable. Since the two veils along with the remaining imprints are eliminated, they are unpolluted. The dharmakaya has the characteristic of being inseparable from these four qualiﬁcations. The fact that this dharmakaya has become directly manifest is called ultimate nirvana, or in other words, liberation. In the light of the fact that suchness (Skt. tathat›) is directly realized, such true qualiﬁed liberation (Tib. thar pa 
mtshan nyid pa) is also called “tathagata.”
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3. Detailed explanation of these by means of examples
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.1. The fictitious example of the painters B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.1.1. Example
Suppose some painters mastered their craft,
each with respect to a different [part of the body],so that whichever part one would know how to do,he would not succeed with any other part.Then the king, the ruler of the country,hands them a canvas and gives the order:“You all together paint my image on this!”Having heard this [order] from the [king]they carefully take up their painting work.While they are well immersed in their task,one among them leaves for another country.Since they are incomplete
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      147
due to his travel abroad,
their painting in all its partsdoes not get fully perfected.Thus the example is given.
The cause through which one accomplishes the four qualities men-
tione
d above is primordial wisdom realizing emptiness endowed 
with all supreme aspects (Tib. rnam kun mchog ldan gyi stong pa nyid). 
Therefore this primor
dial wisdom is taught by means of the example 
of the painters as given in the Ratnacudasutra (Tib. rin chen gyis zhus 
pa’i mdo
). The example is as follows:
Supp o
se there is a gathering of many painters, each of whom is highly 
specialized and has master ed 
his craft with respect to a different part 
of the body, such as the head and so forth. Whichever part of the body 
one of them knows how to do, he will not succeed with any other part. Then, when they are assembled, the king, the ruler of the country, hands them a canvas and gives the following order: “You all together paint my royal image on this canvas!” Having heard this command from the 
king, each of them carefully takes up his painting work, whatever he is able to execute. While these painters are immersed in their task, the one among them who knows how to paint the head leaves for another country. This painter having traveled abroad, they are incomplete. Hence the painting of the king does not get fully perfected in all its parts. (See also Part Three, annotation 48.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.1.2. Meaning
Who are the painters of these [parts of the image]?
They are generosity, morality, patience, and so on.Emptiness endowed with all supreme aspectsis described as being the form [of the king].
One may wonder what is illustrated by the artists who execute the 
different parts of this painting. They stand for generosity free from any 
attachment, moral discipline free from the pollution of the defects [of body, speech, and mind], patience never disturbed by anger in any respect, and so on, that is, for diligence delighting in virtue, meditative stability being one-pointed with regard to its focus, and discrimina-tive wisdom completely and thor
oughly discriminating phenomena. 
Emptiness endowed with all supreme aspects of means is equivalent to the direct manifestation of the dharmakaya. This is said to be similar to the well-painted form of the king being fully perfected. (See also Part Three, annotation 49.)
148    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.2. Explanation by means of the non-fictitious example 
of the sun
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.2.1. Presentation of the corresponding qualities
Illuminating, radiating, and purifying,
and inseparable from each other, analytical wisdom,primordial wisdom, and total liberationcorrespond to the light, rays, and orb of the sun.
Discriminative or analytical wisdom, primordial wisdom, and 
complete liberation (Tib. rnam grol ) are inseparable from the four quali-
ties [dharmakaya, tathagata, noble tr
uth, and nirvana]. In their given 
sequence they illuminate, radiate, and purify, and these three [aspects] 
are not separate from each other. For these reasons they have properties corresponding to those of the sun: to the clarity of its light, the radiation of its rays, the purity of its orb, and to the fact that these three are not separate from each other. (See also Part Three, annotation 50.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2.8.2.3.2.2. Explanation of buddhahood as being nirvana
One will therefore not attain nirvana
without attaining the state of buddhahood.Just as one could not see the sunif one were to eliminate its light and its rays.
Therefore, as has been explained in detail in the foregoing sections, 
one will not attain the ultimate nirvana completely liberated from all 
the veils without attaining perfect buddhahood endowed with the vi-sion 
of the primordial wisdom that is free from attachment with regard 
to everything knowable. This is similar to the example that one could not see the completely pure orb of the sun if one were to eliminate its clear light and its beaming rays. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.2.3. Summary of the meaning of the explanation 
In this way the nature of the Victorious One
is expressed [by] the “Tenfold Presentation.”
Such as it has been explained in detail in the foregoing sections, the 
nature of the victorious Tathagata, or in other words, the dharmad-
hatu, the true state, 
has been well expressed and clearly elucidated in 
a systematic order by means of “the Tenfold Presentation” starting with the topic “essence” and ending with the topic “inseparability of 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      149
the qualities.”
B.II.2.2.2.1.3. Explanation of the way the defilements are to be purified though 
the essence is unchanging, by means of examples
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.1. Concise summary
This [tathagatagarbha] abides within the shroud of the afflic-
tions,
as should be understood through [the following nine] ex-
amples:
This tathagatagarbha, the true state by nature pure, abides within 
the many-millionfold shroud of the afﬂictions. These are deﬁlements 
that are by nature adventitious. Although they [have been] close to buddha nature since beginningless time, they are not connected with it. This is clearly and fully illustrated by means of nine examples, which should be understood as being given in accordance with the Tathagata-
garbhasutra (Tib. de bzhin gshegs pa’i snying po’i mdo).
B.II.
2.2.2.1.3.2. Explanation of the nature of the Victorious One and the 
defilements by means of nine examples
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.1. Concise explanation
B.II.
2.2.2.1.3.2.1.1. What is obscured and what causes obscuration alternately 
expressed through an example followed by its meaning
Just like a buddha in a decaying lotus, honey amidst bees,
a grain in its husk, gold in filth, a treasure underground,a shoot and so on sprouting from a little fruit,a statue of the Victorious One in a tattered rag,a ruler of mankind in a destitute woman’s womb,and a precious image under [a layer of] clay,this [buddha] element abides within all sentient beings,obscured by the defilement of the adventitious poisons.
Just as a good buddha statue is present within the shroud of a 
decaying lotus (1), just as pure honey is present amid a big swarm of 
bees (2), just as the grain is contained in its husk (3), just like gold in the midst of ﬁlth (4), just like a precious treasure in the ground under a poor man’s house (5), just like the shoot of a mighty tree grows and increases from a tiny fruit (6), just like a statue of the Victorious One inside a tattered rag (7), just like a universal ruler of mankind in the womb of a woman of miserable appearance (8), and just as at the time 
150    Buddha Nature
when the mold is removed a precious image is present under a layer 
of clay (9), this undeﬁled expanse, the buddha element, deﬁnitely abides within all sentient beings, obscured by the deﬁlement of the adventitious mental poisons.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.1.2. Both example and meaning expressed separately
The defilements correspond to the lotus,
the insects, the husk, the filth, the earth,the fruit, the tattered rag, the pregnant womandirely vexed with burning suffering, and the clay.The buddha, the honey, the grain, the gold,the treasure, the nyagrodha tree, the precious statue,the continents’ supreme ruler, and the precious imageare similar to the supreme undefiled element.
The mental poisons, the adventitious deﬁlements obscuring the 
inherently pure element, correspond to the lotus ﬂower, the bees, 
the husk, the ﬁlthy material, the heap of earth, the skin of the fruit, the tattered rag, the woman who is direly tormented by the burning 
suffering of being destitute and without protection, and to the element of black clay.
The buddha statue, the honey, the grain, the pure gold, the pre-
cious treasure, a 
mighty tree such as a nyagrodha, the statue made 
from precious material, the supreme universal monarch who rules the four continents, and the precious golden image correspond to the tathagata-garbha, the supreme element, which is completely pure and free from any deﬁlement.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2. Detailed explanation
All o
f the following nine examples are presented in three parts, 
which are the example itself, its meaning, and their function. First the 
example is given, then its meaning is explained, and ﬁnally both ex-ample and meaning are combined and their function is elucidated.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.1. Example and meaning of the buddha and the lotus
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.1.1. Example 
Seeing that in the calyx of an ugly-colored lotus
a tathagata dwells ablaze with a thousand marks,a man endowed with the immaculate divine visiontakes it from the shroud of the water-born’s petals.
Inside the closed calyx of a lotus that has an ugly color and a repug-
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      151
nant smell dwells a statue of the Tathagata, ablaze with a thousand 
pure and beautiful marks. A man who is endowed with the clairvoy-ance of immaculate divine vision 
sees this, and upon being aware of 
it, removes the buddha statue from the shroud of the petals of the water-born [ﬂower].
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.1.2. Meaning
Likewise the Sugata with his buddha eye perceives his own 
true state even in those
who must abide in the hell of direst pain.
Endowed with compassion itself, which is unobscured and 
endures to the final end,
he relieves them from their obscurations.
Likewise, with their eye of primordial buddha wisdom, the Sugatas 
perceive that the tathagatagarbha, the true state illuminating their own 
being, is even present within those who have to abide in the hell of direst pain (Skt. Avıci, Tib. mnar med). Being 
 endowed with discriminative 
wisdom, compassion, and activity, 
which are free from the veils and 
enduring up to the last, until the far end of samsara, they relieve the 
disciples from their adventitious obscurations.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.1.3. Both combined
Once his divine eye sees the Sugata abiding within the closed 
ugly lotus,
the man cuts the petals. Seeing the perfect buddha nature 
within beings,
obscured by the shroud of desire, hatred, and the other mental 
poisons,
the Muni does likewise and through his compassion defeats 
all their veils.
Once someone who possesses divine vision sees this statue of the 
Sugata abiding within the bud of the closed ugly lotus, he will cut off 
the petals in order to remove the statue. Likewise the Munis see that the nature of perfect buddhahood is present within all sentient beings, obscured by the shroud of the deﬁlements, by desire, hatred, and the other mental poisons. Through the might of their limitless compassion for all those beings who do not realize this [presence], the awakened Munis also unfold their activity, thus overcoming these adventitious 
veils, just as the petals obscuring the statue are removed.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.2. Example and meaning of the honey and the bees
152    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.2.1. Example
Honey is surrounded by a swarm of insects.
A skillful man in search of [honey][employs], upon seeing this, suitable meansto fully separate it from the host of bees.
Honey is present in the midst of a surrounding swarm of bees. Upon 
seeing that there is honey among the bees, a capable and skillful man 
whose aim is to get this honey makes use of suitable means. Letting smoke rise and so on, he completely separates the honey from the host 
of bees and procures the honey.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.2.2. Meaning
Likewise, when his eye of omniscience
sees the honey-like element of awareness,the Great Sage causes its bee-like veilsto be fully and radically abandoned.
Likewise the Buddha, the Great Sage, sees with his eye knowing 
all phenomena that the element of [self-sprung] awareness is present 
within all beings, contained in the shroud of the mental poisons like honey surrounded by bees. Upon seeing this, he teaches the path by means of which the bee-like veils covering this element are fully and radically abandoned and the element is realized. Thus he causes the direct manifestation of the dharmakaya.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.2.3. Both combined
Aiming to get honey that is obscured by millions and millions 
of honeybees,
the man disperses all these bees and procures the honey, just 
as he wishes.
The unpolluted knowledge present in all sentient beings is 
similar to the honey,
and the Victor skilled in vanquishing the bee-like poisons 
resembles the man.
When honey is obscured by millions and millions of honeybees, 
a man who is skillful and in search of honey disperses these bees by 
means of suitable methods and procures the honey, just as he wishes. The unpolluted knowledge, the sugatagarbha, is present within all be-ings, contained in the shr
oud of their deﬁlements. Thus it is similar to 
the honey surrounded by bees. The Victorious One (Skt. jina, Tib. rgyal 
ba) is skilled in the methods to overcome the bee-like mental poisons 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      153
obscuring the element. Thus he is similar to the skillful man whose 
aim is to get the honey.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.3. Example and meaning of the grain and the husk
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.3.1. Example
A grain when still in its husk
is not fit to be eaten by man.Those seeking food and sustenanceremove this [grain] from its husk.
Since a grain that still has its husk is not edible for man, those hu-
man beings who seek palatable 
food and nourishment must remove 
this grain from the inside of its husk.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.3.2. Meaning
[The nature of] the Victorious One, which is present within 
beings
[but]
 mixed with the defilement of the poisons, is similar to 
this.
While it is not freed from being mingled with the pollution of 
these afflictions,
the deeds of the Victor will not be [displayed] in the three 
realms of existence.
The nature of the Victorious One, which is present within all sentient 
beings but mixed with the deﬁlement of the mental poisons, is similar 
to this example. As long as it is not freed from being mingled with the deﬁlement of the mental poisons, the deeds of the Victorious One will not be displayed in the three realms of existence. Buddha activity unfolds in order to separate this nature from its veils.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.3.3. Both combined
Unthreshed grains of rice, buckwheat, or barley, which not 
having emerged from their husks
still have husk and beard, cannot be turned into delicious food 
that is palatable for man.
Likewise the Lord of Qualities is present within all beings, but 
his body is not liberated from the shroud of the poisons.
Thus his body cannot bestow the joyous taste of Dharma upon 
sentient beings stricken by the famine of their afflictions.
When ripe grains of rice, buckwheat, or barley have not been well 
threshed until the husk and spelt are cleared away, when they have 
therefore not emerged from their husks and still have husk and beard, 
154    Buddha Nature
they cannot be turned into delicious food that is palatable for human 
beings. Likewise the sugatagarbha, the Lord of Qualities, is present within all beings. Yet, while his body is not liberated from the shroud of the mental poisons, it cannot bestow the taste of the joy of sacred Dharma upon those sentient beings who are stricken by the famine of their afﬂictions.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.4. Example and meaning of the gold and the filth
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.4.1. Example
While a man was traveling, gold he owned 
fell into a place filled with rotting refuse.This [gold], being of indestructible nature,remained for many centuries just as it was.Then a god with completely pure divine vision saw it thereand addressed a man: “Purify this supremely precious goldlying here in this [filth], and [then convert it into something]that is worth being made from such a precious substance!”
When a man who was traveling had reached a crossroads, out of 
negligence and lack of attentiveness he dropped  a great lump of gold 
he owned into a place ﬁlled with rotting refuse. The nature of gold is such that it will not diminish or be destroyed even after many years. Thus this gold stayed in the midst of this ﬁlth just as it was, unblem-ished for many centuries. Then 
a god who possessed completely pure 
vision saw that there was a large lump of gold in the midst of this ﬁlth. Upon seeing this he turned to a man who was in search of gold and said: “Purify this supremely precious lump of gold that is lying in this heap of refuse from its deﬁlement and convert it into a piece of jewelry or something similar that is worth being made from such a precious substance!”
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.4.2. Meaning
Likewise the Muni sees the quality [of] beings,
which is sunken in the filth-like mental poisons,and pours his rain of sacred Dharma upon themto purify the muddiness of their afflictions.
Likewise the great Muni, the Perfect Buddha, sees that the sug-
atagarbha, the quality of beings, 
which is sunken in the mud of the 
ﬁlth-like mental poisons, is present within all sentient beings. Upon 
seeing this he pours the mighty rain of his sacred Dharma upon all 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      155
those beings in order to purify this mud of their afﬂictions.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.4.3. Both combined
Once the god has seen the gold that has fallen into the place 
full of rotting refuse,
insistently he directs the man’s attention to this supremely 
beautiful thing so he may completely cleanse it.
Seeing within all beings the precious perfect buddha that has 
fallen into the great filth of the mental poisons,
the Victorious One does likewise and teaches the Dharma to 
persuade them to purify it.
As soon as the god has seen the gold that has fallen into the place 
full of rotting refuse, with insistence he shows the man this supremely 
beautiful gold so that he may completely cleanse it, and he incites him to purify it. Similarly the omniscient Victorious One sees that the nature of a perfect buddha, resembling the precious [gold], is present within all sentient beings, but has fallen into the great ﬁlth of the mental poisons. Upon seeing this he teaches the Dharma to all those 
beings in the measure of their karmic fortune, so that they may purify their [buddha] nature.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.5. Example and meaning of the treasure and the earth
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.5.1. Example
If an inexhaustible treasure were buried
in the ground beneath a poor man’s house,the man would not know of it, and the treasurewould not speak and tell him “I am here!”
If a great inexhaustible treasure were buried in the ground beneath 
a poor man’s house, the man would not know that this treasure was 
there, and the treasure would also not be able to speak to the man and tell him “I am here!” Therefore the man would have to experience the suffering of poverty.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.5.2. Meaning
Likewise a precious treasure is contained in each being’s mind. 
This is its true state,
which is free from defilement. Nothing is to be added and 
nothing to be removed.
Nevertheless, since they do not realize this, sentient beings
continuously undergo the manifold sufferings of deprivation.
156    Buddha Nature
Likewise the precious treasure of the sugatagarbha is contained 
within the minds of all sentient beings. This is the true state [of the 
mind], which is by nature free from deﬁlement. To this true state no quality that was previously not present is to be added. No deﬁlement is to be removed from it, [since the deﬁlements] to be abandoned are not truly existent. Nevertheless, sentient beings do not realize that this true state is present within themselves. Therefore, although the direct manifestation of the qualities is at hand, they must continuously experience the deprivation of the manifold aspects of the suffering of samsara.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.5.3. Both combined
When a precious treasure is contained within [the ground 
beneath] a poor man’s house,
the treasure cannot tell him “I am here!” [and] the man does 
not know of its presence.
Like the poor man, beings are [unaware] that Dharma’s trea-
sure lies in the house of their minds
and the great Sage truly takes birth within the world to cause 
them to attain [this treasure].
When a precious treasure is contained in the ground underneath 
a poor man’s house, this precious treasure cannot tell the man “I am 
here!” and the poor man will not know that this treasure is there. Through his being ignorant of this he is not liberated from his suffering of poverty and deprivation. All beings are equally [unknowing] and thus resemble the poor man. Although the treasure of dharmakaya abides within their own mind’s house, they are unaware of it. In order to cause those beings to actually attain the treasure of dharmakaya, which is present within themselves, the great Sage, the Buddha Bhaga-vat, truly takes birth 
in the endless realms of the world and teaches 
the sacred Dharma. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6. Example and meaning of the shoot and the fruit-skin
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6.1. Example
The seed contained in the fruit of a mango or similar trees
[is possessed of] the indestructible property of sprouting.Once it gets plowed earth, water, and the other [conditions],the substance of a majestic tree will gradually come about.
Although it is contained inside the skin of a fruit of a mango, a 
nyagrodha, or similar trees, a tree seed has the capacity to generate 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      157
a mighty tree. It has an indestructible property in that there is no 
hindrance that could obstruct the sprouting of the shoot. Once it has all the necessary conditions collected together, such as well-plowed earth, water, manure, warmth, and so on, it will gradually develop in substance until a genuine king of trees has come about. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6.2. Meaning
The fruit consisting of the ignorance and the other defects of 
beings
contains in the shroud of its peel the virtuous element of the 
dharma[kaya].
Likewise, through relying on virtue, this [element] also
will gradually turn into the substance of a King of Munis.
The fruit, which consists of the mental poisons, of ignorance and 
the other defects of beings, contains within the shroud of its skin 
the element of the dharmakaya, the expanse of all virtue. Similar to 
the way in which a mighty tree comes about when all the favorable 
conditions [for its gr
owth] are present, this element will also turn into 
the substance of a buddha, a King of Munis, when one relies on the necessary condition, which is the virtue of the two accumulations, and thus gradually travels the paths and levels.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6.3. Both combined
By means of water, sunlight, wind, earth, time, and space, the 
necessary conditions,
the tree grows from within the narrow shroud of the fruit of a 
banana or mango.
Similarly the fertile seed of the Perfect Buddha, contained 
within the fruit-skin of the mental poisons of beings,
also 
grows from virtue as its necessary condition, until the [shoot 
of] Dharma is seen and augmented [towards perfection].
What has come forth is moistened by water, ripened by sunlight, 
increased by wind, supported by earth, strengthened by the passing 
of time, provided with the opportunity to unfold by space, and so on. Due to these necessary conditions a mighty tree is gradually growing from its abode within the narrow shroud of the fruit-skin of a banana or mango. Similarly the seed of the Perfect Buddha, which is contained within the fruit-skin of the mental poisons of beings, resembles the shoot. Just as a tree grows from the meeting of the necessary conditions, the virtue of the two accumulations acts as the necessary condition, on the basis of which the shoot of the Dharma is seen on the path of seeing, 
158    Buddha Nature
augmented on the path of meditation and led to ultimate perfection 
on the path of no more learning.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.7. Example and meaning of the statue and the tattered rag
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.7.1. Example
An image of the Victorious One made from precious material
lies by the road, wrapped in an evil-smelling tattered rag.Upon seeing this a god will alert the [passersby]to its presence by the road to cause its retrieval.
Suppose a statue of the Victorious One made from invaluably pre-
cious material is lying at 
a crossroads, wrapped in an evil-smelling 
tattered rag, and people heedlessly pass it by, unaware of its presence. 
When a god sees what is lying there, he will alert the passersby to the fact that a statue is lying by the road and show it to them, so that they retrieve this statue from its evil-smelling covering.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.7.2. Meaning
Likewise, being possessed of unhindered vision
[the Buddha] sees the substance of the Sugatawrapped in the multitude of the mental poisons,even in animals, and teaches the means to free it.
Since beginningless time the sugatagarbha has been wrapped in the 
evil-smelling rags of the afﬂictions, in the various aspects of the three 
poisons and the other deﬁlements [up to] the remaining imprints. The eye of a buddha sees that this substance of the sugatagarbha is even present within animals. Upon seeing this he opens an endless number of gates of the sacred Dharma. He teaches the means to practice the path, so that this dharmadhatu may be released from its adventitious veils, just as the [rag] enveloping the statue is removed.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.7.3. Both combined
When his eye perceives the statue of the Tathagata, which is of 
precious nature
but wrapped in a stinking rag and lying by the road, the god 
points it out to passersby, so that they retrieve it.
Likewise the Victor sees that the element, wrapped in the tat-
te
red
 garments of the poisons and lying on samsara’s road,
is present even within animals, and teaches the Dharma so that 
it may be released.
When the god’s eye perceives that a statue of the Tathagata, which 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      159
is made from a material of precious nature but wrapped in a stinking 
rag, is lying by a crossroads unnoticed by the men passing by, he will show it to those men and tell them: “There is a statue here!” so that it may be retrieved from the tattered rags. Similarly the Victorious One sees the buddha element which, wrapped in the tattered garments of the mental poisons, is lying on samsara’s road. He sees that it even abides within animals and teaches the Dharma so that it may be re-leased fr om these rags of the mental poisons.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.8. Example and meaning 
of the universal monarch and the 
woman
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.8.1. Example
A woman of miserable appearance
who is without protection and abides in a poorhouseholds in her womb a glorious king,not knowing that a lord of man dwells in her own body.
A woman of miserable appearance and complexion, having neither 
protection nor refuge, abides in poorhouses, cheap hostels, and at 
crossroads. She bears in her womb an infant who is endowed with the signs and will become a glorious universal monarch. And yet, since this child is obscured by the shroud of her womb, she does not know that this being dwelling in her own body is a ruler of mankind. Being ignorant of this she suffers and is stricken with the fear of being slandered, treated with contempt, and abused by others. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.8.2. Meaning
Birth in an existence is similar to the poorhouse.
Impure beings are like the woman bearing [a king] in her 
womb.
Since he is present within her, she has protection.The undefiled element is like [the king] who dwells in her 
womb.
Since births in the various places of samsaric existence are accom-
panied by suffering, they 
are similar to living in a poorhouse, in the 
abodes of those who have neither protection nor refuge. Since all beings 
who are not puriﬁed from the adventitious afﬂictions have protection and refuge and yet are ignorant of this, they are similar to the woman who has a king in her womb. Since a king is present within this woman, it will become apparent that she has protection. Since within those 
160    Buddha Nature
beings the true state, the tathagatagarbha, is present, they are accom-
panied by the best possible 
protection. Once this element, which is 
by nature completely pure and free from any deﬁlement, has directly revealed itself, they will be sheltered from all their fear. Therefore the element is similar to the king who dwells in this woman’s womb.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.8.3. Both combined
A ruler of the earth dwells in the womb of a woman who has 
an unpleasant appearance and whose body is dressed in 
dirty clothes.
Nevertheless she has [to abide] in a poorhouse and undergo 
the experience of direst suffering.
Likewise, beings deem themselves unsheltered though a pro-
tector resides within their own [minds].
Thus they have to abide in the ground of suffering, their 
minds being unpeaceful under the predominating drive of the mental poisons.
A universal monarch, a ruler of the earth, dwells within the womb of 
a woman who has an unpleasant appearance and whose body is dressed 
in dirty clothes. Although this ruler resides in her own womb, being ignorant of this, she has to abide in a poorhouse and undergo the experience of direst suffering, of being destitute, subject to contempt, abused, and neglected. Similarly all sentient beings have a protector and refuge, this being the sugatagarbha which resides within their own minds. Yet, since they do not know this, they deem themselves without any protection and refuge. Thus those beings whose minds are unpeaceful due to the predominating inﬂuence of the mental poisons have to abide within the cycle of existence, the ground of suffering.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.9. Example and meaning of the golden image and the clay
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.9.1. Example
An artistically well designed image of peaceful appearance,
which has been cast in gold and is [still] inside [its mold],externally has the nature of clay. Experts, upon seeing this,will clear away the outer layer and cleanse the gold therein.
When an image, which is artistically well designed in all its parts, 
pure, and beautiful in its peaceful appearance, has been cast in gold 
and is still inside its black mold, it is covered by clay and thus exter-nally has the natur e 
of earth. Upon seeing this, experts who know 
that a golden image is contained in the covering mold will clear away 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      161
the outer layer in order to remove the traces of clay remaining on the 
golden image enclosed therein.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.9.2. Meaning
Likewise those of supreme enlightenment
fully see that there are defilements [on] the luminous nature,but that these stains are just adventitious,and purify beings, who are like jewel mines, from all their 
veils.
Similarly the Victorious Ones fully see that there are deﬁlements 
on the luminous nature of the minds of beings, but that these are 
just adventitious, being able to be removed. Upon seeing this they clear away these veils, which are similar to the mold. Once they are awakened and expanded in supreme enlightenment, they teach the sacred Dharma and purify beings, who are like jewel mines, from all their obscurations.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.9.3. Both combined
Recognizing the nature of an image of peaceful appearance, 
flawless and made from shimmering gold,
while it is [still] contained in its mold, an expert removes the 
layers of clay.
Likewise the omniscient know the peaceful mind, which is 
similar to pure gold,
and remove the obscurations by teaching the Dharma, [just as 
the mold] is struck and chipped away.
Suppose there is an image of peaceful and beautiful appearance 
that is ﬂawless and completely pure, made from unalloyed, shim-
mering gold, but which at 
the time of its casting is contained within a 
mold of black clay. An expert skilled in the making of statues would recognize its nature and remove the external layers of clay. Similarly the Buddhas who know the entirety of the knowable recognize the sugatagarbha, the true state of the mind, which is by nature peaceful, and thus similar to completely pure gold. They remove the veils that hinder the direct realization of the element by teaching the Dharma as the means to their removal, acting just as one who strikes the clay, chipping it away to remove the mold.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.3. Summary of the meaning
162    Buddha Nature
The lotus, the bees, the husk, the filth,
the earth, the skin of the fruit, the tattered rag,the woman’s womb, and the shroud of clay[exemplify the defilements], while [the pure nature]is like the buddha, the honey, the kernel, the gold,the treasure, the great tree, the precious statue,the universal monarch, and the golden image.It is said that the shroud of the mental poisons,[which causes the veils] of the element of beings,has had no connection with it since beginningless time,while the nature of mind, which is devoid of stains,[has been present within them] since beginningless time.
By “the ugly lotus,” “the bees,” “the husk of the grain,” “the ﬁlthy 
mud,” “the ground,” “the skin of the fruit,” “the evil-smelling tattered 
rag,” “the woman’s womb,” and “the shroud of black clay,” the nine examples for the deﬁlements causing the obscuration are summarized, whereas through the statements “like a buddha adorned with the signs and marks,” “like honey endowed with the essence of taste,” “like a 
ripe grain,” “like a lump 
of gold that does not change into something 
else,” “like a great inexhaustible treasure,” “like a great fruit-bearing tree,” “like a beautiful precious statue,” “like a universal monarch,” and “like an image of unalloyed gold,” the nine examples for the bud-dha natur e that is obscured are explained concisely .
The 
meaning illustrated through these examples is as follows: It is 
said that the shrouds of the mental poisons causing the obscuration of suchness, of the element of beings, are naturally present, and yet have no connection with it. For this reason they are adventitious. Neverthe-less they are also 
simultaneously present with the dharmadhatu and 
have remained close to it since beginningless time. Wherever these shrouds of the mental poisons are, there is the tathagatagarbha as well. The nature of the minds of beings is contained within them. This tathagatagarbha, which has ever been free from any deﬁlement and is coemergent primordial wisdom, has remained close to them since beginningless time.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3. The way the defilements are purified
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.1. Explanation of the nine defilements
The nine aspects of defilement: desire, aversion,
and mental blindness, their fierce active state,the remaining imprints [of unknowing], the defilementsto be abandoned on the paths of seeing and meditation,and the defilements based upon the impure levels
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      163
and the pure levels respectively, are fully taught
by the shroud of the lotus and the other examples.[When] classified, the shroud of the secondary poisonsis beyond any end. But when it is comprised concisely,the nine defilements of desire and the other afflictionsare well explained in the given order by the nine similesof the shroud of the lotus and the subsequent examples.
If the adventitious deﬁlements veiling the dharmadhatu, which is 
by nature completely pure, are comprised concisely by means of the 
families they belong to, there are nine aspects:
The ﬁrst three aspects provide the condition of the karma of im-
movability (Tib. mi g.yo ba’i 
las). These are the remaining imprints of 
desire, aversion, and ignorance, which is mental blindness with respect to thatness. 
The f 
ourth aspect provides the condition of virtuous and unvirtuous 
karma. It consists of the ﬁercely active state of these three poisons, the state in which they immediately manifest. These three are presented as one aspect. 
The ﬁfth aspect pr ovides 
the condition producing a body of mental 
nature. This is the ground of the remaining imprints of ignorance (Tib. ma rig bag chags kyi sa).
The sixth aspect consists of 
the deﬁlements exclusively abandoned 
on the path of seeing.
The seventh aspect consists of 
the deﬁlements exclusively aban-
doned on the path of meditation.
The e
ighth aspect comprises the deﬁlements based upon the stream 
of being of an individual who dwells on one of the seven impure [bodhisattva] levels. Only their elimination generates the pure [bod-hisattva] levels.
The ninth aspect comprises the 
deﬁlements based upon the stream 
of being of an individual dwelling on one of the pure [bodhisattva] levels. Their elimination generates the end of the continuum.
In their given sequence these 
nine aspects are fully and thoroughly 
explained by the nine examples of the shroud of the lotus, the bees, and the following [seven]. 
When the shroud of 
the secondary mental poisons that obscure the 
element is fully classiﬁed in terms of subject matter, there are eighty-four thousand different major types, which in their turn split up into ever further kinds. This process is beyond any end and corresponds to the different kinds of primordial wisdom of a tathagata, which are similarly endless in number.
The lines starting with “But when it is comprised concisely . . .” and 
164    Buddha Nature
ending with “...and the subsequent examples,” have been elucidated 
in the foregoing sections and are easily comprehended from the words of [Asanga’s] commentary.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.2. Explanation of the question: In which individual’s stream 
of being are they present?
These defilements cause in their given sequence
the four impurities of children, the impurity of arhats,the two impurities of followers of the path of training,and the two impurities of those with understanding.
With regard to the statement of the Bhagavan: “All beings possess the 
tathagatagarbha,” there are different classes of beings who are veiled 
by these nine aspects of obscuring adventitious deﬁlements. These are the impurities of the children or of ordinary beings, of shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats, of those who generally follow the path of training, and of bodhisattvas who particularly possess understanding. 
Furthermore, in their given sequence the ﬁrst four veils are the dormant tendencies of the three poisons, which constitute the impurity of the children dwelling in the higher realms, and the ﬁercely active state of these three poisons, which constitutes the impurity of the children bound to the desire realm. The following veil is the ground of the remaining imprints of ignorance, which constitutes the impurity of arhats. The following two veils are those to be abandoned through seeing and meditation, respectively. These constitute the impurities of ordinary beings on the path of training and of noble ones on the path of training. The last two veils are the deﬁlements based upon the seven impure bodhisattva levels and those based upon the three pure bodhisattva levels. These constitute the impurities of bodhisattvas who have not reached ﬁnal [accomplishment] and of those who have reached ﬁnal [accomplishment]. These impurities are the pollutions respectively prevailing in these individuals and foremost to be aban-doned
, since they constitute their [immediate] hindrance that prevents 
the ultimate dharmadhatu from revealing itself directly.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3. Detailed explanation of the way the defilements are puri-
fied
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.1. The three dormant tendencies
When a lotus [just] born from the mud
appears to [a beholder], it delights his mind.Yet later it changes and becomes undelightful.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      165
The joy born from desire is similar to this.
Bees, when extremely agitated,
will fiercely use their stings.Similarly, hatred, once arisen,brings suffering to the heart.
The kernel of rice and so on
is obscured by its outer husk.Likewise the vision of the [true] meaningis obscured by the eggshell of ignorance.
When a lotus ﬂower freshly born from the mud appears to a beholder 
soon after its arising, it will greatly delight his mind. Yet later, without a 
long time passing, it changes and becomes faded and undelightful. The dormant tendencies of the mental poison of desire are similar to this. When greed born from improper mental activity directly manifests, joy and delight are present. When later it ceases, there is no longer any delight. This greed is therefore said to be similar to the delight upon seeing the lotus, while the dormant tendencies of desire are similar to the lotus [itself]. 
Bees 
are attached to their honey. When someone else takes the honey 
away, their minds are extremely agitated by anger. They ﬁercely at-
tack and sting this person, 
causing a burning pain. Similarly, when 
the dormant tendencies of anger and hatred increase until anger has actually arisen, this also generates a burning suffering in the hearts of oneself and the others [involved]. Thus the dormant tendencies of hatred are said to be similar to bees.
The kernels of rice and other grains cannot be seen since they are 
concealed by their husks, by the beards and different layers of skin. Likewise the vision of the meaning of the tathagatagarbha, of the dharmadhatu, which is by nature clear light, is also obscured by the dormant tendencies of mental blindness, of ignorance, and so on, which are similar to an eggshell. Thus they cause it not to be seen. In this way the dormant tendencies of mental blindness are said to be similar to the husk. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.2. The defect of their fiercely active state
Filth is repugnant.
Being the cause for those bound up with greedto indulge in sense pleasures,the active state [of the poisons] resembles it.
Filthy and rotten things belong to the repugnant part. They involve 
166    Buddha Nature
danger, and are to be feared. The state in which the three poisons rise 
up and become directly manifest is the cause for beings in the desire realm who are bound up with greed to get immersed in many forms of evil conduct, to indulge in sense pleasures and pursue various other inferior aims. The ﬁercely active state of the mental poisons is therefore similar to a great heap of ﬁlth. It is the abode of afﬂiction, of anxiety and mental disturbance. Thus the direct manifestation of the three poisons is said to resemble ﬁlth.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.3. The fault of the ground of the remaining imprints of 
ignorance
When wealth is hidden, one is ignorant of it
and therefore does not obtain the treasure. Likewise self-sprung [wisdom] is veiled in arhatsby the ground of remaining imprints of ignorance.
When a great treasure representing inexhaustible wealth is hidden 
and obscured by a vast amount of earth, the poor do not know that there 
are riches [at hand] and thus will not obtain this treasure. Similarly the vision of self-sprung primordial wisdom endowed with inexhaustible qualities is veiled within arhats by the ground of remaining imprints of ignorance. For this reason the arhats, resembling the poor, are pre-vented from seeing it. 
Thus the complex of the remaining imprints of 
ignorance is explained as being similar to earth.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.4. The defilements to be 
abandoned on the paths of seeing 
and meditation of the common vehicle
As by gradual growth from bud to shoot
the skins of the seed are cut,the vision of thatness averts[the stains] to be abandoned by seeing. 
Through their junction with the noble path
they have overcome the essential part of the transitory  
collection.
What their wisdom must abandon [on] the path of meditationis explained as being similar to tattered rags.
By the gradual growth of a tree bud into a sprout, a shoot, and ﬁnally 
a tiny trunk with small branches and leaves, the skins of the seed are 
progressively cut. Similarly the gradual vision of thatness or of the absolute dharmadhatu progressively averts the mental poisons that 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      167
are to be abandoned through seeing. Through the section containing 
this statement, the deﬁlements to be abandoned through seeing are explained as being similar to the skin of a fruit.
Arhats have joined with [or attained] the direct vision of the actual 
state of the Four Truths that constitute the Noble Path. Through this vision they have overcome the essential or main part of the deﬁlements belonging to the so-called transitory collection and the views related to it. The views of the transitory collection consist of the belief that the ﬁve skandhas constitute a self, something that belongs to a self, and similar notions. Once the true state has been seen directly, deﬁlements are [still] present within the stream of being of an arhat. These deﬁle-ments are t
o be abandoned through primordial wisdom on the path of 
meditation. They are the remainders that are present after the coarse aspect has been exhausted. These remainders are explained as being similar to dirty shreds of a garment. Through the section containing this statement, the deﬁlements to be abandoned through meditation are said to resemble tattered rags.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.5. The defilements of the seven impure levels in particular
The stains based on the seven [impure] levels
resemble the defilements of the shrouding womb.Concept-free primordial wisdom [is released]like the mature [prince] from the womb’s confine.
Since they veil what needs to be seen and involve deliberate effort, 
the stains based on the seven impure [bodhisattva] levels resemble the 
deﬁlements of the shrouding womb. Once it is completely freed from these stains, like being released from the conﬁnes of the womb, com-pletely concept-free primor dial 
wisdom directly reveals itself on the 
eighth bodhisattva level and the levels above, doing so spontaneously and without any deliberate effort. This direct revelation of concept-free primordial wisdom is similar to the full development and birth of the Chakravartin king. Through the statement contained in this section the deﬁlements based on the seven [impure levels] are said to be similar to the shroud of the womb.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.6. The defilements to be overcome by vajra-like samadhi
The defilements connected with the three [pure] levels
should be known as being similar to the layer of clay.They must be overcome by the vajra-like samadhi
168    Buddha Nature
of [those] who are the embodiment of greatness.
Since the subtle deﬁlements connected with the three pure [bodhi-
sattv
a] levels can be abandoned without exerting deliberate effort, they 
should be known as being similar to the ﬁne layer of clay, which only 
just covers the golden image a tiny bit. They are to be overcome by the vajra-like samadhi of those great [bodhisattvas] who are themselves the embodiment of the remedy. By the statement in this section, the deﬁlements based on the three pure [bodhisattva] levels are said to be similar to [traces of] clay.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.3.3.7. Summary of the meaning
Thus desire and the further of the nine defilements
correspond to the lotus and the following examples.
In the foregoing sections, corresponding properties have been exten-
sively related to each 
other. In the way shown there and in their given 
sequence, desire, hatred, and the further of the nine adventitious deﬁle-
ments that obscure the 
dharmadhatu have properties corresponding 
to those of the lotus, the bees, and the following examples. Since each of these deﬁlements and examples have an individual corresponding property, one example and one meaning are respectively combined. This does not mean, though, that whatever has been explained as the obscuration of a particular [individual] is exclusive, in that it does not veil the previously mentioned of the nine [individuals] as well.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4. The gradual stages of realization
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.1. Short explanation of what is illustrated by the nine ex-
ample
s
Its nature unifying three aspects, the element has properties
that correspond to those of the Buddha and the other similes.
The nature of the element uniﬁes three aspects, as will be explained 
in the following sections. With these three aspects the tathagatagarbha 
has properties that correspond to those of the buddha statue, the honey, and the further of the nine similes illustrating buddha nature.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.2. Individual classification of their meaning
Its nature is dharmakaya, suchness,
and also the disposition. These are to beknown by the [first] three examples,
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      169
the [fourth] one, and the [following] five.
One may wonder: What are the three aspects of the nature of the 
sugatagarbha or dharmadhatu?
The three aspects ar
e its nature in terms of the dharmakaya, which 
is luminous clarity, its nature in terms of suchness, which is unchang-
ing, and its natur e 
in terms of the disposition, which accomplishes 
the state of buddhahood. These three aspects must be understood by means of what is illustrated by the nine examples. By means of the ﬁrst three examples of the buddha statue and so on, the element is to be understood as having the nature of the dharmakaya, by means of the example of gold as having the nature of suchness, and by means of the last ﬁve examples of the treasure and so forth as having the nature of the disposition.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3. Detailed explanation of the essence of the different kinds
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.1. Example and meaning of the dharmakayaB.II.
2.2.2.1.3.4.3.1.1. Explanation of the different aspects of the dhar-
makaya
The dharmakaya is to be known [in] two aspects.
These are the utterly unstained dharmadhatuand the cause conducive to its [realization],which is teaching in the deep and manifold way.
When classiﬁed in terms of what is actual or real and what is im-
puted, the nature in 
the sense of the dharmakaya is also to be known 
in two aspects: The real or actual aspect (Tib. mtshan nyid pa) is the 
dharmakaya in the sense of realization. This is the tathagatagarbha, 
the dharmadhatu, which is utterly free from deﬁlement and by nature clear light. It exists as the ﬁeld of experience of the self-aware primor-dial wisdom of all buddhas. 
The imputed aspect is the dharmakaya in 
the sense of teaching. This is the cause conducive to the attainment or realization of this actual or real dharmakaya. It consists of the teachings of the words of the Buddha, from which true awareness will emerge in accordance with the respective karmic fortunes of the disciples. These two aspects are classiﬁed in terms of the object to be expressed and the means of expression, or in other words, in terms of fruit and cause. 
When the dharmakaya in the sense of teaching is categorized into an 
internal classiﬁcation, there are also two aspects: The ﬁrst is teaching in the way of the deep Dharma. This is teaching from the viewpoint of thatness or the absolute tr
uth. It stems from the bodhisattva pitaka. 
170    Buddha Nature
The second aspect is teaching in the vast and manifold way. This is 
teaching from the viewpoint of the relative truth in accordance with the varied mental dispositions of beings. It stems from the twelve branches of the supreme speech of the Buddha (Tib. gsung rab yan lag bcu gnyis ), 
from the sutras, and so on. (See also Part Four, note 7.) 
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.1.2. Combination of these with their examples
[The dharmakaya] being beyond the worldly,
no example for it can be found in the world.Therefore the element and the Tathagataare explained as being [slightly] similar.Teaching in the deep and subtle wayis like the one single taste of honey,while teaching through various aspectsresembles grain in its variety of husks.
The dharmakaya in the sense of the completely pure nature, being 
what is to be realized, is truly beyond all worldly phenomena. There-
fore no example whatsoever 
to illustrate it can be found in the world. 
For this reason the statue of the self-sprung Tathagata abiding within 
the lotus, and the element that is by nature completely pure, are ex-plained as having an only 
slight similarity. The cause conducive to the 
realization of this element is teaching in the mode of the absolute. This is subtle and deep, since it is difﬁcult to fathom and holds beneﬁt. It shows all phenomena as being of one single taste in the light of their suchness. Therefore this teaching is like the different kinds of honey, which are of one taste in that they are equally sweet and delicious. Teaching in the way of the various aspects of means consists of the twelve branches of the supreme speech of the Buddha and so forth. To facilitate realization of the actual meaning, the vast aspect of teaching gradually provides a connection with various meanings requiring interpretation (Skt. ney›rtha, Tib. drang don). It should therefore be 
known to resemble grain, which is ﬁt to be turned into edible food, abiding in the enclosures of its various husks.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.2. Example and meaning of suchness
Since the nature is unchanging,
full of virtue, and utterly pure,suchness is said to correspondto the shape and color of gold.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      171
Although the nature of mind is connected with the endless suffer-
ing incurred by 
the mental poisons, it is unchanging, luminous clarity, 
and utterly pure. Therefore it is called “suchness.” Just as pure gold 
is unchanging, this suchness does not change into another nature throughout all phases. Just as gold is beautiful and can be turned into an ornament, it is by nature full of virtue and supreme. Just as the essence of gold has no stain, it has been utterly pure and free from deﬁlement since beginningless time. For these reasons, this suchness, the dharmadhatu, is said to have properties corresponding to the shape and color of pieces of pure gold.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3. Example and meaning of the disposition
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3.1. Presentation of the two 
types of disposition by means 
of their examples
Similar to the treasure and the fruit of a tree,
the disposition is to be known in two aspects,as it has existed [as] the nature since beginningless timeand has become supreme [through] right cultivation.
The aspect of nature called “the disposition to buddhahood” is also 
to be known in two aspects. The ﬁrst is the disposition that has existed 
since beginningless time (Tib. thog ma med pa nas gnas pa’i rigs) as the 
nature of mind. This is similar to an underground treasure, since it is not accomplished through deliberate effort. The second aspect is the disposition that is expanded (Tib. rgyas ’gyur gyi rigs) or unfolded. 
Just as the fruit of a tree increases into something new by means of the necessary conditions, this is equivalent to supreme ability unfold-ing through right cultivation 
by means of the necessary conditions of 
learning and reﬂection. 
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3.2. Explanation of the way the three kayas are attained 
from these
The attainment of the three kayas of a buddha
is seen to stem from the twofold disposition.By the first aspect there is the first [kaya],through the second there are the latter two.
The attainment of the three kayas of a perfect buddha is seen as the 
fruit stemming from the twofold disposition. These are the disposi-
tion in terms of the 
nature and the expanded disposition acting as the 
cause of the three kayas.
172    Buddha Nature
(1) Once the numerous accumulations of primordial wisdom have 
been led to ﬁnal perfection, the disposition that exists as the nature 
will have become free from all the adventitious stains without any remainder. Through this the ﬁrst kaya is attained. This is the svabhavi-kakaya, the true state possessing the two types of purity. 
(2) Through ﬁnal perfection of the accumulation of merit, the dispo-
sition that is expanded has 
room to unfold. Due to this, the latter two 
kayas are attained. These are the sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya, which appear to the near and distant disciples, respectively.
In this context the venerable Karma Thrinläpa states the follow-
ing: 
Nowadays most of those who interpret the ﬁve Dharmas of 
Maitreya hold that the expanded disposition is compounded, in that it has come about through causes and conditions. As a proof they quote the above statement [which is also contained in the Mahayanasutralamkara  (Tib. mdo sde rgyan )]: “it has become supreme 
[th
rough] right cultivation” (B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3.1). On this basis they 
say: “The disposition that is expanded is the proper cultivation of the roots of virtue.” This can only be considered as an assertion comparable to the noise of the rabbit.
The g
lorious Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorjé said in The 
Profound Inner Meaning (Tib. zab mo nang don): “Moreover, when 
some think that the expanded disposition is newly arisen, this is not the case...” This quote, as well as further statements he made, corresponds in content to this present text. It is therefore not held here that the expanded disposition consists of the proper cultiva-tion of the roots 
of virtue. On the contrary, it has been present 
since beginningless time. Yet, in the phase of an ordinary being it is obscured by the veils so that complete maturation and activity cannot unfold. Therefore it lacks the ability to accomplish the beneﬁt of sentient beings to a large extent. The [inherent] ability of this disposition unfolds, though, when the roots of virtue that form the accumulation of merit are properly cultivated on the path of training. For this reason, once the veils are puriﬁed, the activity of the form kayas, which are adorned with the thirty-two qualities of complete maturation, unfolds in the phase of a buddha. This is expressed in the passage: “it has become supreme [through] right cultivation.” This passage corresponds in content to the passage: ”Similar to...the fruit of a tree” (B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3.1) and to the passage further above: “The seed contained in the fruit of a mango or similar trees” (B.II.2.2.2.1.3.2.2.6.1). If with regard to this fact one sees the necessity to claim that this disposition [as it is explained in the context of the nine examples and their respective meanings by means of the example of the fruit-skin and the shoot] is the proper cultivation of the roots of virtue, this is, I think, an exaggerated interpretation.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      173
(See also Part Four, note 8.)
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.3.3. Combination of these with their examples
The beautiful svabhavikakaya
is like the statue of precious material,since [it exists] naturally, is not created,and is a treasure of gem-like qualities.Wielding the sublime majesty of the Great Dharma,the sambhoga[kaya] resembles the Chakravartin.Being of the nature of a [mere] representation,the nirmana[kaya] is similar to the golden image.
The svabhavikakaya, which is the absolute kaya, is by nature clear 
light and is supremely beautiful due to the glory of its qualities. It 
should be known as being similar to the statue of the Buddha made from precious material, since it has naturally existed since beginning-less time. It is not 
newly created by means of deliberate effort and it 
has qualities, the powers and so on, similar to an inexhaustible treasure of gems.
The sambhogakaya [the kaya of 
perfect enjoyment], which appears 
to beings of pure vision, wields the sublime glory of the majesty of the 
Mahayana Dharma in its deep and vast aspects. It therefore resembles the precious Chakravartin who enjoys the wealth of his seven posses-sions, which are the 
four continents and so on. (See also Part Four, 
note 9.)
The nirmanakaya, which appears to 
all sentient beings in common, 
is like the golden image. Because of the power resulting from the real-ization of the absolute kaya, 
it has the effect or nature of appearing to 
the minds of the disciples as a mere representation of whatever form 
is suitable to train any of them.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.4.3.4. The way these are to be realized through faith
This truth of the Self-Sprung Ones
is to be realized through faith.The orb of the sun blazes with light,[but] is not seen by the blind.
This true nature of all self-sprung buddhas, who have not come 
about through conditions but have been spontaneously present from 
the very beginning, is within all sentient beings. Nevertheless ordinary beings, shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, and those bodhisattvas who have newly entered [the path] do not realize it directly, as it is. Relying on 
174    Buddha Nature
the trustworthy words of the Buddha they [ﬁrst] have to realize it in a 
general way by means of faith, devotion, and ﬁnally ﬁrm conviction. This is similar to the example of the orb of the sun, which blazing with 
light is still not seen by the blind.
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.5. Explanation of the very nature itself
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.5.1. Essence
Nothing whatsoever is to be removed.
Not the slightest thing is to be added.Truly looking at truth, truth is seen.When seen, this is complete liberation.
This sugatagarbha, or this element by nature completely pure, does 
not have any afﬂicting fault whatsoever. There are no stains existing 
in the nature of the element that are formerly present and have to be removed. Its nature is such that it has been free from all the adventi-tious stains without any exception since beginningless time.
Similarly , not in the 
slightest way is there any completely puriﬁed 
quality that is formerly not present and has to be added. Its nature 
is such that the absolute qualities, the powers and so on, have been 
spontaneously present since 
beginningless time and are equivalent to 
the true state, which is completely indivisible.
Thus the object to be perceived is suchness, the true dharmadhatu, 
which is free from the two extremes. The perceiving subject is the au-thentic discriminative wisdom, which knows 
the absolute. Through 
looking directly at this true dharmadhatu by means of this discrimina-tive wisdom, and thr ough 
resting within it in meditative equipoise, 
one will become supremely familiar with it, and primordial wisdom, which directly sees the authentic meaning of the actual true state, will gradually arise. Through this [seeing] one attains complete liberation from the adventitious stains that are to be abandoned. [First] one will be completely freed from the stains to be abandoned through seeing on the path of seeing. [Subsequently] one will be completely freed from the stains to be abandoned through meditation on the path of meditation. [Finally] one will be completely freed from the two veils along with their remaining imprints without any exception on the path of ﬁnal perfection (Tib. mthar phyin pa’i lam).
B.II.2.2.2.1.3.5.2. The way it is empty and not empty
The element is empty of the adventitious [stains],
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      175
which are featured by their total separateness.
But it is not empty of the matchless properties,which are featured by their total inseparability.
The true nature of mind is free from there being anything to be 
removed or added, and thus is devoid of extremes.
This element is empty of the adventitious stains, which have the 
feature of being totally separate from it, along with the fact that they 
are able to be removed. For this reason the element is free from the extreme of assertion or overstatement (Tib. sgro ’dogs) in the sense of 
[falsely] stating existence.
Yet, this element is 
not empty of the powers and so on, the unsur-
passa
ble properties or qualities, which have the feature of being totally 
inseparable from it and thus are not able to be removed. For this reason the element is free from the extreme of denial or understatement (Tib. skur ’debs) in the sense of [falsely] stating non-existence.
Since the simultaneous pr esence 
[of existence and non-existence] 
is a contradiction, it is also freed from the extreme of there being both existence and non-existence.
Since 
 this is so, it is also freed from the extreme of there being neither 
of these two that have been refuted, of there being neither existence 
nor non-existence.
For this reason it 
is completely freed from the two extremes, or in 
other words, from the four extreme views. This complete freedom from the four extreme views is the way unperverted emptiness is. This is thatness [the simple state of everything].
B.II.2.2.2.1.4. The necessity to explain the element
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.1. Short explanation of question and answerB.II.2.2.2.1.4.1.1. Question
[The sutras of the second turning of the wheel of Dharma] 
state in numerous places
that all knowable [phenomena] are in all ways empty like a 
cloud, a dream, or an illusion.
Why is it then, that in [the sutras of the third turning of the 
wheel of Dharma]
the Buddha, having said this, declared that buddha nature is 
present within beings?
In the transition to the following verses it is said in [Asanga’s] 
commentary: 
176    Buddha Nature
The element being so difﬁcult to see that it is not [even] the object 
of experience of the supreme noble ones who dwell on the level where freedom from attachment is ﬁnally perfected, one may wonder why its presence was taught to the children.
This question is implicitly contained in the section commented here. 
The literal question is as follows: It is said in numerous places in the great, the middling, and the other prajnaparamitasutras, in which on the occasion of the second turning of the wheel of Dharma the teaching on the absence of characteristics was expounded:
. . . Appearance, but not true and devoid of entity like a cloud, a 
dream, or an illusion; thus all knowable phenomena starting from form up to omniscience appear, but are empty in all ways and devoid of entity, without the slightest exception.
Why is it then, that after having extensively taught this, the Buddha 
taught on the occasion of the third turning of the wheel of Dharma in numerous lectures, the tathagatagarbhasutras, and so on, which ﬁnally identify the absolute: “Buddha nature, the dharmadhatu, which is by nature completely pure and luminous clarity, has been spontaneously 
present within all sentient 
beings since beginningless time”? Does it 
not follow that there is a contradiction between the second and the third turnings of the wheel of Dharma?
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.1.2. Answer
With regard to faintheartedness, contempt for inferior beings,
perceiving the untrue, disparaging the true nature,and exceeding self-cherishing, he said this to persuade thosewho have any of these five to abandon their defects.
This and the following sections explain why there is no contradic-
tion between the teachings of 
the second and the third turnings of the 
wheel of Dharma. They explain the necessity for which the presence 
of buddha nature is taught in the tathagatagarbhasutras and so on.
The teaching that buddha nature is present within every sentient 
being is necessary, since the Buddha has given it in order to persuade those who have any of the following ﬁve faults to abandon these: The ﬁrst of these faults is faintheartedness, which hinders one from exerting effort and striving for enlightenment. The second is contempt for “inferior beings,” which hinders one from [developing] love and compassion for others. The third is distorted perception, which comes about through not perceiving an object in its true way of existence. The fourth is disparaging the true nature [by] denying the existence 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      177
of the sugatagarbha, and the ﬁfth is exceeding self-cherishing and 
attachment to oneself.
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2. Detailed explanation of their meaning
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.1. The intention of the 
teaching of the second turning of the 
wheel of Dharma
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.1.1. Short explanation
The final truth is in every respect
devoid of anything compounded.The poisons, karma, and their productare said to be like a cloud and so on.
What was meant when the Buddha said, on the occasion of the sec-
ond turning of the wheel 
of Dharma, that all phenomena are devoid 
of entity?
The meaning is that the 
ﬁnal true nature is in every respect devoid 
of the adventitious stains, which are compounded. The afﬂictions 
of birth and so on, which appear due to the afﬂiction of the mental poisons, the afﬂiction of karma, and due to the skandhas and so on, which are the product of the full ripening of the mental poisons and karma, do not truly exist. With the words “like a cloud and so on” they are said to be like a cloud, a dream appearance, an illusion, or a deceptive apparition.
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.1.2. Detailed explanation
The mental poisons are like a cloud.
Karma resembles a dream experience.The skandhas produced by the poisons and karmaare similar to an illusion or a deceptive apparition.
The omnipresent afﬂictions of desire and the other mental poisons 
are like a cloud, since they pervade the sky-like nature of mind and 
since they are adventitious. The omnipresent afﬂiction of karma, unvir-tuous action, and so on, 
which is fully activated by attachment and so 
forth, is similar to a dream experience. This is because it is generated by a distorted understanding and [thus] is a deluded imagination. The omnipresent afﬂiction of birth is due to the skandhas and so on, which are the fruit of the full ripening of karma and mental poisons. This is similar to an illusion or a deceptive apparition, since it depends upon conditions and is not real.
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.2. The reason for the teaching of the third turning of the 
178    Buddha Nature
wheel of Dharma
For the time being it was thus expounded.
Additionally in this unsurpassable continuityit was then taught: “The element is present,”so that the five evils would be abandoned.
[The teachings of the three turnings of the wheel of Dharma were 
given] in order to guide the disciples gradually. With respect to the 
ﬁrst turning of the wheel of Dharma, which consists of the teachings on the Four Noble Truths, some might think that form and so on are truly existent. In order to cause the abandonment of this attachment to the immediate semblance, the Buddha said for the time being, on the occasion of the second turning of the wheel of Dharma, which expresses the absence of characteristics: “All phenomena are emptiness, appear-ance but devoid of entity
, like a cloud, a dream, or an illusion.” Thus 
he gave an explanation that mainly and almost exclusively teaches the absence of an existing essence. Without abandoning his explanation that solely elucidates this [essencelessness], he then additionally gave 
the cycle of teachings pertaining to the highest or the last of the three turnings of the wheel of Dharma, which ﬁnally deﬁnes the absolute. He did so in order to demonstrate the deepest aspect. His aim was to cause the abandonment of the ﬁve evils of faintheartedness and so on and the subsequent attainment of qualities such as delight in the Dharma and so forth. With this intention he said here in the context of the explanation of the ultimate, which is comparable to a continuity, since the uninterrupted dharmadhatu is taught: “This element that is by nature completely pure, the tathagatagarbha, is all-pervasively present within all [sentient beings].” And he explained this extremely clearly by means of a vast number of examples, reasons, and so forth.
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.3. Detailed explanation of this reason
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.3.1. The way the five evils come about
As long as they have not heard this,
bodhichitta will not be born in thosewhose minds are feeble and fainthearted,stirred by the evil of self-contempt.Having engendered [a little] bodhichitta,some proudly imagine: “I am supreme!”Towards those who have not developed itthey are imbued with notions of inferiority.In those who entertain such thoughts,
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      179
true understanding will not arise.
They hold the untrue [to be true]and thus will not realize the truth.Being artificially produced and adventitious,these faults of beings are not truly [existent].In truth these evils do not exist as self,but exist as the qualities by nature pure.While they hold the evils, which are untrue, [to be true]and disparage the true qualities, [denying their presence,]even those of understanding will not attain the lovethat perceives the similarity of oneself and others.
If the Buddha had not taught: “This buddha nature is all-pervasively 
present within all beings” 
and one could therefore not hear this teach-
ing, there would be 
the following consequences. As long as sentient 
beings have not heard this, ﬁve faults will arise within them:
Some individuals’ minds are feeble and fainthearted because of 
the evil of self-contempt and lack of drive, so that they think: “How 
could someone like me attain unsurpassable enlightenment?” Special 
bodhichitta expresses itself in the wish: “May the true Buddha, which is my own nature, reveal itself!” In those beings this special bodhichitta will not be born.
Bodhi
chitta consists of the wish: “May I accomplish buddhahood for 
the sake of the others!” Some, through having developed this only a little bit, get arrogant and conceited so that they imagine: “I follow the Great Vehicle! Therefore I am extraordinary and supreme!” Towards other beings who have not engendered bodhichitta they are imbued with the notion: “These are inferior!” This is due to their ignorance of the fact that suchness is present in these other beings as well.
In those individuals who entertain such thoughts, who believe that 
buddha nature does not exist, true understanding free from assertion and denial will not arise. Therefore they fall into the evil of overstate-ment and hold what is 
not true—the relative, adventitious stains—to 
be truly existent.
On the other hand they also fall into the evil of understatement. 
They will not realize that the dharmadhatu, which contains the ab-solut 
e qualities, is spontaneously present. In this way they do not 
realize the truth. Thoroughly analyzing, one ﬁnds that these faults of beings are artiﬁcially produced by causes and conditions and are adventitious, being able to be removed. These adventitious stains are therefore not truly existent. In truth these adventitious evils, since they do not exist in terms of a self of the person or a self of phenomena, exist 
180    Buddha Nature
as the powers and so on, as the absolute qualities that are by nature 
completely pure.
When one falls to assertion or denial, believing that the adventi-
tious evils, which ar e 
not the truth, exist as the nature, or believing 
that the dharmadhatu, which contains the true qualities, has not been spontaneously present since beginningless time, the evil of exceeding self-cherishing and attachment to oneself will arise. Thus not even bodhisattvas possessing understanding will attain the great love that sees oneself and all sentient beings as having the same nature, as being equally the absolute buddha.
Ther efore the dharmadhatu 
has been clearly elucidated in order to 
cause the abandonment of these evils.
In th
is context the venerable Mikyö Dorjé [the eighth Karmapa]  
has said: 
Here some Tibetan scholars consider the words in the Mahayana 
Uttara Tantra Shastra: “The 
tatagathagarbha is present within all 
beings” as a statement requiring interpretation, inasmuch as to 
their opinion this was only said in order to eliminate the ﬁve faults. If this was so, it would follow that there would be no need to eliminate the ﬁve faults. It would also not be a fault to have contempt for inferior beings. The tathagatagarbha would not be present within sentient beings. There would be no need to take the teachings on the tathagatagarbha as being a valid truth. This would be a statement requiring interpretation. To deny the existence of the sugatagarbha as dharmakaya would also not be a fault, but a correct statement expressing the actual way of existence, since with regard to something that never existed one cannot fall into the extreme of understatement. Also faintheartedness would be justiﬁed, since no sugatagarbha would be present in one’s own stream of being and a teaching aimed against faintheartedness would therefore be a statement that does not correspond to reality. Further, it follows from this opinion that the noble Asanga, for instance, was not a person of authority, since in his system he would not present the holy teachings of the Buddha, of Maitreya, and so on, which “have been given for a speciﬁc purpose and when taken literally lead to contradiction,” as a statement that is “not to be understood in the literal sense.” Since we ﬁnd ourselves unable to follow those who are capable of walking over the Protector Asanga, we will follow the Noble One himself.
B.II.2.2.2.1.4.2.3.2. The way qualities are attained once the five evils are  
aband
oned
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      181
Once one has heard this, joy will be born.
Respect as towards the Buddha, analytical wisdom,primordial wisdom, and great love will arise.Through the arising of these five qualities,one is rid of the faults and sees similarity.[By realizing] the absence of defects and the presence of quali-
ties,
and through love, [seeing] the equality of oneself and [all] 
beings,
buddhahood will be quickly attained.
Through the fact that in the context of the Buddha’s words contain-
ing the deﬁnitive meaning (T
ib. nges don, Skt. nit›rtha), it is said that 
“the dharmadhatu of the T
athagata is all-pervasively present within 
all beings,” and through the disciples having thoroughly heard this, 
[ﬁve qualities will arise]:
Through the notion, “direct revelation of my own nature is great 
enlightenment,” joy and willingness towards the hardships and bur-dens of the path will be born.
Throu 
gh knowing that the nature of others is also buddha, the 
respect one has for one’s teacher will equally arise towards anyone else.
With regar d 
to the relative, adventitious stains, which do not exist 
in terms of the two aspects of self, the discriminative wisdom knowing them to be non-existent arises.
With regar d 
to the absolute dharmadhatu, which exists in terms of 
the nature, the primordial wisdom knowing it to be existent arises.
Through seeing one’s own nature and that of others equally as bud-
182    Buddha Nature
dha, great love, which wishes to do others good, is born.
Since in this way ﬁve qualities arise, this results in the beneﬁt that 
one is free from the defects of faintheartedness and so on and sees 
buddha nature to be equally present within all. 
Through the realization that the faults, the adventitious stains, do 
not exist, whereas the naturally pure qualities exist and everyone has them, and through the great love seeing the equality of oneself and all beings in that all have the tatagathagarbha, one will gradually ac-complish the path. Thr ough 
this one will without any doubt quickly 
attain the fruit, unsurpassable buddhahood, which is the ﬁnal perfec-tion of the two beneﬁts.
♦ This was the section “Tathagatagarbha,” the ﬁrst [chapter] of The 
Commentary on the Highest Continuity 
of the Mahayana Dharma which 
Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare and Sublime Ones.
With this the complete 
explanation of the ﬁrst chapter, teaching the 
nature of the Tathagata, the ground to be realized, is achieved.
CHAPTER  TWO
The Fifth Vajra Point: Enlightenment
B.II.2.2.2.2. Enlightenment is the realizationB.II.2.2.2.2.1. Short explanation of the essence of the subject to be explained
With its purity, attainment, freedom,
benefit for oneself and others, [their] basis, depth, vastness, and greatness of nature,duration, and suchness [it has eight qualities].
Enlightenment is the essence of realization. It is the fruit of the ﬁnal 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      183
perfection of the path and possesses the following eight particular 
qualities: It is puriﬁed from the veils. It is attained through the power of meditation, which constitutes the path. It is free from anything to be abandoned. It is the accomplishment of beneﬁt for oneself and oth-ers. It possesses the powers 
and so forth, the basis of these beneﬁts. 
It contains the division of [the three kayas]: the dharmakaya which is deep, the sambhogakaya which is vast, and the nirmanakaya which is the embodiment of greatness. It is durable in that it exists as long as samsara lasts. Its nature is suchness, the true state [of everything].
B.II.2.2.2.2.2. Concise summary of the way of explanation
By [the topics] essence, cause, fruit,
function, endowment, manifestation,permanence, and inconceivability,the level of a buddha is presented.
By means of the following eight topics the ultimate fruit is therefore 
presented as being the level of buddhahood:
The topic “essence” describes the fact that it possesses the two types 
of purity: in addition to the sphere being by nature completely pure it 
is free from the adventitious stains, from anything to be abandoned.
The topic “cause” describes the means to attain this [enlightenment] 
as being the practice of the path of the meditative and post-meditative phases.
The topic “fruit” describes 
the fact that due to the practice of the 
path it is free from the pollution of the two veils.
The topic “function” describes the fact that due to the veils being 
abandoned it accomplishes two beneﬁts: beneﬁt for oneself and oth-ers.
The topic “endowment” describes the 
fact that it possesses incon-
ceivable qualities providing the basis for these two beneﬁts.
The 
topic “manifestation” describes the fact that these qualities 
manifest through the division of the three kayas: the svabhavikakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya.
The topic “permanence” describes the 
fact that [of] these kayas [the 
ﬁrst] will last as long as there is space and [the latter two] as long as there are sentient beings. 
The topic “inconceivability” describes the way the ﬁnal ultimate 
[fruit] actually is as being inconceivable to ordinary beings. (See also 
184    Buddha Nature
Part Three, annotation 51.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3. Detailed explanation by combining these
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.1. Detailed explanation of essence and causeB.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.1. Concise explanation of the way purity is attained
[Enlightenment, of which the Buddha] said: “It is by nature 
clear light,” is similar to the sun and space.
It is free from the stains of the adventitious poisons and hin-
drances to knowledge, the veils of which obscured it [like] a 
dense sea of clouds.
Buddhahood is permanent, steadfast, and immutable, possess-
ing all the unpolluted buddha qualities.
It is attained on the basis of [two] primordial wisdoms: [one is] 
free from ideation with regard to phenomena, [the other is] discriminative.
The state of a buddha, which possesses the two types of purity, is 
enlightenment, of which the words of the Buddha conveying the de-
ﬁniti
ve meaning state: “It is by nature clear light.” This enlightenment 
has four particularities:
(1) I
t is similar to the sun in that primordial wisdom has expanded, and 
it is similar to space in that there is [the aspect] of abandonment, which 
constitutes purity. This is the particularity in terms of the essence.
(2) It is free from the pollution of the veils of the adventitious mental 
poisons and hindrances to knowledge, which obscured it like a dense sea of clouds. This is the particularity of abandonment, or of the fact that all obscurations have been eliminated.
(3) When buddhahood has dir
ectly revealed itself, it possesses the 
entirety of the unpolluted buddha qualities, such as the powers and so forth. With regard to this, buddhahood represents the essence of permanence, steadfastness, and immutability. This is the particularity in terms of the way in which it is endowed with qualities.
(4) This enlightenment is attained 
on the basis of the practice of 
the path by means of the [two] primordial wisdoms present during meditation and in the post-meditative phase, respectively. The ﬁrst is primordial wisdom that is completely free from ideation with regard to all phenomena, and the second is primordial wisdom that fully and thoroughly discriminates all objects of knowledge. This is the particularity in terms of the cause. (See also Part Three, annotation 52, and Part Four, note 11.)
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      185
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2. Detailed explanation of its meaning
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2.1. Essence
Buddhahood is indivisible, yet can be divided
according to its property of [twofold] purity.[Thus] it has two features, which are abandonmentand primordial wisdom, similar to space and the sun.
The enlightenment of a buddha exists indivisibly from the com-
pletely pure nature 
that is the essence of all [sentient beings]. When 
additionally, at the end [of the purifying process] it has also become 
free from the adventitious stains, it possesses two types of purity [pu-rity of nature and 
purity in terms of puriﬁcation] and can be divided 
according to this property of twofold purity. Thus it possesses two characteristics, which are best possible abandonment and realization. Just as space is by nature completely pure, it is totally pure from the two veils. This is the characteristic of abandonment. Just as the sun is by nature clear light, it is luminous clarity, this quality being insepa-rable from the natur
e of primordial wisdom. This is the characteristic 
of realization. (See also Part Three, annotation 53.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2.2. The way it possesses qualities
Luminous clear light is not created.
It is indivisibly manifest [in the nature of beings] and holds all the buddha propertiesoutnumbering the grains of sand in the river Ganges.
The dharmakaya, which is by nature luminous clear light, is an 
unpolluted sphere. It is not created by causes and conditions, yet is 
indivisibly manifest within the nature of all sentient beings. Since beginningless time it has spontaneously possessed all the properties of a buddha, such as the powers and so forth. These qualities are im-measurable and their number is 
beyond that of the grains of sand in 
the river Ganges. (See also Part Three, annotation 54.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2.3. The meaning of the stains
By nature not existent, pervasive,
and adventitious, the veils of the poisonsand of the hindrances to knowledgeare described as being similar to a cloud.
Since beginningless time the stains by their very nature have never 
186    Buddha Nature
been truly existent. In the unpuriﬁed phase they pervade everything, 
and they are adventitious since they are able to be removed. For these three reasons the veil of the mental poisons, which constitutes the obstacle to liberation, and the veil of the hindrances to knowledge, which constitutes the obstacle to omniscience, are said to be similar to a cloud. Just as a cloud veils the sun and the sky, these two veils obscure the nature of clear light in the phase of ordinary beings. (See also Part Three, annotation 55.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.1.2.4. The cause by which one becomes free from these [veils]
Twofold wisdom causes release from the two veils.
Since there is the one that is free from ideationand the one ensuing from this in post-meditation,it is held that there are [two] primordial wisdoms.
Through freeing oneself from the two veils of the mental poisons and 
hindrances to knowledge, the vimuktikaya (Tib. rnam par grol ba’i sku, 
“the kaya of complete liberation”) and the dharmakaya (Tib. chos kyi 
sku, “the kaya of qualities”) are directly revealed. The cause bringing 
about this fruit consists 
of the fact that twofold primordial wisdom 
is jointly cultivated. The two primordial wisdoms are the ones real-
izing correctly and completely
. In the phase of meditative equipoise, 
bodhisattvas cultivate primordial wisdom that is completely free from 
ideation. This acts as the remedy for the three realms of existence. This cultivation mainly puriﬁes the veil of the mental poisons. In the post-meditative phase ensuing from [meditative equipoise], they cultivate the primordial wisdom that fully and thoroughly discriminates all objects of knowledge, as many as there are, in their deep and vast aspects, and so on. This cultivation mainly puriﬁes the veil of the hindrances to knowledge. For this reason these are considered as being two primordial wisdoms. (See also Part Three, annotation 56.)
It should be understood that in the context dealt with above, the 
ﬁrst three stanzas explain the topic “essence.” This points out that [enlightenment] possesses twofold purity. The last stanza explains the topic “cause.” This points out that it is primordial wisdom that brings about the attainment [of this twofold purity].
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2. Detailed explanation of the fruit
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.1. Concise explanation of freedom 
from stains by means of 
examples
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      187
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.1.1. The fruit of liberation from the veil of the mental poi-
sons
Like a lake filled with unpolluted water gradually overspread 
by lotus flowers,
like the full moon released from Rahu’s mouth and the sun 
liberated from a sea of clouds,
it is free from affliction. Being free from pollution and pos-
sessing qualities,
[buddhahood] is endowed with the brilliant light rays [of cor-
rect and complete vision].
[The state of a buddha] is completely liberated from the afﬂiction of 
desire. Thus it is similar to the example of a beautiful lake, free from any 
pollu
tion of mud or dirt and ﬁlled with an abundant amount of water, 
which is covered by a wealth of gradually spreading lotus ﬂowers.
It is liberated from the afﬂiction of aversion and hatred. Inasmuch 
as that, it is like the full moon, which is released from the inside of the demon Rahu’s mouth.
It is 
 completely liberated from the evil afﬂiction of ignorance, which 
is similar to a dense sea of clouds. For this reason it is like the orb of the sun with its clear radiant light.
Since 
 it is free from the adventitious stains and since it possesses the 
ﬁnal ultimate qualities of best possible abandonment and realization, 
it is perfect buddhahood, endowed with the brilliant light rays of cor-rect and complete vision. (See also Part Four, note 12.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.1.2. The fruit 
of liberation from the veil of the hindrances to 
knowledge
Being similar to the [statue of the] Muni, the leader of beings,
and to the honey, the grain, the precious gold, the treasure, the 
mighty tree,
the Sugata’s statue [made from] immaculate precious material,the ruler of the earth, and the golden image, [a buddha] has 
gained victory.
Perfect buddhahood has gained victory over the veil of the hin-
drances to knowledge, eliminating them 
without any exception. Thus 
it is similar to the statue of the Muni, the leader of beings, which is 
liberated from the shroud of the lotus. It resembles the honey sepa-rated from the bees, 
the grain removed from its husk, the precious 
gold freed from the rotting rubbish, the treasure brought to light from 
188    Buddha Nature
underground, and the mighty tree grown from the seed. It is like the 
statue of the Sugata made from immaculate precious material that is removed from the tattered rags, like the Chakravartin, the ruler of the earth, born from the womb, and like the golden image cleansed from the traces of clay.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.2. Detailed explanation of the reason for this
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.2.1. The fruit attained through 
meditative equipoise and the 
post-meditative phase
Purity from the adventitious afflictions
of desire and the other mental poisonsis like the water of the lake and so forth.When put concisely it can be fully shownas the fruit of wisdom free from ideation.The actual attainment of the buddhakaya,which has all supreme aspects, is explained as the fruitof primordial wisdom ensuing from this after meditation.
The lake ﬁlled with unpolluted water and the other examples have 
three particular properties. Purity from the adventitious afﬂictions of 
desire and the other mental poisons is similar [to these examples]. Brieﬂy, the means to achieve this purity and to then attain the three antidotes, which are meditative stability and so forth, can be fully de-scribed as being the fr
uit of freedom. This is primordial wisdom free 
from ideation, which is present during meditative equipoise. Through eliminating the veil of the hindrances to knowledge one attains the buddhakaya, which has all supreme aspects of qualities. The means for the authentic attainment of this buddhakaya is explained as being the fruit of cultivation. This consists of learning and so forth by means of the worldly primordial wisdom ensuing from this meditative equipoise in the post-meditative phase.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.2.2. The fruit of purification from the three poisons
Having eliminated the silt of desire,
he lets the waters of meditative stabilityflow onto the lotus[-like] disciples,and thus resembles the lake of pure water.Having freed himself from the Rahu of hatred,he pervades beings with the light raysof his great love and compassionate concern,and thus is similar to the immaculate full moon.Totally freed from the clouds of unknowing
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      189
and dispelling [its] darkness within beings
through the light rays of primordial wisdom,buddhahood is similar to the unpolluted sun.
Within his own stream of being, a buddha has eliminated all desire, 
which is comparable to silt polluting the mind. He has eradicated all 
attachments of the three realms of existence without any exception. To the multitude of other beings, who are comparable to the lotus ﬂowers, he teaches the Dharma. By means of his teaching he lets the waters of the samadhi of meditative stability ﬂow onto the disciples’ streams of being and moistens them with calm abiding (Skt. Ÿamatha, Tib. zhi 
gnas) and special 
insight (Skt. vipaŸyan›, Tib. lhag mthong). For these 
r
easons a buddha who has led the two beneﬁts to ﬁnal perfection 
resembles a delightful lake ﬁlled with an abundance of pure water and overspread by lotus ﬂowers.
He has completely liberated his own stream of being from the veil 
of hatred, which totally haunts the mind with tormenting thoughts when facing anything unpleasant and is thus comparable to the vicious Rahu. He takes care of all sentient beings, not neglecting a single one, and pervades the disciples with his great love and compassion. [A buddha’s love and compassion] are comparable to light rays, his love expressing itself in the wish that all other beings may meet with good-ness, and his compassion taking 
form in the wish that their streams 
of being may be free from suffering. For these reasons a buddha who has ﬁnally perfected the two beneﬁts resembles the immaculate full moon released from the [demon’s] mouth.
He has completely liberated his own stream of being from the veil 
of not knowing, which is similar to a dense sea of clouds. He has freed himself from all the ignorance and bewilderment of the three realms of existence. To the great multitude of beings who are his disciples he teaches the Dharma in accordance with their streams of being. Through his teaching he dispels all the darkness of their ignorance by means of the light rays of primordial wisdom. For these reasons buddhahood in which the two beneﬁts are ﬁnally perfected resembles the unpolluted and luminous sun, which is freed from clouds. (See also Part Three, annotation 57.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.2.2.3. Combination of the meaning with the nine examples
Since [enlightenment has] peerless properties,
since it bestows the taste of sacred Dharma,and since it is free from the peel [of the veils],
190    Buddha Nature
it is like the Sugata, the honey, and the grain.
Since it is purified, since [beings’] povertyis dispelled by the wealth of its qualities,and since it grants the fruit of total liberation,it is like the gold, the treasure, and the tree.Representing the jewel of the dharmakaya,and [the attainment of] the supreme lord of humans,and [manifesting in] the likeness of a precious image,they are like the bejeweled, the king, and the golden.
Final ultimate enlightenment, which has the two types of purity, 
possesses peerless properties in that only a buddha has its qualities. 
It bestows the taste of the sacred Dharma upon the disciples, granting them the most excellent essence of its deep aspect. It is free from the peel of the two veils along with their remaining imprints. For these reasons and in the same sequence, it resembles the Sugata having come to light from the lotus, the honey separated from the bees, and the grain having emerged from the husk.
It is by nature free from stains and in addition to that is completely 
puriﬁed from the adventitious faults. By means of the inexhaustible wealth of its qualities it dispels all the poverty and destitution of the disciples, not leaving a single trace. It grants the disciples the fruit of 
great bliss, which completely liberates them from all their suffering. For these reasons it is like the pure gold cleansed from the ﬁlth, like the great treasure having come to light from the shroud of the earth, and like the mighty fruit-bearing tree.
The dharmakaya has directly revealed itself. Possessing immeasur-
able qualities, it is similar 
to a jewel that is the source [of the fulﬁll-
ment] of all wishes and 
needs. The sambhogakaya is attained, being 
the supreme leader and lord of all disciples, especially of all human beings. The nirmanakaya is demonstrated. It is similar to the form of an image made from precious gold, in that it manifests in various illusory appearances. For these reasons buddhahood is like the bejew-eled statue freed fr
om the tattered rags, like the Chakravartin released 
from the shroud of the womb, and like the golden image freed from the traces of clay.
Through the ﬁrst stanza of the foregoing section, buddhahood is 
explained as being the ﬁnal ultimate fruit, through the second as be-ing liberated from the 
veils, and through the third as representing the 
complete perfection of the three kayas.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3. Detailed explanation of its function
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      191
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.1. Concise explanation of the way the two benefits are accom-
plish
ed
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.1.1. The function of the essence
Rid of pollution [and] all-pervasive, [true buddhahood] has an 
indestructible nature
since it is steadfast, at peace, permanent, and unchanging. As 
the abode [of qualities]
a tathagata is similar to space. For the six sense-faculties of a 
saintly being
it forms the cause to experience their respective [pure] objects 
[of perception].
The true absolute state of a buddha is equivalent to ﬁnal ultimate 
abandonment in that it is free from even the slightest trace of pollution 
along with its remaining imprints. It is equivalent to ﬁnal ultimate realization in that it pervades the whole range of the knowable in terms of “as it is” and “as much as there is,” in its absolute and relative aspects or in its ways of being and of appearance. This true buddha-hood,
 which has best possible abandonment and realization, is of an 
uncompounded and lastingly indestructible nature. This is because it is free from death, birth, sickness, and aging and is therefore steadfast, permanent, at peace, and unchanging. Buddhahood being such, its 
attainment means that one’s 
own beneﬁt is ﬁnally perfected. Since 
it is the abode of all unstained [lit. “white”] properties, it also ﬁnally 
perfects the beneﬁt of others. A buddha who has gone into the very essence of suchness, into the true state itself, is similar to uncreated space. The own essence of space is not such that it fulﬁls a function, and yet it unfolds activity, providing the prerequisite for visible objects to be seen and so forth. Similar to that, a buddha acts as a cause with respect to the six sense-faculties of a saintly being who has karmic fortune. Once the six sense-faculties of such a person have become supreme, buddhahood represents the cause for the pure object of perception corresponding to each sense faculty to be experienced and 
realized. (See also Part Three, annotation 58.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.1.2. The function in terms of there being purity throughout 
all phenomena
It is the cause for visible objects, which are non-arising,  
to be seen,
for good and pure speech to be heard,
for the pure scent of the moral conduct of the Sugata to be 
smelled,
192    Buddha Nature
for the flavor of sacred Dharma [of] the great noble ones  
to be tasted,
for the blissful touch of samadhi to be felt,
and for the mode [of the Dharma], which is by essence deep,  
to be realized.
When reflected upon in a very fine way, a sugata bestowing 
true bliss
is like space, devoid of any reasons.
The Sugata constitutes the cause for manifold sensory objects, such 
as the form kayas and so forth, to be perceived [and yet known] as 
being merely relative. This perception occurs through the power of having previously gathered the accumulations. The objects perceived are non-arisings in that they are not made from the elements. One beholds [pure] physical form, hears the good and pure speech of the Mahayana Dharma, smells the pure scent of the moral conduct of the Sugata, and tastes the ﬂavor of the nectar of the sacred Dharma that is the object of experience of the great noble ones. Through samadhi one attains suppleness or malleability (Tib. shin sbyangs). The Sugata 
is the cause for [a noble one] to feel the blissful touch arising from this suppleness and to realize the mode of the Dharma, which is deep 
according to its own essence.
Therefore, when reﬂected upon in a very ﬁne way by means of the 
intelligence analyzing the absolute, a sugata bestowing true bliss is similar to space. Like space he is devoid of any reasons that generate a fruit, and yet he generates all goodness for the disciples.
Here Rongtönpa explains in his own commentary: 
Since the Sanskrit term “buddhi” has two meanings, which are 
“non-arising” [i.e. karma, mental poisons, and self-attachment will never arise again] and “wielding power” (Tib. dbang ’byor), it is 
[literally] translated [in the root text] as “non-arising” (Tib. ’byung 
med). Yet, as for the meaning it is better to translate it as “wield-ing power,” having in 
view the point of its taking form, which is 
equivalent to wielding or being possessed of power. 
(See also Part Three, annotation 59.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.2. Detailed explanation of the meaning
B.II.
2.2.2.2.3.3.2.1. Explanation of the way the two benefits are accomplished, 
combined with their respective classification
In brief, [two kayas] are to be understood
as functions of the two primordial wisdoms:the vimuktikaya [representing] perfection,
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      193
and the dharmakaya [representing] refinement.
Vimuktikaya and dharmakaya are to be knownin terms of two aspects and [a common] one,as they are free from pollution and all-pervasive,uncreated and thus embody the ground [of virtue].
Brieﬂy speaking, the functioning of the two kayas is to be understood 
as the function of the two primordial wisdoms, which are present on 
the path of training during meditative equipoise and during the post-meditative phase, respectively.
During meditative equipoise one contemplates [the true nature] as 
it is [and thus gains correct knowledge]. Through this contemplation one perfectly attains ﬁnal ultimate abandonment. This is equivalent to the vimuktikaya, the kaya in terms of being completely liberated from anything to be abandoned. During the post-meditative phase one trains oneself in an unperverted way with regard to the manner in which [anything relative], as much as there is, exists [and thus gains complete knowledge]. Through this training one fully reﬁnes ﬁnal ultimate realization. This is equivalent to the dharmakaya.
In this context the kaya in terms of complete liberation from the 
veils and the dharmakaya, which is the support of primordial wisdom, 
are each to be known as having an individual aspect, namely the two aspects of freedom from pollution and all-pervasiveness, respectively. They are further to be known as having one [common] aspect in that they are both uncreated. This is because the vimuktikaya is free from even the slightest pollution and thus has [the aspect of abandonment], and the dharmakaya pervades all objects of knowledge without any remainder and thus has [the aspect of] realization. Their common as-pect is due to the 
fact that they are both of a nature that is not created 
by causes and conditions. It is taught that these constitute the best possible beneﬁt for oneself. Since they are the abode [of all virtue], of all unstained [lit. “white”] properties, they also provide the best possible beneﬁt for others.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.2.2. Particular explanation of the best possible benefit for one-
self
Since the mental poisons along with their remaining imprints 
are ended,
[the vimuktikaya] is free from any pollution.
Since there is no attachment and obstruction,[the dharmakaya] is considered as pervasive primordial wis-
dom.
194    Buddha Nature
Being of a nature forever indestructible
[neither kaya] is something that is created.While “indestructibility” is the [concise] explanation [of uncre-
atedness],
it is taught in more detail through [the topic] “steadfast” and 
so forth.
“Destructibility” is to be understood [in terms of] four aspects,since it constitutes the contrary of “steadfastness” and so on.These are decay, drastic change, being cut-off, and  
transmigration,
which
 is inconceivable [and] a transformation [in various] 
ways.
Since [the vimuktikaya and dharmakaya] are free from these 
[features],
they are to be known as steadfast, peaceful, permanent, and  
unchanging.
Since all the adventitious mental poisons along with their remain-
ing imprints are ended, 
having been eliminated without exception at 
their very root, the vimuktikaya has the aspect of being free from any 
pollution. Likewise the dharmakaya is considered as having the aspect of pervading the full range of the knowable, as much as there is, by means of the realization of primordial wisdom. This is equivalent to correct and complete knowledge. Correct knowledge results from the fact that perverted perception has been exhausted; hence there is no at-
tachm
ent and ﬁxation to objects. Since all aspects [of the relative world] 
have become apparent, there is no hindrance with regard to objects [of perception]. Thus there is complete knowledge. Furthermore, both kayas have the aspect of not being created by causes and conditions in their own right. For this reason they are of a nature that is forever indestructible, or in other words, unchanging. In this context their indestructibility is brieﬂy explained by means of the reason of their uncreatedness. “Indestructibility” is then taught in detail through the four topics of steadfastness and so forth, the latter [three] being peace, permanence, and unchangingness.
Then, if these ar e 
analyzed from the viewpoint of their opposite 
sides, all created or composite things are found to be subject to four ways of destruction for the following reasons: Contrary to being stead-fast they are not 
stable; contrary to being at peace they are unpeaceful; 
contrary to being permanent they are impermanent; and contrary to being unchanging they are subject to manifold changes.
One may wonder in what way they are mutable. Mutability has 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      195
four aspects: Reaching the point when they are fully ripened, all com-
pounded things become rotten 
and old; this is the process of aging, 
which is equivalent to putrefaction and decay. The elements undergo a total change; this is the aspect of sickness, which consists of suffer-ing. The course of the 
previous existence is cut and the following one 
is achieved; this is the aspect of being born. Then there is the process of dying; this implies a change that is inconceivable and takes place in manifold ways.
Since with respect to 
the vimuktikaya and dharmakaya these four 
aspects of destruction are not present, in the same sequence they are to be considered as being the embodiment of steadfastness, peace, permanence, and immutability. (See also Part Three, annotation 60.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.3.2.3. Particular explanation of the best possible benefit for 
others
As absence of pollution and [primordial] wisdom are the sup-
port for the unstained properties
[to come forth in the disciples], they are [also] the abode [of the 
best possible benefit for others].
Space is not a cause, and yet the cause
for all visible things to be seen,for sound, odor, flavor, touch,and phenomena to be heard and so on.Just so, they cause the unstained qualitiesto arise as objects sensed by those[whose vision is] stable by junctionwith the unveiled [seeing of] the two kayas.
Thus these aspects of abandonment and realization, which are 
freedom from any pollution and primordial wisdom having revealed 
itself directly, are the support or ground for the outstanding quali-ties, for the unstained pr 
operties of virtue, to come forth within the 
disciples’ streams of being in accordance with their respective karmic fortunes. For this reason they are also the abode of the best possible beneﬁt of others.
This can be shown by 
means of an example: Space does not con-
stitute a cause that brings 
about any generation, and is devoid of the 
characteristics of the visible and so forth. Yet it is still established as being a cause in that it provides the prerequisite and opportunity for visible things to be seen by the sense faculty of the eye, for sounds to be heard by the ear, and so on—which is to say, for odors to be smelled 
196    Buddha Nature
by the nose, for ﬂavors to be tasted by the tongue, for touches to be 
felt by the body, and for phenomena to be thought by the mind. In the same way, [the aspects of abandonment and realization] act as a cause: Cultivating the path of junction, one becomes free from the veils that prevent one from seeing the two buddhakayas. Through the cultivation of this path one’s understanding is profound and stable. The six sense-faculties of heirs of the Victorious One who are endowed with karmic fortune have become supreme by means of [this cultivation]. Thus their object of perception or ﬁeld of experience is the dharmakaya and the visible kayas. By the power of seeing the visible kayas, and so forth, the unpolluted qualities—such as the marks, signs, and so on—arise on the relative level. From seeing the dharmakaya, and so forth, the numberless unstained qualities—such as the powers, fearlessnesses, and so on—will reveal themselves directly on the absolute level. The cause for the arising [of these qualities] is [joint] abandonment and realization.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4. Detailed explanation of endowment
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.1. Concise explanation through listing the names [of the quali-
ties]
Buddhahood is inconceivable, permanent, steadfast, at peace, 
and immutable.
It is utterly peaceful, pervasive, without thought, and unat-
tached like space.
It is free from hindrance and coarse objects of contact are 
eliminated.
It cannot be seen or grasped. It is virtuous and free from pol-
lution.
Buddhahood, which is equivalent to the attainment of great enlight-
enment, is endowed with ﬁfteen ultimate qualities, listed [below]:
 (1) It cannot be conceived by means of study and so on.
 (2) 
Being free from birth it is permanent.
 (3) Being free from aging it is steadfast. (4) Being free from sickness it is at peace. (5) Being free from death it is immutable. (6) Being free from suffering it is utterly peaceful. (7) Due to complete understanding it pervades the knowable. (8) Due to correct understanding it is free from thought. (9) The veil of the mental poisons having been abandoned, it is 
without any attachment, like space.
 (10) The veil of 
the obstructions to knowledge having been aban-
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      197
doned, it is at all times free from any hindrance with regard 
to all objects [of perception].
 (11) The veil of the obstructions to meditative equipoise having 
been abandoned, coarse objects of contact are eliminated. (See also Part Three, annotation 61.)
 (12) Being free from the features of the visible it cannot be seen. (13) Being free from characteristics it cannot be grasped. (14) Being by nature pure it is virtuous. (15) Being puriﬁed from the adventitious stains it is free from  
pollution.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2. Detailed explanation of the meaning [of the qualities]B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.1. Concise explanation of who is endowed with qualities
As was explained, the vimuktikaya and the dharmakaya
[accomplish] benefit for oneself and benefit for others.These [kayas], being the support of this twofold benefit,possess the qualities of being inconceivable and so forth.
As has been explained already, the vimuktikaya and the dharmakaya, 
which embody abandonment and realization, accomplish the best 
possible beneﬁts for oneself and others. This is because complete liberation from all the fetters of anything to be abandoned is the achievement of personal beneﬁt, and the activity [unfolding] on the support of the qualities of the dharmakaya, which is equivalent to 
realization, accomplishes the beneﬁt of others. These two kayas thus forming the support of this twofold beneﬁt for oneself and others are to be known as possessing the ﬁfteen qualities or properties of being inconceivable and so forth.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2. Definition of the qualities that constitute endowment
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.1. Detailed explanation of the reason why they are deepB.II.
2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.1.1. General explanation of the way they are inconceivable
Being the object of the omniscient primordial wisdom,
buddhahood is not an object for the three types of insight.So even those with a wisdom body must realizethat [buddha enlightenment] is inconceivable.
The enlightenment of a buddha is exclusively the object of percep-
tion of the omniscient primor
dial wisdom. As such it is not an object 
or ﬁeld of experience for the three types of discriminative wisdom, 
which result from study and so forth. For this reason it is said:
Those beings who are different from a buddha must realize that 
198    Buddha Nature
the ultimate kaya of primordial wisdom possesses the quality of 
being inconceivable, in that it cannot be conceived just as it is by saying: It is this!
Or else:
All the noble ones below those who have a wisdom body must realize that it is inconceivable.
(See also Part Three, annotation 62.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.1.2. Detailed explanation of the specifics
Being subtle it is not an object for study.
Being absolute it cannot be reflected upon.Dharmata is deep. Hence it is not an objectfor any worldly meditation and so on.
Since the absolute Buddha is extremely subtle and difﬁcult to real-
ize, it is not an 
object of experience [for] the discriminative wisdom 
resulting from study. Likewise it is not an object of the discriminative 
wisdom resulting from reﬂection, since the ultimate truth must be realized through self-aware primordial wisdom. Since suchness or the dharmata is deep and hard to explore, it is not an object of experience of any type of consciousness that consists of a discriminative wisdom resulting from worldly meditation, and so forth [i.e., this is the ﬁrst quality]. (See also Part Three, annotation 63.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.1.3. Combination of the reasons with an example
Why [is it hard to realize]? Like the blind with regard
to the visible, the children have never seen it before.Even noble ones [see it] as babies [would glimpse] the sun from within the house where they are born.
One may wonder for what reason it is so difﬁcult to realize. This is 
because the children, all ordinary beings, are like people blind from 
birth who have not seen the various aspects of the visible at all, ever before [in their lives]. Similar to the example, all children without excep-tion have never befor e 
seen unpolluted suchness directly, not even to 
the slightest extent. And even those noble heirs of the Victorious One who dwell on the tenth bodhisattva level are like newborn children who faintly glimpse the light rays of the orb of the sun from within the house where they were born, but are not able to view it fully and perfectly. They see the dharmakaya directly to a small extent but are 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      199
not able to apprehend it immediately in its full perfection.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.2. Explanation of the reason for the next [fourteen qualities]
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.2.1. The qualities of being unchanging
Since it is free from being born, it is permanent.
Since it is without cessation, it is steadfast.Since these two are not present, it is peaceful.It is immutable, for the dharmata [ever] remains.
Because this unpolluted buddha has been free from being born [or 
coming into existence] due to causes and conditions since beginningless 
time, it has the quality of being permanent (2). Because something that has not come into existence [will not end and thus] is without cessa-tion,
 it has the quality of being steadfast (3). Because it is not disturbed 
and made restless through the two aspects of birth and cessation, this buddha has the quality of being peaceful (4). As such it has the qual-ity of being immutable (5). 
The reason is that the dharmata, the true 
state of everything, which is by nature nirvana, beyond any torment, is unchangingness itself and has remained since beginningless time.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.2.2. The qualities of abandonment and realization
It is utter peace, since the truth of cessation [is revealed].
Since everything is realized, it pervades [all the knowable].Since it does not dwell upon anything, it is without ideation.Since the mental poisons are eliminated, it has no attachment.Since the veil of the hindrances to knowledge is cleansed,it is in all ways unobstructed [with regard to complete insight].Being free from its two [obstacles], it is suited for [samadhi]and thus relieved from the touch of coarse objects of contact.
The enlightenment of a buddha has the quality of great bliss, all 
suffering being utterly paciﬁed (6). This is because the ﬁnal ultimate 
truth of cessation is revealed directly, as everything to be abandoned has been ended without any exception. Likewise all aspects of the knowable are immediately realized. For this reason it has the qual-ity of pervading the full 
range of whatever is to be known. This is 
equivalent to complete insight (7). Since it does not dwell upon any focus or characteristic whatsoever, it has the quality of being without ideation. This is equivalent to correct insight (8). These two aspects are the particularities in terms of realization and bliss.
Since the veil of the mental poisons, which constitutes the obstruc-
tion to liberating other beings, 
is eliminated along with its remaining 
200    Buddha Nature
imprints, it possesses the quality of having no attachment to the ﬁeld 
of correct insight (9). Since all the veils of the hindrances to knowledge, which constitute the obstruction to omniscience, are totally puriﬁed without any exception, it has the quality of being unobstructed in all ways with regard to the ﬁeld of complete insight (10). Being free from the veil of meditative equipoise, which consists of the two [obstacles] of agitation (Tib. rgod) and dullness (Tib. bying), and so on, body and 
mind 
are smooth [and malleable] and thus suited for samadhi. For this 
reason it has the quality of being relieved of meeting any sensation of coarse objects of contact (11).
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.4.2.2.2.3. The qualities of purity and purification
Since it is not something visible, it cannot be seen.
Since it is free from features, it cannot be grasped.It is virtuous, [the dharmadhatu] being by nature pure,and it is free from stains, since pollution is abandoned.
Since enlightenment is not something visible that consists of a gath-
ering of subtle particles, and 
since it is totally beyond all conditioned 
phenomena, it cannot be seen by means of the ordinary sense-faculty 
(12). Since it is free from features in terms of the conceptual elabora-tion of signs, deﬁnitions, and 
so forth, and since it is totally beyond 
all phenomena of consciousness, it cannot be grasped by the ordinary intellect (13). It has the quality of ultimate virtue, since it embraces the dharmadhatu, which is by nature utterly pure (14). It has the quality of being extremely stainless, since all the adventitious pollutions along with their remaining imprints have been abandoned without any exception and it is in consequence totally puriﬁed (15).
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5. Detailed explanation of its manifestation
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1. Concise explanation through listing the characteristicsB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1.1. Explanation of who realizes the essence
What is the nature of dharmadhatu? It is without beginning, 
middle, and end.
It is totally indivisible and far away from the two [extremes],
rid of the three [veils], unpolluted, and not an object of 
thought.
Its realization is the vision of a Yogi who Dwells in Meditative 
Equipoise.
What is the nature of the dharmadhatu? It possesses ﬁve charac-
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      201
teristics: It is without coming into existence in a beginning, without 
abiding during an intermediate phase, and without ceasing at an end. Thus there is the characteristic of being uncreated (1). Spaciousness and awareness cannot be split into different things at all. Thus there is the characteristic of being indivisible (2). It does not dwell in the two extremes of assertion and denial. Thus there is the characteristic of being unperverted (3). It is free from the three veils. Thus there is the characteristic of being totally puriﬁed (4). It is by nature free from any pollution and does not constitute an object for the thoughts of a reasoner. Thus there is the characteristic of clear light (5). The direct realization of the dharmadhatu possessing these ﬁve characteristics is the realization of the dharmakaya. This is seen as it is by a tathagata. It is the vision of a Yogi who Dwells in Meditative Equipoise in such a way that he never rises from the dharmata, the true state of everything. (See also Part Three, annotation 64.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1.2. Concise explanation of the particularity of the dhar-
makaya
The unpolluted sphere of a tathagata possesses the [four] 
qualities [of realization].
It cannot be fathomed and [in number] is beyond the grains of 
sand in the river Ganges.
It is inconceivable and peerless and there is furthermore
elimination of all faults along with their remaining traces.
This unpolluted sphere of a tathagata, which is the dharmakaya, has 
the four qualities of best possible realization: It cannot be fathomed 
in terms of any measure (1). [Its virtues are] countless, their number being beyond that of the grains of sand in the river Ganges, as many as there may be (2). Due to its depth it is inconceivable (3), and it is peerless, unequaled by anything else (4). Furthermore there is the qual-ity of best possible abandonment 
(5), since the faults of the two veils 
along with their remaining imprints have been eliminated without exception. The dharmakaya is therefore to be understood in terms of possessing ﬁve qualities.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1.3. Concise explanation of the particularity of the sambhogaka-
ya
Through various aspects of the sacred Dharma, through bodies 
shot with light rays,
202    Buddha Nature
and through its readiness to accomplish the task of the total  
liberation of beings,
its deeds resemble the activity of a king of wish-fulfilling 
jewels.
[It appears as] a variety of things, yet is not of the nature of 
these.
The sambhogakaya has ﬁve qualities or particular properties: It 
has mastery over teaching the various aspects of the sacred Dharma, 
demonstrating its deep and its vast aspects. Thus the ﬂow of pure speech is uninterrupted (1). It shows itself in various appearances through bodies endowed with the light rays of the signs and marks. Thus the ﬂow of displaying pure physical form is uninterrupted (2). There is [constant] readiness to accomplish the task of totally liberating the disciples’ streams of being. Thus the ﬂow of pure mental activity is uninterrupted (3). Acting without any deliberate effort, spontane-ously and without thought, its 
deeds resemble the activity of a king 
of wish-fulﬁlling jewels (4). It appears to the disciples as a variety of things, and yet demonstrates at the same time that it is not of the nature or essence of these (5).
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.1.4. Concise explanation of the particularity of the nirmanaka-
ya
[The nirmanakaya persuades] the worldly beings to enter the 
path towards peace.
He fully matures them and, granting prophecy, [becomes] the 
cause [of their release].
These form [kayas] remain forever in this [world]
like the realm of form within the realm of space.
First the nirmanakaya persuades the worldly beings to enter the 
path towards the nirvana which is peace (1). Thereupon during an 
intermediate period he leads them to reach full maturation on the path of the Great Vehicle (2). Finally he becomes the cause of their liberation and release through granting them prophecy with regard to their enlightenment (3). The visible kayas endowed with these three particular properties are the nirmanakayas, which appear in various ways. They remain forever in this world as long as samsara lasts. This is because they dwell uninterruptedly within the dharmadhatu just as, for example, the inanimate and animate constituents (Tib. snod bcud, 
lit. 
“vessel and content”) of the realms of desire and form dwell within 
the realm of space. (See also Part Three, annotation 65.)
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      203
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2. Detailed explanation of their meaning
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.1. Common classification
The Omniscience of All the Self-Sprung Ones is given
the name of “Buddhahood.” Its meaning is [also termed]:“Most Supremely Beyond Torment,” “The Inconceivable,”“Foe-Vanquisher,” and “Quintessence of Self-Awareness.”When these are categorized, they can be fully dividedinto [three] properties, which are the qualities of depth,vastness, and greatness, or the nature [kaya] and so on.[The benefits] are fulfilled through these three kayas.
Great enlightenment is self-sprung (Tib. rang byung ) (1) in that it does 
not depend upon extraneous conditions. The Self-Sprung Ones [who 
have reached great enlightenment] are omniscient (2); they know all aspects of the knowable (Tib. shes bya thams cad mkhyen pa) and thus 
possess primordial wisdom. With respect to their having primordial wisdom, there are the aspects of best possible abandonment and re-alization. From the viewpoint 
of there being these aspects, the Omni-
scien
ce of the Self-Sprung Ones is called Buddhahood (Tib. sangs rgyas 
nyid) [sangs rgyas means “awakened and expanded” and is explained as “awakened from the 
sleep of ignorance and expanded with regard 
to the knowable,” this being equivalent to the aspects of abandonment and realization, or correct and complete insight] (3). What this expresses is also called Supremely Beyond Torment, or Highest Nirvana (Tib. mchog tu mnya ngan las ’das) (4), since great enlightenment does not abide within the two extremes of existence and peace. It is called The Inconceivable (Tib. bsam du med pa) (5), since it is beyond any object of 
experience of reasoning and argumentation. It is the Foe-Vanquisher or arhat (Tib. dgra bcom pa) (6), since it has gained victory over the objects 
of samsara [having vanquished all enemies, which are karma and the mental poisons]. It has become the Quintessence of Self-Awareness (Tib. so so rang gis rig pa’i bdag nyid) (7).
When 
great enlightenment expressed by means of these seven 
synonymous names is categorized, it can be fully divided into three properties, which are the qualities of depth, vastness, and greatness. It is deep since it is difﬁcult to realize. It is vast since it wields power, and it is the embodiment of greatness since it corresponds to any kar-mic fortune. In the same 
sequence there are therefore three kayas: the 
svabhavikakaya, the kaya of the nature or essence that is deep, and so forth. “And so forth” refers to the sambhogakaya, which is vast, and to 
204    Buddha Nature
the nirmanakaya, which is the embodiment of greatness. Through these 
three kayas beneﬁt for oneself and others is achieved spontaneously and without interruption. (See also Part Three, annotation 66.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2. Presentation of each individually
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1. Presentation of the dharmakaya or svabhavikakayaB.II.
2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1.1. Concise explanation of the qualities and characteris-
tics
Of these, the svabhavikakaya
of the buddhas is to be knownas having five characteristicsand, if condensed, five qualities:
In this way ultimate enlightenment is classiﬁed in terms of three 
kayas. Of these the svabhavikakaya, or essence kaya of all buddhas, 
which constitutes best possible beneﬁt for oneself, has ﬁve particulari-ties or characteristics. These ar 
e the characteristics of being uncreated 
and so forth. The number of its qualities is extremely great. Yet, when these are summarized and put brieﬂy, it is to be known as having ﬁve types of qualities that are indivisibly native to it. These are the qualities of being unfathomable and so forth.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1.2. Detailed explanation of their essenceB.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1.2.1. Explanation of the five characteristics
It is uncreated and totally indivisible.
The two extremes are completely abandoned.It is definitively freed from the three veils—the mental poisons and the obstructionsto knowledge and meditative equipoise.It is unpolluted and not an [object of] thought.Being the field of the yogis and the dharmadhatu,being by essence pure, it is luminous clarity.
The svabhavikakaya, which constitutes the ultimate [kaya], has the 
following ﬁve particular characteristics:
 (1) It is uncreated and totally indivisible. It is uncreated since it 
is far away from the aspects of arising, abiding, and disintegration, 
which are the properties of anything compounded, that is, created [by causes and conditions]. And it is totally indivisible since the unpol-luted
 dharmadhatu and ﬁnal ultimate primordial wisdom are entirely 
mixed into one.
 (2) 
The two extremes of eternalism and nihilism are completely 
abandoned, eternalism being equivalent to an exaggerative [view in 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      205
that existence is asserted where it is not present] and nihilism being 
equivalent to a depreciating [view in that existence is denied where it is present].
 (3) It is deﬁnitively freed from the three veils, which are the veil of 
the mental poisons, the veil of the obstructions to knowledge, and the veil of the obstructions to meditative equipoise. The ﬁrst-mentioned veil consists of avarice and so forth. The second-mentioned veil does not contain any mental poisons but constitutes the obstacle that hinders one from understanding the knowable. The third-mentioned veil is a particular aspect of the veil of the obstructions to knowledge. It consists of not knowing how to rest evenly in meditative equipoise just as one wishes. Freedom from these [three] constitutes the characteristics of being free from the veils or obscurations.
 (4) It is free from the pollution of the mental poisons and is not an 
object or ﬁeld of experience for any thought or conceptualization.
 (5) It is the ﬁeld of experience of the self-aware primordial wisdom 
of those ultimate yogis who always rest evenly in the meditative equi-poise in which means and 
discriminative wisdom are in union. The 
deep dharmadhatu has been by essence utterly pure since beginning-less time. For these r 
easons it has the characteristic of being by nature 
luminous clarity. (See also Part Three, annotation 67.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.1.2.2. Explanation of the five qualities
The svabhavikakaya truly has
the final and ultimate qualitiesof being unfathomable, countless,inconceivable, unequaled, and pure.Since it is vast, not to be numbered,not an object of reasoning, and unique,and since the remaining traces are eliminated,it is in the same order unfathomable and so on.
The svabhavikakaya possesses the following ﬁve ﬁnal and ultimate 
qualities: It cannot be fathomed or evaluated by means of signs and 
marks (1). It cannot be expressed by means of numbers (2). It cannot 
be c
onceived by means of the intellect (3). It is not equaled by anything 
else (4). It is utterly pure (5).
When 
[viewed] in true perspective the svabhavikakaya and its 
ﬁve qualities are indivisible. There are ﬁve reasons: Its essence is vast like space (1). One cannot pinpoint it in any way saying: “This is its number!” (2). It is in no way and no respect an object or ﬁeld 
206    Buddha Nature
for reasoning, argumentation, or dialectics (3). It is a unique quality 
in that only a buddha embraces it (4). The two veils along with their remaining imprints are eliminated without exception (5).
Therefore the qualities of being unfathomable and so forth are to be 
understood in the same sequence in combination with the ﬁve reasons of being vast and so on.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.2. Presentation of the sambhogakaya
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.2.1. Detailed explanation of the presentation
It perfectly enjoys the various aspects of Dharma
and appears [in the form] of natural qualities.Corresponding to the pure cause of its compassion,the benefit of sentient beings is uninterrupted.Totally without any thought and spontaneouslyit wholly grants all wishes exactly as they areby miraculous powers, like a wish-fulfilling gem.It therefore fully abides in Perfect Enjoyment.
The sambhogakaya (Tib. longs spyod rdzogs pa’i sku, “the kaya of 
perfect enjoyment”) has the following ﬁve [particular qualities]:
 (1) It perfectly enjoys the wealth of the various aspects of the Ma-
hayana Dharma in its featur
es of depth and vastness, [of teaching the 
ultimate and the relative truth].
 (2) To the pure among the disciples it always appears in the form of 
natu
ral qualities adorned with signs and marks that are not just illu-
sory.
 
(3) Uninterruptedly it brings about the beneﬁt of all sentient beings. 
[This activity] constitutes the fruit that corresponds to its pure and 
immaculate cause, which is great compassion.
 (4) Its activity manifests spontaneously, totally without thought and 
deliberate effort. By means of this activity it grants all wishes of the disciples just as they are and thus wholly fulﬁls any of their expecta-tions and hopes.
 (5) Due to the 
surface underneath it, a wish-fulﬁlling gem appears 
in various colors, but does not exist as the essence of these. Likewise, due to [different wishes and needs of] the disciples, the sambhogakaya manifests in perfect play by means of various miraculous powers, but does not exist as the essence of these [manifestations].
Thus 
it possesses ﬁve particularities. Through the manner in which 
it is endowed with these it fully abides as the Kaya of Perfect Enjoy-ment of the Mahayana Dharma.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      207
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.2.2. The five properties taught in summarized form
Since the stream of verbal expression, display [of form],
and action [of mind] is uninterrupted and not a product,and since it shows that it is not of the essence of these,it is taught here in five aspects, as “various” and so on.
The clear verbal expression of instruction, which is the action of 
speech, the display of physical appearance, which is the action of the 
body, and mental activity, which is the action of mind, are an uninter-rupted stream (1-3). 
These three types of action are spontaneous and 
are not the products of deliberate effort (4). Due to the power of [the disciples’] karmic fortunes it appears in various ways, but at the same time shows that it is not of the essence of these (5). With respect to these ﬁve properties it is taught here in this chapter, which explains the sambhogakaya, in terms of ﬁve particularities. These are [enjoy-ment of the] variety [of Dharma], and so on.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.2.3. The way it appears due to conditions
Due to the various colors [of its background] a gem appears [in 
manifold colors],
[but] is not a thing fulfilling their function.
Likewise the All-Pervasive [Ones] appear due to the manifold 
conditions [set by beings]
without being a thing fulfilling their function.
Due to the condition provided by the various hues of the colorful 
cotton forming its background, a precious wish-fulﬁlling gem lying 
upon it appears, because of its brilliant transparence, in manifold [colors], though it is not a thing fulﬁlling their function. Likewise, as shown by this example, perfect buddhas who are the embodiment of 
great c o
mpassion, pervading all sentient beings (Tib. skye dgu) by 
means of it, appear in a totally illusory manifestation of color, size, 
and so forth. They do so due to the condition set by the beings who are to be trained, reﬂecting their [different] temperaments, wishes, aspirations, and so forth, though they are not a thing fulﬁlling the function of these [conditions].
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3. Presentation of the nirmanakaya
B.II.
2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.1. The way the twelve deeds of the supreme nirmanakaya 
are demonstrated
[The Supreme Nirmanakaya] knows the world and having 
gazed upon
208    Buddha Nature
all worldly [beings demonstrates] out of his great compassion
[twelve wondrous deeds]. Without moving away from the 
dharmakaya
he manifests through various [aspects] of an illusory nature.Having [first] been born spontaneously in a [divine] existencehe then leaves the realm of Tushita and passes [into this 
world].
He enters [his mother’s] womb, takes birth, and gains perfect 
skill,
mastering all the various fields of handicraft, science, and art.He mirthfully enjoys amusement among his spouse and her 
retinue.
Feeling weariness and renunciation he practices as an ascetic.Then he goes to Awakening’s Heart and defeats the hosts of 
Mara.
[He finds] perfect enlightenment and turns the wheel of 
Dharma.
He passes into nirvana [the state beyond any torment and 
pain].
Within all the [endless] fields totally infested with impurityhe shows these deeds as long as [beings] abide in existence.
When the phrase “[he] shows or demonstrates” is to be put down 
to a basis of explanation, [one might wonder]:
(a) For what r eason 
does [the Supreme Nirmanakaya] demonstrate 
activity? The reason is that out of his inconceivable great compassion 
towards all sentient beings beyond end in number, he wishes to take them in his protection and care.
(b) In what way does he demonstrate it? By means of his primordial 
wisdom, which knows all the realms of the world, as many as there 
are, he thoroughly gazes upon and beholds all worldly beings who are to become his disciples, without exception. Resting evenly within the unchanging sphere of the dharmakaya, within the primordial wisdom that knows correctly, he thereupon [demonstrates activity] without in any way moving away from his resting in this meditative equipoise. (See also Part Three, annotation 68.)
(c) What does he demonstrate? By means of various aspects that 
are of an illusory nature he truly and perfectly demonstrates twelve sublimely wondrous deeds. This can be illustrated by the way in which the King of the Shakyas [Buddha Shakyamuni] acted. The basis of his activity was such that this great being was ﬁrst born spontaneously in a divin
e existence as “Dampa Tog Karpo” in the realm of Tushita. Having 
led the extremely vast assembly of gods to maturity and liberation he left the realm of Tushita and passed into the world of Zambuling, this 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      209
being the ﬁrst of his twelve deeds. He entered the womb of his pure 
mother (2) and took birth from her womb (3). He gained perfect skill, mastering all the various ﬁelds of handicraft, science, and art (4). He mirthfully enjoyed amusement in the surrounding of his spouse and her retinue (5). Experiencing weariness and renunciation he left the palace where he dwelt with his queen (6) and trained himself severely as an ascetic (7). He went to Bodhgaya, “the Heart of Enlightenment,” and entered the Vajra Seat (8). Through the might of his love he over-came all the classes of Maras along with their host [of evil forces] (9), 
and
 found great enlightenment, awakening directly and perfectly (10). 
He turned the Wheel of Dharma in three stages (11) and went into nirvana, the state beyond any torment and pain (12).
(d) W 
here does he demonstrate [these deeds]? Within all the endless 
ﬁelds totally infested with impurity, the realms of the world and so forth [stricken by unbearable suffering].
(e) How long does he demonstrate them? As long as a [single] 
disciple still abides in samsaric existence he demonstrates them, spon-taneously and without interr uption.
B.II
.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.2. The way the disciples are gradually guided, this being 
the function of the [twelve deeds]
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.2.1. The way the ordinary 
beings are guided to enter 
the lesser vehicles
With the words “impermanent,” “suffering,” “selfless,” and 
“peace”
[the Buddhas] who know all means persuade sentient beings
to generate weariness with the three realms of existenceand to fully enter into the state beyond torment and pain.
“Everything compounded is impermanent. Everything bound up 
with pollution is suffering. All phenomena are devoid of self-entity. 
Nirvana is supremely in peace and comfort.” With these words and so forth, which expound the Great Bonds (Tib. sdom chen po) or guid-
ing principles of Dharma summarizing 
all the teachings, the buddhas 
who know the methods to tame the disciples address sentient beings who are to be tamed.
To those who are attached to and hold on to samsara they describe 
extensively and in manifold ways what a great punishment and ordeal the three realms of existence actually are. [By means of these teachings] they incite them to generate weariness with and renouncement of cyclic existence. They persuade them to ﬁnd access to and fully follow either of the paths of the shravakas or the pratyekabuddhas. Thus they cause 
210    Buddha Nature
[those beings clinging to existence] to ﬁrst enter, for a little while, the 
state beyond torment and pain (Skt. nirv›˚a), which is [mere] peace in 
that 
only the faults of samsara are most closely paciﬁed.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.2.2. The way those following the lesser vehicles are 
ripened by means of the Mahayana
Those who have perfectly followed the path of peace
believe that they have attained the state of nirvana.By the White Lotus of Dharma Sutra and similar aspectsof his sacred teaching he explains the nature of phenomena.Thus he causes them to refrain from their former belief,to fully adopt skillful means and discriminative wisdom,and gain maturity on the [path of the] supreme vehicle.
The shravaka and pratyekabuddha paths constitute the means 
through which one gains peace for oneself, totally pacifying the suf-
ferin
g of samsara. Those who have perfectly followed these paths have 
attained arhathood or self-enlightenment, respectively. When this is achieved, they hold the belief that they have attained nirvana, though they have not yet reached the ﬁnal ultimate state. To those arhats [the Buddha] teaches the White Lotus of Dharma Sutra  (Skt. Saddharmapu˚�a-
rıkasÒtra), the Mahaparinirvanasutra, and similar aspects of the 
 sacred 
Dharma, where it is said: 
There is only one vehicle that illustrates the actual nature of all 
phenomena, this being the union of emptiness and compassion. Hence there is also only one nirvana, and this results from having traveled this path.
Through these teachings he causes the shravakas and pratyeka-bud-
dhas to turn away fr
om the notion that they have attained ultimate  
enlightenment, though this is not 
yet the case. He persuades them to 
rely on the [appropriate] means and on the discriminative wisdom through which one realizes all phenomena as being emptiness. The appropriate means is great compassion, which consists of the wish to lead all sentient beings to liberation. Thus he causes them to fully adopt and gather the two accumulations of merit and primordial wis-dom, and leads them to 
gain maturity in the course of the Mahayana, 
which is supreme, being the highest of the three vehicles. In this way he guides them onto the truly authentic path. (See also Part Three, annotation 69.)
B.II.
2.2.2.2.3.5.2.2.3.2.3. The way those following the Great Vehicle are joined 
with complete liberation
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      211
Then he grants them prophecy of their supreme enlighten-
ment.
Thus having led [the shravakas and pratyekabuddhas] to gradually 
gain maturity on the path of the Great Vehicle, they attain the eighth 
bodhisattva level and the levels above. [Then] he grants them proph-ecy regarding their 
futures as unsurpassable Kings of Dharma whose 
enlightenment, constituting total release, is supreme among the three types of enlightenment. [He foretells the details] as it is stated in the Mahayanasutralamkara (Tib. mdo sde rgyan): 
Furthermore the buddhaﬁeld and the name, the time [to appear] 
and the name of the eon, the retinue as well as the sacred teachings. Abiding in this nature he is asserted as such...,
and so forth.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.3. Summary of their meaning
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.3.1. Summary into three [kayas] with reference to reasons
Since [these kayas] constitute depth, best possible power,
and supreme guidance in tune with the aims of the children,they should be known in accordance with this numberas being deep, vast, and the embodiment of greatness.
Since it is subtle and difﬁcult to realize, it constitutes depth. It pos-
sesse
s the best possible power to accomplish the beneﬁt of others. Since 
he teaches the children or ordinary beings in a way that is in tune with 
their wishes and aims, he constitutes supreme guidance in the cycle of existence. For these reasons these three kayas should be known, when referred to in accordance with the number [of reasons], as the deep svabhavikakaya, the vast sambhogakaya, and the nirmanakaya embodying greatness.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.5.2.3.2. Summary into two [kayas] with reference to the way 
they are
Here the first is the dharmakaya, 
and the latter are the form kayas.As the visible abides in space,the latter abide in the first.
Here in this chapter explaining the buddhakayas, the ﬁrst kaya, the 
kaya constituting depth, is to be understood as being the dharmakaya 
[the kaya in terms of nature], since it is equivalent to the nature of all phenomena and since it is not a ﬁeld of experience for an other-aware 
212    Buddha Nature
cognition (Tib. gzhan rig). The latter two kayas, these being the samb-
hogakaya and the nirmanakaya, ar
e the form kayas or visible kayas 
(Skt. rÒpa k›ya, Tib. gzugs sku), since they appear to the disciples in 
tune with their respective karmic fortunes.
Taking an example, [the relationship between] these [kayas should] 
also [be understood as follows]: All the various compounded visible 
things abide within the uncompounded sphere of space. In the same way, the latter-mentioned form kayas, which appear in various ways, abide in the unchanging sphere of the ﬁrst-mentioned dharmakaya.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6. Detailed explanation of its permanence
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.1. Concise explanation of the reason
There is permanence [since] the causes are endless and sen-
tient beings inexhaustible [in number].
They have compassionate love, miraculous power, knowledge, 
and utter [bliss].
They are masters of [all] qualities. The demon of death has 
been vanquished.
Being not of the essence [of the compounded] it is the [true] 
protector of all worldly [beings].
In brief these three kayas of a tathagata are permanent for ten rea-
sons:
Ther
e are seven reasons why with regard to the visible kayas the 
accomplishment of the beneﬁt of others is always permanent:
 (1) The causes, which consist of the two accumulations and so 
forth, are endless.
 (2) There is no end to exhausting the number of sentient beings 
to be trained.
 (3) Th e
re is uninterruptedness through great compassionate 
love.
 (4) Mastery is gained on the support of miraculous powers.
 (5) There is knowledge [seeing] the oneness of samsara and nir-
vana.
 (6) They possess utter bliss, free from any pollution.
 (7) They are the masters of all qualities or properties.
There are three reasons why the dharmakaya is permanent, since 
it is unchanging:
 (1) The demon of the Lord of Death has been vanquished.
 (2) 
It is not of the essence of whatever is compounded.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      213
 (3) It proves to be the protector and refuge of all worldly be-
ings.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.2. Detailed explanation of its meaning
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.2.1. The seven reasons why the visible kayas are permanent
Having offered bodies, lives, and goods
they [purely] uphold the sacred Dharma.In order to benefit all sentient beingsthey fulfill their vow as initially taken.Buddhahood supremely expresses itselfas compassion both cleansed and purified.Appearing on the feet of miraculous powersthey [can] act forever by means of these.By knowledge they are freed from the belieffixed on the duality of samsara and nirvana.They always possess the best possible blissof samadhi, beyond ideation [and end].While acting in the world [for other’s good]they are unsullied by all worldly phenomena.
There are four reasons why the visible kayas of a buddha stay in 
samsara for the beneﬁt of the other beings:
(1) Having offered their bodies, lives, and goods throughout three 
countless kalpas they uphold the sacred Dharma as comprised by the 
two accumulations.
Then 
one may wonder: “So all causes beyond end are complete. But 
is there also a necessity [to stay]?” (2) There is the necessity to always stay for the beneﬁt of others due to the following reason: When they initially generated bodhichitta in order to beneﬁt all sentient beings, they vowed to free all disciples without any exception from the cycle of existence. There is the necessity to fulﬁll this vow to its full extent. [Thus they will stay permanently] since the number of disciples is inexhaustible.
Then 
one may wonder: “So there is necessity, but is there also such a 
noble wish?” (3) There is the wish to accomplish the beneﬁt of all oth-ers, 
since buddhahood supremely expresses itself as great compassion, 
cleansed of karma and mental 
poisons and puriﬁed from the veil of 
the hindrances to knowledge.
Then 
one may wonder: “So there is the wish to accomplish the 
beneﬁt of others, but is it not satiated and exhausted by rendering 
beneﬁt in the course of one lifetime?” (4) There is the ability to always stay for the sake of others. The reason is that they possess ability pro-vided by the support [lit. 
“feet”] of miraculous powers, on the basis 
214    Buddha Nature
of which the appearance of the visible kayas is displayed. Through 
these miraculous powers they have the ability to act forever, as long as samsara may last.
Ther e are three r easons why they do not forsake the world:
“So 
there is permanent abiding for the sake of others. But will there 
not be an urge to leave samsara, there being the view of samsara and nirvana being different in that samsara is considered as something to be abandoned, whereas nirvana should be adopted?”
(1) They do not have any notion of abandoning and adopting with 
respect to samsara and nirvana. This is because they know the nature of all objects of knowledge just as it is, they know the way they are. By this knowledge they are freed from the belief that is ﬁxed on the duality of samsara and nirvana, wherein samsara is viewed as being something to be abandoned, while nirvana is viewed as being some-thing to be adopted.
“When they abide in samsara, 
are they not harmed by the suffering 
experienced in the cycle of existence?”
(2) T
hey are not harmed, since they always possess the best possible 
bliss of samadhi, which is inconceivable and beyond any end.
“So they are not 
harmed by suffering, but are they not affected by 
its faults?”
(3) It is impossible for 
them to be harmed by the faults of samsara 
for the following reason: When they act within the world for the sake of others, they are not sullied by worldly phenomena such as karma, mental poisons, suffering, and so forth.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.2.2. Explanation of the three reasons why the dharmakaya 
is permanent
Free from dying, it is the attainment of peace.
In this sphere the demon of death cannot roam.The state of the Muni being of uncreated naturehas been fully pacified since beginningless time.For all those who are bereft of permanent shelterit provides the most delightful refuge, and so on.
There are three reasons why buddha dharmakaya is permanent 
and unchanging:
 (1) 
Since it is free from transmigration and change in that it does not 
die, the attainment of the dharmakaya is the abode of peace. Within 
this sphere the demon of the Lord of Death cannot roam.
 (2) The dharmakaya of the Muni has a nature not created by causes 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      215
and conditions. As such it is fully paciﬁed, not having undergone birth, 
death, and so on, since beginningless time.
 (3) For all those 
shelterless sentient beings endless in number it is 
the ﬁnal and ultimate refuge, the most delightful protector, guardian-friend, and so on.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.6.3. Summary of its general meaning
The first seven reasons clarify
the permanence of the form kayas,while the latter three illustratewhy the dharmakaya lasts forever.
Through the ﬁrst seven reasons, that is, “the causes are endless” and 
so forth, the visible kayas are clariﬁed and taught as being permanent, 
in that there is uninterruptedness in always [bringing about] the beneﬁt of others. Through the latter three reasons, that is, “The demon of death has been vanquished” and so on, buddha dharmakaya is illustrated and taught as permanence in the sense of being unchanging.
Thus 
these are also explained in the Mahayanasutralamkara (Tib. mdo 
sde rgyan): “Their permanence is that of nature, of uninterruptedness, and of continuity.” This is to say that the dharmakaya is permanent in terms of its nature, the sambhogakaya is permanent in terms of its being uninterrupted, and the nirmanakaya is permanent in terms of its being continuous. (See also Part Three, annotation 70.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.7. Detailed explanation of inconceivability
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.1. Concise illustration of the way it is inconceivable
It is not an object of speech and is embraced by the absolute.
It is not a field for ideation and is beyond any example,unexcelled and not embraced by existence and peace.Even the noble cannot conceive the sphere of the Victor.
This great enlightenment, which is equivalent to suchness free from 
any pollution, is not an object to be expressed by speech. It is embraced 
by or consists of the absolute. It is not a ﬁeld accessible to ideation. It is beyond any example and unexcelled. It does not consist of existence or peace. Thus it is the sphere or the object of perception of the primordial wisdom of a perfect buddha, of a victor alone. For the above reasons even the noble ones who dwell on the tenth bodhisattva level cannot conceive of it [as it actually is]. (See also Part Three, annotation 71.)
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.2. Detailed explanation of the reason for this
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.2.1. Gradual explanation through eight logical reasonings
216    Buddha Nature
It is inconceivable since it cannot be verbally expressed.
It is inexpressible since it consists of the absolute [truth].It is absolute since it cannot be [intellectually] scrutinized.It is inscrutable since it cannot be inferentially deduced.It is not deducible since it is peerless, the highest of all.It is the highest of all since it is not comprised by anything.It is uncomprised since it does not dwell [on any extreme].This is because there is no dualistic idea of quality and fault.
(1) This enlightenment, which takes form as the complete perfec-
tion of the three 
kayas, is even inconceivable for [a bodhisattva] who 
dwells on the tenth bhumi, since it cannot be expressed by means of 
speech.
(2) I
t is inexpressible since it consists of the absolute [truth], whereas 
any object of speech is invariably part of the relative.
(3) It is absolute since it cannot be intellectually scrutinized or in-
vestigated by means of thought, 
whereas any aspect of the relative is 
invariably an object of thought.
(4) I
t is intellectually inscrutable since it cannot be deduced by means 
of signs and examples, whereas any object of thought is invariably able to be deduced from examples.
(5) It is not deducible since it is unequaled and peerless, the high-
est of all, wher eas 
anything that can be deduced from examples has 
qualities corresponding to those of the example. Enlightenment is not similar to any of that.
(6) It is the highest 
of all since it is not comprised by existence and 
peace, whereas anything that has an equal is comprised by either existence or peace [i.e. by either samsara or the provisional nirvana reached by shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats].
(7) It is not comprised by existence and peace since it does not abide 
in either of the extremes of existence and peace.
(8) This is because there is no [dualistic] idea in terms of ideating 
peace as being a quality and existence as being a fault.
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.2.2. Summary into six causes
For the [first] five reasons the dharmakaya is subtle
and thus beyond the reach of thought. For the sixththe form kayas are inconceivable. [They show appearance]but are not something that fulfils the function of this.
For the [ﬁrst] ﬁve reasons, that is, “it is not an object of speech ” 
and so on, the dharmakaya is taught to be not conceivable for ordi-
nary beings in terms of 
being able to say: “It is this!” This is because 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      217
it is extremely subtle and profound and thus difﬁcult to explore. For 
the sixth reason, that is, “not embraced by existence and peace,” the illusory manifestations of the visible kayas, the number of which is beyond any end, are taught to be inconceivable. This is because they appear as the phenomena of existence and peace—they appear to be born, to cease, and so forth, but are themselves not something that fulﬁls the function of these [appearances].
B.II.2.2.2.2.3.7.2.3. Explanation of the way it is difficult to realize
Since through peerless primordial wisdom, great compassion, 
and further attributes
all qualities are finally perfected, the Victor is inconceivable.
Thus the last mode of the Self-Sprung Ones is not even seen
218    Buddha Nature
by those Great Sages who have received “the Empowerment 
[of Splendorous Light Rays].”
Through peerless primordial wisdom, great compassion, and its 
further attributes it constitutes the ﬁnal ultimate perfection of [all] 
qualities. For this reason, the state of all victors, embracing the dhar-makay 
a and the visible kayas, does not abide in either extreme of 
samsara or nirvana and is therefore inconceivable. Thus “the last mode of the Self-Sprung Ones” is not even seen as it is by the Great Sages who have received the Empowerment of Splendorous Light Rays and thereby dwell on the tenth bodhisattva level.
[The formulation in the root text: “the last mode of the Self-Sprung 
Ones” can be explained in two ways]:
Ther e are eight 
qualities of the Self-Sprung Victorious Ones. The 
last, being the mode in which they are inconceivable, is not even seen as it is  [by a tenth level bodhisattva].
Or else: Bringing to mind how bodhichitta was developed for the 
ﬁrst time, the ﬁnal mode in which one directly and perfectly awakens and expands [in buddhahood] is not even seen as it is [by a tenth level bodhisattva].
In this context the Lion of Speech Rongtön r emarks: 
Since this mentions the term dbang [which is here explained as be-
ing s
hort for dbang bskur,  “empowerment”], it is commented: “It is 
not even known by those who have attained the eighth [bhumi] by 
attaining the ten powers (Tib. dbang bcu ).” Drawing that connection 
does not correspond to the meaning of the chapter.
♦ This was the section “Enlightenment,” the second chapter of The 
Commentary on the Highest Continuity 
of the Mahayana Dharma which 
Analyzes the Disposition of the Rare and Sublime Ones.
With this the complete 
explanation of the second chapter, teaching 
enlightenment or the means of realization, is achieved.
CHAPTER  THREE
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      219
The Sixth Vajra Point: Qualities
B.II.2.2.2.3. The qualities are the attributes [of realization]
B.II.2.2.2.3.1. Concise explanation of their number combining them with 
the two kayas
B.II.
2.2.2.3.1.1. Explanation classifying them in terms of kaya and primordial 
wisdom
Benefit for oneself and benefit for others are equivalent
to the ultimate kaya and the relative kayas based upon it.Being the fruits of freedom and complete maturationthese are [endowed with] sixty-four types of qualities.
What is called “buddha” is fully classiﬁed by best possible beneﬁt 
for oneself and best possible beneﬁt for others, both being ﬁnally per-
fected. These are equivalent 
to the ultimate dharmakaya, constituting 
the basis, and to the relative visible kayas based upon it. The dharmakaya represents beneﬁt for oneself and the visible kayas represent beneﬁt for others. Thus “buddha” is also that which has the nature of the two kayas. If these are classiﬁed with respect to their endowment, or in other words, with respect to the qualities supported by them, both together have sixty-four types of qualities: the dharmakaya possesses thirty-two qualities, which are the fruit of freedom, and the visible kayas [also] have thirty-two qualities, which are the fruit of complete maturation. (See also Part Three, annotation 72.)
B.II.2.2.2.3.1.2. The qualities combined with these individually
The abode adhering to [benefit] for oneself
is the kaya being [wisdom’s] sacred object.The symbolic kaya of sages is the groundof best possible [benefit] for other beings.The first kaya has the qualities of freedom,which are the qualities of power and so on.The second has those of full maturation,which are the marks of a great being.
The abode or ground adhering to and spontaneously fulﬁlling 
every best possible beneﬁt for oneself is the dharmakaya having 
immediately revealed itself as the object or ﬁeld of experience of the sacred and authentic wisdom of the noble. The visible kayas of the Great Sages, of perfect buddhas, teaching by mere symbols and terms, are the abode or ground giving rise to and spontaneously fulﬁlling 
220    Buddha Nature
every best possible beneﬁt for all other beings who are their disciples. 
Of these, the dharmakaya, which is the ﬁrst to reveal itself, possesses the ten powers, the four kinds of fearlessness, and so forth, in such a way that they are completely inseparable from it. These qualities fully unfold their different types exclusively due to freedom from the veils, which has come about through gathering the accumulation of primordial wisdom. The second kaya, which is the [division of the] visible kayas, possesses the thirty-two signs of a great being and so forth. These are the qualities that emerge due to the accumulation of merit through which the power of the essence was gradually matured to its full extent.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2. Detailed explanation of the different classes of qualities
B.II.
2.2.2.3.2.1. Concise explanation combining the meaning with an ex-
ample
Power is like a vajra against the veil of unknowing.
Fearlessness acts like a lion amidst [any] assembly.Like space are the unmixed features of the Tathagata,like a water-moon the two facets of the Muni’s teaching.
The ten powers of a victor relinquish the veils of unknowing and 
so on at their very root, while nothing else is able to overcome these 
veils. For this reason they are like a vajra [when compared to] a material thing. The four fearlessnesses are like a lion, the king of all animals, since there is no intimidation when amidst any assembly. Since the eighteen unmixed features of a tathagata have nothing in common with anything else, they are like space, which has nothing in common with the four elements. The two aspects of teaching [manifesting] as the visible kayas of the Muni are like [the reﬂection of] the moon in water. This is because they appear in various [forms] by the power of devotion, but do not exist as the essence of these.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2. Detailed explanation presenting each individually
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1. Illustration of the fruit of freedomB.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.1. The ten powersB.II.
2.2.2.3.2.2.1.1.1. Depiction of the essence of the point to be demon-
strated
Knowing what is worthwhile and worthless,
knowing the ripening product of all action,knowing faculties, temperaments, and wishes,knowing the path reaching the entire range,
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      221
knowing meditative stability and so on—
when it is afflicted or without pollution—memory of past states, divine sight, and peaceare the ten aspects of the power of knowledge.
(1) From having previously given rise to bodhichitta and having 
relied on the sacred commitment represented by the [bodhisattva] 
vow, there is knowledge as to how an agreeable product of ripening is gained through [the practice of] virtue and how a disagreeable product of ripening is harvested. Thus there is knowledge of what is worthwhile and advisable, of what is worthless and inadvisable (Tib. gnas dang gnas min), and so forth.
(2) Through the teaching 
on action and its fruit (Skt. karma, Tib. 
las ’bras) there is knowledge of the product, of all actions’ complete 
ripening.
(3) S
ince the Dharma has been taught in correspondence to the 
faculties [of beings], there is knowledge [and recognition] of supreme and lesser faculties, respectively.
(4) Since there was manifestation in correspondence to the tempera-
ments [of beings], ther e is knowledge of the various temperaments.
(5) 
Since there was manifestation in correspondence to the wishes [of 
beings], there is knowledge of the various wishes and aspirations.
(6) From having cultivated all vehicles there is knowledge of the 
path reaching the entire range of samsara and nirvana. [This is to say that a buddha fully knows all the paths leading into cyclic existence as well as those leading to complete liberation].
(7) F
rom wholehearted dedication to samadhi there is knowledge of 
meditative stability and so on, knowing when it is afﬂicted or without pollution.
(8) R 
esulting from inexhaustible virtue there is memory of previous 
states [of existence].
(9) F
rom supreme noble-mindedness towards sentient beings and so 
on there is knowledge of birth and the transmigration of death, [which are seen] through divine vision.
(10) Through teaching the Dharma in order to exhaust pollution there 
is attainment of the power of knowing that all afﬂiction is appeased and pollution is exhausted.
These ten aspects of power 
vanquish everything that is to be aban-
done d
, each in correspondence to its respective cause. Having directly 
revealed themselves, they overcome the Four Maras, or in other words, anything belonging to the part that is non-conducive to oneself and 
222    Buddha Nature
[all] others.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.1.2. Clarification through examples as the means of 
demonstration
[Knowing] the worthwhile and worthless, complete ripening, 
the various temperaments, paths, and aspirations of beings,
their manifold faculties, the defiled and the utterly pure, re-
membrance of previous states [of existence], divine sight,
and [knowing] the way in which [all] pollution is exhausted  
piercingly destroys the armor of ignorance, fells its trees
and smashes its unshakable walls, laying them in utter ruin. 
Such power, therefore, resembles an [indestructible] vajra.
 (1) Knowing which cause and result are worthwhile and worthless, 
respectively;
 (2) knowing that action and its complete ripening are done and must 
be harvested by oneself (Tib. bdag gir bya ba);
 (3) 
knowing the various temperaments or dispositions of the dis-
ciples;
 (4) knowing the various differ ent paths of beings;
 
(5) knowing the various aspirations or ways of mindedness of sen-
tient beings;
 (6) knowing which of 
the manifold faculties of the disciples such as 
faith and so on are excellent or not excellent [as yet];
 (7) knowing the difference and particularity of meditation, of resting 
evenly in meditative equipoise and so on, in terms of knowing whether 
it is bound up with deﬁlement or utterly puriﬁed, respectively;
 (8) clairvoyance in terms of remembering previous states of exis-
tence;
 (9) kn o
wing birth and the transmigration of death by means of 
divine vision;
 (10) knowing the way 
in which [all] pollution of oneself and other 
sentient beings is exhausted.
These
 powers of knowledge [overcome] their respective coun-
terparts, which are non-conducive. 
These consist of the veils of not 
knowing and so on, which are comparable to an impenetrable armor, to ﬁrm and unshakable walls, and to a dense forest of trees. In the re-spective order they pier
cingly destroy [this armor], they smash [these 
walls] laying them in utter ruin, and they fell [these trees of ignorance]. Therefore, the powers of the Victor resemble an [indestructible] vajra [when compared to] a material thing.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      223
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.2. The four fearlessnesses
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.2.1. Concise explanation of the essence
Perfectly enlightened [in] all phenomena,
setting an end to [all] hindrances,teaching the path, and showing cessationare the four aspects of fearlessness.
On the path of training, buddhas have taught the Dharma with-
out greed and avarice, 
being guided by a calm and impartial mind. 
In the meantime [while following the path] they have not relied on 
adverse phenomena. They have kept to the path of all virtuous [lit. “white”] phenomena and taught the Dharma without any pride. For these reasons, no opponent can defeat their sacred words when they state: “I am directly and perfectly enlightened within the sphere of all phenomena!” proclaiming this to be the best possible realization and beneﬁt for oneself (1). No one whosoever can contest them when they state: “Set an end to attachment and so forth, the hindrances to libera-tion!
” teaching these to be the impediments to the beneﬁt of others (2). 
No other follower of Dharma can oppose them when they teach the path that deﬁnitively brings forth the beneﬁt of others, showing the thirty-seven dharmas conducive to enlightenment as being the path of liberation (3). And no one whosoever can defeat them when they demonstrate having attained cessation itself, where everything that is to be abandoned has been ceased, declaring this to be the best possible abandonment and beneﬁt for oneself (4).
For these reasons buddhas have attained physical well-being, free-
dom f
rom intimidation, and mental dauntlessness. There are therefore 
the qualities in terms of the four aspects of the fearlessness native to all buddhas. (See also Part Four, note 10.)
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.2.2. Detailed explanation of the function
Knowing and causing [others] to know all the different aspects 
of things that are to be known of oneself and others,
havin
g abandoned and causing abandonment of all things that are 
to be abandoned, having relied on what is to be relied upon,
having attained and causing attainment of the Peerless and 
Stainless to be attained,
they relate their own truth to others. Thus the Great Sages are 
unhindered anywhere.
The function of these [four fearlessnesses] is as follows: Perfect 
buddhas themselves know the truth of suffering in every respect. 
224    Buddha Nature
They know all the things that are to be known in relation to oneself 
and others, and they cause the other beings to gain this knowledge (1). They themselves have abandoned everything contained in the truth of origination. They have abandoned all things to be abandoned in rela-tion to oneself and others, 
and they lead the other beings to abandon 
them as well (2). They themselves have relied on the truth of the path. They have relied on everything that needs to be relied upon in relation to oneself and others, and cause the other beings to gain access to this reliance (3). They themselves have attained the truth of cessation. They have attained the peerless and stainless state that is to be attained by oneself and others, and they manifest for all other sentient beings so that they attain it as well (4). Having themselves made the meaning of the Four Noble Truths immediately apparent, they truthfully relate this meaning to all other beings. For these reasons the perfect buddhas are the great sages who manifest in an unhindered way with respect to teaching the sacred Dharma in any assembly, be it a gathering of monks, of Brahmins, and so on.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.2.3. Clarification by means of examples
The lord of animals is ever fearless to the far ends of  
the jungle,
undauntedly roaming amongst the [other] animals.
In [any] assembly the Lord of Munis is a lion as well,remaining at ease, independent, stable, and endowed  
with skill.
The lion, the lord of animals, is ever fearless to the far ends of the 
jungle and undauntedly roams among the other animals. Likewise, 
in the midst of any gathering or assembly, the Lord of Munis is a lion amongst humans as well. He fearlessly remains at ease. Seeing that other beings are not his equal he is independent from and unimpressed by others. His samadhi is stable, and since he has [even] traversed [and left behind] the ground of the remaining imprints of ignorance, he is constantly endowed with skill and energy.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.3. The eighteen unmixed features
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.3.1. Concise explanation of the essence
There is no delusion and no idle talk.
The Teacher’s mindfulness is unimpaired.Never is his mind not resting evenly.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      225
There is no harboring of various ideas.
There is no equanimity without analysis.His aspiration, diligence, mindfulness,and discriminative wisdom are unimpaired,as are total release and its eye of wisdom.All action is preceded by primordial wisdomand this is unobscured with regard to time.Thus these eighteen features and othersare the unmixed qualities of the Teacher.
The [unmixed features] have four sections:
(a) Six pertain to conduct: As far as his physical behavior is concerned 
there is no delusion (1). As far as his verbal behavior is concerned there is no idle talk (2). Likewise the Teacher’s mindfulness does not suffer any impairment (3). His mind is never such that it does not rest evenly in meditative equipoise (4). There is also no harboring of various ideas (5). There is no equanimity without individually analyzing each and every thing (6).
(b) T
he six unmixed features of realization: His aspiration does 
not suffer any impairment (7). His diligence (8), mindfulness (9), discriminative wisdom (10), and total release from the veils (11) do not get impaired and do not deteriorate in any way. His vision of the primordial wisdom of total release does not get diminished (12).
Here the reason why the different kinds of samadhi are enumer-
ated is the intention [of 
showing them] to collectively stand for the 
fact that a buddha never has a mind that does not dwell in meditative equipoise.
(c) The three unmixed 
features of activity: The activities of body 
(13), speech (14), and mind (15) are preceded by primordial wisdom and are achieved manifesting in its likeness.
(d) The three unmixed features of primordial wisdom: Since his 
intellect has been puriﬁed with respect to all knowable phenomena of the three times (16-18), he has attained the unobscured vision of primordial wisdom that is free from obstruction and without attach-ment 
with regard to the three aspects of time [these being past, present, 
and future].
Such are the eighteen features; in addition to these there are fur-
ther ones: His physical body 
is beyond measure and [the height of] 
his ushnisha cannot be perceived. At ﬁrst sight and merely through 
being seen he paciﬁes the faults of sentient beings. In the sutras it is said that his robes do not touch his body, keeping a space as broad as 
226    Buddha Nature
four ﬁngers. These and others are also the unmixed qualities of the 
Teacher. They equally result from the fact that a buddha previously, while following the path of training, showed the unmistaken path to all beings who had gone astray or lost the way, and so on. For this reason these qualities are especially wonderful and have nothing in common with those of shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, and so forth.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.3.2. Detailed explanation of the function
Delusion, idle talk, forgetfulness, mental agitation, ideation of 
duality, and indifferent equanimity:
the Sage does not have any of these. His aspiration, diligence, 
and mindfulness,
his utterly pure and unstained discriminative wisdom, his 
constant total release,
and his primordial wisdom of liberation seeing all fields of the 
knowable do not suffer any impairment.
His three activities are preceded [by primordial wisdom] and 
display themselves in its likeness.
He manifests his vast definitive knowing, always unhindered 
in its vision of the three times.
By such insight he is fearless and supremely turns the Great 
Wheel of Pure Dharma for beings.
Endowment with great compassion and quintessence of vic-
tory are what all buddhas will find.
Delusion with respect to the body, idle talk with respect to speech, 
forgetfulness with respect to the mind, mental agitation in terms of not 
resting evenly in meditative equipoise, ideation of duality in terms of samsara and nirvana being viewed differently, indifferent equanimity in terms of not being alert and analyzing: the Sage is without any of these.
His a
spiration, diligence, mindfulness, and his utterly pure and 
unstained discriminative wisdom, his being always totally released, and his primordial wisdom of liberation seeing all ﬁelds of the know-able, do not suf fer any impairment.
Whic 
hever of the three activities of body, speech, and mind a buddha 
displays, they are all preceded by primordial wisdom, which constitutes the cause for his behavior. And while his respective behavior lasts it manifests in the likeness of primordial wisdom.
He manifests his vast deﬁnitive knowing always unhindered in 
its view of the three aspects of time, which are past, future, and the moment arising right now.
Having attained such realization and insight as it is represented 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      227
by the eighteen [unmixed features], he is without any fear and thus 
supremely turns the Great Wheel of Sacred Dharma for beings.
Endowment with great compassion constitutes the beneﬁt of oth-
ers, and quintessence of victory 
over the foes, which are equivalent 
to everything that is to be abandoned, constitutes one’s own beneﬁt. Having previously cultivated the path that corresponds to and takes care of each individually, and having rid themselves of the adventitious pollutions, this is what all buddhas will ﬁnd or discover directly.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.1.3.3. Clarification by means of examples
The nature of any of the properties native to earth and so on is 
not the nature of space.
Any of the features of space, such as being non-obstructive 
and so on, is not a feature of the visible.
Earth, water, fire, air, and 
space, being equally [elements], have 
something in common in the world.
The unmixed qualities and worldly beings have nothing in 
common, not even as much as a single atom.
The individual nature of anything compounded is not the nature 
of space; any of the properties of the four elements of earth and so 
on, such as being solid, moist, and so forth, are not native to space. Any of the individual features of space, such as not obstructing other phenomena, offering an opportunity [for their arising], and so on, are not native to anything visible. Thus, space pervades anything visible and yet has nothing in common with it; similarly the great compassion of a buddha pervades all beings, and yet his unmixed qualities have nothing in common with sentient beings.
When viewed in tr ue 
perspective, though, the unmixed qualities 
cannot be illustrated by means of [the example of] space either: the constituents of earth, water, ﬁre, air, and space have something in com-mon i
n the world, in that they are just elements and so on, whereas the 
eighteen unmixed qualities of a buddha have nothing in common with the worldly beings, not even as much as a single atom. For this reason they constitute a particularity that is even beyond any example.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.2. Explanation of the fruit of maturation
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.2.1. The different kinds of signs intended to be illustrated
His perfectly even [soles] are marked with wheels.
His feet are broad and his ankles are not visible.His fingers and toes are long and the digits
228    Buddha Nature
of his hands and feet are entwined by a web.
His skin is soft and his flesh remains youthful.His body has seven elevated and rounded parts.His calves are like those of an antelope andhis secret parts are hidden as are an elephant’s.His [mighty] torso is similar to that of a lion.[The hollow] between his clavicles is well filled.The curve of his shoulders is perfect and beautiful.His hands and arms are rounded, soft, and even.His arms are long and his utterly immaculate bodyis enfolded in the mandala of an aureole of light.His neck, unblemished [in hue], resembles a conch.His cheeks are like those of the king of all animals.His forty teeth are equal [in number in both his jaws].His teeth are supremely pure and most beautifully set.They are totally immaculate and aligned in even rows.The eye-teeth are of supreme and excellent whiteness.His tongue is long, his speech unlimited and inconceivable.His sense of taste is supreme, and the Self-Sprung’s voiceis like the kalavinka’s call and the melody of Brahma.His pure eyes are like blue lotuses, his eyelashes [dense]as those of an ox. He has the stainless white urna hairembellishing his face and the ushnisha crowning his head.His skin is pure and delicate and of the color of gold.Extremely fine and soft, each of the hairs on his bodycurls from one pore to the right and upwards to his crown.His immaculate hair resembles [in color] a deep-blue gem.Well-proportioned in stature like a perfect nyagrodha tree,the Great Sage who is all-good and without any examplehas an unbreakable body possessed of Narayana’s strength.These thirty-two marks, which one cannot conceive or graspand which are resplendent [in their brightness and beauty],the Teacher has described as the signs of a lord of humans.
A self-sprung buddha possesses thirty-two pure and beautiful marks 
which are as follows:
(1) Previously, while following the path of training he has taken 
and kept his vows in the most sincere and perfect manner and he has 
sought his guru and kept to his company. Due to that, the soles of his feet are perfectly even like the belly of a tortoise and marked with the image of a thousand-spoked wheel. In the prajnaparamitasutras (Tib. sher phyin) it is said that the palms of his hands are also marked with wheels. This [sign] is attained from having practiced generosity purely and genuinely. As for their shape, the wheels on the palms have spokes, the tips of which are sharp and pointed like a sword, while those of 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      229
the wheels on the soles are slightly rounded in shape.
(2) Since he has genuinely adopted the virtuous dharmas, and since 
he has not killed, even for the sake of another sentient being, his heels 
are as broad as his entire feet and the ankles do not protrude [and are thus not visible].
(3) From having pr 
otected sentient beings who were meant to be 
killed and from having relieved their fear, [a buddha] possesses the sign that his ﬁngers and toes are as long as his palms and soles.
(4) He has kindly looked after his own following by means of the 
four essentials of partnership, and he has not divided the following of others by creating disharmony through calumny and slander. For this reason the digits of his hands and feet are connected by a [delicate] web. (See also Part Four, note 13.)
(5) From having freely given all kinds of food and clothing, his skin is 
soft and the ﬂesh [of his body] remains perfectly ﬁrm and youthful.
In this context it is also said: “The skin of his hands and feet [is 
soft] . . .” When this connection is made, though, the statement below: “His hands and arms are smoothly rounded, soft, and even” becomes a repetition.
(6) From having given a great number of things, such as delicious 
food and drink, seven parts of his body—his palms, soles, shoulders, and neck—are elevated.
(7) He has cultivated and preserved the teachings on the ﬁve sci-
ences given by the Buddha. 
For this reason his calves resemble those 
of an antelope: beautiful in their delicate magniﬁcence, and yet well-rounded and ﬁrm. (See also Part Four, note 14.)
(8) Since he has guarded the secret words [from evil forces] and 
since he has abandoned sexual conduct, his secret parts are concealed in a recess as are those of an elephant or a bull.
(9) Since he has not killed, [even] for the sake of others, and since he 
has gradually practiced and developed his own vast virtue, his torso is mighty as that of a lion.
(10) From his having 
genuinely practiced virtue and having given 
medicine and so forth the hollow between his clavicles is well ﬁlled [and thus not visible].
(11) He has taken 
all fear from his fellow beings and has made them 
fearless through addressing them in ways that are friendly, skillful, and so on. For this reason the curve of his shoulders is perfectly round and beautiful.
(12) Since he was [always] 
ready and made any effort to act as a 
friend towards all other sentient beings, his hands and arms are beauti-
230    Buddha Nature
ful, being soft to the touch, smoothly rounded and evenly shaped.
(13) Since he has extended his giving hand to all beggars, not ne-
glecting a single one, his 
arms are long, reaching to his knees when 
unbent.
(14) Since he has practiced 
the ten virtues without ever contenting 
himself, his immaculate body, completely puriﬁed from any ﬂaw, is 
enfolded in the mandala of an aureole of light.
(15) From having given medicine and so on to the sick, and from 
having praised the Buddha, his neck is unblemished in hue and beauti-ful in shape like a conch.
(16) From having himself 
abandoned senseless words, and from 
having caused the other beings to connect with [the practice of] virtue, his cheeks are like those of a lion, the king of all animals.
(17) Through viewing all sentient beings as being equal to himself 
[and worthy of respect] he has given up all slanderous and abusive talk. For this reason his forty teeth are of equal number in both his jaws, there being twenty in each.
(18) Since he has averted any discordancy and since he has always 
uttered truthful words, his teeth are supremely pure and most beauti-fully set, not showing any gap.
(19) From having given 
pleasant riches to others, and from having 
himself kept to a livelihood that was utterly pure, his teeth are immacu-late, fr ee from any ﬂaw, and of similar length, aligned in even r ows.
(
20) He himself has guarded his three gates of action [of body, 
speech, and mind], and has shown honor and respect to all his fellow beings. For this reason his eye-teeth are very sharp and of supreme and excellent whiteness.
(21) From having spoken 
only truthful words in a gentle manner 
his tongue is long, his speech is unlimited, and its meaning is incon-ceivable.
(22) Since he has tended 
the sick and has given them tasty medicine 
and so on, his sense of taste is supreme.
(23) Through uttering pure and gentle words he helped all beings to 
understand the sacred Dharma. For this reason his speech is amiable, like the call of the kalavinka bird or the melody of Brahma.
(24) Since he has looked upon all beings with loving eyes, as if each 
were his only child, his pure eyes are like blue utpala lotuses.
(25) Since 
his gaze was unmoved and free from anger and scorn, 
his eyelashes are dense and shining as those of an ox.
(26) From having praised all supreme beings he possesses the stain-
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      231
less white urna hair, which embellishes his face.
(27) Since he has granted gifts to temples, monasteries, and so on, 
and since he has respectfully carried the guru on the crown of his head, 
he has the ushnisha, which being very straight, invisibly crowns the center of his head.
Authentic scriptures state: “. 
. . has [the ushnisha] on the center [of 
his head]” (Tib. dbus ldan), whereas in most places it is said: “ . . .has 
the ushnisha on his head” 
(Tib. dbu ldan). This is not just the mark of 
having the ushnisha, though, [as this can also be the case with certain beings bound to samsara]. It is illustrated as being special and different from the mark of an ordinary being. The mark of the Muni is especially excellent through its being perfect, clear, and situated in its place.
(28) Since his mind was suited to seek the Dharma, and since he has 
given housing and so on to others, his skin is pure and delicate.
(29) Since a buddha who is supreme among all sentient beings has 
offered clothing and seats pleasant to the senses, his skin is of the color of gold.
(30) He has forsaken the 
worldly hustle and bustle and increased 
any virtue he had genuinely adopted, such as having a mind suited to seek the Dharma and so on. For this reason the hairs on his body are extremely ﬁne and soft; each grows from one pore and curls to the right upwards towards the crown of his body.
(31) Because of his compassionate love towards all, and because 
he has abandoned any impulse to strike or use weapons, his hair is immaculate and resembles in color a deep-blue gem.
(32) He has donated monasteries, groves, and so on, and he has 
connected others with [the practice of] samadhi. For this reason his physical stature is well-proportioned, like the mandala of a perfect nyagrodha tree. And the all-good Buddha, the Great Sage who is without any example, has a ﬁrm and unbreakable body possessing the strength of Narayana.
These thirty-two [marks], which one cannot conceive of or grasp 
and which are resplendent in their brightness and beauty, the Teacher has described in the Ratnadarikasutra (Tib. bu mo rin chen 
 gyis zhus pa’i 
do) as being the signs of a buddha, a lord of humans.
This 
passage differs from the way in which the pure marks [of 
a buddha] are deﬁned in the Abhisamayalamkara (Tib. mngon rtogs 
rgyan), where each is only mentioned, but the meaning is the same. 
When here the number 
of thirty-two is established, this mainly refers 
to the body being taught as the basis of thirty-two qualities. Differing from other [scriptures], the fact that [his soles] are perfectly even and 
232    Buddha Nature
marked with wheels is taken as one [mark]. The fact that [his feet are] 
broad and his ankles not visible is [also] considered as one. So is the fact that the hairs on his body are extremely ﬁne and grow from one pore, curling to the right upwards to his crown. This is the intended meaning of the Ratnadarikasutra. Then, one may wonder what other 
ways there ar e 
besides summarizing [the marks of a perfect buddha] 
into thirty-two. Apart from [their classiﬁcation] into thirty-six as was just explained, elsewhere examples are also given of eighty pure [marks] being the qualities of complete maturation. Other than that, all buddha qualities, as many as there are, are [described as] those of complete maturation, being equivalent to the fruit of the complete ripening of the accumulation that has been gathered on the path of training. What is mainly viewed [in the description given] here is the question of which family or category the [different qualities] belong to. Viewing the fruit of meditative equipoise, which is the accumulation of primordial wisdom, there are thirty-two qualities of freedom. View-ing the fruit of 
the phase ensuing from meditative equipoise, which is 
the accumulation of merit, there are thirty-two qualities of complete maturation. The establishment of the number of sixty-four qualities is [therefore] only made in terms of a general and rough classiﬁcation.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.2.2.2. Summary through examples, being the means of illustra-
tion
Just as in autumn the form of the moon is seen
in a cloudless sky and in the deep blue water of a lake,the form of the All-Embracing is seen by the Victor’s heirs in the perfect buddha mandala [and in the world].
At the time of autumn when there are no clouds, the form of the 
full moon is seen in the round of the sky and in the deep blue water 
of a clear and unpolluted lake. Similar to this example, the two visible kayas of an all-pervasive buddha, which are the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya, will be seen in the same sequence by those heirs of the Victor who dwell on the tenth bhumi and by ordinary disciples, within the perfect buddha mandala and within the mandala of the world, respectively.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.3. The way these are to be realized from the words of the 
Teacher
These sixty-four qualities
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      233
each combined with its cause
should be known in their orderto follow the Ratnadarikasutra.
These sixty-four qualities of freedom and complete maturation, 
which is to say the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the eighteen 
unmixed features, and the thirty-two pure marks, each combined with its individual essence and cause, have the following source of explana-tion:
 In the order as given above they should be known to be explained 
following the words of the sutra called The Oral Instructions of the Great 
Vehicle Requested by the Maiden Rinchen (Skt. Ratnad›rik›sÒtra, Tib. bu 
mo rin chen gyis zhus pa’i theg pa chen po’i man ngag).
B.II.
2.2.2.3.2.4. Explanation by once more summarizing meaning and ex-
ample
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.1. 
General teaching of the reason for the similarity of mean-
ing and example
Being unchangeable and never weakened,
dissimilar and unmoving, they are taughtby the examples of the vajra, the lion,space, and the moon in sky and water.
The ten powers of a tathagata are not changed or inﬂuenced by their 
respective non-corresponding or opposite sides. The four kinds of 
fearlessness are never weakened in their courage and thus are similar to a lion. The eighteen unmixed features have nothing in common with and are not similar to those of the shravakas and so forth. The two visible kayas endowed with the pure marks and signs appear to those to be trained in such a way that they do not move away or separate from the dharmakaya, which is similar to space. The four sections of qualities are therefore taught in their given sequence by means of four examples. These are the material substance of a vajra, the lion being the lord of all animals, uncreated space, and the moon, which is of lustrous brightness, being not polluted in any way [seen in the sky and in water].
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2. Explanation of each individually 
by combining [meaning 
and example]
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1. Explanation of the fruit of freedom
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.1. Illustration of the powers by means of examplesB.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.1.1. Illustration of the individual kinds
234    Buddha Nature
Of the powers, six powers, three, and one,
in this sequence, have totally dispelled[the veils of] knowledge and meditation,along with that of the remaining imprints.Resembling armor, a wall, and a tree,they were pierced, shattered, and felled.
Of the ten powers, the ﬁrst six powers, the middling three, and 
the last power, in this sequence, have totally dispelled the veils of 
the hindrances to knowledge and of the hindrances to meditative equipoise, along with the veil of the remaining karmic imprints. For this reason they are like a vajra, because these three veils, resembling armor, a wall, and a tree, were in this order pierced, shattered, and felled by the powers.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.1.2. Illustration of their common feature
Being firm, essential, steadfast, and unchangeable
the powers of the Great Sage are similar to a vajra.Why are they firm? Because they are essential.Why essential? Because they are steadfast.Why steadfast? Because they are unchangeable.Being unchangeable, they are like a vajra.
The ten powers are the quintessence of ﬁrmness, essentiality, stead-
fastness, and unchangeability. Since 
they possess these four qualities 
or properties, all ten powers of the Great Sages, of all perfect buddhas, 
are similar to a vajra. Then one may wonder: “For what reason are they ﬁrm?” “Because they are the essential core of all phenomena of samsara and nirvana.” “Why are they essential?” “Because they are steadfast, being uncreated and spontaneously present.” “Why are they steadfast?” “Because they cannot be changed or inﬂuenced by concepts, characteristics, and so on, by anything that belongs to the non-conducive side.” Furthermore, since in this way they have over-come everything to be abandoned 
and will never again be changed 
by anything to be abandoned, the ten powers resemble a vajra [when compared to] a material thing.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.2. Illustration of the fearlessnesses by means of ex-
amples
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.2.1. Concise teaching
Since he is not intimidated, is independent,
stable, and [possessed of] best possible skill,the Muni is like a lion. The Lion [of Mankind]
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      235
does not have fear in any assembly whatever.
A buddha is not intimidated by anyone, whoever he may be, and he 
is unimpressed by and independent with regard to others. His intel-
lectual power is supr emely 
stable and he possesses the best possible 
skill and energy in overcoming the non-conducive side. Thus being endowed with four types of qualities, the Lord of Munis resembles a lion who due to having four qualities is free from fear amidst the animals. Similar to that, the Lion of Mankind abides in the midst of any assembly, endless in number, without having any [feelings of] fright or fear.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.2.2. Detailed explanation
Knowing everything directly, he always remains
totally fearless of anyone, no matter of whom.Seeing that even pure beings are not his equal,he is unimpressed and not daunted [by others].His mind being one-pointed as to all phenomena,[his samadhi] is the quintessence of stability.He possesses skill, having crossed the earthof the latencies of unknowing, ever so [subtle].
Thus possessing [these] four qualities, a buddha directly knows all 
the aspects of the knowable without any exception, and is therefore 
able to answer all questions to whoever deems himself knowledgable. For this reason he remains totally fearless of any hostile opponent, counterpart, and so on, no matter what kind of person he may be. He sees that all beings who are puriﬁed from the veils to a certain respective extent—that is, shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats, and even bodhisattvas who dwell on the tenth bodhisattva level—are not his equal and that he is more highly evolved than [all of] them. For this reason he is unimpressed and not daunted by anyone whosoever. His mind abides one-pointedly and without ideation with regard to all phenomena [in terms of their ultimate and relative aspects, seeing them] correctly as they are and completely, as many as there are. For this reason his samadhi is always stable. He has even crossed and fully left behind the veil of the earth of the latencies or remaining imprints of unknowing, which being ever so subtle are the hardest to abandon. For this reason he possesses best possible skill and energy in overcoming 
anything that belongs to the non-conducive side. [With these] he has the four qualities [of fearlessness].
B.II.
2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.3. Illustration of the unmixed features by means of ex-
236    Buddha Nature
amples
The understanding of worldly beings, of listeners,
of biased practitioners, of those who have insight,and of self-sprung buddhas getting ever subtlerand progressively refined, there are five similes:Sustaining the life of all worldly beings, [buddhas]are likened to earth and water and to fire and air.Away from the features of the worldly and of thosebeing beyond the world, they are similar to space.
Earlier the unmixed features were described by the example of space, 
and in addition to that earth, water, ﬁre, air, and so on were mentioned 
to supplement it. One may wonder for what purpose these examples are given. The understanding of ordinary worldly beings, of listeners (Skt. shravakas), of pratyekabuddhas practicing their own beneﬁt in a 
biased, one-sided way, of 
bodhisattvas who have insight, and of bud-
dhas who are self-spr
ung, is progressively more subtle and profound 
[and] ﬁnally supreme. The characteristics of earth, water, ﬁre, and wind, which are taken as examples, are progressively subtler from the former to the next. Since, therefore, understanding is facilitated when combining the meaning with these examples, the ﬁve examples of earth and so on are given. Furthermore, these ﬁve examples are ap-plied since buddhahood constitutes the 
ground providing sustenance 
of life for all the worlds. Earth forming the basis, water bringing about cohesion, ﬁre bringing about ripening, air preventing putrefaction, and space offering the opportunity for all of these, they proffer the possibility of life. Similar to the last-mentioned [example of space], the unmixed features of a buddha are far away from the characteristics or qualities of ordinary worldly beings, as well as of those of noble shravakas, pratyekabuddhas, and bodhisattvas who are beyond the worldly. They have nothing in common with these characteristics. For this reason they are similar to space, which is beyond the characteristics 
of the four [other] elements.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.1.4. Summary of the way they are indivisible
So the dharmakaya fully divides
into these thirty-two qualities,indivisible like a precious gemin its light, radiance, and shape.
Thus these thirty-two qualities of freedom are fully divided by the 
ultimate dharmakaya and they are indivisibly inherent and native to it. 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      237
As, for example, the light shining forth from a precious jewel, its clear 
radiance, and its beautiful shape are inseparable from the gem itself, the thirty-two qualities are inseparable from the dharmakaya.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.2. Explanation of the fruit of maturation
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.2.1. The way the marks are based upon the two kayas
238    Buddha Nature
Granting satisfaction whenever they are seen,
the qualities called “the thirty-two [marks]”adhere to two kayas, being the illusory kayaand the kaya perfectly rejoicing in Dharma.
The qualities of complete maturation, called “the thirty-two marks 
[of a Great Being],” satisfy and content the mind whenever they are 
seen. They  adhere to the nirmanakaya and the sambhogakaya, which is to say, the illusory kaya and the kaya that perfectly rejoices in Dharma. These are the two visible kayas, since they embody the buddha quali-ties appearing to the disciples.
B.II.2.2.2.3.2.4.2.2.2. The way the two 
kayas are illustrated by the example 
of the moon
Those far from and close to purity [see them]
as the mandalas of the world the Victor,like the form of the moon in water and sky.Thus these [kayas] are beheld in two ways.
There are disciples who are far away from being utterly puriﬁed 
from the veils that constitute the hindrance to seeing the visible kayas, 
and there are others who are very close to it. The former are ordinary beings, shravakas and so on, and the latter are bodhisattvas who dwell on the ten bhumis. In the given sequence, the nirmanakaya appears to ordinary beings in the mandala of the world and its circumstances, and the sambhogakaya appears to the bodhisattvas in the mandala of the Victorious One and his retinue. This is, for example, like seeing the form of the moon in pure water and like seeing it in the sky. Thus there are two kinds of disciples who see these two kayas which are embellished by the pure marks. For this reason, though one longs for the direct revelation of the visible kayas, one needs karmic fortune, consisting of [appropriate] puriﬁcation. (See also Part Three, annota-tion 73.)
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      239
♦ This was the section “Qualities,” the third chapter of The Commentary 
on the Highest Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma which Analyzes the 
Disposition of the Rare and Sublime Ones.
With 
this the complete explanation of the third chapter, teaching the 
sixty-four qualities or branches [of enlightenment], is achieved.
CHAPTER  FOUR
The Seventh Vajra Point: Activity
B.II.2.2.2.4. Activity is the action [of realization]B.II.2.2.2.4.1. Concise teachingB.II.2.2.2.4.1.1. Concise teaching [of activity] being spontaneous
An All-Embracing One always has spontaneous access
to the disciples’ temperaments, the means of training,the [various] trainings that suit their temperaments,and to seeking them wherever they are, at the right time.
When buddhas bring about the beneﬁt of beings, they know the 
temperaments and constitutions of the endless number of sentient 
beings who are to be trained. They know their dispositions, their latent tendencies, their wishes, thoughts, and so on. In accordance with these they teach the means of training, whichever is appropriate for any [individual]. They take care that the trainings as they suit the various temperaments of the disciples establish them in the higher states of existence and in the state representing the deﬁnitive good. They go to any place within the endless realms of the world and seek every disciple no matter where each may live, doing so whenever the right time to train them has come. While engaging in all of these, the All-Embracing Ones, the perfect buddhas, are always totally free from concepts and so on. They do not have to exert any deliberate effort and spontaneously have access [to all these activities].
B.II.2.2.2.4.1.2. Concise teaching [of activity] being uninterrupted
Having multitudes of supremely precious qualities and the 
waters of the ocean of primordial wisdom, possessing the 
sunlight of merit and wisdom,
it is the definitive accomplishment of all vehicles without 
exception. [Enlightenment] is vast, without middle or end, 
240    Buddha Nature
and thus all-pervasive like space.
Fully seeing that buddhahood, the treasure of the unpolluted 
qualities, is [present] within all sentient beings without the 
slightest distinction,
the wind of the Buddhas’ sublime compassion totally dispels 
the clouds of afflictions and hindrances to knowledge, which have spun their net about it.
It is stated in the scriptures:
The activity of the Victor is uninterrupted and unceasing for the 
following reasons: [Buddhas] have an immeasurable multitude of supremely precious qualities, which are dharani, samadhi, and so on, and there is the great ocean of the ten bodhisattva levels, completely ﬁlled with the waters of unpolluted primordial wis-dom. These latter constitute the 
cause that deﬁnitively reveals 
release (Tib. nges par ’byin pa’i rgyu). They are endowed with the 
accumulations of merit and wisdom, which are similar to the light rays of the sun, causing the ripening of all sentient beings. These constitute the supportive cause (Tib. nye bar ston pa’i rgyu ). 
Throu
gh these, all vehicles or paths of beings are deﬁnitively 
accomplished without any exception. Sprung from this accom-plishment they possess the best 
possible causes and they have 
attained the best possible fruit that can result from these. This is great enlightenment, which is pervasive as space, being vast and without middle or end. For these reasons buddha activity is uninterrupted or ever-present. Furthermore, once they have attained enlightenment, they perfectly see that true and ultimate buddhahood has been present in all sentient beings without any differentiation since beginningless time. Similar to a treasure, it is within all beings, possessing qualities that are by nature free from any pollution, such as the powers and so on. Since the buddhas help all these sentient beings to fully get hold of this treasure, their activity does not cease. The nature of the Victorious One, which itself is similar to space, is obscured by the adventitious pollutions of the veils of the afﬂictions and hindrances to knowledge. These obscurations, being similar to a net of clouds that has spun about it, need to be removed; the condition that will clear them away is the force of the great compassion of the Victors. This is similar to a ﬁerce and mighty wind, constituting the ability to utterly dispel all the clouds of pollution. For these reasons as well, buddha activity is uninterrupted.
When put concisely, [this can be explained as follows]: Temporarily a 
buddha joins all sentient beings with the two accumulations and the ten 
bodhisattva levels and ﬁnally with ultimate enlightenment. Furthermore, 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      241
through his great compassion a buddha overcomes all the obscurations 
of beings. Buddha activity is therefore taught as being uninterrupted or ever-present.
B.II.2.2.2.4.2. Detailed explanation
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.1. Teaching of the summarized meaning of spontaneityB.II.2.2.2.4.2.1.1. Manifesting free from ideation
For whom? How? By which training?
Where? and When? Since ideationas to such [questions] does not occur,the Muni always [acts] spontaneously.
“For the sake of which disciple should I manifest?” “Through which 
method should I train them?” “Which activity of training should be 
applied?” “To which place of living of a disciple should I go?” “And when should I do so? What is the appropriate time?” Any ideation in terms of such questions does not occur and there is no movement initiated by deliberate effort. For this reason, the activity of a Muni, a perfect buddha, always manifests spontaneously.
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.1.2. Manifesting unmistakenly as to place and time
The temperaments of the disciples,
which of the many means for each,which training at what place and time:[He is not mistaken as to any of] these.
A buddha is spontaneously familiar with the temperaments of the 
disciples, who have manifold wishes and aspirations. The same is 
true of the many methods of training: he intuitively knows through which of the three vehicles and so on each disciple will be trained most beneﬁcially in accordance with his individual aspiration. He also has spontaneous access to the different activities of training, knowing which will establish [the disciples] temporarily in the higher states of existence and ﬁnally in the state that is deﬁnitively good (Tib. nges 
par legs pa). He 
intuitively knows where and when, [the right] time 
and place. He will go to the place where any disciple lives, no matter who, and will do so when the right time to train this particular disciple has come. In this as well a buddha is unmistaken and [his activity] manifests spontaneously, without any deliberate effort.
242    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2. Explanation of the classified meaning of uninterruptedness
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.1. Concise teaching enumerating names
Since, with regard to the definitive revelation of release,
its support, its fruit, those being fully sustained, their obscurations, and the condition cutting these veils,there is no ideation, [buddha activity is uninterrupted].
The activity through which buddhas bring about the beneﬁt of 
beings is uninterrupted. This is because it manifests owing to the fol-
lowing six [points], doing so effortlessly and without any ideation:
(1) The [primary] cause 
of activity is the path that will deﬁnitively 
reveal release (Tib. nges ’byin gyi lam). A buddha has formerly relied 
[on it] in the most authentic manner.
(2) There are the two accumulations, which are the cause supportive 
to this total release.
(3) There is enlightenment, which is the fruit of this cause and 
condition.
(4) There is a 
cause for enlightenment, [as] there are sentient be-
ings [who need to be] 
fully sustained and [thus] are the object for the 
manifestation of activity.
(5) In their streams of being obscurations are present that need to 
be cleared away.
(6) There is great compassion constituting the necessary condition 
for the activity that cuts these [obscurations]. (See also Part Three, annotation 74.)
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.2. Detailed explanation of the different kinds of meaning
The ten levels definitively reveal release.
The two accumulations provide their cause.Supreme enlightenment is the fruit of these.Enlightenment in beings is fully sustained.These are obscured by the endless afflictions,the secondary afflictions, and the latencies.A buddha’s great compassion is the conditionthat, at all times, vanquishes these [veils].
From the very beginning, when starting from samsara until at last 
enlightenment is reached, [one follows] the path that deﬁnitively leads 
up to and reveals release within the ﬁnal or ultimate state. This path is the condition or cause of [buddha] activity and is equivalent to the 
ten bodhisattva levels. While one gradually 
 travels through these ten 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      243
levels, the qualities they represent will ever increase. The supportive 
cause of [buddha] activity is the two accumulations of primordial wisdom and merit, or in other words, of wisdom and [skillful] means. The ultimate fruit of these causes and conditions is the attainment of great enlightenment, which is authentically perfected, unsurpassable, and supreme. Once enlightenment is attained, it is seen that there is an object for the manifestation of [buddha] activity, as all sentient beings also possess buddha nature. When this is seen, sentient beings are fully sustained. This buddha nature [within beings] is obscured by the endless afﬂictions, the secondary afﬂictions, and the accompa-nying
 latencies or karmic imprints. These adventitious deﬁlements 
must be overcome; the condition that at all times vanquishes these veils is great compassion, out of which the path is taught. For the ﬁrst-mentioned reasons and the latter-mentioned as well, buddha activity is uninterrupted.
In this context Rongtönpa the Great has said, explaining this section 
very well:
Therefore, what is the cause for activity to be uninterrupted? It 
stems from having formerly traveled the paths and gone through the accumulations. Through the attainment of what fruit is it uninterrupted? Through the attainment of enlightenment. What object is there for it to be uninterrupted? Since the nature of enlightenment is present in all sentient beings and is identical [with enlightenment itself] (Tib. tshul du), the veils obscuring it 
are cleared away by great compassion.
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.3. Illustration of these by means of examples
These six points, being similar
to an ocean, the sun, space,a treasure, clouds, and windare to be grasped accordingly.
Six points or meanings serve as the reasons why the activity of a 
tathagata is uninterrupted or ever-present. These are to be understood 
through combining one meaning with an example, respectively. In their given sequence they are to be grasped as being similar to a vast ocean, to the unpolluted sun, to the element of space, to a great treasure, to a multitude of clouds that are to be dispelled, and to the force of a mighty wind dispelling [these clouds].
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.4. Detailed explanation combining example and meaning
244    Buddha Nature
Holding wisdom’s waters and qualities
like gems, the levels are like an ocean.Closely sustaining all sentient beings,the two accumulations are like the sun.Being vast and without any middle or end,enlightenment is like the element of space.Genuine perfect awakening is dharmata,hence beings’ nature is like a treasure.Adventitious, pervasive, and not existent,its afflictions are like a host of clouds.Always ready to dispel these [afflictions],compassion is similar to a merciless wind.
They contain the waters of unpolluted primordial wisdom and hold 
gems of qualities such as clairvoyance and so forth. For this reason the 
ten bodhisattva levels, being the cause that deﬁnitively reveals release, are like an ocean. Since they beneﬁt all sentient beings, sustaining them with happiness and well-being, the two accumulations of merit and primordial wisdom, which constitute the supportive cause, are like the sun. Pervading everything it is vast, and being without middle or end it is deep and profound. For this reason great enlightenment, which is the fruit of these [causes], is like the element of space. Dharmata, the actual state of a truly perfect buddha, has been spontaneously present since beginningless time [and] contains an inexhaustible wealth of qualities. For this reason sentient beings must be fully sustained and the tathagatagarbha, their element that is by nature pure, is similar to a great treasure. They are adventitious, being able to be removed; they pervade the nature and ultimately do not truly exist. For this reason the afﬂictions obscuring the element that is by nature utterly pure are similar to a dense host of clouds. It is always present and ready to teach the path that dispels these cloud-like afﬂictions. For this reason great compassion, which provides the condition to eliminate all veils, is similar to the force of an extremely ﬁerce and merciless wind.
B.II.2.2.2.4.2.2.5. Summary of the way it is uninterrupted
Their release [is accomplished] for the sake of others.
They see the equality of themselves and sentient beingsand their activity is not completed to its full extent.Thus their deeds will never cease while samsara exists.
Previously, while following the path of training, they have vowed 
to liberate all sentient beings without any exception and they have 
accomplished their release [from the cycle of existence] through the 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      245
practice of the path, which is solely for the sake of the beneﬁt of oth-
ers. After having attained enlightenment 
for the beneﬁt of others they 
have seen that they themselves and all sentient beings are equal as far as buddha nature is concerned. Thus they know that it is meaningful to unfold activity. There is no end to the number of the species “sen-tient beings.” Therefor e 
their activity of establishing all those sentient 
beings on the level of buddhahood is not completed to its full extent. For these reasons the deeds of the buddhas are uninterrupted and will never cease as long as samsara has not been emptied.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3. Very detailed explanation in combination with examples
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.1. Concise teaching of the different kinds of examples
A tathagata is similar to Indra,
to the drum [of the gods], clouds,to Brahma, the sun, a precious gem,to an echo, to space, and the earth.
There are nine examples to illustrate how the activity of all bud-
dhas manifests in accordance 
with the karmic fortune of the disciples, 
doing so in such a way that it is free from ideation, spontaneous, and 
uninterrupted:
(1) The example illustrating the body is the appearance of the reﬂec-
tion of Indra in a lapis lazuli gr ound.
(2) The example for 
the speech exhorting [beings to practice] the 
sacred Dharma is the drum of the gods.
(3) Clouds are the example for the way in which knowledge and 
compassionate love pervade everything.
(4) The example illustrating the 
various illusory manifestations of 
the body is Brahma, who without moving away from his own abode brings about the beneﬁt of the gods of the realm of desire by means of an illusory appearance.
(5) The way in which 
light rays issue from the sun is the example 
for the spreading radiance of primordial wisdom.
(6) The example for the inconceivable secret aspect of mind is a 
precious [wish-fulﬁlling] gem that brings forth any necessities that are desired.
(7) The example for the inconceivable secret aspect of a tathagata’s 
speech is an echo resounding from a rock—the way in which an echo is not real and yet demonstrates various articulate sounds.
(8) The example for the inconceivable secret aspect of the body is 
space, which is in no way existent and yet appears everywhere.
(9) The example for compassion fulﬁlling the beneﬁt of others is 
246    Buddha Nature
the earth providing the basis for everything else.
In this context the omniscient Dolpopa has said:
Since they are free from arising and ceasing, buddhas have the 
characteristics of the uncompounded in their full division. This being so, the question may arise: “How can they manifest unin-terrupted and spontaneous activity 
as long as samsara lasts?” In 
order to eliminate the delusion of those who have given rise to such doubts and uncertainties, and to then inspire devotion towards the inconceivable object represented by a buddha, [activity] is explained by many clarifying examples.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2. Detailed explanation of the examples and their meaning
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1. Combining each example and meaning in terms of its 
individual essence
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1. The body demonstrating illusory appearanceB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.1. Presentation of the exampleB.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.1.1. The way it appears
If the surface of the ground here changed
into the nature of immaculate lapis lazuli,because of its purity one would see in itthe [appearance of] the Lord of All Godswith his following of many young goddesses.One would see his sublimely beautiful palace“the All-Victorious” and other divine abodes,the gods’ various palaces and manifold wealth.
There is a tradition according to which the appearance of the Lord 
of Gods will become visible to an inhabitant of Zambuling who pos-
sesses merit. This tradition is as follows:
Through the power of 
former virtue the surface of the ground here 
in Zambuling will become utterly pure and will have the immaculate nature of precious lapis lazuli. Since the ground is extremely pure and brilliant, one will see the Lord of All Gods in it, together with his reti-nue of hosts of young 
goddesses. One will see the sublimely beautiful 
palace of the king, called “the All-Victorious,” and other divine abodes besides, such as “the Garden of Joy” and so forth. The various splendid residences of the gods will appear ﬁlled with manifold wealth and riches for the gods to delight in. All this will appear on the ground of this earth and be seen by the worldly human beings.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.1.2. The function
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      247
Once the assembly of men and women
who inhabit the surface of the earthsaw this appearance, each would say:“Before a long time passes, may I toobecome like this Lord of the Gods!”Prayers like these they would utterand to achieve this feat would adoptgenuine virtue and remain within it.
In this way the assembly of men, women, and so on of Zambuling, 
all those who live on the surface of this earth, will see the appearance 
of the Lord of Gods with his retinue and inconceivable treasures. Once they have beheld this, this seeing will act as the condition for them to wish: “Before a long time passes, may we too become like this Lord of the Gods!” Prayers such as these they will utter and, in order to attain this state of the Lord of Gods, they will genuinely adopt the practices of virtue such as generosity and so forth, and will remain in and keep to these practices. This illustrates that the appearance of the Lord of the Gods has a special function.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.1.3. The way it becomes meaningful
“This is just an appearance!” There would not be
any such understanding. Still their virtuous deedswould lead them to be reborn in a divine existenceafter they departed from the surface of the earth.These appearances are totally free from ideationand do not involve the slightest movement at all.There is nothing of this kind, and yet neverthelessthey are accompanied by great benefit on the earth.
“When we see Indra and so on, this is the mere appearance of a 
reﬂection, whereas the real substance of the god and so forth has not 
come here!” These men and women who have engaged very well in the practice of unstained virtuous deeds, such as guarding their moral conduct and so on, will not have any such correct understanding. Nevertheless, the power of having practiced virtue after they took the reﬂection for the real thing will lead them to be reborn as gods, whoever they wish to be, once they die and depart from the human bodies they have on the surface of the earth.
The s
hining forth of these appearances is completely free from 
ideation in terms of any particular motivation. There is not even the 
thought: “I will incite the inhabitants of Zambuling to enter [the prac-tice of] virtue!” These appearances 
do not involve the slightest move-
248    Buddha Nature
ment at all, and thus are free from deliberate effort. There is nothing of 
this kind, and yet in reality this appearance connects those who abide in the places of humans on the surface of this earth with virtue. It makes them adhere to it 
and leads them to the state they formerly wished for. 
This being so, it is accompanied by and entails great beneﬁt.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.2. Explanation of the meaning
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.2.1. The way of appearance
Those endowed with unpolluted faith and so forth,
having cultivated the qualities of faith and so on,will see in their own minds the Buddha’s appearance,which is perfect and has special signs and marks.They will see the Buddha while he is walking,while he is standing, sitting, or resting in sleep.They will see him in manifold forms of conduct:when explaining the teaching leading to peace,when silently resting in meditative equipoise,or when displaying various forms of miracles.Possessed of great splendor and magnificence,[the Buddha] will be seen by all sentient beings.
As is shown by the example, [ﬁrst] one has to rid [one’s mind] of 
the pollution of distrust and so on, of everything that belongs to the 
opposite side of faith, diligence, and so forth. Once this pollution is eliminated, one has to gradually cultivate all the qualities, such as faith, diligence, mindfulness, and so on. Through the power of this cultivation one’s own mind will become clear and the visible kaya of the Perfect Buddha, endowed with the thirty-two pure signs and the eighty special marks, will appear in it. He will be seen in manifold forms of conduct, at times walking or standing, sitting on a seat or resting in sleep, going somewhere, and so forth. He will be seen while explaining the teaching of the peace of nirvana to the disciples, and at other times while not teaching the Dharma but resting in meditative equipoise, immersed in the truth within. Beings will see him displaying various forms of miracles, such as magical illusions and so on. Thus all sentient beings of karmic fortune will see the Buddha in an endless number of illusory appearances, such as an appearance surrounded by a mandala of light and thereby endowed with great splendor and magniﬁcence, and so forth.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.2.2. Striving [to achieve it]
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      249
Once having seen this, they too will wish
to fully join what is named “buddhahood,”and adopting its causes in a genuine waythey will attain the state they longed for.
Having seen the visible kaya appearing in one’s pure mind, one will 
have the longing to attain the state of a buddha as well. Out of this 
wish and in order to quickly attain buddhahood, one will fully unite with the practices of virtue, such as studying [the Dharma] and so forth. In a genuine manner one will adopt the causes that accomplish this [aim]. These causes are bodhichitta in terms of motivation and bodhichitta in terms of application, which consists of the practice of the ten perfections, and so on. Through gradually cultivating these causes one will eventually attain the state of a perfect buddha, the ultimate fruit one was longing for.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.2.3. Free from ideation and yet bringing about benefit
These appearances are totally free from ideation
and do not involve the slightest movement at all.There is nothing of this kind, and yet neverthelessthey are accompanied by great benefit in the world.“This is the appearance of my own mind.”Worldly beings do not have such insight.Yet, their seeing of this visible kayawill become meaningful for these beings.Relying on gradually beholding this form,all those who follow the [Great] Vehiclewill see their genuine inner dharmakayaby means of the eye of primordial wisdom.
A buddha who appears in the pure mind is totally free from ide-
ation in terms of any 
particular intention, such as thinking: “I must 
bring about the beneﬁt of sentient beings in such and such a way!” 
His appearance does not involve any movement, and thus is free from deliberate effort. This being so, nevertheless the seeing of a buddha’s visible appearance is accompanied by and entails great beneﬁt in the world. This is because it immediately links the disciples with vast amounts of the roots of virtue and eventually links them with the state of omniscience.
“This is just the r
eﬂection of the true buddha that appears in my 
own pure mind, but it is not the ultimate buddha itself.” Children, or 
in other words, worldly 
beings, do not have any such insight. They 
do not understand the endless number of illusory appearances of the 
250    Buddha Nature
visible kayas as they truly are. Nevertheless, beholding the buddhakaya 
will become very meaningful for the onlooking disciples. [They will want] to attain buddhahood. Relying on the gradual vision of the visible kayas they will follow the Mahayana in order to achieve this aim, and will practice the path in accordance with the profound mode of this vehicle. In doing so, those of karmic fortune [will discover] clear light, the true nature of mind that needs to be realized through self-awareness. The true nature of mind is no other than emptiness endowed with all supreme aspects. This is the dharmakaya [the body of qualities] and it will be seen directly and in clear precision by means of the eye of concept-free primordial 
wisdom present during meditative equipoise.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.3. Detailed explanation of the example
If the whole earth became rid of fearful places
and turned into an even surface of lapis lazulithat was flawless, radiant, and beautiful,having a gem’s qualities and unstained luster,various divine abodes and the form of their Lordwould shine forth within it because of its purity.Then, as the earth gradually lost these properties,they would be invisible again and appear no more.Yet, for their real attainment the men and womenwould side with the vows of individual release,with penitence, authentic giving, and so forth,scattering flowers and so on with longing minds.
Suppose through the power of virtue, the great earth, the whole of 
Zambuling, became rid of rocky ravines and other fearful places and 
turned into an even surface, smooth as the palm of a hand and made from ﬂawless lapis lazuli. Radiant and beautiful, it would possess a luster free from any stain such as containing ﬂaws of less precious materials (Tib. rngul) and so on, and all the qualities of a precious 
gem would be complete. Thus it would be arranged in the likeness of an ornament. Since this ground would be extremely pure, the various divine abodes such as the Lord of the Gods’ sublime palace called “the All-Victorious,” and so on, would shine forth within it. And the reﬂections of the King of the Gods and his retinue would clearly ap-pear.
 Later these properties of [the earth] would gradually be lost. Due 
to that, these reﬂections would become invisible again and appear no 
more: they would have arisen and ceased. Yet, through the power of 
having seen these reﬂections all the men and women would side with [the practice of virtue]. To attain the state of Indra in its real substance 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      251
they would [adopt] the vows of individual release, speaking the truth 
and so forth, and would practice penitence (Tib. brtul zhugs). They 
would genuinely train in generosity, giving material goods and so on, and then proceed to moral discipline, to meditation, and so on. With longing minds they would scatter ﬂowers and so forth, and joining the palms of their hands would utter prayers to be reborn as gods. In this way they would train on the path in order to attain the visible kaya [they had formerly seen].
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.4. Precise depiction of the meaning
Likewise, to attain the state of a Lord of Munis shining forth in 
their minds, which are similar to pure lapis lazuli,
the heirs of the Victor, their vision filled with sheer delight, 
give rise to bodhichitta in the most perfect manner.
Those human beings who have seen the reﬂection of Indra are ﬁlled 
with aspiration towards him. Likewise, the bodhisattvas, the heirs of 
the Victor, whose minds are ﬁlled with sheer delight in the Buddha, give rise to bodhichitta, to the mind aspiring to unsurpassable enlight-enment, in the most perfect 
manner. They do so since they [feel the] 
need to attain the state of the Lord of Munis, whose appearance shines forth in their own pure minds, which are similar to pure lapis lazuli.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.1.5. Summary of the way in which there is freedom from 
arising and cessation
Just as mirrored by the purified lapis lazuli ground
the physical appearance of the Lord of Gods is seen,likewise the kaya of the Lord of Munis is reflected in the purified ground of sentient beings’ minds.Whether these reflections will rise or set in beingsowes to their own minds being sullied or unstained.Like the form [of Lord Indra] appearing in the worlds,they are not to be viewed as “existent” or “extinct.”
When in the world of human beings the ground consists of lapis 
lazuli, having become puriﬁed and free from any pollution of dust 
and so on, the reﬂection of the Lord of Gods will appear in it together with all his wealth. In the same sense the reﬂection of the kaya of the Lord of Munis possessed of the pure marks will shine forth in the 
ground of the minds of beings. This will happen once the disciples’ 
minds have become puriﬁed and are free from the stains of distrust and so forth. Also, just as described in the example, the reﬂection of the buddhakaya will seem to appear and disappear in sentient beings 
252    Buddha Nature
to be trained. This is due to the way their own minds manifest. When 
their minds have become pure and are not stained by lack of faith and so on, then through the power of this mental condition the visible kaya will seem to rise [in them]. Whereas, when their minds are utterly im-pure and sullied by 
distrust and so on, then through the power of this 
frame of mind the visible kaya will seem to have set. In the example the reﬂection of the Lord of the Gods seems to appear and disappear, depending upon the ground in the worlds of human beings, which is either pure or impure. Yet, the Lord of the Gods himself does not move away from his own abode. In the same sense, the visible kaya seems to arise and cease depending upon the disciples being pure or impure. Yet the ultimate dharmakaya is not to be viewed in any way in terms of “arising and ceasing” or in terms of “existent and extinct.” This is because it is both uncreated and uninterruptedness itself. (See 
also Part Three, annotation 75.)
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2. The speech expressing the oral instructions
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.1. Presentation of the example
By the power of the gods’ former virtue
the Dharma drum [arose] among them.Involving no effort, origin, or thought,no vibration and no intention at all,the drum resounds again and againwith “impermanence” and “suffering,”“non-existence of self” and “peace,”admonishing all the careless gods.
In the sky above the roof of the beautiful palace “the All-Victori-
ous” there is the 
great drum of Dharma called “Donator of Teaching’s 
Sound,” which arose among the gods by the power of their former 
unstained virtuous deeds. From this drum articulate sound arises without involving any effort in terms of someone beating it and so on. There is no origin that produces the sound such as a tongue, throat, and so on, no intention in terms of a thinking mind, and no visible basis in terms of vibration. It is free from any ideation such as think-ing: “I will pr oduce 
a sound.” Without there being any of these, the 
sounds of: “All compounded things are impermanent!” “Everything bound up with pollution is suffering!” “All phenomena are devoid of 
self!” and “Nirvana is peace!” arise from it again and again. Thus it admonishes all the gods who have become careless, seeking distraction in the pleasures of the senses, to turn [their minds] to Dharma.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      253
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.2. Teaching the meaning
Likewise, though free from effort and so on,
the buddha speech of the All-Pervading Onespermeates sentient beings without exception,teaching Dharma to those of karmic fortune.
Similar to the foregoing example, the perfect buddhas who per-
vade 
existence and peace are without the ﬁve [aspects mentioned 
above]. Though they are free from the deliberate effort of articulating 
the Dharma and so on, they permeate all sentient beings without any exception by means of their buddha speech. To those of karmic fortune they teach the Dharma in correspondence to their respective capacities and gifts.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.3. The function of the meaning and the example
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.3.1. Detailed explanation
Just as the sound of the drum arises
among the gods from their own deeds,the Dharma spoken by the Muni arisesin the world from beings’ own deeds.Just as the sound [of the drum] accomplishes peacewithout effort, origin, visible form, or intention,likewise the Dharma causes accomplishment of peacewithout deliberate effort or any other such feature.
The sound of the great drum arises among the gods due to the power 
of their own virtuous deeds. Similar to that, the appearance of the 
Munis who utter Buddha Dharma in the world of the disciples arises from the virtuous deeds done by all sentient beings themselves. The sound of the drum [comes about] without the effort of someone [beat-ing it], without any place 
of origin, without basis in terms of a visible 
form, and without thinking in terms of intention. And yet, the sound of the drum, though it has none [of these features] at all, admonishes the gods to [turn their minds towards] Dharma and thus accomplishes peace. Likewise a buddha is free from any deliberate effort of teaching the Dharma and so on. And yet this Dharma, though it has none [of these features] at all, causes the disciples to pacify their suffering and to accomplish nirvana, the state beyond any torment and pain.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.3.2. Summary of the meaning
The sound of the drum in the city of the gods acts as the cause, 
254    Buddha Nature
yielding the gift of undauntedness and granting them vic-
tory
over the host of the asuras, when these, driven by their poi-
sons, make war upon them, and it dispels the gods’ reveling in play.
Likewise, arising in the worlds from the cause of meditative 
stability, formless dimension, and so on, it expresses the mode
of the unsurpassable path, which will fully overcome all af-
fliction and suffering and thus lead all sentient beings to peace.
The sound of the great drum that is present in the city of the gods, 
suspended in the sky above the sublime palace “the All-Victorious,” 
acts as the cause yielding the gift of fearlessness to the gods. At the time when the gods have gone into the dense forests, and the asuras, generating the mental poison of hatred, make war upon them, this fear-lessn
ess grants them victory over the host of the demigods. The sound 
of the drum dispels the gods’ reveling in various plays, their distraction and indulgence in sense pleasures, and thus gradually leads them to enlightenment. Similarly the speech of the Buddha arises in the worlds of the disciples from their reliance on virtues such as the practice of the samadhis of meditative stability and of the formless dimensions (Tib. gsugs med ), and so on. Due to this cause, buddha speech fully overcomes 
the afﬂictions of all sentient beings, which constitute the cause, and their suffering, which constitutes [its] fruit. It perfectly expresses the Great Vehicle, the mode of the unsurpassable path [leading to] peace, to the paciﬁcation of all suffering without exception.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.4. Expressing its specialty
Universal, of benefit, bestowing bliss,
and endowed with threefold miracle,the Muni’s melody is by far superiorto the cymbals treasured by the gods.
Being there for all the endless number of disciples, [manifesting] in 
tune with the very own wishes and motivations of each, it is universal, 
the quintessence of freedom from any smallness and limitation (Tib. nyi tshe ba ma yin pa nyid). Since ultimately it joins them with the state 
repre 
senting the deﬁnitive good, it is the quintessence of beneﬁt. 
Since meanwhile it joins them with the joy of the higher states of ex-
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      255
istence, it is the quintessence of bliss. It is endowed with three types 
of miraculous display. These are displaying miraculous powers (Tib. rdzu ’phrul gyi cho ’phrul ), displaying all-pervasive expression (Tib.  
kun tu brjod pa’i cho 
’phrul), and displaying the miraculous effects of 
teaching the Dharma (Tib. rjes su bstan pa’i cho ’phrul). Through these 
it is the quintessence of deﬁnitive release from all suffering. Since it possesses these four qualities or properties, the melody of the Muni articulating the teaching of all perfect buddhas is superior to and by far more excellent than the cymbals that are in the possession of the gods. These cymbals are limited and of small reach. They neither constitute beneﬁt nor happiness or deﬁnitive release. (See also Part Three, annotation 76.)
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.5. Explanation in combination with the three miraculous 
displays
The mighty sound of the drum in the divine realms
does not reach the ears of those dwelling on earth,whereas the drumming sound of Buddha’s [speech]even reaches the subterranean worlds of samsara.Millions of divine cymbals resound among the godsto set the fire of lust ablaze and to fan its flames.The single melody of Those of Compassionate Beingmanifests to fully quench all the fires of suffering.The beautiful and bewitching sound of the cymbalscauses among the gods increase of their distraction,whereas the speech of the compassionate Tathagataexhorts [us] to reflect and commits the mind to samadhi.Any cause of happiness for earthly beings and godsin whichever sphere of the world without exception,briefly spoken, fully depends upon this melodythat pervades all the worlds, not forsaking one.
Though the mighty sound of a heavenly drum pervasively reaches 
all the endless abodes of the gods, it is still limited and does not reach 
the ears of those sentient beings who dwell on the surface of the earth. Whereas, when a buddha utters Dharma at the right time, the sound of this drum reaches everywhere, pervading even those disciples who d well in the subterranean worlds of samsara. For this reason [the 
spee
ch of a buddha] is totally unlimited and is therefore of special 
excellence.
In this context the noble Karma Thrinläpa has said: 
256    Buddha Nature
The drum mentioned here is to be taken as belonging to the [class 
of] ordinary heavenly cymbals and drums, which are different from the great drum [of Dharma]. This passage is an expanded explanation of the foregoing section starting with: “Universal, of beneﬁt, bestowing bliss...,” whereas the great drum has been explained in an earlier section by means of one stanza in terms of a particular property that is distinct from the ordinary [heavenly] cymbals. To think that the line: “...does not reach the ears of those dwelling on earth” includes the statement that the great drum is not heard by human beings and so on who dwell on the earth is therefore erroneous. This opinion contradicts the statement that the Four Guiding Principles of Dharma and so forth, which arise from the sound of the great heavenly drum, admonish the gods and turn them away from their careless pursuit [of sensual plea-sures
]. So if we nowadays heard this from someone and thereupon 
spoke accordingly, we would insult our own [intelligence]. That we should not do!
(See also Part Three, annotation 77.)
There are many millions of different kinds of divine cymbals among 
the gods. Yet, these only resound in order to set ablaze the ﬁre of crav-
ing for the happiness derived 
from sense pleasures, and to increase it, 
fanning its ﬂames. Thus they are of no beneﬁt. The melodious speech of perfect buddhas, who are the embodiment of great compassion, is just of one kind. Yet, with its single melody it leads all disciples of karmic fortune to fully quench the ﬁres of their manifold suffering along with its causes, and to attain the state beyond torment and pain. Since [the speech of the Buddha] manifests for this purpose, it is beneﬁcial and thus again especially excellent.
In th
e divine realms, the sound of the cymbals, which are beautifully 
shaped and bewitching the very moment one hears them, is varied and manifold. Yet, it acts as the cause that makes the mind yearn for objects and increases its being totally distracted and scattered. Therefore, this sound does not constitute [any true] happiness. Contrary to that, the speech of tathagatas who are endowed with great compassion itself acts as the cause that exhorts the disciples to reﬂect and to commit their minds to meditative stability and samadhi. For this reason it constitutes happiness and thus is also especially excellent.
In brief, the cymbals tr
easured by the gods do not constitute what 
will deﬁnitively reveal release. As opposed to that, there is a cause relinquishing all suffering and the sources of suffering experienced by gods, by humans dwelling on the earth, and so forth, in whichever sphere of the world without exception. All suffering being ended, it will increase unpolluted great bliss. Such a cause is said to fully de-
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      257
pend upon the melody of buddha speech, which wielding three types 
of miraculous display pervades all world spheres, not forsaking one. For this reason it constitutes deﬁnitive release from suffering and is therefore also especially excellent.
Here, through these four stanzas [each consisting of four lines], 
what is limited or unlimited, what is beneﬁcial or non-beneﬁcial, what [yields] happiness or non-happiness, and what deﬁnitively reveals release or does not, is taught extensively.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.2.6. Where the power of speech does not enter and where 
it is unhindered
Without [an intact sense of] hearing
one cannot experience subtle sound,and all [its manifold variations]do not even reach the ears of a god.Likewise, as the field of experienceof the very finest primordial wisdom, the subtle Dharma only reaches the earof someone whose mind is rid of poison.
Just as, for example, without an intact sense of hearing one does not 
experience subtle sound and cannot hear it, similarly those who do not 
have the [respective] karmic fortune do not hear the melody of buddha speech. All the different variations and particularities of sound do not even reach the ears of someone who has attained divine hearing, and are only heard by some. Likewise, the extremely subtle and profound teaching of a buddha does not reach the ears of all the disciples. This Dharma is exclusively the ﬁeld of experience of the very ﬁnest pri-mordial wisdom. As such 
it only reaches the ears of someone who has 
great karmic fortune, having become a supreme disciple whose mind is rid of the mental poisons. (See also Part Three, annotation 78.)
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3. The way the mind is pervasive through knowledge and 
compassionate love
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.1. Short presentation of the example of clouds
The monsoon clouds in summertime
continuously and without any effortpour down their vast masses of water,
causing on earth the best possible crops.Just so, from the cloud of compassionthe rain of the Victor’s pure teachingpours down its waters without ideation,
causing a harvest of virtue for beings.
258    Buddha Nature
In summertime, during the rainy season, the clouds [of the monsoon] 
continuously and without any effort pour down vast masses of water 
onto the earth, thus causing the best possible crops. Similarly, the rain of the sacred Dharma pours down without any ideation from the cloud of the Victor’s compassion and acts as the cause for the best possible harvest of virtue in the mindstreams of sentient beings.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.2. Detailed explanation of the example
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.2.1. Presentation of the meaning and the example
Just as the wind-born clouds cause rain to fall
when the worldly beings follow the path of virtue,from the buddha cloud called by compassion’s wind,
pure Dharma rains to nurture the virtue of beings.
When the worldly beings follow the path of the ten virtuous deeds, 
the clouds born from the call of the wind release their waters and cause 
rain to fall. Similarly, in order to increase and actualize the harvest of virtue in beings, the mighty rain of the sacred Dharma falls from the buddh
a cloud, called by the wind of loving kindness and compassion.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.2.2. Explanation of the meaning through corresponding 
properties
Through great knowledge and compassionate love with regard 
to existence
it abides in the midst of space unsullied by change and non-
change.
Holding the essence of the unpolluted waters of dharani and 
samadhi,
the cloud of the Lord of Munis is the cause of the harvest of 
virtue.
Through great knowledge and compassionate love with regard 
to the existence of the disciples, it abides in the midst of the space of dharmadhatu, which is not sullied by change and non-change nor by samsara and nirvana. It pours down the rain of Dharma, which holds the essence of the unpolluted waters of dharani and samadhi. For these reasons the cloud of 
the compassion of the Lord of Munis constitutes 
the cause that increases the harvest of virtue in [all] sentient beings.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.3. The way there is change in terms of the vessel
Water that is cool, delicious, soft,
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      259
and light when it falls from the clouds
acquires on earth very many tastesby touching salty and other grounds.When the waters of the noble eightfold [path]rain from the heart of the vast cloud of love,they will also acquire many kinds of tastesby the different grounds of beings’ make-up.
When water having the eight properties—being cool, delicious, soft, 
light, and so forth—falls from the clouds, it is just of one kind. Yet, 
on the surface of the earth, through its contact with salty and other grounds, with good and poor soils that are present there, it acquires very many tastes, such as a sweet or a bitter ﬂavor and so on. In the same sense, when raining from the heart of the extremely high and vast cloud of compassionate love, the waters of the teachings of the noble eightfold path are one and the same. Yet, due to the ground, which is the mindstream and make-up of beings to be trained, due to their different aspirations, it acquires many kinds of tastes, such as the ﬂavor of the shravaka vehicle and so on. In this way it seems to be of various kinds.
In hi
s commentary to Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge (Skt. 
AbhidharmakoŸa˛ık›, Tib. chos mngon pa’i mdzod kyi ’grel bshad), Yasho-
mitra describes the eight properties of water as follows:
It is cool, delicious, light, and soft,
of clear transparency and unpolluted.Drinking it does not cause any harmto the stomach or to the throat.
In this context the Venerable Seventh [Karmapa] has said: 
The Victorious One has spoken all his sublime words solely in the light of the deﬁnitive meaning (Tib. nges don). Due to the various 
ways of understanding of the disciples, they are grasped as being provisional, as being a meaning requiring interpretation (Tib. drang 
don), and so forth. The presentation in terms of “deﬁnitive” and “prov
isional” is therefore made from the viewpoint of the disciples. 
Yet, from the viewpoint of the own essence of the teachings itself they are all exclusively a deﬁnitive meaning.
This seems to ﬁnally conclude the intended meaning of this present 
text, the Uttara Tantra.  Similar to that it is stated in Chandragomin’s Let-
ter to a Disciple (Skt. �i�ya-lekha,  
Tib. slob ma la springs pa’i spring yig):
The nectar of Dharma, the cause of supreme nirvana, is of single 
taste.
Like 
a stream of rain it falls down and dispels the scorching 
260    Buddha Nature
heat.
Depending on the vessel this will turn into different kinds of ﬂavor.
Lobpön Pawo [Ashvaghosha] has also said:
There being many aspirations
and meeting with many targets,from the command of one speechseemingly there will be many.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4. Effortless manifestation
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4.1. Concise presentation
Those of devotion towards the supreme vehicle,
those who are neutral, and those with animosityare three groups [of beings] who are similarto humans, peacocks, and craving spirits.
According to the dispositions of sentient beings there are three dif-
ferent groups or 
skandhas. The ﬁrst group is certain in that there is 
faith and devotion towards the rainfall of the sacred Dharma of the 
supreme vehicle. The second is uncertain in that beings of that group are neutral, dwelling between faith and non-faith towards this vehicle. The third group is certain in a perverted way in that there is animosity towards the supreme vehicle. In the given sequence these three groups are similar to humans who rejoice over the rainfall in the hot season, to peacocks who dwell in between, who neither like nor dislike this rain, and to craving spirits who have aversion towards it.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4.2. Detailed explanation
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4.2.1. Combination of example and 
meaning in terms of 
corresponding properties
At the end of spring, when there are no clouds, human beings 
and the birds that rarely fly
[are unhappy or neutral, respectively]. When rain is falling in 
summertime, the craving spirits suffer.
Similar to this example, the arising and non-arising of the 
Dharma-rain from the host of clouds of compassion
also [leads to opposite reactions] in worldly beings who long 
for Dharma or are hostile to it, respectively.
In the hot season at the end of spring, when there are no clouds, hu-
man b
eings are unhappy, the peacocks who [rarely ﬂy and thus] do not 
continuously move in the sky react with indifference, and the craving spirits are happy. When in summertime the rain falls onto the earth, 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      261
human beings are happy, peacocks are again indifferent, and it causes 
suffering to the craving spirits, since to them it transforms into a rain of hailstones. Similarly, when the rain of the sacred Dharma brought forth by the host of the clouds of compassion arises in the worlds, it leads those who long for Dharma to be happy, leaves those who are neutral indifferent, and makes those who are hostile to Dharma unhappy. Its non-arising again makes the hostile ones happy, leaves the neutral ones indifferent, and makes those longing for Dharma unhappy. For this reason the three species of beings [who react differently] at the time of rainfall and the three types of skandhas [or dispositions to Dharma] of beings in the world have similar properties and are thus combined in terms of example and meaning.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.4.2.2. The way it is not discriminatory
When releasing a deluge of heavy drops or hurling down hail-
stones and thunderbolts,
a cloud does not heed any tiny beings or those who have 
sought shelter in the hills.
Likewise the cloud of knowledge and love does not heed 
whether its vast and subtle drops
will purify the afflictions or [increase] dormant tendencies 
towards holding the view of a self.
When it releases a deluge of heavy drops of water or hurls down 
hailstones and thunderbolts in a screaming gale, a cloud is heedless [of 
the consequences] and does not think: “I will cause beneﬁt or harm.” It does not attend to the fact that these, once they have fallen on the ﬁelds, will harm all those many tiny beings who live on the ground, whereas they will not do any harm to the beings who took shelter in the hills and will even be of beneﬁt to them. Likewise the cloud of knowledge and compassionate love releases the drops of emptiness and skillful means such as generosity and so on, of [teaching] in the subtle and the vast way. In doing so, it does not attend to the fact at all that these will purify the afﬂictions of those who have devotion towards the Great Vehicle, whereas they may increase the dormant tendencies towards holding the view of an [existing] self in those who are hostile to it. It causes the rain of Dharma to fall without any such notion.
B.II.
2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.5. Connection with the property conducive to eliminating 
suffering
262    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.5.1. Depiction of suffering and its elimination
In this cycle of beginningless birth and death five paths are 
open for sentient beings to tread.
Just as no sweet scent is found in excrement, no happiness will 
be found among the five types of beings.
Their suffering resembles the continuous pain arising from 
fire and weapons, or [from a wound] being touched by salt, 
and so on.
The great rain of sacred Dharma pours down in cascades from 
the cloud of compassion, fully soothing and appeasing this [pain].
The twelve branches of interdependent origination, which are com-
pounded by and consist of 
the active state of the three mental poisons 
repeatedly evolve in an ongoing cycle. Due to this cycle there is the 
suffering of being born, of dying, and so on. [To beings caught in this cycle, the suffering it involves] is without beginning and end. They do not have the certainty that it has only arisen from these [poisons]. And those who do not practice the path of release do not have any certainty either that [suffering] will be ended when [the practice of] this [path] is ﬁnalized. In this place of beginningless and endless suffering there are ﬁve paths open for sentient beings to tread. These are the three kinds of evil wanderings (Tib. ngan song: of hell beings, craving spirits, and 
animals) and the two paths of gods and men. Just as in excrement and similar unclean things no sweet scent is to be found at all, there is also not the slightest opportunity for happiness in the cycles of existence of the ﬁve kinds of beings. This is because [the cycle of existence] is the abode of suffering itself, being direly and utterly steeped in the three kinds of suffering, the eight kinds of suffering, and so on. The speciﬁc suffering ingrained in this cycle of existence is comparable to the feeling of pain arising from being forever burnt by an enormous ﬁre, from being continuously cut by sharp weapons, or from a raw wound coming in touch with salt, and so on. For anyone who abides in this [state] extremely hard to endure, a buddha [manifests] the cloud of great compassion, consisting of the wish to liberate all these [beings] from their suffering. From the cloud of his compassion he releases the mighty rain of the sacred Dharma in its vast and deep aspects. When the meaning of this Dharma is practiced, it fully soothes and 
appeases all the cr
uel ﬁres of suffering. A buddha makes its rain fall 
uninterruptedly and in accordance with the speciﬁc karmic fortune of each [sentient being].
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      263
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.5.2. Realizing in terms of change
“[Even] gods have the suffering of death and transmigration, 
and man suffers from desperate strife!” Realizing this,
those endowed with discriminative wisdom have no desire for 
even the highest [state] of a lord of humans or gods.
There is wisdom [from the past] and they faithfully follow the 
sublime words of the Tathagata,
so insight makes them see: “This is suffering! This is its cause! 
And this is cessation of misery!”
“Even gods are subject to the suffering of death and transmigra-
tion, which will lead them 
to fall [into a lower state of existence]. And 
human beings suffer as well—they have the suffering of holding on 
to and protecting whatever is there and of desperately striving for whatever is not there for them. Beside that, they are subject to other sufferings, such as hunger and thirst, weariness and fatigue, and many others.” Those skillful ones who possess the discriminative wisdom that understands the nature of samsara and nirvana realize this. For this reason they have no desire, not even for the highest state of a god or a human being. They neither long for the state of Indra, the lord of the gods, and so on, nor do they long for the state of a Chakravartin, the lord of mankind, and so on. Throughout their former existences they have attained discriminative wisdom and [generated] utter faith in the sublime words of the Tathagata, which are free from any pollu-tion. By the power of 
this faith they continue to follow these words in 
this life as well, and carry out the aspects of study and reﬂection in the right fashion. Resulting from this [practice] there is completely pure discriminative wisdom that realizes the non-existence of a self and thus constitutes the path. Through this wisdom they truly and unmistakenly see: “The aspect of the fruit, anything that is bound up with pollution, constitutes in its entirety nothing but suffering. The entirety of the mental poisons and karma, anything that is of this kind, constitutes its cause, the origination of all suffering. The point where the cycle of existence and action in terms of cause and fruit have ceased without any exception is the state of nirvana, which constitutes cessation [of all suffering and pain].”
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.3.5.3. Seeing the way of the four truths
In the case of disease, one needs to diagnose it, remove its 
264    Buddha Nature
cause,
attain the happy state [of health], and rely on suitable medi-
cine;
simil
arly one needs to recognize suffering, remove its cause,
come in touch with its cessation, and rely on the suitable path.
Intelligent people who wish to get rid of the suffering caused by a 
disease and to attain the happiness of health must ﬁrst ﬁnd out what 
the disease is—they must diagnose its nature. Thereupon they have to abandon the cause that has generated this disease, such as unhealthy food and so on. They have to attain the happy state of freedom from sickness and to do so rely on good medicine, the means to achieve this aim. Similar to this example, those who have the intelligence of wishing to get rid of the suffering of samsara and to attain the happi-ness of nirvana must ﬁrst 
understand what suffering is. They must 
recognize that the whole of samsara, which consists of the fruit of any-thing bound up with pollution, 
is in its entirety nothing but suffering. 
Upon this recognition they have to remove its cause, the origination of all suffering, to its full extent. This consists of karma and the mental poisons. They must come into direct contact with the cessation [of suffering], which is free from these stains, and attain the happiness of nirvana. As the means towards this aim they must rely on the ﬁve paths, which are free from pollution, and gradually incorporate them into their streams of being.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4. Emitting illusory manifestations
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4.1. Short presentation of the example and its meaning
Just like the way in which Brahma,
without departing from his abode,effortlessly shows his appearancein all the residences of the gods,without moving from dharmakayathe Muni effortlessly demonstratesillusory appearances in every realmto beings who have karmic fortune.
Without moving from his abode “the Brahma Heaven,” Brahma the 
Great effortlessly shows an illusory appearance, manifesting in his 
likeness in all the residences of the gods of the desire realm. Similar to that, without moving from the dharmakaya of all buddhas, a Muni effortlessly demonstrates physical appearances of an illusory nature (Skt. nirm›˚ak›ya, Tib. sprul sku) in all 
 the realms of the world to those 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      265
disciples who have karmic fortune.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4.2. Detailed explanation
When Brahma, never departing from his palace, has manifested 
in the desire realm, he is seen by the gods.
This vision incites them to emulate him and to abandon their 
delight in [sensuous] objects.
Similarly, without moving from dharmakaya, the Sugata is 
seen in all spheres of this world
by beings of karmic fortune. This vision incites them to emu-
late him and to dispel all their pollution.
When Brahma, never departing from his own palace, has manifested 
an illusory appearance in his own likeness among the gods of the desire 
realm, this is seen by the gods addicted to desire. Then these gods who envisage this appearance as Brahma are incited to emulate him and to abandon their delight in sensuous objects. Similar to this example, the Sugatas do not move from the dharmakaya. Without there being any such agitation, their visible kayas are seen in all spheres of the world by those beings who have karmic fortune. The vision of these kayas also incites the disciples [to emulate the Sugatas] and [thus] always dispels all their pollution.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4.3. Presentation of the cause of seeing
By his own former wishing prayers
and the power of the virtue of the godsBrahma appears without deliberate effort.So does the self-sprung illusory kaya.
In former times Brahma himself uttered wishing prayers [to become 
able] to fulﬁll the beneﬁt of the gods. The gods, who whenever they 
desire something act accordingly, accumulated merit conducive to see-ing Brahma in the futur 
e. By the power of these supplications and this 
virtue, something that appears to be Brahma is shown without effort in the realm of desire. Similar to that, the illusory kaya of self-sprung perfect buddhas [comes about] as well. By the power of prayers prior to buddhahood and by the power of virtue enacted by sentient beings who are to be trained, manifold appearances, which are totally illusory, are demonstrated. They issue from dharmakaya in such a way that they do not involve any deliberate effort.
266    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.4.4. Explanation of the twelve deeds of the nirmanakaya
He moves from [Tushita] and enters the womb, gets born, and 
goes to his father’s palace.
He enjoys amusement and then seeks solitude, undergoes 
austerity, and defeats all evils.
[In Bodhgaya] he finds great enlightenment and shows the 
path to the citadel of peace.
The Muni, having shown [these deeds], becomes invisible to 
those of no karmic fortune.
When the right time for the disciples has come, buddhas demonstrate 
twelve deeds. [The Buddha Shakyamuni] moved away from Tushita 
and entered his mother’s womb. He was born and went to his father’s palace where he gained skill in all sciences, arts, and crafts. He enjoyed amusement with his spouse and her retinue. Seeking solitude, he renounced the householder’s life and the worldly bustle and became a monk. For six years he practiced austere asceticism. Then he went to Bodhgaya, “the Heart of Awakening,” defeated all the Maras and evil forces and found great enlightenment. He turned the wheel of Dharma showing the path that leads to nirvana, the citadel of peace. Having shown these eleven [deeds] he passed into nirvana and became invisible to the eyes of those who do not have the karmic fortune of 
being able to see a buddha.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5. The way primordial wisdom manifests
B.II.
2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.1. Presentation of the manifestation and non-manifestation 
of primordial wisdom
When the sun blazes down, lotuses and so on open
while simultaneously kumuta flowers totally close.On the benefit and fault of the water-born flowers’ opening 
and closing
the sun does not shed any thought. The sun of the Noble acts 
likewise.
When the rays of the sun blaze down with scorching heat, all the 
lotus ﬂowers will fully open, while simultaneously the kumuta ﬂow-
ers will totally close. Y
et, the orb of the sun does not give any thought 
to the beneﬁt and fault represented by the opening and closing of the water-born ﬂowers. It manifests without any ideation in terms of thinking: “I must make the lotuses open and I must make the kumuta ﬂowers close.” Here as well, the sun of the Great Noble One, of the 
Perfect Buddha, does likewise. When he blazes with his light rays of 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      267
sacred Dharma, the lotus of understanding of those who are able to be 
trained will fully blossom. Simultaneously the kumuta ﬂower of the minds of those who are not able to be trained will totally close. The Buddha also perfectly manifests without any ideation as to the beneﬁt and harm represented by these [effects].
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.2. Explanation of its manifestation’s activity
As the sun shining its own light
simultaneously and without thoughtmakes lotus flowers open their petalsand brings ripening to other [crops],so the sun of the Tathagata manifests,shedding its rays of the sacred Dharmaon the lotus-like beings to be trainedwithout harboring any thought or idea.
The orb of the sun, without any thought or intention, simultane-
ously shines its innumerable light 
rays. Through these it causes all 
lotus ﬂowers to open their buds and to fully blossom. And it makes 
other especially excellent crops ripen into a perfect harvest. Similarly the orb of the sun of the Tathagata, of the Perfect Buddha, also radiates its innumerable light rays of the sacred Dharma simultaneously. Thus it causes the lotus-like beings to be trained to fully open the petals of their qualities and makes the crops of their virtue mature. Yet, in doing so, a buddha also manifests spontaneously and without harboring a thought or idea as to any of these [effects].
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.3. They way primordial wisdom radiates
By the dharmakaya and the visible kayas
the sun of omniscience rises in the sky,which is the very heart of enlightenment,to shed light beams of wisdom on beings.
When, for example, the orb of the sun rises in the expanse of the sky, 
its light rays dispel the darkness of the world. Similarly the sun of the 
omniscient King of Dharma rises in the sky, which is the direct revelation of the very heart of enlightenment, free from all extremes of conceptual elaboration. It does so with the completely perfect mandalas of the two kayas, which are the ultimate dharmakaya representing beneﬁt for oneself and the relative (Tib. tha snyad ) visible kayas r epresenting 
the beneﬁt of 
others. By means of his primordial wisdom of [correct 
and complete] knowledge, the Buddha sheds manifold light beams of 
268    Buddha Nature
the sacred Dharma onto beings to be trained without any exception. 
Thus he also dispels the darkness of their unknowing.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.4. The way there is manifold manifestation
In all disciples, as in water vessels,
simultaneously the sun of the Sugatais mirrored in countless reflectionsowing to the purity [of these beings].
The reﬂection of the sun will appear simultaneously in many vessels 
ﬁlled with clear water. Similar to this example, like the reﬂection of the 
sun countless visible kayas of the Sugata are simultaneously mirrored in the endless number of the disciples, thus bringing about the best possible beneﬁt for others. This happens to all disciples whose mind-streams are completely 
puriﬁed from the stains of the mental poisons 
and so on and who are therefore like vessels ﬁlled with clear water.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.5. The gradual manifestation of primordial wisdom
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.5.1. Concise presentation
[From] within the space of dharmadhatu,
which continuously pervades everything,the buddha sun shines on the disciples[like] on mountains, as merited by each.
The utterly pure dharmadhatu, which continuously pervades any-
one whose state is r
elative (Tib. chos can) in a totally indivisible way, is 
similar to the sphere of space. Perfect buddhas resemble the great sun. 
Having arisen in the space of dharmadhatu they gradually shine on the mountain-like disciples as is merited by each, and corresponding to their respective karmic fortunes.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.5.2. Detailed explanation
Just as the rising sun with thousands of far-reaching beams
illuminates all the worlds and then gradually sheds its lighton th
e highest mountains, then the medium-sized, and the 
small,
the buddha sun gradually shines on the assembly of beings.
When rising in the expanse of space, the sun, which is endowed with 
many thousands of far-reaching light rays, illuminates all the worlds 
of the four continents with its beams. Then it gradually sheds its light 
ﬁrst on the highest mountains, then on those of medium size, and 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      269
ﬁnally on the small. The sun of an omniscient buddha who is endowed 
with the far-reaching light rays of primordial wisdom is similar to that. Rising within dharmadhatu’s space it also shines gradually on the assembly of sentient beings. First it illuminates disciples of supreme karmic fortune, then those whose karmic fortune is of medium quality, and ﬁnally those whose karmic fortune is poor. In this way a buddha leads all disciples step-by-step to complete maturation.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.6. The special excellence of its function
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.6.1. Presentation in terms of being beyond the example
The sun does not radiate to the depth of space in every field, 
nor can it show
the meaning of the knowable [to those] confined to the dark-
ness of unknowing.
Appearing in clarity through a multitude of light emitting 
various colors,
Those of Compassionate Nature show the meaning of the 
knowable to beings.
The sun does not have the ability to send out light rays pervad-
ing t
he depth of space of every ﬁeld in the ten directions. It also 
does not show the meaning of the knowable to beings whose eyes of 
understanding are shut through the darkness of unknowing. Perfect buddhas, whose nature is great compassion, are clearly apparent in the ten directions, their light emitting the various colors of the three vehicles’ sacred Dharma teaching. In doing so they show the mean-ing of the knowable to 
all sentient beings. For this reason, although 
the sun and the light rays of compassion [radiating from] the Victor’s sun are linked in terms of example and meaning, the latter are totally beyond this example.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.5.6.2. Depiction of its specific function
When a buddha goes to the city [of the disciples], people with-
out eyes become sighted.
Being freed from all meaningless things they see the meaning-
ful and experience [happiness].
When blinded by delusion they fall into existence’s sea and 
are wrapped in the darkness of views,
the light of the buddha sun illumines their vision and they see 
the very point they never saw before.
When a buddha goes to the city of the disciples, the impairments 
270    Buddha Nature
causing harm (Tib. nyer ’tshe ) to the higher states of existence are 
cleared away: blind people [who have no eyes] become sighted and 
see the visible, the deaf hear sound, and so on. They free themselves from the multitude of sufferings of the evil wanderings, which are meaningless in that they are without any happiness. They see what is meaningful [and will lead to] happiness. Once established in the delightful wanderings (Tib. bde ’gro) they experience happiness and 
well-being. Then there are those who possess the quality of the higher states of existence, of the delightful wanderings, but who are blinded by ignorance and have fallen into the ocean of existence. In consequence they are wrapped in the darkness of inferior views. In those beings the sunlight of the Buddha’s compassion illuminates insight and understanding. They expel the ocean of existence and clear away the darkness of delusion whereupon they see thatness, the true nature they never saw before. For this reason [the sun of the Buddha’s compassion] 
is especially excellent in terms of its function as well.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.6. The secret aspect of mind
B.II.
2.2.2.4.3.2.1.6.1. The way manifold wishes are accomplished without 
ideation
A wish-fulfilling gem, though free from thought,
grants all those who dwell in its field of activityeach of their desires simultaneously,doing so in the most perfect manner.Likewise beings of different ways of thinking,when they rely on the wish-fulfilling Buddha,will hear various kinds of teachings,though he generates no ideas of these.
A precious wish-fulﬁlling gem is totally free from any intention in 
terms of thinking: “I will give something to this [person]!” And yet 
when beings with different thoughts in mind dwell in the vicinity of its ﬁeld of activity and pray to it, it grants all their wishes simultane-ously and without exception. It 
fulﬁls each and every one of their 
desires, whatever they may be, such as nourishment, clothing, grain, medicine, a place of living, and so on, not getting mixed up and doing so in the most perfect manner. Likewise, the immeasurable number of disciples who, being endowed with the three kinds of disposition and so on, have different thoughts and aspirations, will also hear various teachings when they rely on the precious wish-fulﬁlling gem that is a 
perfect buddha. They will hear the teachings of the three vehicles and so on, corresponding to their individual karmic fortunes. Though he 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      271
fulﬁls the beneﬁts of all these disciples completely and in the most 
perfect manner, a buddha is totally free from ideation while giving these teachings. There is not the slightest intention in terms of thinking: “I will give this particular instruction to this [disciple]!”
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.6.2. The way there is continuous manifestation without 
deliberate effort
As a precious gem, which is free from thought, fully bestows
the desired riches on others, doing so without any effort,the Muni always stays for others’ sake, as merited by eachand as long as existences last, doing so without any effort.
A precious wish-fulﬁlling gem is free from any thought or intention. 
And [yet] it bestows on other beings who pray to it all riches and goods, 
no matter what they may desire, doing so without any effort or labor. Likewise buddhas, the Lords of Munis, stay in endless samsara, always and ever-presently, as long as existences may last. To accomplish the ﬁnal beneﬁt of the other beings who are to be trained, they teach the Dharma as it is suited to and merited by each, doing so without any effort or labor in terms of ideation and so on.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.6.3. Presentation of similarity in terms of being difficult to 
find
The good jewel lying underground or in the ocean
is very hard to find for beings wanting it.Likewise, one should understand that beings held in the grip 
of the poisons,
and whose karmic gifts are poor, will hardly see the Sugata in 
their minds.
A precious wish-fulﬁlling gem granting all desires and necessities is 
contained in the depth of the great ocean or lies hidden underground 
in the great earth. Because of this, beings of poor merit who desire the pure gem and look for it have extreme difﬁculty in ﬁnding it. Likewise, one should understand that it is extremely difﬁcult for the endless number of beings abiding in samsara to see the appearance of the two kayas of the Sugata in their own minds, which are bound up with pollution. This is because the karmic gifts of these beings are extremely poor and they are in the [iron] grip of various mental poisons and secondary afﬂictions.
272    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.7. The secret aspect of speech
Just as the sound of an echo arises
due to the perception of others,without thought or purposeful laborand neither abiding without or within,so the speech of the Tathagata arisesdue to the perception of others,without thought or purposeful laborand neither abiding without or within.
An echo resounding from a rock and so on comes into appearance 
as various sounds. Yet, in terms of its necessary condition it only 
appears and arises due to the perception or faculty of cognition of others—of those who hear it—and it does so in accordance with their very own way of expressing themselves. The rock and so forth in its turn is without any intentional thought or purposeful labor and effort. It does not think: “I will utter this particular thing to this particular person!” The own essence of the sound, furthermore, neither abides outside the rock and so on, nor does it abide within it. Likewise, when the Tathagatas expound the sacred Dharma, the sound of their speech comes into appearance as various tones. Yet, this also, in terms of the disciples, only appears and arises due to the perception of others—of those who listen to it—and it does so in accordance with their very own individual ways of thinking and frames of mind. A buddha in his turn is without the slightest thought or intention, and he is free from any deliberate effort or labor. A buddha does not think: “I will teach this particular subject to this particular person!” Furthermore, the own essence of the sound [of his speech] neither abides on the surface of nor within his body.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.8. The secret aspect of body
Space is nothing at all and does not appear.
It is neither an object [of the senses] nor a support.It is totally beyond being a path for the eye.It has no form and is not to be demonstrated.Nevertheless it is seen as being high and low,but it is not at all like that.Likewise all [his appearances] are seen as Buddha,but he is not at all like that.
Space does not exist as a thing at all and it does not appear to the 
sense faculties and consciousnesses. It does not exist as their object 
and is also not a supportive ground for them. In particular, it is totally 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      273
beyond being a path for the sense faculty of the eye. It does not exist 
as form obstructing [other things from being seen] and it cannot be demonstrated as another object in terms of being able to say: “It is this!” Uncreated space, which has these features, is seen in various ways. Some people perceive appearances arising in its middle as being high, and appearances arising at its fringe as being low. It is also seen in terms of shape and color. In actual fact, though, space appears as various things, but does not truly exist like that. Likewise all the illusory appearances, inﬁnite in number, demonstrating the twelve deeds and so on, which are due to the aspirations and ways of thinking of the disciples, are seen to exist as Buddha. In actual fact, though, the true and ultimate Buddha, which appears in various ways, as something that arises, ceases, and so on, does not really exist like that, because the true Buddha is unchanging.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.1.9. The way compassion manifests
Everything that grows from the earth
will increase and become firm and vaston the support of its thought-free soil.Likewise, relying on the Perfect Buddha,who [like] the earth is free from thought,every root of virtue of sentient beingswithout exception will flourish and grow.
All the fruit trees, groves, ﬂowers, and so on that grow from the 
great earth rely on the support of its ground, which is free from any 
deliberate effort or intention. The earth does not think: “I must gener-ate all these [plants]!” Relying 
on its thought-free soil, [vegetation] 
that has not been there before will grow and increase into something new, what was there before will develop ﬁrm and stable roots, and everything will ﬂourish, becoming ever more vast and expanded. For this reason the earth provides sustenance and the basis of living for sentient beings. A perfect buddha is similar to the great earth. Just like the earth, he is free from any deliberate effort or intention. A buddha does not think: “I must accomplish the beneﬁt of these [beings]!” When beings to be trained rely on this effortless and thought-free Victor, all the immeasurable crops of their roots of virtue, represented by the two accumulations, will increase, become stable and ﬁrm, vast and expanded. For this reason a buddha provides sustenance and the basis of living for all sentient beings, endless [in number].
274    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2. Summary of the meaning of this chapter by expressing its 
purpose
B.II.
2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1. The different kinds of the examples’ purpose and mean-
ing
B.I
I.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1.1. The way the immediate purpose and the intrinsic 
purpose is achieved
It is not obvious that one could act
without exerting deliberate effort.Therefore nine examples are taughtto cut the doubts of the disciples.The place where these nine exampleswere explained in very great detailis the sutra which through its very nameteaches their necessity and purpose.Adorned with the far-reaching lightof knowledge arisen from hearing it,those of insight will quickly enterthe field of experience of a buddha.
For ordinary beings it is not at all obvious that someone could act in 
spontaneous ways and that his actions could come about without the 
slightest need of deliberate effort and labor. Ordinary beings cannot see that, as such activity does not form an object of their understand-ing. For this r eason, 
doubts will arise when the disciples reﬂect: “If 
the activity of a buddha is free from deliberate effort, and [yet] acts in such a way that it spontaneously fulﬁls the beneﬁt of sentient beings, there is a contradiction!” In order to eliminate and cut such doubts, [arisen from] mental poisons, the nine examples of the reﬂection of Indra and so on are used to explain very clearly in what way action is carried out without involving deliberate effort. Furthermore, the place in the supreme words of the Buddha where the nine examples illustrating buddha activity along with their detailed reasons are fully and clearly explained, is the sutra named Adornment with the Light of 
Primordial Wisdom Entering the Domain of the Buddha (Skt. Sarvabud-
dha-vi�ay›vat›rajñ›n›lok›la˙k›ra-sÒtra; Tib. sangs rgyas kyi yul la 
 ’jug 
pa ye shes snang ba rgyan). In this sutra, the fact that there is a need to speak in examples and the way their intrinsic purposes are achieved are explained very well. It says there: 
Bodhisatttvas who have gained insight will understand these 
supreme words of the Buddha and the commentaries on their intended meaning. From hearing these, discriminative wisdom will arise, totally adorning these bodhisattvas by its utterly pure light, so that they quickly ﬁnd access to the domain of the activity 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      275
of a buddha. First they gain access to all the ways of accomplishing 
activity spontaneously and without deliberate effort by means of thought, [by means of the discriminative wisdoms arising from learning and reﬂection]. Then later, in the end, they will manifest [this feat] in terms of actually accomplishing it, [through the dis-criminative wisdom arising from meditation].
Thus there is the immediate purpose of cutting all doubts as to the ac-
tual 
way activity is, whereas in the long term there is also the purpose of 
actually entering the domain or the ﬁeld of experience of a buddha.
2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1.2. Presentation of a summary of the example and the mean-
ing
This point is made clear in the nine examples
of Indra’s reflection in lapis lazuli and so on.Their concise meaning, when grasped precisely,is to [illustrate] display [of physical form],speech, and the all-pervasiveness [of mind],illusory emanation, radiation of wisdom,the secret aspects of body, speech, and mind,and the fact that compassion itself is attained.
The nine examples of the reﬂection of Indra appearing in the pure 
lapis lazuli ground and so on are expressed in great detail in the forego-
ing s
ections in order to illustrate what is meant by activity unfolding 
with o
ut deliberate effort. When grasped precisely, the concise meaning 
of what is shown by the examples can be explained as follows:
 (1) Th r
ough the example of Indra the display of the illusory 
manifestation of the body is explained.
 (2) The drum illustrates speech expr essing the sacr
ed Dharma.
 (3) The clouds clarify [the way in which] mind is all-pervasive 
by means of knowledge and compassionate love.
 (4) Br a
hma stands for the illusory emanation of body and 
speech.
 (5) Th e
 sun illustrates the mind radiating the light rays of primor-
dial wisdom.
 (6-8) Th r
ough the jewel, the echo, and space the three secret aspects 
are explained: the jewel represents the secret of mind, the echo 
that of speech, and space that of the body.
 (9) The example of the earth explains that the embodiment of great comp 
assion is attained, fully constituting the basis and ground 
of all qualities. This attainment provides sustenance and the basis of living for all sentient beings, limitless in number.
276    Buddha Nature
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1.3. Applying the examples in three ways
All streams of effort being fully appeased
and the mind being free from all ideationis similar to Indra’s reflection appearingwithin stainless lapis lazuli and so forth.Appeasement of effort is the proposition;mind free from ideation its justification.In order to establish the meaning of this nature
the similes of Indra’s form and so on are given.
When perfect buddhas accomplish the benefit of others, they 
manifest in such a way that all streams or channels of deliberate effort 
involving a focus [of perception] are totally appeased without any exception. This is because ﬁnal and ultimate compassion, which is by nature clear light, has revealed itself directly. This compassion is such that all thoughts are totally eliminated, and it is without any ideation. This is similar to the example of the reﬂection of Indra, the lord of the gods, appearing in the world of humans once the ground has turned into ﬂawless lapis lazuli. Here, as in the other examples, action takes place though there is no exertion of deliberate effort. [Buddha activity is to be understood] accordingly. In this context, with the statement: “All streams of deliberate effort involving a focus [of perception] are totally appeased” the proposition or thesis (Tib. dam bca’) is evolved. 
And the statement: “since the ﬁnal and ultimate mind free from all ideation has revealed itself directly” constitutes the justiﬁcation or proof of this thesis (Tib. gtan tshigs). In order to establish the meaning 
of a nature that represents spontaneous accomplishment of the beneﬁt of others, and yet is free from any deliberate effort whatsoever, as an object of understanding of the disciples, there are the examples of the reﬂection of Indra, the sound of the great drum, and so on, as given in 
the foregoing sections. Through these this nature is illustrated.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.1.4. The meaning of the chapter is freedom from deliberate 
effort
Here the meaning of the chapter is as follows:
The nine aspects of physical display and so on
[show] that the Teacher has no birth and death,and yet perfectly manifests without any effort.
Here, in this chapter treating buddha activity, its meaning illustrated 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      277
by means of examples is as follows: Through the nine points  explained 
before (i.e. the aspects of display of illusory physical appearance, 
verbalizing instruction, and so on), the Teachers, the perfect buddhas, are shown to perfectly manifest, though they are free from being born, dying, and so on—they are rid of all compounded phenomena. Never-thele
ss they manifest in such a way that they accomplish activity for the 
disciples, doing so without there being any ideation, deliberate effort, or labor in terms of having to think: “I should do this or that!”
B.II.
2.2.2.4.3.2.2.2. Specifically explaining the way it has been shown by  
examples
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.2.1. The different kinds of examples
Something that, similar to Indra, the drum, clouds, Brahma,
the sun, the precious king of wish-granting gems, an echo, 
space,
and the earth, effortlessly and as long as existence may lastfulfils others’ benefit is only conceived of by [supreme] yogis.
Buddha activity is something spontaneous and uninterrupted. It is 
explained in nine examples that illustrate it quite closely. In these it is 
shown as being similar to the reﬂection of Indra, to the sound of the great drum, to the way in which clouds pervade the sky, to the illusory emanation of Brahma, to the light rays of the sun, to a mighty king of supremely precious wish-fulﬁlling gems, to an echo resounding from a rock, and so on: that is, to the great element of space, and to the ground of the earth, which provides the support for everything else. The way in which activity unfolds, accomplishing the beneﬁt of others in such a way that it is spontaneous and free from deliberate effort, and at the same time uninterrupted, [not ceasing] as long as the existences of endless samsara may last, is [only] conceived of by those yogis who are utterly supreme [i.e. a buddha himself]. For ordinary beings, though, it is inconceivable.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.2.2.2. Explanation in combination with their meaning
[Kayas] are displayed like the Lord of Gods appearing [in]  
the gem.
Explanation being well bestowed resembles the drum of  
the gods.
With 
cloud-hosts of insight and deep concern, the All-Embrac-
ing
278    Buddha Nature
pervades the limitless number of beings up to existence’s 
peak.
Like Brahma, not moving from his sphere devoid of pollution,
he pe
rfectly displays a manifold number of illusory appear-
ances.
Like a sun, primordial wisdom perfectly radiates its brilliance.
Buddha mind resembles a pure and precious wish-fulfilling 
jewel.
Buddh
a speech has no letters, like an echo resounding from 
rock.
Simil
ar to space, his body is pervasive, formless, and perma-
nent.
Like the earth, a buddha is the ground holding without excep-
tion
and in any way all medicinal herbs of beings’ unstained quali-
ties.
Perfect buddhas fulﬁll the beneﬁt of others in the following way:
(1) The reﬂection of Indra, the lord of the gods, appears in the 
human world when the ground there has changed into a surface of precious lapis lazuli. Similar to this example there is the appearance of physical form. A buddha, without moving from the dharmakaya, displays an endless number of illusory form kayas to disciples who have karmic fortune.
(2) Likewise, in or der 
to incite those not practicing meditation to 
do so, and to fully liberate those who practice meditation, there is the advice of speech. The way in which the teaching resulting from this advice is well explained is similar to the great drum of the gods expounding the Four Great Guiding Principles of Dharma.
(3) Buddhas embody pervasiveness in that their minds embrace all 
the knowable. Thus there is primordial wisdom that knows correctly and completely. They have great compassionate concern, consisting of the wish to free [all sentient beings] from the suffering of samsara. Filled with this wish they are like hosts of clouds reaching everywhere. Their manifestations pervade all sentient beings, all their disciples beyond any count, wherever they dwell, up to the peak of existence.
(4) Just as Brahma shows appearance in the desire realm without 
moving away from the realm of form, a buddha perfectly displays a manifold number of different physical and verbal appearances in ac-cordance with his own 
aspiration, and yet does not move away at all 
from the unpolluted abode of the dharmadhatu.
(5) As the sun disperses the brilliance of its light rays, a buddha 
based upon primordial wisdom perfectly radiates brilliant light rays 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      279
of the sacred Dharma, beyond any end in number.
(6) A buddha has the inconceivable secret aspect of mind which, 
though totally free from ideation, grants all wishes and needs. In this 
respect there is similarity to a supremely precious wish-fulﬁlling jewel, 
which is utterly pure and free from stain.
(7) Just like an echo resounding from a rock and so on, the secret 
aspect of the speech of all perfect buddhas is heard in various ways, 
and yet does not exist as the essence of letters [the basis of words and names].
(8) T 
he secret aspect of the body is similar to space in that it pervades 
everything, is permanent, and appears in various shapes and so on, and yet does not exist as form.
(9) A 
s the earth provides the basis for the arising and growth of crops 
and so on, a buddha is the basis for all medicinal plants without excep-tion, 
 these being the unstained virtuous qualities of all sentient beings, 
immeasurable in number. Buddhas provide the ground that makes all these crops ﬂourish in the streams of being of the disciples, making them ﬁrm, stable, wide, and expanded in every respect. Such is the attainment of the level of all buddhas who are endowed with great compassion; it represents a total transformation of state in every respect and without exception. (See also Part Three, annotation 79.)
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3. Specific explanation through a very condensed summary
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.1. The way there is 
appearance and yet freedom from birth 
and death
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.1.1. The example of [dependence on] faculties
The cause for the Buddha to be seen in the mind
similar to pure lapis lazuliis the purity of this ground,[achieved] by a firm faculty of irreversible faith.Since virtue arises and ceases,the form of a buddha arises and ceases.Like Indra, the Muni who is dharmakayais free from arising and ceasing.
If buddhas are always free from arising and ceasing, one may won-
der for what reason 
they are seen as if they were arising and ceasing. 
Based upon the gathering of the roots of virtue, the surface of the earth 
transforms into pure lapis lazuli. The kaya of all perfect buddhas will be clearly seen in one’s own mind once the mind has become lucid and free from pollution, being thus [comparable to] the pure lapis lazuli. The cause of this seeing, or in other words, the means that purify the 
280    Buddha Nature
mind, are the faculties of faith and so on (i.e. of diligence, mindfulness, 
samadhi, and discriminative wisdom) having become extremely ﬁrm and stable through no longer being reversed by anything belonging to the unconducive side, such as lack of conﬁdence and so on. In the 
context [of the example], the reﬂection will appear and disappear due to th
e surface of the earth being pure or impure, respectively. Similarly 
the roots of virtue of the disciples, their faith and other qualities, arise and cease. Due to this arising and ceasing, respectively, the relative form kayas of all buddhas appear as if they were arising and ceasing. Nevertheless, the own essence of Indra does not move away from the thirty-three [divine] abodes. Likewise the omniscient Muni is the ulti-mate dharmakaya, which does not 
suffer any change. For this reason 
the own essence of a buddha is free from arising and ceasing.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.1.2. The way it is free from birth and death, since it is 
uninterrupted
Effortlessly, like [Indra] he manifests his deeds,
displaying [physical appearance] and so forth,from birthless and deathless dharmakayafor as long as samsaric existence may last.
Further, one may wonder for what reason activity emerges effort-
lessl
y and uninterruptedly. Though Indra and the other examples 
are free from deliberate effort, they bring about the beneﬁt of others 
through their reﬂection shining forth and so on. Likewise, all buddhas are also free from any kind of deliberate effort in terms of ideation, intention, and so on. They do not depart from birthless and deathless dharmakaya, which has immediately revealed itself. In this effortless and unmoving way they manifest their spontaneous deeds uninter-ruptedly and ever -pr
esently, as long as samsara is not emptied and 
the endless existences of the disciples may last. They display illusory appearances through [the aspect of] body, express instruction through [the aspect of] speech, pervade everything with their knowledge and compassionate love through [the aspect of] mind, and so on.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.2. The way there is special excellence superior to the cor-
responding property
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.2.1. Concise presentation
The condensed meaning of the examples is [contained] herein.
Their order is also [not arbitrary], as they are abandoned suchthat properties not in tune are eliminated
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      281
[progressing] from the former to the latter.
The brieﬂy condensed meaning of the nine examples illustrating 
buddha activity and their detailed explanation has been elucidated 
by the [foregoing] sections. In addition to that it is also explained here that there is a deﬁnitive cause for presenting them in this order, for the latter being elucidated after the former. In this context the respective preceding examples are not able to illustrate buddha activity to its full extent. Whatever aspect is a non-corresponding property is gradually eliminated by the following examples. Thus it is expressed by teaching in terms of corresponding qualities.
B.II.2.2.2.4.3.2.3.2.2. Detailed explanation
A buddha is like the reflection, and yet dissimilar,
since the reflection is not endowed with his melody.He is like the drum of the gods, and yet dissimilar,since the drum does not bring benefit everywhere.He is similar to a vast cloud, and yet dissimilar,since a cloud does not eliminate worthless seeds.He is like the mighty Brahma, and yet dissimilar,since Brahma does not continuously cause maturity.He is like the orb of the sun, and yet dissimilar,since the sun does not always overcome darkness.He is like a wish-granting gem, and yet dissimilar,since the gem’s appearance is not so rarely found.He is similar to an echo, and yet dissimilar,since an echo arises from cause and condition.He is similar to space, and yet dissimilar,since space is not a ground of pure virtue.Being the lasting basis for every goodness,the best possible for all without exception,for worldly beings and those beyond the world,[activity] is similar to the mandala of earth.Because based upon all buddhas’ enlightenment,the path beyond the world will arise, as willthe path of virtuous deeds, mental stability, andthe immeasurable and formless contemplations.
(1) The unfolding of the activity of all perfect buddhas is similar to 
the reﬂection of Indra appearing in the lapis lazuli surface of the earth, 
inasmuch as an endless number of illusory physical manifestations is displayed. Nevertheless, the form [of Indra] does not wield a melody, whereas a buddha possesses the melody of his speech expounding 
282    Buddha Nature
the Dharma. For this reason there is a dissimilarity and [a buddha] is 
more excellent than that.
(2) [Buddha activity] is similar to the great drum of the gods teach-
ing the Four Guiding Principles 
of Dharma, inasmuch as through the 
melody of his speech expounding the Dharma various instructions are 
given. Nevertheless, the great drum is not such that it brings beneﬁt in whichever direction wished for, whereas a buddha accomplishes beneﬁt pervading all the worlds of the disciples. For this reason there is again a dissimilarity and [a buddha] is more excellent than that.
(3) Viewing the aspect that it pervades all world spheres, buddha 
activity, which matures all disciples by means of knowledge and compassionate love, has properties similar to those of a vast cloud, which all-pervasively causes the ripening of crops. Nevertheless, a cloud does not eliminate worthless seeds, whereas a buddha causes the elimination of everything that is worthless, of all afﬂictions such as desire and so on. For this reason there is a further dissimilarity and [a buddha] is more excellent than that.
(4) Viewing the aspect of eliminating worthless seeds, the display 
of an endless number of illusory appearances is similar to the illusory manifestation of Mahabrahma eliminating the attachment to sense gratiﬁcations. Nevertheless, Brahma only brings beneﬁt one time and thus does not continuously cause maturity, whereas a buddha always and uninterruptedly leads the disciples’ streams of being to full maturation. For this reason there is again a dissimilarity and [a buddha] is more excellent than that.
(5) Viewing the aspect that all crops, which are the disciples, are 
continuously lead to maturation, the radiation of an inﬁnite number of light rays of primordial wisdom is similar to the orb of the sun con-tinuo
usly ripening all crops by means of its light beams. Nevertheless, 
the sun only shines alternately. It does not always overcome darkness, doing so day and night, whereas a buddha always and uninterruptedly overcomes the darkness of unknowing. For this reason, again there is a dissimilarity and [a buddha] is more excellent than that.
(6) Viewing the aspect of darkness being overcome continuously, 
the secret aspect of mind, radiating the light of totally thought-free primordial wisdom, is similar to a wish-fulﬁlling gem that through its brilliance continuously overcomes darkness, doing so day and night. Nevertheless, the jewel being present among Nagas and so on, and even among animals, its occurrence is not so hard to ﬁnd, whereas a 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      283
buddha does not appear to sentient beings who lack karmic fortune 
and is thus very hard to ﬁnd [for those beings]. For this reason there is another dissimilarity and [a buddha] is more excellent than that.
(7) Viewing the aspect of his appearance being difﬁcult to encounter, 
the secret aspect of speech excellently explaining various teachings is similar to an echo being difﬁcult to encounter, since it does not truly 
exist either outside or inside [its source]. Nevertheless, an echo occurs in dependence on adventitious conditions, whereas a buddha, being self-sprung and uncreated, does not appear due to causes and condi-tions. For this r eason 
there is a further dissimilarity and [a buddha] is 
more excellent than that.
(8) Viewing the aspect that [buddha activity] is truly uncreated and 
does not arise from causes and conditions, the secret aspect of body, displaying an inﬁnite number of totally illusory manifestations, is similar to space, which appears as a variety of things and is yet un-created. Nevertheless, space does 
not become a basis or ground for 
virtue, whereas a buddha becomes the basis or ground of all unstained virtuous properties. For this reason there is again a dissimilarity and [a buddha] is more excellent than that.
(9) [Buddha activity] becomes the basis and lasting ground of every 
goodness without exception, of everything that is best for worldly be-ings and beings beyond the 
worldly. For this reason it is similar to the 
great mandala of the earth, which provides the basis for everything. One may wonder why [a buddha] forms the ground of all [goodness]. This is because the attainment of the great enlightenment of all bud-dhas constitutes the basis on 
which the sacred teachings arise. These 
consist of the three vehicles and so on, constituting the path that leads beyond the worldly. As it is stated in the Madhyamakavatara (Tib. dbu ma 
la ’jug pa): “. . .the shravakas, the mediocre buddhas, and the Lords of Munis [i.e. pratyekabuddhas and perfect buddhas] will arise.” Based upon this [great enlightenment], the paths of the ten virtuous actions 
284    Buddha Nature
will arise, constituting the cause of the best possible [feat] of the desire 
realm. The four stages of meditative stability and the immeasurable contemplations will come about, constituting the cause of the best possible [achievement] of the realm of form. And the formless states of resting evenly in meditative equipoise, constituting the cause of the best possible [feat] of the formless realm, will arise as well. (See also Part Three, annotation 80.)
♦ This was the section “Unfolding the Activity of the Tathagata,” the 
fourth chapter of The Commentary on the Highest Continuity of the Ma-
hayana Dharma which Analyzes the 
Disposition of the Rare and Sublime 
Ones.
With this the complete 
explanation of the fourth chapter, teaching 
the unfolding of the activity of the Tathagata, is achieved.
CHAPTER  FIVE
Benefit
B.II.3. Conclusion of the explanationB.II.3.1. BenefitB.II.3.1.1. Presentation of the meaning being inconceivable
Buddha element, buddha awakening,
buddha qualities, and buddha activitycannot be thought, not even by purified beings.They are the field of experience of their guides.
The phase in which the naturally pure buddha element is bound up 
with the adventitious stains is the tathagatagarbha [or heart of buddha]. 
The phase in which this buddha element is completely and thoroughly puriﬁed from all the adventitious stains is the attainment of the great awakening or enlightenment of a buddha. Great enlightenment has all buddha qualities, those special properties which are the powers and so on, possessing them in an indivisible way. Through the force provided by the attainment of these qualities, there is the activity accomplishing the deeds of a buddha spontaneously and without interruption. These four vajra points are in accordance with and accomplish the Three Jewels [of Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha] in their likeness. Their true and actual way of being cannot even be thought by those beings who 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      285
are to a certain extent completely puriﬁed from the adventitious stains 
and thus dwell on one of the bodhisattva levels. When this is so, what need is there to consider how they might be viewed by ordinary beings, shravakas, and pratyekabuddhas? For them they are inconceivable, 
as has been explained before. Then one may wonder: Whose ﬁeld of experience are these four vajra points? They emerge as the ﬁeld of experience of the primordial wisdom exclusively native to perfect buddhas, the guides of all sentient beings.
B.II.3.1.2. Short teaching of its qualities
Those of insight who have devotion to this buddha domain
will become vessels for the multitude of all buddha qualities,while those truly delighting in these inconceivable propertieswill exceed in merit [the good actions of] all sentient beings.
Those bodhisattvas of insight who have special devotion to these 
four points, which are the ﬁeld of experience of the primordial wisdom 
exclusively native to perfect buddhas, will become vessels for the im-measurable multitude of buddha qualities, 
such as the powers and so 
on. The Mahayana disposition being awakened, they will quickly attain the ﬁnal ultimate fruit. The beneﬁts of being especially devoted to and truly delighting in these four points, which possess a multitude of unimaginable qualities, are extremely great in number. For this reason ordinary beings will also exceed all those who have no connection with these [four vajra points]. Without exception, they will surpass all their accumulations of merit sprung from generosity and so forth.
B.II.3.1.3. Explanation of its special excellence in comparison with generosity 
and two further [virtues]
B.II.3.1.3.1. Explanation in comparison with generosity
Someone striving for enlightenment may turn to the Dharma 
kings, offering golden fields adorned with gems
of equal [number] to the atoms in the buddhafields, and may 
continue doing so every day.
Another may just hear a word of this, and upon hearing it 
become filled with devotion.
He will attain merits far greater and more manifold than the 
virtue sprung from this practice of giving.
Some generous person striving for enlightenment may offer ﬁelds 
made of gold adorned with gems to all buddhas, to all Dharma kings. 
These [offerings] may be equal in number to the number of atoms in 
286    Buddha Nature
the buddhaﬁelds, and he may do so continuously, each single day. As 
opposed to the merit [arising from] this offering and so on, another person may just hear one single word of the sublime words of the Buddha that teach the four vajra points. Yet, upon hearing it, he may 
be ﬁlled with devotion and thereby gain conviction with regard to them. When this happens, this [person] will attain supreme merit by far greater and much more manifold than the virtue sprung from the generosity of the former.
B.II.3.1.3.2. Explanation in comparison with moral conduct
An intelligent person wishing for enlightenment may by body, 
speech, and mind
guard a flawless moral conduct and do so effortlessly, even 
through many eons.
Another may just hear a word of this, and upon hearing it 
become filled with devotion.
He will attain merits far greater and more manifold than the 
virtue sprung from this discipline.
An intelligent person who wishes to attain unsurpassable enlight-
enment may by means of 
the three aspects of body, speech, and mind 
guard his own ethical conduct ﬂawlessly, without any stain from 
breaking moral discipline. He may even do so throughout many kalpas. Another person may just hear one single word of the sublime words of the Buddha that teach the four vajra points. Yet, upon hearing it, he may be ﬁlled with devotion, being ﬁrmly convinced of them. When this happens, this [person] will attain supreme merit that is by far greater and much more manifold than the virtue sprung from the moral discipline of the former.
B.II.3.1.3.3. Explanation in comparison with meditative stability
Someone here may finally achieve the divine meditative sta-
bilities and Brahma’s abode, thus quenching all 
affliction’s fire
within the three realms of existence, and may cultivate these as 
a means to reach unchanging and perfect enlightenment.
Another may just hear a word of this, and upon hearing it 
become filled with devotion.
He will attain merits far greater and more manifold than the 
virtue sprung from this meditation.
An intelligent person here in this world may have ﬁnally perfected 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      287
the four meditative stabilities that are the abode of the gods and the 
four limitless contemplations that are the abode of Brahma. He may have led them to their peak and may have cultivated them as a means leading to unchanging perfect enlightenment. Another person may just hear one single word of this, yet upon hearing it, may be ﬁlled with devotion. When this happens, this [person] will attain beneﬁt and merit by far greater and much more manifold than the virtue sprung from the meditative stability of the former.
B.II.3.1.4. Presentation of the reason for this excellence
Why [is it so beneficial]? Generosity only yields wealth,
discipline leads to the higher states of existence, and  
meditation removes affliction.
Discriminative wisdom fully abandons all afflictions and 
[hindrances to] knowledge.
It is therefore supreme, and its cause is studying these.
One may wonder why it has such great beneﬁt. When not held by 
discriminative wisdom, extensive generosity will only yield mate-
rial wealth, extensive discipline will 
only lead to the higher states of 
existence, and meditation will only remove the afﬂictions in terms of suppressing them and keeping them down. As opposed to that, the discriminative wisdom realizing the four vajra points totally abandons all the veils of the afﬂictions and hindrances to knowledge along with their remaining imprints. For this reason, discriminative wisdom realizing the profound ultimate nature is supremacy itself, and by far more excellent than generosity and so on. Therefore, there are special beneﬁts of a training in the frame of which one studies and reﬂects upon the sublime words of the Buddha teaching the four vajra points. This is due to the fact that there is only one cause for the realization represented by the discriminative wisdom, which is far more excellent than the virtue resulting from the three [practices] of generosity and so on. This single cause consists of studying the sublime words of the Buddha teaching the four vajra points, of thereupon having faith in them, and training oneself [as to their meaning].
B.II.3.1.5. Very detailed explanation of the benefit
B.II.3.1.5.1. Attainment of enlightenment
The presence [of the element], its result,
its qualities, and the achievement of benefitare the objects of understanding of a buddha.When towards these four, as explained above,
288    Buddha Nature
one of understanding is filled with devotion
to their presence, ability, and qualities,he will be quickly endowed with the fortuneby which one attains the state of a tathagata.
The element forming the ground to be realized, which has been pres-
ent since beginningless time, enlightenment, 
which is the realization 
transforming the element’s state, the qualities, which are the branches 
of enlightenment, and its action, which is the activity accomplishing the beneﬁt of others, are the objects of understanding of a buddha. Those bodhisattvas possessed of understanding who train themselves in an unperverted way with regard to these four points, as explained above, will quickly harvest the beneﬁt of attaining enlightenment. Devotion towards the fact that the element is present in all sentient beings, that it wields the ability of reaching enlightenment, and that enlightenment has been indivisibly endowed with qualities since beginningless time, will transform into the karmic fortune of quickly 
attaining the state of a tathagata.
B.II.3.1.5.2. Firm bodhichitta
Those who realize: “This inconceivable object is present
and someone like me can attain it;its attainment will hold such qualities and endowment”will aspire to it, filled with faith.Thus becoming vessels of all qualities,such as longing, diligence, mindfulness,meditative stability, wisdom, and so on,bodhichitta will be ever-present in them.
“This element is present within myself and someone like me has the 
ability to attain enlightenment. Due to the attainment of enlightenment, 
qualities will emerge such as the powers and so on, and sprung from these there will be endowment with activity fulﬁlling beneﬁt [for each and every one].” Those who derive such insight from the four profound [vajra] points, which are objects inconceivable to ordinary beings, will aspire to them, ﬁlled with the three kinds of faith. Thus they will become vessels for manifold qualities. There will be heartfelt longing in terms of the wish to attain enlightenment, and diligence inspired by delight in enlightenment. There will be mindfulness preventing one from forgetting the means to enlightenment, and meditative stability that is one-pointed as to these means. There will be discriminative 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      289
wisdom perfectly and thoroughly discerning all phenomena, and so 
on. In those bodhisattvas who are devoted to and realize these four vajra points, bodhichitta, which consists of the wish to attain perfect enlightenment for the sake of all other fellow beings, will be ever-pres-
ent and ingrained.
B.II.3.1.5.3. Attainment of complete perfection
[Bodhichitta] being ever-present in them
the heirs of the Victor will not fall back.The perfection of merit will be refineduntil being transformed into total purity.Once these five perfections of meritare not ideated in threefold division,they will become perfect and fully pure,as their opposite facets are abandoned.
Since bodhichitta, as explained before, is ever-present in them, the 
heirs of the Victor will not fall back from unsurpassable enlightenment. 
Wholeheartedly inspired and uplifted 
by this particular motivation 
they will fully reﬁne the ﬁrst ﬁve perfections, and transform these into total purity. The ﬁrst ﬁve perfections represent the aspect of application or the accumulation of merit, of generosity, and so on, constituting the means to be of beneﬁt and help to all sentient beings. Then further, not ideating the three circles of actor, action, and the one towards whom the action is directed, these perfections are reﬁned into supremacy. And they will become utterly pure, as the veils of their opposite sides, such as avarice being the contrary of generosity and so forth, are totally and radically abandoned.
B.II.3.1.5.4. Definition of the accumulations
The merit of generosity arises from giving,
that of morality arises from moral conduct.The two aspects of patience and meditative stabilitystem from meditation, and diligence accompanies all.
Formerly, merit was explained as the three aspects of generosity, 
ethical conduct, and meditation. So one may wonder whether it does 
not follow that, of the six perfections, three are to be considered as the accumulation of merit and three as the accumulation of primordial wisdom. The ﬁrst ﬁve perfections are considered as being the ac-
290    Buddha Nature
cumulation of merit. The merit arisen from giving is the perfection of 
generosity, and the merit arisen from ethical conduct is the perfection of morality. Both aspects of patience and meditative stability are the merit sprung from meditation. Diligence accompanies all three aspects of merit [as mentioned here].
B.II.3.1.5.5. Elimination of the veils
B.II.3.1.5.5.1. Depiction of the veils to be abandoned
Whatever ideates [in terms of] the three circles
is viewed as the veil of the hindrances to knowledge.Whatever is the impulse of avarice and so onis to be regarded as the veil of the mental poisons.
When it is said: “Discriminative wisdom totally abandons all the 
afﬂictions and [hindrances to] knowledge,” one may wonder which 
are the two veils to be abandoned by discriminative wisdom. Any ideation in terms of the three circles—of the giver, the object to whom one is giving, and the action of giving—and so forth is considered to be the veil of the hindrances to knowledge. It constitutes the obstruction to the ﬁrst ﬁve paramitas becoming fully perfected. Any ideation of avarice, desire, anger, sloth, total distraction, and so on is considered to be the veil of the mental poisons. It constitutes the obstruction to the ﬁrst ﬁve perfections becoming totally pure. Thus these [two veils] are to be abandoned.
B.II.3.1.5.5.2. Explanation of wisdom being the supreme remedy
Since apart from discriminative wisdom
there is no other cause to remove these [veils],this discriminative wisdom is supreme.Its ground being study, such study is supreme.
Since it realizes points such as those [discussed here] in the most 
excellent way, apart from discriminative wisdom there is no other 
cause that will eliminate the two veils at their very root. Generosity and so on, when devoid of discriminative wisdom, can only suppress the direct manifestation of the veils but cannot eliminate them to the extent of uprooting their seeds. As opposed to that, the perfection of discriminative wisdom has the ability to eliminate the seeds of the two veils and their remaining imprints up to their very root. For this reason, discriminative wisdom, which forms the accumulation of primordial wisdom, is supreme and more excellent than the ﬁve perfections of 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      291
merit. The ground that will increase such discriminative wisdom is 
learning the sublime words of the Buddha, which teach subjects such as these four vajra points, along with the commentaries explaining their intended meaning, and doing so in the proper fashion. Although the merit resulting from generosity, ethical conduct, and meditation is extremely manifold, the wisdom of learning a profound teaching such as this is by far more excellent.
B.II.3.2. The way the commentary was composed
B.II.3.2.1. The reason for its composition
Based on the trustworthy words of the Buddha and on  
scriptures of logic,
I have explained this for the sole purpose
of purifying myself and supporting all thosewhose understanding has the best of virtue and devotion.
The way in which the seven vajra points have been taught in the 
foregoing sections is not my own artiﬁce or the selﬁsh product of not 
heeding any instructions. It is based upon many sutras containing the trustworthy words of the Buddha, such as the Sutra Requested by King 
Dharanishvara and so on. Equally it is based on direct recognition in yoga, and on many logical 
arguments that cut all exaggerative and 
depreciating [views]. I have composed this Commentary on the Highest 
Continuity in a meaningful way [for two reasons. The ﬁrst is] to purify the nature of the veils up to the last single seed and remaining imprint. [The second is] to support all those disciples who have the disposition to the Great Vehicle and whose understanding is endowed with the best possible virtue of devotion.
B.II.3.2.2. The basis on which it was composed
As someone with eyes sees by relying on a lamp,
or on lightning, a jewel, the sun, or the moon,this has been truly explained by relying on the Muni,brilliant in meaning, words, phenomena, and power.
Relying on the outer primary condition, which is the light of a butter-
lamp, of lightning, a gem, the sun, or the moon, an individual endowed 
with a clear consciousness of sight, forming the inner primary condi-tion, will perceive visible 
things. Seeing them in an unperverted way 
this individual can also explain them to others. Likewise this Commen-
tary 
on the Highest Continuity has been well explained by relying on the 
sublime words of the Muni as the outer primary condition. The Muni 
292    Buddha Nature
is endowed with insight into all knowable phenomena by radiating 
the light of the four kinds of individual and authentic awareness (Tib. so so yang dag par rig pa bzhi). [The ﬁrst of these four is] individual and authentic awareness of the meaning (Tib. don), which is equivalent to 
knowing the intrinsic and general 
characteristics of all phenomena. 
[The second is] individual and authentic awareness of the words (Tib. tshig), which is equivalent to knowing all denotations without excep-tion.
 [The third is] individual and authentic awareness of phenomena, 
which is equivalent to knowing all synonymous names without excep-tion. 
 [The fourth is] individual and authentic awareness of self-reliance 
and fearless power (Tib. spobs), which is equivalent to knowing all 
knowable objects in an unhinder
ed and unobstructed way. The inner 
primary condition that was relied upon [when composing this text] is the immediate seeing of the tathagatagarbha by means of the eye of discriminative wisdom. (See also Part Three, annotation 81.)
B.II.3.2.3. Definition of the words of the Buddha
Whatever speech is meaningful and well connected with 
Dharma,
which removes all afflictions of the three realms
and shows the benefit of the [attainment] of peace,is the speech of the Sage, while any different speech is other.
Any exalted speech having the four following particular properties 
is the command of the Victorious One, the sublime speech of the Great 
Sage, the Buddha: Whatever is expressed holds great meaning and beneﬁt. The words that are the means of expression are well connected with stainless Dharma. Its function is such that it causes elimination of all the afﬂictions of the three realms of existence. It demonstrates the fruit, showing the beneﬁt of nirvana as being peace, [the state beyond any torment and pain]. Any speech connecting one with [the elimina-tion of all afﬂiction and 
the attainment of peace] is equivalent to the 
sacred words of the Buddha. As opposed to that, anything else, since it is different from his command, should not be followed.
B.II.3.2.4. Explanation that everything according with the Buddha’s words 
should be accepted
Whatever someone has explained with undistracted mind,
exclusively in the light of the Victor’s teaching,and conducive to the path of attaining release,one should place on one’s head as the words of the Sage.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      293
Whichever scriptures have been composed by an author with un-
distr
acted mind, solely in the light of the Victor’s teaching, exclusively 
expressing its meaning, and thus elucidating all the words of the Bud-
dha a
nd granting excellent explanation conducive to the attainment of 
the fruit, which is the path leading to liberation, should be placed on the head as the words of the Sage, of the Buddha himself. The reason is that these completely pure scriptures, which comment the intended meaning of the [Buddha’s words], are in the likeness of these words themselves.
B.II.3.2.5. One should not teach contradicting the Buddha’s words
There is no one in this world more skilled in Dharma than the 
Victor.
No other has such insight, knowing everything without excep-
tion [and knowing] supreme thatness the way it is.
Thus one should not distort the sutras presented by the Sage 
himself,
since this would destroy the Muni’s manner [of teaching] and 
furthermore cause harm to the sacred Dharma.
Compared to the Victor, the Perfect Buddha, there is no one in this 
world as skilled in Dharma. There is no other who has such knowledge 
consisting of the primordial wisdom that directly knows all aspects, perceiving them the way they are and in an unperverted manner. The Buddha’s primordial wisdom knows completely and knows cor-rectly. Thus he 
knows the whole range of the knowable, as much as 
there is, without any exception, and he knows everything as it is, in terms of supreme thatness. For this reason whichever sutras the great Sage himself has presented in terms of a deﬁnitive and a provisional meaning should not be adulterated and explained in a false way. They should not be distorted through self-styled artiﬁces, such as calling a meaning requiring interpretation a deﬁnitive meaning, and a deﬁnitive meaning a provisional one. For if one does so, the way in which the Perfect Buddha [has expounded] his pure teaching will be destroyed. One will further cause harm to the sacred Dharma and fall into the great evil of abandoning it.
B.II.3.2.6. Explanation of the fault of contradiction
B.II.3.2.6.1. Defining how the Dharma is abandonedB.II.
3.2.6.1.1. Explanation of how it is abandoned due to the condition of one’s 
stream of being
Those blinded by poisons [and possessed of] the nature of 
294    Buddha Nature
ignorance
revile the noble ones and despise the teachings they have 
spoken.
Since all this stems from a fixated view, mind should not be 
joined with polluted vision.
Clean cloth is totally transformed by color, but never is cloth 
[to be treated] with oil.
Those who are blinded by their mental poisons and possessed of the 
nature of ignorance revile the noble ones who are special objects [of 
veneration], and despise the teachings these noble ones have spoken. All of this is produced by an inferior view ﬁxated upon one’s very own doctrine. Since any holding on to inferior tenets twists what is self-sprung into something bound up with pollution, one should not join one’s mind with such ﬁxed and opinionated view. It is suitable, for instance, to transform a clean cloth that is free from stains through color 
into various hues, but it is not suitable to [treat] such cloth with oil.
B.II.3.2.6.1.2. The ten direct causes for abandoning the Dharma
Due to a feeble intellect, lack of striving for virtue, reliance  
on false pride,
a nature obscured by neglect of pure Dharma, taking the provi-
sional for the definitive meaning—for thatness, craving for 
profit,
being under the sway of [inferior] views, relying on those  
disapproving [of Dharma], staying away from those who uphold the teachings,
and due to mean devotion, the teachings of the Foe- 
Vanquishers are abandoned.
It is taught [in the scriptures]: “Thus the deﬁnitive meaning, the 
ﬁnal and ultimate essence of the teachings of the Great Vehicle, is 
supremely profound and possesses great beneﬁt.” This being so, one might wonder: How could anyone not have devotion and thus totally abandon it? This is not the fault of the Dharma but the fault of such an individual. This relates to the fact that a person will abandon the sacred Dharma for the following [ten] reasons:
(1) Discriminative wisdom thoroughly investigating the profound 
meaning is faint and a person’s understanding and intellectual capac-ity ar e extremely feeble.
(2) Since the 
disposition to be expanded has not been awakened, 
there is total lack of striving for unstained virtuous properties.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      295
(3) A person relies on false pride, nourishing the conceited idea: “I 
have qualities!” while what he believes to be a quality is not one at 
all.
(4) In former lives a 
person has accumulated the karma through 
which the sacred Dharma is abandoned, doing so very intensively and 
to a great extent. For this reason this person has the nature of being obscured [and blinded] with respect to truth.
(5) The sublime words of the Buddha expressing the provisional 
meaning are mistakenly held to be a deﬁnitive meaning, which is thatness, [the true nature] of all phenomena.
(6) A person is in the grip of very strong craving and greed for the 
proﬁts of sense gratiﬁcations, such as food, clothing, wealth, and so on.
(7) A person is under the sway of being totally ﬁxated upon and 
indoctrinated by inferior views, such as the views belonging to the transitory collection, and so on.
(8) A person has 
fallen to the inﬂuence of evil friends, having re-
lied on them for a 
very long time, having totally forsaken the sacred 
Dharma, and having disapproved of and noisily opposed its deep and vast aspects.
(9) Likewise, for a very 
long time, a person has stayed away from 
those who have the characteristics of a saintly being, from spiritual friends who uphold the sacred teachings of the Great Vehicle.
(10) A person has mean devotion and aspiration, in that he delights 
in what is harmful and wrong, while there is no faith and conﬁdence in the true Dharma and in pure beings.
These are the reasons why the sacred teaching of the tathagatas who 
have vanquished all foes is abandoned; there is hardly any need to mention that in this way especially the instructions on profound that-ness are forsaken. Since 
this will also damage and cause deterioration 
of one’s own being, those who are skillful will not act like that.
B.II.3.2.6.2. Defining how not to abandon the profound Dharma
Skillful beings must not be as deeply afraid of fire and cruel 
poisonous snakes,
of murderers or lightning, as they should be of the loss of the 
profound Dharma.
Fire, snakes, enemies, and thunderbolts [can] only separate us 
from this life,
but cannot take us to the utterly fearful states of [the hells] of 
direst pain.
296    Buddha Nature
Pure sentient beings who are skillful in adopting [what is right] 
and abandoning [what is wrong] should not fear anything frightful 
in this world as much as the loss of the profound sacred Dharma. They should not be as afraid of being burnt by a raging ﬁre, eaten by a cruel poisonous snake, killed by a murderer, or struck by lightning. These are irrelevant, since the loss of Dharma is to be feared far more than 
them. When we die from ﬁre, a snake, an enemy, or a thunderbolt, this only has the power to separate us from this very life; it cannot make us go into the evil wanderings, into the utterly fearful states of the hells infested with direst pain (Skt. Avıci). Whereas, when abandoning the 
sacred Dharma, one will experience the suffering of the A vici hell
.
B.II.3.2.6.3. Explanation that abandoning the 
Dharma is more grave than 
the immeasurably negative acts
Even someone who has relied on evil friends again and again 
and thus heeded harmful intentions towards a buddha,
who has committed one of the most heinous acts—killing  
his father, mother, or an arhat, or splitting the sublime 
Assembly—
will be quickly released from these, once genuinely reflecting 
the dharmata.
But where would liberation be for someone whose mind is 
hostile to Dharma?
An individual may have relied again and again on evil and mislead-
ing friends and thus may 
have wounded a buddha’s body, spilling 
his blood in the harmful intention of wanting to kill him. He may 
have committed one of the three most severe acts of killing his father, his mother, or an arhat. Or he may have created a rift in the sublime Assembly, causing division among its members. Even such a person will be quickly released from the karma of the immeasurably negative acts once he closely and genuinely reﬂects suchness or the dharmata, which is the way in which everything really exists. But where would liberation be for an individual whose mind is hostile to the teaching of the Great Vehicle and who therefore abandons the sacred Dharma? There is no [possibility of] release for such an individual. Since the negativity of abandoning the Dharma is even more severe than having committed the immeasurably negative acts, one should always refrain from this great evil.
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      297
B.II.3.3. Dedication and summary of the meaning
B.II.3.3.1. Meaning of the benefits combined with a dedication prayer
Having properly explained the seven [vajra] points of the jew-
els, the utterly pure element,
flawless enlightenment, qualities, and activity, may any virtue 
I harvest from this
lead all sentient beings to see the Lord of Boundless Life who 
is endowed with Infinite Light.
Upon seeing, may their stainless Dharma-eye open and may 
they reach highest enlightenment.
Thus I have properly explained the seven points resembling a vajra, 
being the Three Rare and Sublime Ones, the element by nature utterly 
pure, enlightenment free from pollution, the fact that [enlightenment] possesses sixty-four qualities, and the manifestation of activity. May any virtue that I, Maitreya, harvest from this explanation lead all sentient beings, whose number is as inﬁnite as space, temporarily to directly perceive the kaya of Amitayus (Tib. tshe dpag med), the great 
Sage of Boundless Life who is endowed with Inﬁnite Light. Upon perceiving him, may they also receive his teachings. May their Dhar-ma-eye be freed fr
om dust and may the realization of the unpolluted 
path of seeing be born in them. Finally may they attain unsurpassable supreme enlightenment.
All the virtue of composing this text is dedicated to all sentient beings 
for their unsurpassable enlightenment. Through this, all followers are advised and encouraged to apply themselves to practice.
B.II.3.3.2. Summary
On what basis, for what reason, and in what way
[this has been given], what it explainsand what cause is conducive [to understanding it]have been taught by means of four stanzas.Two stanzas [show] the means to purify oneselfand one [shows] the cause of deterioration.Thereupon, by means of two further stanzasthe fruit [sprung from deterioration] is explained.[Being born] in the mandala of a buddha’s retinue,attaining patience and [then] enlightenment:expressing these qualities, the two aspects of fruitare explained by the last in a summarized way.
[The following ten points are expressed in the foregoing nine stan-
298    Buddha Nature
zas]:
(1) The basis on which [this text] was explained is taught by means 
of the line: “Based on the trustworthy words of the Buddha and on 
scriptures of logic . . .”
(2) The reason or 
need for explaining it is taught by the lines [con-
tained in the same stanza]: 
“I have explained this for the sole purpose 
of purifying myself and supporting 
all those whose understanding is 
endowed with the best possible virtue and devotion.”
(3) The way it was 
explained is taught by the stanza: “As someone 
with eyes sees by relying on a lamp, or on lightning, a jewel, the sun, 
or the moon . . .” and so on.
(4) T
he essence of the meaning to be explained is taught by the 
stanza: “Whatever speech is meaningful . . .” and so on.
(5) What kind of explanation 
will become a cause conducive to the 
 The Unassailable Lion’s Roar      299
PART THREE
Explanations by Khenpo  
Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche 
300    Buddha Nature
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      301
realization of what is to be understood from this text is taught by the 
stanza: “Whatever someone has explained with undistracted mind, exclusively in the light of the Victor’s teaching . . .” and so on.
Thus  
the way the commentary has been undertaken and carried out 
is extensively taught by the aforementioned four stanzas [the ﬁrst of these teaching two points].
(6) Through the two 
stanzas: “There is no one in this world more 
skilled in Dharma than the Victor . . .” and so forth it is taught that, 
as a means of 
purifying oneself, one should be alert to and avoid the 
obscuration [resulting from] abandoning the Dharma.
(7) Through the stanza: “Due to a feeble intellect . . .” and so on 
one is advised to 
abandon [the fault of losing the Dharma], since by 
accumulating the actions of forsaking the Dharma one sets the cause that deteriorates one’s nature and being.
(8) Thereupon, through the two stanzas [starting with the words]: 
“Skillful beings must not be as deeply afraid . . .” the consequence of 
aban 
doning the Dharma is very clearly depicted. It is taught that there 
will be a twofold fruit: through deteriorating from and losing the pro-found Dharma one will temporarily 
take birth in the evil wanderings 
and will ultimately not attain liberation.
(9) T
he last stanza is wholehearted dedication [to all sentient beings] 
expressing [the wish that they may attain] the following qualities: to temporarily be born in the utterly pure mandala of a buddha’s retinue and thereupon directly realize the true state of everything; to attain the patience that is not timid regarding the profound meaning and can forbear it; and to ﬁnally reach great unsurpassable enlightenment. This dedication is expressed in the stanza: “Having properly explained the seven [vajra] points of the jewels, the utterly pure element . . .” and so 
on. Through this 
last stanza it is well explained in a summarized form 
that all followers of the sacred Dharma will harvest a twofold fruit, be-ing the best possible temporary and ultimate beneﬁt.
♦ This was the section “Beneﬁt,” the ﬁfth chapter of The Commentary 
on the Highest Continuity of the Mahayana Dharma which Analyzes the 
Disposition of the Rare and Sublime Ones.
With 
this the complete explanation of the ﬁfth chapter, teaching the 
beneﬁt, is achieved.
B.II.3.3.3. The way it was perfected
It was translated fr om 
Sanskrit into Tibetan by the great Pandita and 
302    Buddha Nature
scholar Sadzana, who was a grandson of the Brahmin Ratnavajra, a 
great scholar of the Incomparable City of Glory in the land of Kashmir [Shrinagar], and by a Tibetan translator, the Sakya monk Lodän Sherab, in this Incomparable City of Glory.
Annotation 1:
(1) The state of a 
buddha is called “perfect” since the two aspects of 
abandonment and realization are ﬁnally perfected.
(2) The two truths are the absolute and the relative truth.
(3) The Sangha of noble ones consists of those who have directly 
realized emptiness. They are called “noble” since due to this realiza-tion they have reached 
a higher level of mental development than an 
ordinary being.
(4) Within the system of the Madhyamaka, “Rangtong Madhya-
maka” and “Shäntong Madhyamaka” (T
ib. dbu ma rang stong dang dbu 
ma gzhan stong) are distinguished. Literally, Rangtong means “self-empty” and Shäntong “empty of other.” In the view of the Rangtong Madhyamaka, “the expanse by nature completely pure” refers to the fact that all phenomena are by nature not truly existent. It is equiva-lent to emptiness in the 
sense of complete freedom from conceptual 
elaboration (Tib. spros pa). In the view of the Shäntong Madhyamaka 
it is the nature of mind, being the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness (Tib. dbyings rig dbyer med).
(5) The deﬁlements fr om 
which the element or the tathagatagarbha 
is puriﬁed in the state of enlightenment are the adventitious stains of delusion with regard to appearances, or in other words, the veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge.
(6) The term “fr uit 
of freedom” is used from the viewpoint of com-
plete freedom fr om 
all the deﬁlements consisting of delusion with 
regard to appearances. With this freedom, the thirty-two qualities of the dharmakaya are attained. The fruit of complete maturation results from the fact that the accumulation of merit has been led to complete maturity. It consists of the thirty-two qualities of the form kayas.
(7) When having reached ultimate direct realization, one has disposal 
over the means causing all other beings to gain this realization. This is buddha activity, which consists of the power or ability of the qualities, or in other words, of the fact that one wields great qualities, those of freedom and complete maturation.
Annotation 2:
When speaking of the qualities, 
those of the path and the fruit are to 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      303
be distinguished. The qualities of the path are those present while the 
state of buddhahood is not yet reached, which are present on the paths of accumulation, of junction, of seeing, and of meditation. The qualities present on the path of no more learning are the qualities of the fruit.
Nagarjuna’s words are to be understood as follows: If the element 
is present and one practices the sacred Dharma, thus purifying oneself 
from the deﬁlements, one will attain the fruit on the support of this puriﬁcation. If the element was not present, not the slightest fruit would be attained, even though one practiced the Dharma and puri-ﬁed oneself from the 
deﬁlements. This can be illustrated by means of 
an example: If ore bears gold and is processed, one will obtain gold. If ore is not gold-bearing, no gold will emerge, no matter how long one processes it. The view as it is expressed by Nagarjuna’s words corre-sponds to that of the Uttara 
Tantra Shastra. Nagarjuna has composed 
two collections of works, which are called “Collection of Reasonings” (Tib. dbu ma rig pa’i tshogs drug ) and “Collection of Praises” (Tib. dbu ma 
stod tshogs). The Dharmadhatustava belongs to the latter . 
 The collection 
of reasonings contains the view of the second turning of the wheel of Dharma, while the collection of praises contains the approach of the third turning of the wheel of Dharma, which corresponds to the Shäntong view.
When the element, or in other words, the dharmadhatu, the insepa-
rable union of spaciousness and 
awareness, is described as being by 
nature completely pure, this means that it is not to be considered as something that is formerly impure and later puriﬁed. It is equivalent to the way the mind exists—as the inseparable union of emptiness and clear light. It is always by nature pure, even though the adventitious deﬁlements, which do not affect this purity, have to be removed, just as the dross needs to be removed in order to obtain the pure gold contained therein.
Annotation 3:
“The expanse of the equality 
of all phenomena” can be explained as 
follows: The term “phenomena” refers to all outer and inner phenom-
ena, that is, to the 
phenomena of the basis and to those of the fruit. The 
phenomena of the fruit consist of the fruits of the three vehicles; the phenomena of the basis comprise all phenomena of samsara without exception. The fact that there is no difference with regard to the essence of phenomena is called “equality.” How this is to be understood is often explained through the example of dream. While dreaming, ﬁre 
304    Buddha Nature
and water are equal, as are light and darkness, in that they are equally 
not truly existent. With regard to their essence there is no difference. The expanse of equality is therefore the expanse of the emptiness of all phenomena.
The term “primary condition” is 
to be understood by the way in 
which, for example, the sense faculty of the eye constitutes the primary 
condition for the eye to perceive visible objects. Without its sense faculty the eye could not perceive anything. Likewise, the presence of the qualities is necessary as they are the primary condition for the manifestation of the inconceivable activity of a buddha’s body, speech, and mind. If the qualities were not present, a buddha would not be able to act spontaneously and without deliberate effort for the beneﬁt of all sentient beings.
Annotation 4:
The term “name and form” 
(Tib. ming gzugs) refers to the ﬁve skan-
dhas: form (Skt. rÒpa, T
ib. gzugs), feelings (Skt. vedan›, Tib. tshor ba), 
discrimination (Skt. sa˙jñ›,  
Tib. ’du 
shes), compositional factors (Skt. 
sa˙sk›ra, Tib. ’du byed ), and consciousness (Skt. vijñ›na,  Tib. rnam shes ). 
The term is used because, other than form, the remaining four can only 
be grasped by a name.
When speaking of doubts about 
the truth and about action and its 
fruit, this refers to two things: the ﬁrst are doubts about the meaning or validity of the Four Noble Truths or of the two truths, which are the absolute and the relative truth. The second are doubts about the fact that the practice of virtue acts as the cause giving rise to the fruit of happiness, the fact that suffering will arise on the basis of unvirtuous action, and so on.
The v
iews belonging to the fearful or transitory collection (Skt. 
satk›yad¸�˛i, Tib. ’jig tshogs la lta ba [the text translated here reads ’ jigs 
tshogs) are views such as taking the skandhas as a self or as some-thing that belongs to this 
self, and so forth. There are twenty of these 
described, for instance, in the Madhyamakavatara (Tib. dbu ma la ’jug 
pa
) by Chandrakirti. For further information in English, see Jeffrey 
Hopk i
ns, Meditation on Emptiness  (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1983), 
pp. 176 f., 258 f.
Annotation 5:
The usage of the terms 
“subject matter” (Tib. rdzas) and “aspect” (Tib. 
ldog pa) can be 
explained as follows: Taking a ﬂower as an example, 
the ﬂower itself is the subject matter. From the point of view that it 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      305
has come into existence due to causes and conditions, the ﬂower is 
compounded. From the point of view that it undergoes a process of destruction taking place from instant to instant—that it is continuously nearing cessation—the ﬂower is impermanent. This way of distinguish-ing two differ ent 
features with regard to the ﬂower is a classiﬁcation 
in terms of different aspects. On the basis of the ﬂower itself, however, whatever is compounded is impermanent and whatever is imperma-nent is compounded. These two 
aspects have just one essence. With 
regard to the essence there is no variety. Nevertheless, since the ﬂower is able to appear to thought as having various different features, it gains an according variety in terms of verbal expression. These aspects are a mere difference of terms; on the basis of the subject matter as such, all different aspects are indivisible.
The terms “subject matter” and “aspect” play a very important role 
in the explanations of valid cognition (Tib. tshad ma). Having gained a 
proper understanding of the meaning of these terms, one will come to understand the way mind manifests. A subject matter is the object of the sense consciousnesses, which are free from thought. An aspect is the object of thought. When the eye-consciousness perceives a ﬂower, it only perceives the subject matter. It does not perceive the ﬂower in terms of “this ﬂower is white, red, compounded, impermanent,” and so on. The conceptual mind makes these differences and divides the ﬂower into various aspects, whereas the sense consciousness perceives the subject matter, or the individual characteristic (Tib. rang mtshan), 
of the sense-object just as 
it comes within the range of perception (Tib. 
bzhin shar du). Therefore the terms “subject matter” and “aspect of the subject matter” refer to the way in which an understanding that is free from thought and one that is bound up with thought manifest. It is very important that these two different ways of manifestation are understood well.
Annotation 6:
Contrary to other worldly beings, 
arhats have an arising through a 
body of mental nature and a cessation in terms of an inconceivable 
type of death. 
The omniscient Rongtön was an 
eminent scholar and the teacher 
of the Sixth Karmapa Tongwa Dönden. He holds that buddhahood is uncreated in the sense of the fourth criterion of uncreatedness. Accord-ing t
o Rongtön, the dharmakaya has the quality of uncreatedness since 
it does not appear to the disciples as something that arises and ceases, whereas the form kayas are created or compounded since these appear 
306    Buddha Nature
to the disciples as something that arises and ceases. 
When it is said that a buddha shows the path in accordance with the 
respective karmic fortune of the disciples, this means that he adapts his 
teaching to their r espective 
intelligence and mental capacities. To less 
gifted disciples he gives a teaching enabling them to reach the state of a shravaka arhat on the basis of the Shravaka Vehicle. He teaches the path of the pratyekabuddhas to disciples of middling gifts, while highly gifted disciples receive the teaching of the path of the Mahayana.
The ﬁrst three qualities of buddhahood, that is, those of being uncre-
ated, spontaneously present, and 
not a realization due to extraneous 
conditions, are the qualities of the dharmakaya, which constitutes the most excellent beneﬁt for oneself. The last three qualities, that is, those of primordial wisdom of knowledge, compassionate love, and ability, are the qualities of the form kayas, which bring about the most excellent beneﬁt of others.
Annotation 7:
(1) T
he expanse or the open dimension (Tib. dbyings ), which is complete 
peace beyond any conceptual elaboration, having neither up nor down, neither middle nor end, is called the dharmadhatu (Tib. chos kyi dby-
ings). It is similar to the depth or sphere of space, which is extremely vast and open and does 
not obstruct anything. Suchness is equivalent 
to emptiness. The terms “dharmadhatu,” “suchness,” and “absolute truth” are synonymous in that both “dharmadhatu” and “suchness” denote emptiness, and the absolute truth is the way everything exists, which is also emptiness. In the context dealt with here, which is to say in the Shäntong view, this emptiness is to be understood mainly in the sense of ultimate emptiness or the ultimate expanse. This is the nature of mind or the way the mind truly exists, being the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness or of emptiness and clear light. According to the Madhyamaka, however, the nature of mind is to be understood solely from the point of view that all phenomena do not truly exist. In this view it is nothing but empty in the sense of not be-ing accessible to any conceptualization. 
It is very important to gain 
a proper understanding of these two different views. What is mainly taught in the system to which the Uttara Tantra Shastra belongs is the aspect of awareness (Tib. rig pa) or clear light (Tib. od gsal), whereas in 
the system of the Madhyamaka the aspect of emptiness in the sense of freedom from conceptual elaboration is exclusively taught. If one 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      307
understands well what is meant by the inseparable union of emptiness 
and clear light, one comes very close to the path of the Vajrayana. In the system of the Vajrayana the nature of mind is then described as the inseparable union of clarity-emptiness (Tib. gsal stong), of bliss-empti-
ness (Tib. bde stong ), 
of appearance-emptiness (Tib. snang stong), and 
of awareness-emptiness (Tib. rig stong). These are called the four “joint 
manifestations” (Tib. zung ’jug bzhi). Without knowing the meaning of 
the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness one will not be able to understand these. Not having studied the views as presented in the Uttara Tantra Shastra and in the Madhyamaka system, one will not come to an understanding of the Vajrayana where the four joint manifestations are introduced. One would ﬁnd oneself forced to leave the level of the Vajrayana “already reached,” in order to study the vehicle of characteristics that forms its basis. It is therefore advisable to study this ﬁrst. If, for example, someone learns how to ﬂy a plane without being able to drive a car, he might one day have to learn how to drive while he can already ﬂy. Since the ﬁrst is also much more difﬁcult than the latter, one had better keep the appropriate order. In brief, one should endeavor to study and understand the views of the Uttara Tantra Shastra and the Madhyamaka properly, since they equally constitute the cause of one’s ability to follow the Vajrayana path.
When it is said that the truth of cessation does not fall into the ex-
treme
 of nihilism, this means that it does not fall into the extreme view 
of considering the absolute truth as being just empty in the sense of a bare nothingness or non-presence of anything. To describe this, the commentary partly uses words from the terminology of the Prasangika Madhyamaka. In this terminology the reasoning would be as follows: the truth of cessation does not fall into the extreme of nihilism, since it exists as the object of experience of self-sprung primordial wisdom.
The literal meaning of the Tibetan term “künzob” ( kun rdzob ), 
which is here translated as “relative,” is “false from every angle” or “deceptive.” A phenomenon is called “adventitious” when it comes into existence as something ﬂeeting and when it is able to be removed or abandoned. An example for this is water containing mud, which will settle by itself when the water is not stirred, and which does not affect the purity of the water itself. Another example is deﬁlements in the sky such as clouds or smoke, which also do not impair the purity of the sky and are dispelled by a breeze. By means of these examples one should understand that there are deﬁlements in terms of mental poisons and 
308    Buddha Nature
obstructions to knowledge as long as the state of buddhahood is not 
reached, but that the nature or essence of mind has been pure since beginningless time and is not afﬂicted in the slightest by the adventi-tious stains of confusion, by 
the mental poisons and so on, which are 
able to be removed. For this reason one can say: “The dharma-dhatu, the absolute truth, does not fall into the extreme of eternalism, since it has been free from arising as a relative, adventitious thing since begin-ningless time.” Generally speaking, the 
term “eternalism” refers to a 
view considering a subject that undergoes an arising and a ceasing as something that cannot be destroyed in any way. Here, in this context, the extreme of eternalism consists of a view holding a subject to be truly existent, to be inherently or of itself existent.
The statement that the truth of cessation is completely freed from 
the conceptual elaboration that consists of the four extreme views, again stems from the terminology of the Prasangika Madhyamaka. According to this terminology the truth of cessation, that is, the dhar-madha
tu, the absolute truth, is completely freed from the four extreme 
beliefs in the non-existence of a subject, the existence of a subject, the simultaneous existence and non-existence of a subject, and a presence of a subject that is neither existent nor non-existent. Therefore it is completely freed from the conceptual elaboration that consists of the four extreme views.
In the terminology of the scriptures explaining the dharmadhatu or 
the absolute truth, the name or the designation of a subject in question is called “symbol” (Tib. brda), whereas its properties are called “terms” 
(Tib. tha snyad). When a ﬂower is called a “ﬂower,” this is a symbol. 
When the ﬂower is described as being white, red, or yellow, or as being impermanent, faded, and so on, these are terms. The dharmadhatu, or the ultimate absolute truth, is beyond symbols and it cannot be ex-pressed by means of 
terms. As such it is completely beyond the ﬁeld 
of activity of speech and is therefore inexpressible.
The terms “self-aware” and “other-aware” denote two different 
types of perception. Whatever is perceived by the different sense consciousnesses—of the eye, the nose, and so on—is an other-aware perception. A self-aware perception does not focus outwards and perceive something else, but perceives its very own essence. At the time when emptiness or Mahamudra is realized, the essence of one’s own mind is realized by itself in such a way that there is no duality between an object to be realized and a realizing subject.
The Dharma in terms of the truth of cessation has three qualities, 
the ﬁrst being the fact that it is inconceivable. The commentary sub-
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      309
stantiates this by successive proofs. When these are traced back, the 
reasoning is as follows:
 (1) The true nirvana of the noble ones, constituting the absolute 
truth, is the object of perception of the self-aware, or self-
sprung, primordial wisdom of the noble ones, since it is not an object for an other-aware perception.
 (2) The absolute truth is not an object for an other-aware percep-
tion 
since it cannot be explained by means of examples, logical 
reasonings, and so forth.
 (3) It cannot be explained by means of examples, logical reason-
ings,
 and so forth since it is inexpressible by means of symbols, 
terms, and so on and thus beyond the ﬁeld of activity of speech.
 (4) It is beyond 
symbols, terms, and so on since any ideation is 
completely paciﬁed.
 (5) All ideation is completely paciﬁed since it is beyond the con-
ceptual elaboration consisting of the four extr eme views.
An improper conceptual 
activity (Tib. tshul bzhin ma yin pa’i rnam 
par rtog pa) is a wrong way of thinking, such as taking something that is impure to be pure, something that does not exist as a self to be a self, and so on.
(2) T
he literal meaning of the Tibetan term “nyönmong” ( nyon mongs ), 
which is here translated as “mental poisons,” is “afﬂiction.” The mental poisons are an afﬂiction since they oppress and afﬂict the mind and above all cause it suffering. The “remaining imprints” (Tib. bag chags) 
are to be understood 
as the after-effect or the remaining force (Tib. nus 
pa) of the mental poisons. If, for instance, a person has been drinking a considerable amount of alcohol 
over a long period of time and then 
stops doing so, he will still feel an urge from time to time, although he has given up his habit completely. The preceding behavior has an after-effect, a remaining force. The traditional example is musk that has been put on a piece of paper. Even after a long time, when the musk itself is completely gone, the smell will still be noticeable.
The t
ruth of the path is mainly equivalent to the primordial wisdom 
that directly realizes emptiness. The essence of this primordial wisdom is its utter purity, which is to be understood as complete puriﬁcation. It is utterly pure in the sense that the deﬁlements of the mental poisons and their remaining imprints are eliminated and no longer present.
The veil of the hindrances to knowledge mainly consists of the fol-
lowing three aspects: the 
ﬁrst is the fact that the so-called three circles 
310    Buddha Nature
(Tib. ’khor gsum) or complexes, that is, actor, object, and action, are 
perceived as something truly existent. This is the coarse aspect of the 
obstructions to knowledge. A subtler aspect is the fact that the three complexes are perceived in terms of their characteristics. The third aspect consists of the fact that the three complexes appear as two. This perception of mere duality as such is the subtlest aspect of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge.
Thus the truth of 
the path is primordial wisdom, which is free from 
the veil of the hindrances to knowledge. The “brilliant light rays of the direct knowledge of all aspects” are this primordial wisdom that directly realizes the true nature of all phenomena, or in other words, the absolute truth.
Annotation 8:
A conceptual understanding is 
any worldly understanding that per-
ceives the relative.
The three poisons are desir e, aversion, and mental blindness.
W
hen speaking of the two truths comprising complete puriﬁcation, 
the term “complete puriﬁcation” refers to the following: Two parts 
are to be distinguished: that of complete puriﬁcation (Tib. rnam byang 
phyogs) and that of the mental poisons (Tib. nyon mongs phyogs). The 
ﬁrst 
part includes the fruit of the process of puriﬁcation, which is the 
state of utter purity from any deﬁlement, as well as the means to bring about this puriﬁcation. In the same way, the latter part includes the veils or obscurations as well as their causes.
Annotation 9:
The term “freedom fr
om attachment” covers three aspects: the means 
that frees one from attachment, the basis to be freed from attachment, 
and the state of freedom from attachment.
When one speaks of the two types of purity, the ﬁrst type is the 
utter purity of the nature, which is to say that the nature of mind, or the element, the sugatagarbha, has been free from all deﬁlements such as the mental poisons and so on since beginningless time. From the viewpoint of the essence, gold contained in ore is also pure gold. Cor-respo
nding to this example, the nature of mind is completely pure. The 
second type of purity is freedom from the adventitious deﬁlements. This is comparable to the purity achieved through processing the ore and removing the dross. Once the dross is completely removed there 
are two types of purity, the ﬁrst being the purity that is also present 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      311
while gold is contained in ore, and the second being the purity achieved 
through the complete removal of the dross.
Annotation 10:
When  
speaking of self-aware primordial wisdom present during medi-
tation, this is to be 
understood as follows: “meditation” here refers to 
a condition of balanced equipoise in which one directly dwells within the true state (Skt. dharmat›), or in other words, within emptiness, the 
natur e of mind, which is the absolute truth or reality . 
T
he term “self-aware” is also part of the terminology of the Chit-
tamatra system (the Mind-Only School), 
yet is used there in another 
meaning. The system of the Chittamatra speaks of a self-aware con-sciou 
sness. While the consciousnesses of the ﬁve senses focus outwards 
and perceive outer objects, the mental sense-consciousness focuses inwards and experiences by itself its own essence (Tib. rang gi ngo bo 
rang gis myong ba). In the system to which the Uttara Tantra Shastra  
belongs, however, the term 
“self-aware” denotes a realization that is 
self-sprung, by means of which the true state, the nature of mind, is realized directly, free from the duality of perceived and perceiver.
A worldly understanding is the understanding of an ordinary being. 
This is any understanding that does not directly realize emptiness.
Synonyms of the term “suchness” (Tib. de bzhin nyid) are the terms 
“true state” (Tib. chos nyid), “emptiness” (Tib. stong pa nyid), “dharma-
dhatu” (Tib. chos kyi dbyings), or “absolute truth” (Tib. don dam pa’i 
bden pa).
Annotation 11:
When 
one has directly realized emptiness, one does not fall back to the 
level of the smaller vehicles. Since a bodhisattva, that is, a noble one, 
an heir of the Buddha (Tib. rgyal sras), has this realization, one speaks 
of the bodhisattvas who do not fall back.
By the phrase “their own 
minds have directly revealed themselves 
as being by nature clear light and functioning as the antidote . . . ,” the following is expressed: In the context explained here , “one’s own 
mind” is equivalent to the 
nature of mind or to the way the relative 
mind truly exists. This is the true state of the mind, which is the in-separable union of emptiness and 
clear light. It can be said to be an 
antidote since it is only the mind in terms of its true existence or state that counteracts the illusory appearances or the appearance of duality (Tib. gnyis snang).
312    Buddha Nature
The fact that it has directly revealed itself (Tib. mngon sum du gyur 
pa), or in other words, that it is realized as it is, means the following: 
Two k
inds of realization, direct realization (Tib. mngon sum) and in-
ferred realization (T
ib. rjes dpag), are to be distinguished. These terms 
are also used within the teachings on valid cognition (Tib. tshad ma). 
Generally speaking, the teachings on 
valid cognition represent “that 
which makes the mind free from being confused and deluded.” In this context all inferences and deductions taking place on the basis of symbols, characteristics, and logical reasonings are inferred valid cogni-tions (Tib. rjes dpag mtshan 
ma). A realization taking place without the 
support of these is a direct valid cognition (Tib. mngon sum tshad ma ). 
Simply because it is in 
front of us, a ﬂower, for instance, is perceived 
directly by means of the sense consciousness of the eye. This seeing, which is to say the sense consciousness perceiving the ﬂower, is called direct valid cognition. If one makes inferences about the ﬂower and ﬁnds that it is empty or does not exist as a self, the understanding perceiving it in such a way is an inferred valid cognition, since this understanding had to be derived. Put brieﬂy, there are two ways of realizing any phenomenon: an inferred and a direct realization. The ﬁrst takes place on the basis of symbols, characteristics, and logical reasonings. In the context of the second, the object is realized directly, without any obscuration and just as it appears.
When the statement that the 
mind has revealed itself as being by 
nature clear light is seen in the light of the Shäntong or Mahamudra views, it is equivalent to the direct or immediate realization of the nature of mind, or of the way the mind truly exists. The point at which one faces the nature of mind, the inseparable union of emptiness and clear light in which all conceptual elaboration has ﬁnally subsided, is called direct realization. 
The statement that the essence of the mental poisons has been free 
from arising since beginningless time refers to the following: The term “arising” means that something is by nature existent, truly existent, by its individual characteristics existent, and so on. Freedom from arising is therefore equivalent to the fact that the subject matter in question is not truly existent and so on.
Generally speaking, we all can notice that the mental poisons arise 
within us. Yet, this arising is but a relative one. It only comes about as a dependent origination, due to the meeting of causes and conditions. In truth the mental poisons are free from arising. This can be shown by the example of dream. While dreaming, all kinds of images arise. 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      313
Whatever arises comes about interdependently as an illusory appear-
ance. In truth these 
appearances are free from arising. Whatever ap-
pears during a dr eam 
does not exist, not even in the form of a single 
atom. Arising as something adventitious and being able to be removed like mud in water or clouds in the sky, the mental poisons are not truly existent. Their essence has been free from arising since beginningless time. When one dreams, for example, and the appearances in this dream are seen differently as friend and enemy, aversion in view of the enemy and affection and desire in view of the friend will arise. These mental poisons are free from arising; they do not truly exist. Since the object is free from arising, the subject perceiving it is also free from arising, or in other words, not truly existent. In this sense one should reﬂect thoroughly. While one has a dream containing the duality of friend and enemy, and while as a reaction desire and aversion arise, the objects, that is, friend and enemy, do not truly exist. While friend and enemy do not truly exist, at the same time they form the basis for the arising of the mental poisons. These arise ﬂeetingly and do not have an arising in terms of being truly existent. When the perceived object does not truly exist, it is not permissible to state that the perceiving subject is truly existent.
When reﬂecting in this way, in my opinion the Chittamatra view 
constitutes a very deep approach for a beginner. The view of the Mad-hyama
ka, for instance, is not directly realized until the ﬁrst bodhisattva 
level is reached. Its realization will be attained when, on the path of junction, a view is cultivated that corresponds to that of the Chittama-tra system. This has been 
stated by the omniscient Pema Karpo and 
others in many scriptural passages. When, while traveling the path of junction, one believes in the truth of the Madhyamaka view, but for the sake of its direct realization cultivates that of the Chittamatra during one’s meditation, these two aspects will become one.
The passage “therefor e 
the bodhisattvas truly realize the nature of 
every being . . .” is to be understood as follows: The nature of beings is equivalent to the way all beings truly exist. With regard to any sub-ject matter, its way 
of existence (Tib. gnas lugs, gnas tshul) and its way 
of appearance (Tib. snangs tshul) are to be distinguished. The way in 
which all beings appear consists of the fact that they have the nature of an illusory appearance, which has come into existence due to the predominating inﬂuence of extraneous factors, that is, due to karma and mental poisons. We all are sentient beings. Our way of appearance is to wander about in the cycle of existence, driven by the attachment to a self. We perceive as a self what does not exist as a self, as mine what 
314    Buddha Nature
does not exist as mine, and experience manifold suffering under the 
sway of this perception. The fact that something that does not exist as a self is perceived as a self, and that something that does not exist as belonging to this self is perceived as belonging to this self, has the effect that the aspects “friend” and “enemy” are perceived, that “my friend” and “my enemy” come into existence. These two aspects of attachment and aversion act as the basis giving rise to the manifold forms of suffering. This is the way in which beings appear.
The way of appearance of ﬁre, for example, is that it is hot and 
burning. The way of existence of ﬁre is the fact that it is by nature empty. When one dreams of being burnt by ﬁre, this ﬁre appears as something that is by nature hot and burning. Yet, the true nature or way of existence of this ﬁre is emptiness in the sense that it is free from any conceptual elaboration, or in other words, free from the three aspects of arising, abiding, and ceasing.
In the same way , 
the nature of all beings is the ultimate selﬂessness 
of persons and phenomena. The ﬁve skandhas do not exist as a self. Nevertheless the two aspects of perception, which contain the beliefs that the person exists as a self and that phenomena exist as a self (Tib. gang zag gi bdag dang chos kyi bdag), arise within us on the basis of these skandhas. When on the basis of the physical body the thoughts “I” and “mine” arise, these result in a perception taking this body as being a self in the sense that a person truly exists. When these thoughts are not present, but the body is taken to be real and perceived as being truly existent, this is an understanding containing the belief that phenomena exist as a self. Yet this body exists neither as a self of the person nor of phenomena. Taking the mind for an example, thoughts such as “my mind is uneasy,” “I am unhappy,” and so forth represent the fault of the belief in the existence of a self of the person. If the mind is viewed as being by nature existent, this is the belief in the existence of a self of phenomena. The mind does not exist as a self. This is the selﬂessness of persons. The mind is by nature not existent. This is the selﬂessness of phenomena. This difference should be understood well.
The ultimate selﬂessness of persons and phenomena is non-existence 
of self as taught by the Prasangika Madhyamaka. Non-existence of self is taught in gradual stages. In the view of the shravakas, for instance, it is to be understood solely as the selﬂessness of persons, whereas in the view of the Svatantrika Madhyamaka it denotes sheer voidness (Tib. stong kyang) comparable to empty space. In the view of the Pra-
sangika Madhyamaka, non-existence of self 
is complete peace in the 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      315
sense of complete freedom from the conceptual elaboration (Tib. spros 
pa) consisting of the appearance of duality (Tib. gnyis snang). This is 
the 
true state or nature of everything (Skt. dharmat›, Tib. chos nyid). 
With r
egard 
to the nature of mind, the two aspects “spaciousness” or 
“expanse” (Tib. dbyings) and “primordial wisdom” (Tib. ye shes) ar e to 
be distinguished. Spaciousness is the aspect of emptiness, primordial 
wisdom that of clear light. The term “peace” in the sense of freedom from conceptual elaboration refers mainly to the aspect of emptiness, synonyms of which are the terms “true state” (Tib. chos nyid ), “dharma-
dhatu” (Tib. chos kyi dbyings ), “suchness” (Tib. de bzhin nyid ), “absolute 
truth” (Tib. don dam pa’i bden pa ), and “thatness” (Tib. de kho na nyid ). In 
the Mahamudra or Maha Ati systems one speaks of “the great symbol,” “the great gesture,” or “the great seal” (Tib. phyag rgya chen po) and of 
“the great perfection” (Tib. rdzogs pa chen po), respectively.
As to peace or fr
eedom from conceptual elaboration (Tib. spros pa 
zhi ba), two aspects are to be distinguished. The ﬁrst is the fact that the object, the true state, is beyond conceptualization, and the second is the fact that the understanding realizing this object is free from conceptual elaboration.
When the object, the tr
ue state, is described as being beyond con-
ceptualization, this means that emptiness is not equivalent to either non-existence or to sheer voidness that merely refutes this non-exis-tence (Tib. med dgag ), 
nor is it truly existent and so forth. Put brieﬂy, it 
is a state of complete peace, of freedom from the extreme views holding it to be existent, to be non-existent, both existent and non-existent, or neither existent nor non-existent.
Nagarjuna has said in this context: 
Permanence, impermanence and so on, where are they in this 
state of peace? 
Emptiness, non-emptiness and so on, where are they in this 
state of peace?
The state of complete peace beyond permanence and impermanence, 
emptiness and non-emptiness, is called freedom from conceptual elabo-ration. This is the aspect 
of the object, or in other words, of emptiness 
being beyond any conceptualization.
The aspect of the understanding, 
the realizing subject, being free 
from conceptual elaboration should be understood as follows: When realizing that the object, the true state, is beyond conceptualization, the subject, the realizing understanding, attains the state of freedom from conceptualization while abiding at balance within this realiza-
316    Buddha Nature
tion. If the object is not free from being conceptualized, accordingly the 
realizing subject will not attain the state of freedom from conceptual elaboration. If the object is viewed as being just empty and is realized as such, the realizing subject will reach a state of mere emptiness, in which nothing whatsoever is present. This understanding still contains an idea, or in other words, a conceptual elaboration. When the object is viewed as clarity, the subject gains a corresponding realization and perceives clarity. Similarly, the subject appears as peace, as freedom from thought and conceptual elaboration, when the object is realized as being beyond conceptualization.
The fact that the r
ealizing understanding is free from conceptual 
elaboration means that all thoughts, all perceptions bound up with or tinged by conceptual grasping (Tib. ’zin pa), are completely paciﬁed.
In th 
is context some followers of the Mahamudra system are of 
the opinion that the explanation of the two aspects of freedom from conceptual elaboration, as given in the Sutrayana system, means that one absorbs oneself into the object, the true state free from concep-tual 
elaboration, and into the subject, the realizing understanding, 
separately during meditation. This is an error. The proponents of the Sutrayana say on the contrary that one ﬁrst gains conviction that the object is beyond conceptualization and then absorbs the subject within this freedom from conceptual elaboration.
The system of the Mahamudra teaches that one has to absorb oneself 
into the nature of mind itself in such a way that one naturally dwells within it just as it appears. Some who receive this teaching without understanding the explanations given in the Sutrayana system will undergo a second error. The Pandita Atisha said: 
With regard to the fact that the true state is beyond conceptual 
elaboration, the realizing understanding is absorbed into a condi-tion of freedom from conceptual elaboration.
Some who practice Mahamudra meditation misunderstand this, 
thinking that according to the Madhyamaka view one has to absorb the understanding into the true state, into emptiness, which is free from conceptual elaboration. On this basis they believe that the ob-ject into which one has 
to absorb oneself and the understanding that 
absorbs itself are the same and not two different aspects. They believe this, since according to the Mahamudra system absorption means to naturally abide within the nature of mind itself. This is a slight error due to misunderstanding the teachings of the Madhyamaka, accord-
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      317
ing to which one gains conviction that the nature of mind is beyond 
conceptualization and then absorbs the realizing understanding into freedom from conceptual elaboration. This error, however, is but a misunderstanding of words. It does not mean that one necessarily errs with regard to one’s own true nature as well. From the point of view of one’s own realization, realization will arise from naturally abiding within the essence of mind. There are numerous examples of persons who did not know the meaning of absorption as it corresponds to the Madhyamaka view and yet directly realized Mahamudra, the nature of their own mind. This difference should also be understood well.
The system of the Madhyamaka contains many different kinds or 
levels of explanations on the way in which one should meditate ac-cording to this system.
It is said, for 
instance, in the scriptures teaching the gradual stages 
of meditation on the highest aspect of the knowable (Tib. shes bya’i 
mchog):
Perceived phenomena are empty according to their very own 
essence (Tib. rang rang ngo bos stong). The perceiving mind is also 
emptiness; it is free from conceptual elaboration. To rest unmoved within the state of freedom from conceptual elaboration, the union of emptiness and clarity, is the main practice of the highest aspect of the knowable.
In the context of the gradual stages of meditation on the perfec-
tion of discriminative wisdom, the 
most excellent kind of practice is 
described as follows:
One gains conviction that all perceived phenomena are empty ac-cording to their very 
own essence. One gains conviction that the 
perceiving mind is also empty, free from conceptual elaboration. Then one absorbs oneself into the state of freedom from conceptual elaboration.
Similar statements are to be found in many scriptural passages. It is 
important that these different kinds of explanation are understood well. 
Sakya Pandita remarks in 
this context that there is not the slightest 
difference between the view of freedom from conceptual elaboration as taught in the system of the Paramita Yana [the vehicle of the six per-fecti
ons] and the views of the Mahamudra or Mantrayana. One should 
be aware that if on the level of the Mahamudra or Secret Mantrayana one develops a view that does not include freedom from conceptual elaboration as taught in the Prasangika Madhyamaka system, one holds 
318    Buddha Nature
a view that is ﬂawed with ideas, with conceptual elaboration.
When speaking of the two types of primordial wisdom, those 
knowing correctly and completely, this means the following: The lit-
eral meanings of the T
ibetan terms here translated as “correctly” and 
“completely” are “as it is” (Tib. ji lta ba) and “as much as there is” (Tib. 
ji snyed pa). Generally speaking, the term “correctly” refers to empti-ness, to the absolute tr 
uth, while the term “completely” refers to the 
relative truth. Correct knowledge knows what truly is. If, for example, we dream of a burning ﬁre, what is true about this phenomenon of ﬁre? This ﬁre is without the three aspects of arising, abiding, and cessation and as such is empty. What is not true about it? The burning of the ﬁre is not true; it is an illusory appearance and comes about through delusion. The term “completely” refers to what is not true or correct, to the aspect of appearance that manifests as a variety. 
The understanding that perceives what is true or correct is therefore 
called “primordial wisdom that knows correctly,” and the understand-ing that perceives what 
is not true, the relative aspect of appearance, 
is called “primordial wisdom that knows completely.” A buddha pos-sesse 
s these two kinds of primordial wisdom. His correct knowledge is 
the immediate seeing of emptiness. His complete knowledge extends to anything relative.
The statement “they see that the true state has always been pres-
ent within beings whose state 
is relative” should be understood as 
follows: The literal meanings of the Tibetan terms translated here as “true state” and “those whose state is relative” are “nature” or “qual-ity” (Tib. chos nyid ) 
and “that which has this nature or quality” (Tib. 
chos can). In the context of the Uttara Tantra Shastra the ﬁrst refers to 
the absolute aspect, to the way a subject matter truly exists, while the latter refers to the relative aspect, to the way a subject matter appears. When one dreams of ﬁre, the state of this ﬁre is relative. Its true state is the fact that it is free from the three aspects of arising, abiding, and ceasing. This is the true nature of ﬁre. When speaking of beings, this refers to whoever possesses a mind (Tib. sems can). What these beings 
are in truth is the way in which their relative nature or relative state actually exists, this being their true state. The true state of beings is the nature of a perfect buddha, or in other words, the tathagatagarbha, the all-pervading dharmakaya. In the view of the Rangtong Madhya-maka this dharmakaya is solely 
considered as emptiness in the sense 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      319
of complete freedom from conceptual elaboration. In the view of the 
Shäntong Madhyamaka it is the inseparable union of emptiness and clear light. In the speech of Dharma this is occasionally also called the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness (Tib. dbyings rig 
dbyer med). The term “spaciousness” refers to the aspect of emptiness or freedom from conceptual elaboration; the term “awareness” refers to the aspect of clear light.
In the following section of 
the praise, the two primordial wisdoms 
constituting the quality of awareness are shown from the viewpoint of being liberated from the veils.
Primordial wisdom that knows correctly is freed from attachment 
to objects—it is free from the veil of the mental poisons. Primordial wisdom that knows completely is freed from obstructions, which is to say, freed from the veil of the hindrances to knowledge. They are called “obstructions” since one will not attain the unhindered knowledge of all relative phenomena as long as they are not removed. In order to reach the omniscient primordial wisdom that knows all phenomena, all aspects of the knowable, the veiling net of the hindrances to knowledge has to be eliminated.
The c
orrectly realizing understanding free from the veil of the mental 
poisons and the completely realizing understanding free from the veil of the hindrances to knowledge are the two aspects of the discrimina-tive wisdom beyond the worldly 
(Tib. ’jig rten las ’das pa’i shes rab ). 
By means of this discriminative 
wisdom, noble bodhisattvas know 
the utterly pure dharmadhatu, or way of existence of beings, as be-ing by nature not 
truly existent. This is the absolute truth, emptiness, 
the buddha nature. They know furthermore that this dharmadhatu pervades the limitless number of all sentient beings. Buddha nature is called “all-pervasive” since it is present within all beings alike. As far as buddha nature goes, there is no distinction between “good beings” who have attained a precious human body and “inferior beings” such as animals and so forth. It undifferentiatedly pervades all sentient be-ings, no matter whether they 
are happy or suffer, whether they dwell 
in the higher or lower realms of existence. 
Since they have these two types of understanding, bodhisattvas 
possess the completely pure vision of primordial wisdom with regard to the entire range of the knowable. Whatever is able to be an object of understanding is part of the knowable (Tib. shes bya), this being its 
characteristic. The term “vision” of primordial wisdom is here equiva-
320    Buddha Nature
lent to the discriminative wisdom beyond the worldly. When it is said 
that this vision is completely pure, this means that it is an authentic seeing that is undistorted, free from error, and complete.
In this way the bodhisattvas have the quality of liberation. The ele-
ment or the sugatagarbha is 
present within all beings, yet is not freed 
from the fetter of the veil of the mental poisons and from the net of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge. When these are removed one has attained the quality of liberation.
One m
ay wonder whether someone who has reached the bodhisattva 
levels is freed from all the veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge. This is not the case. At this point the veils are partly puri-ﬁed. This process of 
puriﬁcation continues while one travels through 
the bodhisattva levels, in a degree corresponding to each level. From the point of view that buddha nature in the state of the basis is also com-pletely free fr om 
the mental poisons and obstructions to knowledge, 
and not in the slightest sullied by these, there is utter purity. From the point of view of the gradual removal of the adventitious deﬁlements there is a continuous process of puriﬁcation. This is expressed in the explanation of the fourth vajra point, where it is said: “[The element] is pure and yet has afﬂiction. [Enlightenment] was not afﬂicted and yet is puriﬁed.” An example for this is the fact that ore also contains pure gold, but that a second type of purity, a state of puriﬁcation, is achieved through the removal of the dross.
Annotation 12:
The object to be r
ealized is the true state, or in other words, suchness, 
the way all phenomena actually are. This is emptiness: the nature of 
mind, the element, or the sugatagarbha. The means necessary to realize this object is the primordial wisdom of the noble ones.
When the noble ones are said to perceive this object as being pres-
ent just as it is, 
this means that they realize the element, or the way 
in which beings exist, as being the luminous buddha nature, the in-separable union of spaciousness and 
awareness or of emptiness and 
clear light. This is the object of perception of the primordial wisdom of the noble ones.
This object of per ception 
is seen in a way that the noble ones do 
not have in common with others. This can be illustrated by a general example: Whenever we have a mental experience, this is an experience we do not have in common with others. Whatever a sentient being experiences is the experience of his or her own mind, which is not shared with anybody else. Corresponding to this example, the noble 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      321
ones experience or realize the nature of their own minds, just as it is.
This realization is a vision by means of inner self-aware primordial 
wisdom, which is to say that it is not a seeing that focuses outwards. 
Contrary to that, the tathagatagarbha, the true nature of mind, is called self-aware. On the level of explanation, the object, the true state, and the subject realizing this true state are both to be understood as self-sprung primordial wisdom (Tib. rang byung gi ye shes ). During meditation these 
self-sprung primordial wisdoms are simultaneously realized as peace, as being free from conceptual elaboration. While receiving explana-tions
, one gains the understanding that the object, the true state, as well 
as the realizing subject, are self-sprung primordial wisdom. During meditation, when a condition is reached in which all conceptualization containing the duality of subject and object has subsided and come to peace, perception proves to be self-aware. It proves furthermore to be “seeing itself by itself” or to be “self-seeing according to its own es-sence
.” The two aspects of perception, an object that is seen and a seeing 
subject, are no longer present. When an ordinary being ﬁrst hears that “self-aware” is equivalent to “seeing itself by itself,” this statement is a mere thought, since it is only during meditation that the object, the true state, proves to be self-aware. On this level, the term “self-aware” means that the conceptual elaboration that contains subject and object, a perceived object and a perceiving mind, is completely appeased, that both aspects manifest as self-sprung primordial wisdom, and that one dwells within this condition of self-sprung primordial wisdom wher-ever it manifests, in its 
very own place (Tib. rang sar du gnas pa). When 
the system of the Chittamatra speaks of “self-aware,” this means that the consciousness experiences itself by itself. Self-awareness in this context is therefore equivalent to the self-experience of the conscious-ness (T ib. rnam shes rang myong).
When it 
is said that 
the state of beings is relative or, literally speak-
ing, that they ar e 
those who have a particular state or nature (Tib. chos 
can), this means that all beings have a true state (Tib. chos nyid), which 
is the 
dharmadhatu, the buddha nature, or the tathagatagarbha. This 
dharmadhatu pervades all beings no matter how many there are, which is to say that it is undifferentiatedly present within all beings, in those of low or high rank, in those who are good or evil alike. Here, the term “dharmadhatu” is equivalent to inseparable spaciousness and aware-ness 
or inseparable spaciousness and primordial wisdom (Tib. dbyings 
dang ye shes dbyer med pa). This inseparable union of spaciousness and primordial wisdom is the buddha nature, the tathagatagarbha. In the view presented by the Madhyamakavatara (Tib. dbu ma la ’jug pa
 ) the 
322    Buddha Nature
dharmadhatu is to be understood exclusively as freedom from con-
ceptu
al elaboration. The aspect of primordial wisdom is not explained 
there. This difference should be understood well.
The object of perception of the noble ones is the fact that the 
dharmadhatu or buddha nature is all-pervasively present within all sentient beings. This means that their perception ﬁrst focuses on the state or nature of sentient beings and that in this way the true state is perceived. The perception focused on the entirety of beings, on all those who have this state, is the aspect of the primordial wisdom that knows completely.
Generally speaking, the aspects of correct and complete knowledge 
refer to the knowledge of a buddha. In this context the realization of emptiness, the fact that the absolute truth is seen, is called correct knowledge. The realization of each and every aspect that is part of the relative is called complete knowledge. Noble bodhisattvas do not have a realization equaling the correct and complete knowledge of a buddha. Merely the same terms are being used here. Noble bodhisattvas master correct and complete knowledge to a certain extent, corresponding to the level they have reached, yet their realization does not cover all the ﬁelds and kinds of the knowable. When a bodhisattva realizes the absolute truth, this is a realization free from the veil that hinders this very realization. What is realized at this point is the fact that the true state of a sentient being is peace. This is the correct knowledge of a bodhisattva. From this knowledge the recognition results that this peace, which is the true state of a sentient being, pervades all, no matter how many there are. This is the complete knowledge of a bodhisattva. The realization of a buddha means that he directly sees the nature of all phenomena. This is his correct knowledge. He has complete knowledge from the point of view that he sees the entire range of the knowable, all phenomena in all their aspects, in a completely unobscured way. As opposed to that, the passage explained here only refers to a be-ing or to beings r
espectively. When the nature of one’s own mind is 
realized directly, the power of this realization leads one to see that all sentient beings are the same in that their true state is equally peace; one realizes that the true state that has been realized pervades them all. In other words, there are two objects of realization. The nature of one’s own mind is realized directly. From this realization a second is deduced. The ﬁrst object of realization is the true state of beings, which is peace. From this viewpoint there is correct knowledge. The second object of realization is the fact that not a single being is exempted from this true state, that it pervades them all. From this viewpoint there is 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      323
complete knowledge.
When it is stated that bodhisattvas see these objects of realization in 
a way that they do not have in common with others, this means they 
have command of a knowledge unequaled by that of an ordinary be-ing, a shravaka, or a 
pratyekabuddha. In the view presented by the 
Madhyamakavatara and similar scriptures, the three kinds of noble ones, 
that is, shravaka arhats, pratyekabuddha arhats, and bodhisattvas who have reached the bhumis, are considered as being on the same level. In this view the noble shravakas and pratyekabuddhas have also realized emptiness. Yet, when talking about emptiness in this context, this refers only to the aspect of spaciousness (Tib. dbyings), to freedom 
from 
conceptual elaboration. In the context of the Uttara Tantra Shastra  
the object of r ealization 
is buddha nature, the tathagatagarbha, being 
the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness. This is very difﬁcult to understand. With this understanding bodhisattvas have a realization that they do not hold in common with shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats. For bodhisattvas who have reached the bod-hisattva levels, differ ent 
names are used. They are also called “those 
who have understanding” (Tib. blo ldan), “the heirs of the Victorious 
One” (Tib. rgyal sras), or “shoot of the Victorious One” (Tib. rgyal ba’i 
nyu gu). The noble bodhisattvas are more excellent than the shravakas and pratyeka-buddhas since they excel these in understanding.
When one speaks of the 
inner primordial wisdom, this means that 
noble bodhisattvas realize the nature of their own minds, the sug-atagarbha, independently from extraneous 
conditions, by means of 
self-sprung primordial wisdom. This realization takes place in such a way that the conceptual elaboration, containing the duality of an object realized and a realizing subject, has come to complete peace. Through the power of inner realization there is correct and complete knowledge. Since noble bodhisattvas have directly realized the nature of their own minds, they possess the inner realization. Through the power of this realization they see that the true state of a sentient being is peace. This is correct knowledge. Subsequently they see that this peace pervades all beings without exception. This is complete knowledge. These three aspects are the quality of awareness.
Noble bodhisattvas are puriﬁed from the two veils of attachment 
and obstruction, which is to say, from the veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge. With regard to both veils, a coarse, a subtler, and an extremely subtle aspect are distinguished. Having reached the ﬁrst bodhisattva level, one is puriﬁed from the gross as-
pects of the veils of 
the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge. 
324    Buddha Nature
The coarse aspect of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge is the belief 
in true existence. The two subtler aspects, that is, the perception of characteristics and the appearance of duality as such, are to be removed gradually while traveling the bodhisattva levels. The quality of being unsurpassable means that noble bodhisattvas are freed from inferior views, from the understanding derived from the lesser vehicles. These are the three aspects of the quality of liberation.
Annotation 13:
The vision of primor dial 
wisdom that knows completely arises from 
the ﬁrst bodhisattva level onwards, since at the time when one reaches 
this level the meaning of the true state is seen directly.
Annotation 14:
One speaks of the path 
beyond the worldly or the path of the noble 
ones, since bodhisattvas who have reached the bodhisattva levels have 
a realization that is beyond the stage of an ordinary being. They see the dharmadhatu in a way that they do not have in common with others, that is, with ordinary beings, shravakas, and pratyekabuddhas, just as it is, by means of self-aware or self-sprung primordial wisdom. When this dharmadhatu is called “by nature undeﬁled,” this means that the deﬁlements cannot touch the essence of mind at all, that the essence of mind is free from pollution. This undeﬁled basis is the element, the buddha nature, or sugatagarbha, which pervades all beings without exception. The fact that bodhisattvas realize this, is called complete 
knowledge.
There
 are two ways of explaining complete knowledge. In the section 
commented here it is described as the realization that the dharma-
dhatu pervades all knowable things. In this case the dharmadhatu is to be understood as emptiness in the sense of complete freedom from conceptual elaboration, as it is explained in the Rangtong Madhyamaka system. When exclusively viewed as emptiness or as being beyond conceptual elaboration, the dharmadhatu pervades everything, all sentient beings as well as all things. When viewed in the light of the Shäntong Madhyamaka, the dharmadhatu is the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness. This is the nature of mind or the way the mind truly exists. As such it does not pervade outer objects.
An ephemeral primordial wisdom is to be understood as a tempo-
rary or provisional one, 
such as that of shravakas and pratyekabud-
dhas who only see the 
selﬂessness of persons. In comparison with 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      325
such provisional primordial wisdom, the bodhisattvas’ primordial 
wisdom knowing correctly and completely is of extreme purity. From the viewpoint of the primordial wisdom of a buddha, however, this is not the case. From this perspective the primordial wisdom of a bo-
dhisattva who has r eached 
the ﬁrst bodhisattva level is similar to the 
new moon, whereas the realization of a buddha is like the full moon. A buddha and a bodhisattva are equal as far as the realization of the meaning of the dharmata or the true state is concerned, but there is a great difference in terms of the power or ability of their understanding, in terms of its clarity and expandedness.
When it is said that 
the primordial wisdom of bodhisattvas is free 
from the veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge, this does 
not mean that a bodhisattva is free from all these veils without any 
remainder. Utter puriﬁcation from the veils is not achieved until the level of buddhahood is reached. When a bodhisattva attains the ﬁrst bodhisattva level he has freed himself from the veils that obstruct the direct realization of the true state, which is to say, he is free from veils during meditation while one-pointedly abiding within the true state itself, seeing the buddha nature. This can be compared to the way in which the sense consciousness of the eye is unobscured and free from veils when it perceives a ﬂower just as it appears. In other words, the primordial wisdom of a bodhisattva is a selective or individual percep-tion 
and understanding. It is not comparable to the primordial wisdom 
of a buddha, which covers all aspects without exception.
This is due to the 
fact that a bodhisattva who has reached the ﬁrst 
bhumi has puriﬁed the veils to a certain extent. Taking the veil of the hindrances to knowledge as an example, a coarse, a subtler, and a very subtle aspect are distinguished. The attainment of the bodhisattva lev-els is equivalent to the 
moment in which emptiness is seen directly, in 
such a way that there is not only a passing experience but an immediate realization that cannot be lost. This realization takes place when the coarse aspect of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge, that is, the belief in true existence, is abandoned. As long as one holds things to be truly existent, one cannot realize emptiness. Once one has attained this realization and thereby the ﬁrst bodhisattva level, the subtler and very subtle aspects of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge, which are the perceptional grasping of characteristics and of duality as such, are to be given up gradually while traveling the nine levels above.
There are three different explanations as to the way in which the 
veils are gradually abandoned. Two of these hold that the main part 
326    Buddha Nature
of the veil of the mental poisons and the coarse aspect of the veil of the 
hindrances to knowledge are abandoned when the bodhisattva levels are reached. According to the third it is only the coarse aspect of the 
veil of the mental poisons that is eliminated at this point. The subtler aspects of this veil are gradually puriﬁed until the seventh bodhisat-tva level is r eached; 
the puriﬁcation from the veil of the hindrances 
to knowledge only starts when the eighth level is attained. This is the explanation of the Gelugpa tradition, when the Prasangika Madhya-maka system is pr esented. 
There are further differences according to 
the Svatantrika Madhyamaka system.
Annotation 15:
Duri n
g their last existence those who follow the pratyekabuddha 
vehicle concentrate exclusively on the twelve links of interdependent 
origination. Relying on this means as their sole support they endeavor to attain the fruit on their own. While traveling the path of training, pratyekabuddhas rely on numerous spiritual friends. Their last ex-istence is the one in 
which they attain the state of a pratyekabuddha 
arhat. During this last existence they absorb themselves in their own interdependent origination without the help of a spiritual friend and reﬂect how this interdependent origination is to be reversed. Through their investigation of interdependence they realize that ignorance gives rise to karmic activity, which in its turn gives rise to birth up to aging and death, that in this way the entirety of samsara comes about. This leads to the understanding that death and old age have ceased when birth is ceased, that birth has ceased when karmic activity is ceased and that karmic activity has ceased when ignorance is ceased. While reﬂecting on the way in which this dependent origination is gradually reversed, they come to realize what ignorance means. When they are able to see and understand ignorance, they realize that ignorance is by nature not truly existent. They realize the profound meaning of inter-dependence and thus attain the fr uit they have been striving for.
Annotation 16:
Dharma in terms of teaching 
comprises all the teachings of the great 
and lesser vehicles. When speaking of abandoning, two aspects are 
to be distinguished. These are abandonment by means of an antidote, and a natural process of abandonment taking place through attaining the ultimate fruit. The veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge are to be abandoned by means of an antidote suitable to 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      327
each, respectively. As far as the Dharma in terms of teaching is con-
cerned, no antidote is needed. 
It is abandoned in a natural way by 
attaining the ultimate fruit. Once this fruit is attained, it is no longer 
necessary to rely on teachings, just as a boat is no longer needed once one has reached the far bank of the river.
The two aspects of Dharma in terms of realization are the truth of 
the path, being the means freeing one from attachment, and the truth of cessation, which constitutes freedom from attachment. The path of training consists of four aspects: the paths of accumulation, junction, seeing, and meditation. The realization of those who travel the path of training is ﬂeeting, since it undergoes a continuous development and progresses from one stage to the next. While following the path of junction, for instance, one meditates on emptiness in such a way that one has a view or an opinion of it. One attributes a certain meaning to emptiness. Once one goes beyond this stage during which emptiness is realized as a complete non-presence of anything and so on, and realizes emptiness directly, the preceding meditation proves to be a changeable phenomenon. During the path of accumulation one medi-tates on suffering and 
impermanence, and realizes these to be facts. 
During the path of junction one sees them in the light of emptiness. When emptiness is realized directly, suffering and impermanence do not truly exist. In this way realization changes on the path of training, developing gradually from one stage to the next.
The truths of cessation of bodhisattvas who travel the path of train-
ing u
p to the tenth bodhisattva level and of arhats of the lesser vehicles 
are not an ultimate refuge since they do not constitute the ultimate quality. In other words, they do not embody the true ultimate fruit, since the ultimate quality is not realized. A refuge that does not embody the ultimate quality is not suited to be an ultimate refuge.
To a respective extent, the Sanghas of arhats of the lesser vehicles 
and of bodhisattvas who have attained the bodhisattva levels have not yet puriﬁed the subtle parts of the veils, and are therefore bound up with the fear of these veils. They have not reached the state of ut-ter fearlessness, which is the 
state of a buddha. Until this is achieved, 
the members of these Sanghas themselves take refuge in the Buddha. Therefore they are also not an ultimate refuge.
In truth, only a buddha who is puriﬁed from the two veils and 
the corresponding remaining imprints, and whose understanding is expanded to cover the highest object of knowledge, is the ultimate refuge of all sentient beings without exception. When the commentary 
328    Buddha Nature
speaks of the completion of freedom from desire and attachment, this 
refers to freedom from the two veils. Only a buddha is ultimately free from the two veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge, while arhats and noble bodhisattvas are freed from these veils to a certain extent, corresponding to the respective level they have reached. Only when a member of the Sangha reaches the level of buddhahood has he attained his ultimate fruit, having become a buddha himself.
A buddha is an inexhaustible refuge since he is free from death. He 
is a permanent refuge since he is free from birth. He is an immutable or unchanging refuge since he is free from aging. He is the absolute or true refuge since he is not ﬂeeting or unsteady, and therefore is unfailing.
Annotation 17:
In the phase of or
dinary beings the dharmadhatu is completely veiled 
by the net of the mental poisons. In this phase, while not freed from 
the covering of the mental poisons to even the slightest extent, the dharmadhatu is called “the element,” “the tathagatagarbha,” or “the sugatagarbha.” This is described in the fourth vajra point.
Throu
gh cultivating the path of the Great Vehicle, this sugatagarbha 
is completely and utterly freed from all the veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge, which are present in the phase of an ordinary being. This is possible since these veils are adventitious, which is to say that they are not deﬁlements by nature and do not truly ex-ist. When, for instance, gold 
contained in ore is totally freed from the 
dross surrounding it, the phase in which the gold was contained in ore has changed into another. Nevertheless the nature of this gold has not changed. Due to the fact that the dross was removed, the state of the gold has been completely transformed. On the basis of this trans-formation the pur e gold is obtained.
When speaking of the 
dharmakaya, two aspects are distinguished. 
These are the dharmakaya that is by nature pure and the dharmakaya that has the two types of purity, which in addition to the ﬁrst type of purity is also freed from the adventitious deﬁlements. The nature of mind that is within all beings, whether they are good or evil, is the dharmakaya by nature pure. When this primordial dharmakaya is puriﬁed from all the adventitious deﬁlements, a second type of purity has joined the ﬁrst. On the basis of the purity of the nature of mind, which is present from the very beginning, the puriﬁcation from the adventitious deﬁlements has been completed. This results from the fact 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      329
that two types of purity are present, the ﬁrst being the primordial purity 
of the nature and the second being the puriﬁcation from all obscura-tion. 
 When this second purity in terms of freedom from all deﬁlements 
without exception is achieved, one has reached the state endowed with twofold purity. This is the true dharmakaya. This true or ultimate dhar-makay
a is suchness, which is free from pollution. This is equivalent to 
enlightenment, which is described in the ﬁfth vajra point.
The sixth vajra point describes the buddha qualities. Suchness 
when freed from any pollution is the dharmakaya possessing the two types of purity. Linked with this dharmakaya are the powers and so on, the qualities of a buddha, consisting of the fruits of freedom and of complete maturation.
When speaking of a link 
or connection, two kinds are to be distin-
guished. The ﬁrst is a 
link in the sense that the same essence or nature 
is present. The second is a link in the sense of one giving rise to another, or in other words, a link in terms of cause and fruit. The ﬁrst kind of connection means that with regard to the same essence or nature different aspects are present. The link between the buddha qualities and the dharmakaya is to be understood in this light. Considering the connection of ﬁre and smoke, this is a link in terms of cause and fruit, as the ﬁrst gives rise to the latter. Yet, on the basis of the essence or the nature, there is no connection. The connection of father and son is a link in that one thing has arisen from another—the son has arisen from the father. Between aspects such as compoundedness and impermanence there is a link in the sense of having the same essence or nature. A ﬂower, for instance, is compounded by causes and conditions, and it is impermanent, undergoing a progressive process of destruction tak-ing place from instant 
to instant. When ﬁrst hearing this, one tends to 
think that these are different things. Nevertheless the two aspects of compoundedness and impermanence have the same essence or nature on the basis of the ﬂower. Of the two types of connection described here, the link between the dharmakaya and the buddha qualities is to be understood in the sense of there being no difference with regard to their essence (Tib. ngo bo la dbye ba med pa’i ’brel ba).
The seventh vajra point describes 
buddha activity. The deeds of 
a buddha bringing beneﬁt and welfare to sentient beings are called “activity.” With regard to this term two aspects are distinguished: 
the activity of the object of action and the activity of the actor. This means that not only the 
actor possesses his proper power or capacity, 
330    Buddha Nature
but so does the object of action. The capacity of the object of action is 
to be understood as follows: In all sentient beings buddha nature or 
the tathagatagarbha is present. This constitutes the capacity enabling sentient beings to develop faith in the Three Jewels, compassion for others, and so on. This is the power, or the activity, of beings who are the object of action. The power of the actor consists of the fact that due to the inherent ability of the buddha qualities there is the capacity to accomplish the beneﬁt of beings. This is the activity of the actor.
The last four vajra points, that is, the element or the tathagatagarbha, 
enlightenment, the qualities, and buddha activity, are the cause and the conditions giving rise to the Three Jewels as their fruit. In this context the tathagatagarbha constitutes the cause. Enlightenment, the quali-ties, and buddha activity ar
e the necessary conditions. The primary 
cause for the growth of a ﬂower is the seed. Earth, water, warmth, wind, space, and so on are the necessary conditions. Without these conditions a ﬂower will never grow, although the seed may be present. Only due to the meeting of the cause with the necessary conditions does the growth of the ﬂower take place. The cause for an individual to reach the state of buddhahood is his or her own buddha nature. The necessary conditions are enlightenment, or in other words, the Buddha, his qualities, and his activity.
The way the Three Jewels, constituting the fruit, arise from this cause 
and these three conditions is inconceivable, even to noble shravakas and pratyekabuddhas and to noble ones who have reached the bod-hisattva levels. Here the 
term “inconceivable” means “inconceivable 
by way of direct realization.” By way of inference or deduction the four vajra points and their link with the Three Jewels are conceivable. It is, for instance, possible to study them or reﬂect upon them. When speaking of realization, two kinds are distinguished. These are inferred valid realization and direct valid realization. As long as one has not realized emptiness directly, one has an inferred valid perception of it. This becomes redundant when emptiness is realized directly. Through this direct realization one reaches the ﬁrst bodhisattva level. The true condition of this realization, such as it is, is inconceivable to ordinary beings. They can only conceive of it by means of deduction. Noble ones who have reached the bodhisattva levels have direct realization, but not the ultimate one. This is inconceivable to them.
The object realized dir
ectly, just as it appears, is the true state (Skt. 
dharmat›, Tib. chos nyid). This is equivalent to emptiness, which in this 
context is to be understood mainly as the buddha nature, the tathagata-garbha. The capacity to perceive this true state arises from the ﬁrst 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      331
bodhisattva level onwards. Yet only a buddha possesses the ultimate 
primordial wisdom directly seeing the true state in everything. This ultimate realization is exclusively the object of perception of buddhas. Shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats and noble bodhisattvas are ca-pable of direct r
ealization, each to a respective extent. They are not yet 
capable of ultimate realization. To explain this, Nagarjuna has taken the moon as an example. Arhats of the lesser vehicles and bodhisat-tvas who have r eached 
the bodhisattva levels see a new moon, while 
buddhas see the full moon in its utter brightness.
Annotation 18:
The element is inconceivable to 
ordinary beings since on one hand the 
nature or the way of existence of mind has always been completely 
pure, and yet on the other hand during the impure phase it has the mental poisons, which form on the basis of adventitious deﬁlements. This seems to be a contradiction. It is not, since the deﬁlements are merely adventitious and cannot touch the inherent purity of the nature of mind. The fundamental deﬁlement is the veil that comes about through delusion, through mistaking illusory appearance. It is called “adventitious,” since on one hand it arises from causes and conditions and on the other hand it is able to be removed. Its more active aspect consists of the mental poisons such as desire, hatred, and so on. They are called “afﬂictions,” since they darken and disturb the mind by destroying its peace and torturing it. In a dream, for instance, illusory appearances will occur. On the basis of these appearances one develops desire, hatred, and so on. When these mental poisons gain strength and grow, suffering arises. The mental poisons contain the nature of suffering and are therefore an afﬂiction.
Enlightenment is inconceivable to ordinary beings since on one hand 
mind exists in such a way that it is by essence always free from deﬁle-ment,
 and since on the other hand the puriﬁcation from the deﬁlements 
has been newly added through the cultivation of the path. This also sounds like a contradiction. It is only a seeming one, as even when the deﬁlements are present, they cannot touch the nature of mind. The nature of mind does not have the slightest fault. Gold contained in ore is also pure gold. In the stage when it is not puriﬁed from the surrounding dross it does not have the slightest fault either.
The buddha qualities are inconceivable, since on one hand during 
the phase of an ordinary being the tathagatagarbha also exists in the true state, which is completely indivisible, and yet on the other hand it does not become apparent until the state of buddhahood is reached. These statements also seem contradictory. The absolute qualities are 
332    Buddha Nature
the qualities of the dharmakaya. When the true state is said to be com-
pletely indivisible, this means that 
the basis tathagatagarbha, the path 
tathagatagarbha, and the fruit tathagatagarbha are equally native to it and that it comprises all these aspects. The fact that the power of the qualities does not unfold before buddhahood is reached can also be explained by the example of gold. Even while contained in ore, gold possesses the luster native to pure gold. Yet as long as it is not puriﬁed from the surrounding dross, this luster cannot shine forth.
Buddha activity is inconceivable to ordinary beings, since on one 
hand a buddha fulﬁls the wishes of the disciples in correspondence with their respective capacities and does so spontaneously and without deliberate effort, whereas on the other hand he is completely free from thought and ambition. This also seems to be a contradiction. That this is not the case will be shown at a later stage, when buddha activity is explained by means of nine examples in its own chapter.
The capacities of the disciples vary depending upon whether they 
have the shravaka disposition, the pratyekabuddha disposition, or the disposition to the Mahayana. If, for example, one has the shravaka dis-position, one is capable of 
following the Shravakayana and of gaining 
the state of a shravaka arhat as one’s fruit, on the basis of the practice of the shravaka teachings. (For the explanation of the term “disposition” see also Part Four, note 1.) 
When it is stated that a buddha is free from thought when unfold-
ing activity, this means 
the following: The general characteristic of a 
thought is the fact that an object and a name or term are combined and perceived together as if they were just one thing. This perception is called “thought” or “concept.” When, for example, a ﬂower is in front of us, the sense consciousness of the eye sees or perceives this object directly, just as it is. When on top of this direct perception the object is given a name and perceived in terms of this name, this is a thought, a conceptual perception. In this context two different things, that is, the object and a term, are linked into just one thing and perceived as such, although the link thus created is completely arbitrary. There is not the slightest need or reason for this particular sense-object to be called “a ﬂower.” Nevertheless this name is attached to it in such a way that, merely upon seeing it, it is perceived in those terms.
Annotation 19:
All o
bjects of knowledge are contained within the last four vajra points, 
which are the element or the tathagatagarbha, enlightenment, quali-
ties, and buddha activity . 
Of these, the tathagatagarbha, or suchness 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      333
bound up with pollution, is what is to be realized. During the time 
in which suchness is present in such a way that it is obscured by the deﬁlements, the whole of samsara is contained in this state. Samsara consists of the mental poisons and karma, which give rise to the skandhas, the elements, and the entrances. These mental poisons in their turn are the deﬁlements causing the obscuration of suchness or the tathagatagarbha. For this reason it is said to comprise all objects of knowledge.
When this tathagatagarbha is fr
eed from all adventitious stains of 
delusion without any remainder, these stains having been removed by means of the discriminative wisdom realizing the non-existence of a self, this is enlightenment, the very essence of realization. 
Linked with enlightenment, in the sense that there is one and the 
same essence, are the sixty-four qualities of freedom and complete maturation, which are thus the attributes of realization.
Realization holds power, which is buddha activity. This means that 
a buddha has not only attained ultimate realization himself, but causes the other disciples to realize their buddha nature, or sugatagarbha, as well. Thus his activity is the means or method to bring about the realization of the other disciples.
The tathagatagarbha bound up with pollution, as it is described 
in the fourth vajra point, is the cause or the basis to be puriﬁed. This is because the Three Rare and Sublime Jewels arise when this bud-dha nature is puriﬁed 
from the obscuration of all the adventitious 
deﬁlements without exception. Once an individual has puriﬁed the deﬁlements hindering the direct realization of the tathagatagarbha, and thus immediately sees his own buddha nature, he has become a member of the Sangha of noble ones. Due to the power of the direct realization of the sugatagarbha, the mind of a member of the Noble Sangha is immersed in the truth of cessation and the truth of the path. The truth of cessation is freedom from deﬁlements. The truth of the path is the realization freeing one from deﬁlements. These truths are the two aspects of the sacred Dharma in terms of realization. Once a member of the Noble Sangha has ﬁnalized the practice of this Dharma, he has himself turned into a buddha. Therefore the three Rare and 
Sublime Jewels arise from the 
 fact that the buddha nature is puriﬁed 
from all pollution without any remainder. 
The remaining three vajra points, that is, enlightenment, the quali-
ties,
 and the activity of buddhahood, are the conditions bringing about 
the puriﬁcation from the adventitious deﬁlements. This is comparable 
to the way in which gold is freed from the surrounding dross. The 
334    Buddha Nature
action of removing the dross is the necessary condition to obtain the 
pure gold.
Annotation 20:
The fact that the dharmakaya 
is all-embracing can be compared to the 
way in which light diffuses and embraces everything within its reach. 
The dharmakaya pervades all phenomena as, for example, butter per-vades milk, in the sense that all milk can be turned into butter .
Samsara is equivalent to conditioned 
existence, the nature of which 
is suffering. When going beyond the suffering of samsara one has reached the state of nirvana. Samsara and nirvana are the same in that with regard to their true state or suchness, there is not the slightest differentiation. There are not two different types of suchness, one of samsara and another of nirvana. The dharmadhatu, or emptiness, is by nature utterly pure. It never suffers the slightest impairment through the veils obscuring it until buddhahood is reached. These veils in their turn are able to be removed. When gold, for example, is contained in ore, the gold itself is completely pure. Its essence is not touched by the surrounding dross. The dross in its turn constitutes a deﬁlement that is removable up to the point where not the slightest trace is left. The nature of beings is called the disposition of the Tathagata or the disposition to buddhahood (Tib. sangs rgyas kyi rigs), since it holds the 
power or ability to become a real buddha who possesses the two types of purity. This is comparable to the way in which the seed will inevita-bly become a ﬂower once it meets with the necessary conditions.
The quotation from Lodän 
Sherab points out that the three reasons 
why the tathagatagarbha can be said to be present within all sentient beings refer to three different aspects, these being the fruit, the nature, and the cause. According to his view the ﬁrst reason refers to the dharmakaya being the real Tathagata. The nature of beings is not the Tathagata. It is merely named after it. The difference between the real subject itself and a subject that is named after it is to be understood as follows. Taking the term “lion” as an example, this can be used as the name of the real subject itself and as a name attached to another subject respectively. When the animal himself is called “lion,” this is the real name. When an individual who has great strength and power is called “lion,” this is an attached or imputed name given for the reason that this individual wields great power as does a lion. Similar to this example, beings do not have the dharmakaya possessing the two types 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      335
of purity, that is, the inherent purity of the nature and the additional 
purity that has come about through the total puriﬁcation from all the veils. Yet beings are able to attain this dharmakaya, which is the real Buddha or Tathagata. Therefore the dharmakaya is explained as being all-pervasive. In the view presented by Lodän Sherab, the dharma-kaya is to be understood as that which has the two types of purity, whereas suchness is equivalent to emptiness. This suchness is the nature of both a buddha and beings because, when considered from the aspect of the utter purity of the nature, the tathagatagarbha is present without any differentiation within a buddha and beings alike. 
According to this view, the disposition to buddhahood is the real 
nature of beings. Being the cause of the Buddha, or Tathagata, it has been given the name of the fruit.
In short, according to Lodän Sherab, the nature of a buddha is the 
dharmakaya, the nature of beings is the disposition to buddhahood, and suchness, which is equivalent to emptiness, is the nature of both a buddha and beings, pervading them undifferentiatedly.
In the quote from the words of the Buddha [“since buddha wisdom 
is always present within the assembly of beings . . .”] it is the primor-dial wisdom of a buddha 
that pervades all beings. “The undeﬁled 
nature” refers to the dharmakaya, and “freedom from duality” refers to suchness or the true state. In this context, Jamgön Kongtrül the Great clariﬁes that the above words of the Buddha, which are contained in the version of the root text he comments, neither appear in all the translations of the root text nor in every commentary, especially not in those of his time. Yet he points out that these words have been quoted, explained, and commented by many eminent scholars. Golo was a great translator; Karma Könchön and Rongtön were both great scholars. The latter belonged to the Sakya school. The Jonangpas, that is, Dolpopa, Taranatha and others, were the ﬁrst to establish the Shän-tong view. Dolpopa Sherab 
Gyaltsen, also known as Künchen Dolpo 
Sangjä, is especially famous and revered for his giving the practice of the Kalachakra Tantra, which belongs to the Vajrayana system. (For further information in English, see S.K. Hookham, The Buddha Within  
[Albany: State University of New 
York Press, 1991], pp. 135-136, and 
index, pp. 387, 394.)
Annotation 21:
336    Buddha Nature
Here in this section, what is to be puriﬁed, that is, the tathagatagarbha, 
and the path or means to purify it are explained together.
(1) As far as its very essence is concerned, a precious wish-fulﬁll-
ing gem is fr ee 
from any deﬁlement. When the sky is obscured by 
clouds, these clouds have arisen as something ﬂeeting: they are but an adventitious obscuration that does not touch the nature of the sky itself. The sky is by nature completely pure. When water is mixed with mud and the like, this does not affect the purity of the water. The water itself is by nature completely pure and has never been deﬁled in any way. These three are examples for the fact that the tathagatagarbha or the dharmadhatu is by nature utterly pure and never touched by the slightest deﬁlement. Here the dharmadhatu is to be understood as being equivalent to the way the mind truly exists, which is the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness or of emptiness and clear light. When viewed in the light of the Rangtong Madhyamaka, the dharmadhatu is nothing but emptiness in the sense of freedom from conceptual elaboration, whereas in the Shäntong and Mahamudra views it is spaciousness-awareness inseparable. On the basis of sheer emptiness it could not become the cause for the attain-ment 
of buddhahood. The fact that the dharmadhatu is the inseparable 
union of spaciousness and awareness or of emptiness and clear light constitutes the reason why the fruit, the level of buddhahood, can be reached. Thus the power allowing the arising of the primordial wis-dom and the kayas of 
a buddha is present. For this reason the view 
of the dharmadhatu being the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness plays a very prominent part in the Shäntong Madhyamaka and Mahamudra traditions.
When it is said that 
the dharmadhatu is by nature always free from 
the stains of the mental poisons, this explains the way in which the essence is by nature utterly pure and at no time affected by the slightest fault, though adventitious deﬁlements are temporarily present, until the state of buddhahood is reached. This is expressed above (B.II.2.2. 1.3) where the fourth vajra point is described as being inconceivable, by stating: “[The element] is pure and yet has afﬂiction.” Even while it is present the pollution of the veils cannot touch its essence. The essence itself has been utterly pure since beginningless time. The way it is pure is to be understood by means of the three examples of a precious jewel, the sky, and water. The essence of a jewel itself is free from any deﬁlement, the essence of water itself is free from mud, and the essence of the sky itself is free from clouds. Thus they are by 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      337
nature completely pure. 
It is very important to understand that there is not the slightest 
pollution as far as the essence is concerned, that deﬁlements, though 
present, cannot touch the essence. In the light of this view, the Ma-hamudra and Maha Ati traditions 
speak of “freedom from bondage 
and liberation.” On the basis of this complete purity of the essence, the view of “purity and equality” is introduced on the level of the secret Mantrayana. The reason why one can speak of the purity and equality of all phenomena is the fact that no stain has ever impaired their essence, that this essence has been completely pure since begin-ningless time, as it is 
taught in the Uttara Tantra Shastra. Once this fact 
is understood well, one will be able to understand the view of purity and equality or of “utter purity” (Tib. dag pa rab ’byams) as taught in the system of the secret Mantrayana. In order to gain the understand-ing t
hat the essence is completely pure, one should reﬂect on the 
process of dreaming: No matter how many impure appearances arise during dream, this impurity does not have the slightest substance in the sphere of the mind; the impure things do not really exist in any way. When reﬂecting in this way, ﬁrst understanding, then certainty, and ﬁnally ﬁrm conviction, will arise. As long as individuals like us do not thoroughly reﬂect by means of suitable examples, as for instance dreaming, appearances are viewed as being different in that there is the duality of pure and impure appearances. There is perception of a multitude of pure and impure things, of a beautiful ﬂower, revulsive ﬁlth, and so on. This is not worthwhile to reﬂect upon. Such percep-tion is present in 
the phase in which understanding is polluted by the 
belief in true existence and all appearances are perceived in the light of this understanding. From the viewpoint of correct valid cognition this phase can be illustrated by means of the example of drunkenness. It is a state marked by confusion and delusion, this delusion being due to the predominating inﬂuence of the belief in true existence. When reﬂecting upon the dream appearances, one will understand that their essence is pure. Once one has gained a ﬁrm conviction of the complete purity of the essence, one is able to develop an equal conviction of the teachings of the Vajrayana. On this basis one will ﬁnd it easy to practice these teachings, whereas not understanding the purity of the essence one will have difﬁculties in gaining conviction of the Vajrayana level of teachings and will develop doubts with regard to the view of utter purity as presented there.
(2) Although the essence is by nature completely pure like the 
sky and so on, and thus free from bondage and liberation, there are 
338    Buddha Nature
adventitious deﬁlements that have to be removed. The method by 
which these adventitious deﬁlements are puriﬁed is the cause of the accomplishment of the fruit. This cause is fourfold.
The ﬁrst cause is devotion towards the Mahayana Dharma. This is 
because in the view of the Mahayana, the basis to be puriﬁed is the element, the sugatagarbha. On this basis the deﬁlements to be removed are ultimately puriﬁed up to their very end. Contrary to this, in the view of the shravakas, for instance, the basis to be puriﬁed is not the sugatagarbha. Accordingly, the followers of this vehicle do not rely on the ultimate means to purify the adventitious stains. Since the teachings of the Mahayana are the only ones to provide the means to purify all deﬁlements preventing the direct manifestation of the sugatagarbha, devotion towards the Mahayana Dharma is needed as the unsurpass-able means of puriﬁcation.
The s
econd purifying cause is highest discriminative wisdom, 
which realizes the non-existence of a self. There are many other kinds of discriminative wisdom among worldly beings. Higher than these is the discriminative wisdom realizing the non-existence of a self. This wisdom arises on the basis of the sacred Dharma. The highest discriminative wisdom is the one not only realizing the selﬂessness of persons, but realizing the selﬂessness of both persons and phenomena. This arises on the basis of the Mahayana Dharma.
The third purifying cause 
is limitless samadhi endowed with bliss, 
or in other words, having the nature of bliss.
The fourth purifying cause is great compassion focusing on be-
ings as its object or 
point of reference. It utters itself in the wish: “If 
only all sentient beings were free from their suffering up to its very end!” There are three types of compassion, as they are described for instance in the Madhyamakavatara (Tib. dbu ma 
 la ’jug pa). The ﬁrst is 
compassion focusing on beings as its object. The second is compas-sion focusing on the [impermanent] 
nature of beings and things, and 
the third is compassion free from any focus. This last-mentioned type of compassion is what mainly needs to be given rise to, once one has realized emptiness. This is stated in many passages, as for example in the Supplication for the Realization of 
 Mahamudra (Tib. phyag chen smon 
lam) by the Third Karmapa, Rangjung Dorjé, where it is said:
The nature of beings is always buddha. Yet, not realizing this they 
wander through the endless cycle of existence. For all beings in their boundless suffering, may unbearable compassion be born in our streams of being.
Even as the skillful activity of unbearable compassion unfolds 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      339
without hindrance, may at the same time the meaning of its empty 
essence nakedly shine forth. Inseparable from this supreme unerr-ing path of union may we meditate at all times, day and night.
These three types of compassion will arise gradually. As a beginner, 
one ﬁrst has to give rise to compassion focusing on beings as its object. 
Once one realizes the impermanent nature of beings and phenomena, understanding that all compounded phenomena are impermanent in that they undergo a process of destruction taking place from instant to instant, compassion focusing on the nature arises. Finally, the re-alization of the emptiness of 
all phenomena gives rise to compassion 
free from any focus. As far as the puriﬁcation of the deﬁlements is concerned, this last-mentioned type of compassion is the most efﬁcient means. Until compassion free from any focus has arisen, compassion towards sentient beings is still ﬂawed by attachment in terms of the belief in their true existence. Once one realizes that beings do not truly exist and yet feels compassion for them, this is the most excellent type of compassion.
The r
ealization resulting from these four purifying causes is enlight-
enment. This is the fr
uit achieved once the adventitious deﬁlements 
are completely puriﬁed, as described in the ﬁfth vajra point.
Annotation 22:
Of the three types 
of individuals mentioned in the commentary, those 
who desire existence are beings who have the cut-off disposition 
and beings who have great desire and are completely immersed in the cycle of existence. Those who desire freedom from existence are tirthikas, shravakas, and pratyekabuddhas. Those who desire neither existence nor freedom from existence are not speciﬁcally mentioned in the commentary. This refers to bodhisattvas who abide in neither of the extremes of cyclic existence or of the individual peace that is the fruit of the small vehicles. The term “tirthika” (Tib. mu stegs pa) is here 
used as a general name and refers to the proponents of the various non-Buddhist tenet systems. The Tibetan term mu stegs pa  is sometimes 
translated as “heretic,” which has a strongly negative connotation. Jamgön Kongtrül the Great, who holds an unbiased view, has clariﬁed in his Treasury of Knowledge (Tib. shes bya kun khyab) that it refers to 
proponents of tenets who have not quite entered the path to liberation 
and whose conduct is not altogether conducive to this aim, but who are very near to it and will eventually reach it. The term mu literally 
means “edge” or “boundary” and 
the term stegs means “support” or 
“pl
atform.” Based on these literal meanings, Jamgön Kongtrül the Great 
340    Buddha Nature
points out that mu refers to the view and stegs refers to the conduct. 
Thus he explains that 
the term mu stegs pa denotes individuals whose 
view is not altogether in correspondence with the truth but is at the 
very edge of a correct view, and whose conduct is not quite the right support but also very near to proper conduct.
Annotation 23:
Discriminative wisdom realizing the 
way everything exists is equiva-
lent to discriminative wisdom r
ealizing the non-existence of a self, or 
in other words, emptiness. 
There are many different kinds of samadhi, many hundreds of thou-
sands
, such as the samadhi of earth, of water, of ﬁre, of red, yellow, and 
so on. Whatever object of perception one focuses upon during medita-
tion 
will eventually result in an according samadhi. The meditation on 
many different objects serves as a means to strengthen one’s power of concentration and one’s mental capacity. When gaining mastery over samadhi, any object one meditates on becomes limitless and one is able to actually transform oneself into this object. When practicing, for instance, the samadhi of water, one meditates upon everything as being of the nature of water, until it directly manifests in the appearance of water. When Jetsün Milarepa had gained mastery over this particular samadhi, he was able to transform his physical form into water and was seen by others as a pond into which they threw pebbles. The term “treasury of space” refers to the fact that when true samadhi is developed and mastered, one has the power to prevent the exhaustion of any material goods that other beings need to dispel their poverty. Accounts of this capacity are to be found in the life stories of many eminent lamas and realized beings, as it is, for example, described in the Bible that Jesus was able to feed a great multitude with just ﬁve loaves of bread and two ﬁsh.
The terms “samadhi” and “meditative stability” (Tib. bsam gtan) are 
being used synonymously here. They refer to a state in which the mind rests one-pointedly, in peace. The literal meaning of the word bsam 
is “reﬂection” and the 
meaning of gtan is “stable.” Thus bsam gtan is 
deﬁned as the mind abiding stably focused o
n a wholesome object.
Annotation 24:
“The 
absolute expanse” is equivalent to the element or the sug-
atagarbha. It has two particular 
features in that it can be considered in 
terms of fruit and function. The fruit consists of four perfect qualities: 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      341
“True purity” refers to the fact that buddha nature in terms of the fruit 
is beyond the extremes of purity and impurity. “True self” refers to the fact that all conceptual elaborations in terms of the existence of a self and the non-existence of a self have been completely stilled and come to peace. “True happiness” denotes the fact that it is beyond the extremes of happiness and suffering, and “true permanence” stands for the fact that all conceptual elaboration in terms of permanence and impermanence is completely paciﬁed.
The fact that the sugatagarbha is present within all sentient beings 
is not without effect. Buddha nature has a function inducing weari-ness of the suf fering 
of samsara, a longing for nirvana, which is peace 
in that it is free from this suffering, and ﬁnally devotion towards this aim. The Tibetan equivalent for the Sanskrit term “nirvana” is mya ngan 
las ’das pa. The term mya ngan means “misery” or “afﬂiction” and the 
term las ’das pa means “beyond.” Thus “nirvana” is a state free from 
or beyond any torment and pain.
Annotation 25:
The fr uit is achieved 
through applying the four causes, that is, devo-
tion,
 discriminative wisdom, meditative stability, and compassion, 
and thus purifying the adventitious deﬁlements. This fruit has four 
aspects. These are true purity, true self, true happiness, and true per-manen 
ce. The dharmakaya has always been utterly pure. Nevertheless 
the children entertain four wrong beliefs with regard to this dharma-kaya, or in other words, with regard to the nature of all phenomena. The term “child” (Tib. byis pa) is used in two different ways. On one 
hand it is used for someone who is very young of age as opposed to an older person, and on the other hand it is used for someone who is very ignorant and foolish as opposed to someone who is capable and skilled in both learning and practice. Here the term “child” is to be understood in the latter meaning. It stands for a deeply ignorant person who does not understand the nature of phenomena at all. When an image appears in a mirror such a person will think that it is real and hold it to be truly existent. A child in that sense is deluded in that he or she takes things that do not truly exist as being truly existent and thus turns reality upside down. This delusion consists of four wrong 
perceptions: Impure things are mistakenly perceived as being pure. Suffering is mistakenly perceived as happiness. What does not exist as a self is mistakenly perceived as an existing self to which one is strongly attached. Finally, that which is impermanent is mistakenly perceived and clung to as being permanent. 
342    Buddha Nature
When following the Shravakayana one applies four antidotes to 
counteract these four wrong beliefs. To remedy the perception of 
something impure as being pure, one meditates on the fact that one’s own body and others’ bodies are impure. As a remedy for the wrong concept consisting of the attachment to a truly existing self, one medi-tates
 on the non-existence of a self. To remedy the attachment that takes 
suffering to be happiness, one meditates on the fact that the entirety of samsara is of the nature of suffering. As a remedy for the perception of permanence, one meditates on impermanence. Thus according to the shravaka tradition the four remedies for the four wrong concepts of the children are the meditations on impurity, non-existence of self, suffering, and impermanence.
Yet, in the light of the ultimate nature of phenomena these four rem-
edies of the shravaka tradition 
imply a fault as well. Though through 
the recognition of impurity, non-existence of a self, suffering, and im-perma 
nence one achieves the reversal of the four wrong concepts held 
by the children, these recognitions do not correspond to the ultimate nature of phenomena and thus represent in their turn wrong concepts of a subtler kind. If, for instance, while dreaming one sees the attractive physical appearance of a man or woman and develops attachment, viewing this body as being pure, this belief is wrong. If one reﬂects upon it as being impure and meditates accordingly, so that ﬁnally it actually appears as an impure phenomenon, this is a wrong vision as well. The dream appearances of one’s own and others’ bodies, no matter how they may be, are beyond the extremes of both purity and impurity. They represent a state of peace in terms of freedom from any conceptual elaboration. They are spacious and relaxed, movements of clear light, which is the mind itself. They are in the state of emptiness, beyond purity and dirt. This emptiness is not an emptiness in terms of “non-existent,” as is a rabbit horn, nor is it nothing at all like sky. It is a state of utter peace, of complete freedom from any conceptual elaboration. This is experienced as relaxation and spaciousness within clear light, which is the nature of the mind itself.
While one applies the methods of the Shravakayana and reverses 
the four beliefs of the worldly beings by means of the four antidotes taught in this system, one will develop an attachment to these remedies. When, for instance, following the shravaka tradition one meditates 
upon the impurity of one’s own body and that of others, one will gradually develop the actual consciousness realizing them as being impure and dirty. Once this consciousness has arisen, in consequence 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      343
there will be attachment to this concept of impurity. At that stage one 
has to practice meditation until this attachment does not arise at all any more. In the tradition of the Mahayana the four aspects of the true purity of the dharmakaya and so on act as the remedies for the four kinds of attachment that form by applying the four methods of the Shravakayana.
While worldly beings per ceive 
the body as being pure, shravakas 
counteract this perception through the meditation on impurity. The fruit is beyond both these extremes. It is beyond purity and impurity and thus constitutes the perfection of true purity.
Worldly beings take what does not exist as a self for an existing self 
and are attached to this self. In the shravaka tradition one counteracts this belief in an existing self through meditating on the non-existence of a self, yet only in terms of sheer voidness. These concepts, and mainly the latter one, are puriﬁed by the understanding that the fruit is a state of peace, of complete freedom from the conceptual elabora-tion of an existing self 
or of the non-existence of a self. Thus it is the 
perfection of true self.
Worldly beings are attached to happiness and mistake suffering for 
happiness. Shravakas counteract this belief by means of the under-standing that all feelings of 
ordinary happiness are in fact suffering. 
Thus they meditate on the entirety of samsara as being of the nature of suffering. In the tradition of the Mahayana one gains the understanding that the fruit is beyond any extreme, that it is beyond both happiness and suffering and as such free from all conceptual elaboration. Thus it is the perfection of true happiness.
Worldly beings take what is impermanent as being permanent and 
are attached to permanence. In the shravaka tradition one recognizes and contemplates the fact that whatever appears to be permanent undergoes a process of destruction taking place from instant to instant and thus is of an impermanent nature. In doing so one develops at-tachment holding the very subtle 
aspect of impermanence to be real 
or truly existent. In order to reverse this attachment one has to medi-tate as taught in the 
Mahayana tradition. One has to understand that 
while permanence does not exist, impermanence, which is merely its contrary or opposite, cannot exist either. Light cannot exist without darkness and darkness cannot exist without light. If there is no light in this world, darkness will not appear. If there is no darkness, there 
will be no light. The same is true of hearing and sound. Without sound there is no hearing. Without hearing there is no sound. These can only 
344    Buddha Nature
exist together in that they mutually presuppose each other. One has 
to understand that the fruit is beyond this mutual implication, being beyond permanence and impermanence and thus constituting the perfection of true permanence.
In short, in the state of children the dharmakaya is obscured by 
four wrong beliefs. Once these have been reversed by means of the four antidotes as taught in the shravaka tradition, four kinds of at-tachment have formed, which in 
their turn obscure the true state of 
the dharmakaya. The obscuration caused by the four antidotes of the shravaka tradition has to be removed subsequently by the understand-ing that the dharmakaya is 
true purity, true self, true happiness, and 
true permanence. The means leading to the perfection of these four qualities are the four causes mentioned above, which are outstanding devotion, highest discriminative wisdom, meditative stability, and compassion.
Annotation 26:
The term “perfection of tr
ue self” is to be understood as follows: The 
tirthikas, such as different Hindu traditions and so on, hold the belief 
of there being a self or atman that is eternal (Tib. rtag pa), unique (Tib. 
gcig), and independent (Tib. rang dbang). This self or atman is called 
“true self.” The shravakas and so on remedy this belief by the medita-tion on the non-existence of 
a self. They meditate that everything does 
not exist as a self at all, that everything is nothing but sheer voidness. The belief in the existence of an eternal, unique, and independent self is a wrong concept and perception. While the recognition that everything is utterly non-existent constitutes a valid remedy for this wrong perception of the tirthikas, it is in its turn also distorted in that it does not correspond to the ultimate nature of everything either. The ultimate nature of everything is a state of peace completely beyond the conceptual elaboration in terms of the existence of a self or the non-existence of a self. If, for instance, while dreaming one thinks in terms of “self” and “I,” attachment to one’s body will arise born from the belief in an existing self. This is a mistaken reaction based on a deluded concept. If, while dreaming, one thinks that a self does not exist at all and therefore takes this body to be nothing but empty, this 
is also a deluded thought. In truth it is beyond any of these conceptual elaborations. There is a great difference between “true self” as taught in the Hindu traditions and as taught in the Mahayana system. In the 
ﬁrst sense the term “true self” denotes a self that is eternal, unique, 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      345
and independent. “True self” as taught in the Uttara Tantra Shastra is 
equivalent to the state of peace in terms of complete freedom from any 
conceptual elaboration. This state of peace has only been given the name of “true self.” There is a mere similarity in terms. The Mahayana system does not hold the view of an eternal, unique, and independent self. Between light and darkness, for instance, there is only a similarity inasmuch as they are both things (Skt. bh›va, Tib. dngos po) fulﬁlling 
a function. 
Apart from that they contradict each other; there is not the 
slightest similarity.
Arhats who have reached the fruit of the lesser vehicles still have 
subtle skandhas, or in other words, a body of mental nature. These skandhas are due to the fact that arhats still have an undeﬁled type of karma resulting from the mental poisons, which consist of the re-maining imprints of ignorance. When 
the state of an arhat is reached, 
ignorance itself is eliminated. Nevertheless the remaining inﬂuence of ignorance, which constitutes a very subtle obscuration, is still present and needs to be abandoned. When these subtle remaining imprints of ignorance are called “mental poisons,” this is merely an imputed name. Arhats have ceased all mental poisons, and the remaining imprints of ignorance are in fact a subtler part of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge.
When Dolpopa states that the 
absolute expanse is spontaneously 
present, this refers to the fact that the qualities of buddhahood have been spontaneously present since beginningless time. In the Shäntong tradition the faults are viewed as being adventitious and the qualities are viewed as being spontaneously present, whereas in the Rangtong tradition the faults are also held to be adventitious, while the qualities are to be newly attained.
Annotation 27:
The literal meaning of the 
Sanskrit term “skandha” (Tib. phung po) is 
“heap.” [This term arose from the fact that, when the Buddha explained 
the skandhas, he heaped up various grains into ﬁve piles to represent the categories of impermanent phenomena.] The ﬁve skandhas rep-resent all impermanent phenomena, 
those of the personal continuum 
as well as those of the external world. 
Those who are dominated 
by great desire are beings who are at-
tached to and crave for 
the happiness of existence. They believe that 
the ﬁve skandhas ar e 
an existing self or entity and perceive them ac-
cordi
ngly. Thus they fall into the extreme of existence. The only means 
346    Buddha Nature
to cut this belief in the existence of a self and the wrong perception 
resulting from it is the discriminative wisdom realizing that neither a self of the person nor of phenomena exist. As long as this wisdom is not present, one cannot cut the attachment to a self.
One speaks of “dormant tendencies” (Tib. bag la nyal) as opposed 
to something that directly manifests. At the time, for example, when strong faith or great love arises, feelings of anger and the like are po-tenti
ally present in a dormant state. When one gets angry, this changes 
into a direct manifestation.
Shravakas and pratyekabuddhas are mainly concerned about their 
own suffering and therefore strive to free themselves from this suffer-ing and to attain a 
state of peace for themselves. Thus they fall into the 
extreme of mere individual peace. The means to remedy this limited motivation is great compassion uttering itself in the wish that all sen-tient beings without exception may be fr ee from all their suffering.
Wh 
en thoroughly cultivating these two means, one does not abide in 
any extreme. Discriminative wisdom realizing emptiness prevents one from abiding in the extreme of existence. Inspired by great compassion, one will not strive to attain a state of mere peace. Thus one will eventu-ally r each the non-abiding nirvana, which is the ultimate fruit.
Annotation 28:
The fact that an individual 
is able to feel weary of the suffering of 
samsara and to develop longing for the attainment of the state of lib-
eration is considered as 
being due to the presence of the disposition to 
buddhahood. Without this disposition these feelings would not arise. This refers to the fact that the mind is not just the power of this body of ﬂesh and blood, but constitutes a particular force.
Generally speaking, any human being, although he has not devel-
oped love as taught in 
the Dharma, is able to feel love and compassion 
for another. Furthermore, the mind will undergo changes and manifest a great number of different expressions. At one time one gives rise to love, at another time it does not arise. Even towards a friend whom one loves, one may suddenly get angry. At that time love is no longer present. These changes could not take place if the mind was simply the power of this body of ﬂesh and blood. If that was the case, whatever had arisen would be there to stay. Once love had arisen, anger could not arise. Once anger had arisen, love could not arise. The fact that the mind undergoes these changes is the sign that the mind constitutes a particular power, which is not the power of this body but comes from previous lives. The body depends on this particular power. When a 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      347
person is mentally unhappy, his body is not able to be happy. It does 
not have an independent force of its own.
As long as the disposition to buddhahood is not awakened, an un-
derstanding of what is to 
be adopted and what is to be rejected will 
not arise. The awakening of the disposition can be illustrated by the following example: while a pig likes to dwell in mud and ﬁlth and cares little about a ﬂower garden, a human being ﬁnds ﬁlth revulsive and delights in a beautiful garden. Once this pig has been reborn as a human being its attitude will have changed. It will no longer delight in ﬁlth and mud, but prefer the ﬂower garden.
Annotation 29:
Where
as according to the Rangtong view the qualities in terms of 
the fruit are something that is developed and newly attained, the 
Shäntong view holds that the qualities in terms of the cause and the qualities in terms of the fruit are equally inherent to the element or the buddha nature. According to this view the three aspects of the ta-thagatagarbha in terms of basis, 
path, and fruit are only distinguished 
from the viewpoint of the puriﬁcation from the adventitious stains of delusion. The buddha nature itself does not change, and the quali-ties that become appar ent, 
once all the adventitious stains have been 
completely removed, are inseparable from it and have always been present. This can be understood by means of the example of muddy water. It contains the qualities in terms of the cause as well as those in terms of the fruit. Water containing mud of itself has the power to become clear, in that the mud will settle by itself once the water rests unmoved. These are the qualities in terms of the cause. While water is muddy, it will not show a clear reﬂection of the moon, whereas once the mud has settled by itself and the water has become clear, the reﬂec-tion of the moon will 
appear extremely clearly. These are the qualities 
in terms of the fruit. Both types of quality are equally inherent to the water, even while it is muddy.
The qualities in terms of the cause are devotion towards the Ma-
hayana Dharma, discriminative wisdom, samadhi, 
and compassion. 
They are called causes since they bring about the removal of the ad-ventitious stains. The qualities in 
terms of the fruit are the ﬁrst ﬁve 
kinds of clairvoyance, unpolluted primordial wisdom, and the fact 
that the abandonment of these adventitious stains has been completed. There are six kinds of clairvoyance: The ﬁrst ﬁve are the clairvoyance of divine sight, of divine hearing, of knowing the minds of others, of knowing death and birth, and of remembering previous lives.
348    Buddha Nature
“Unpolluted primordial wisdom” here refers to the two aspects of 
primordial wisdom: knowing correctly and knowing completely.
The statement that the qualities in terms of the fruit are inseparable 
refers to the fact that there is only a difference in terms of aspects. They 
all have one and the same basis, or essence, which in itself is completely indivisible. This essence is the buddha nature.
Annotation 30:
The seven properties of 
no-more-learning, that is, the ﬁrst ﬁve kinds 
of clairvoyance, unpolluted primordial wisdom, and abandonment 
free from deﬁlement, correspond to the level of a buddha.
Annotation 31:
The topic “manifestation” r efers 
to the fact that with regard to such-
ness three phases ar
e to be discerned. The ﬁrst phase is that of an 
ordinary being who has not directly realized the meaning of empti-
ness. The second phase is 
that of a noble bodhisattva who has directly 
realized the nature of the mind, or truth. The third phase is that of a perfect buddha who has eliminated the two veils along with all their remaining imprints without any exception, who has perfected the two aspects of abandonment and realization. These three phases are called the suchness of an ordinary being, the suchness of a noble one, and the suchness of a perfect buddha. In this context it is important to understand that these three “types of suchness” are just three different aspects in terms of its manifestation in three different phases. As far as the essence is concerned there is not the slightest differentiation. Suchness itself is indivisible.
“The Omniscient One who Dir
ectly Sees Thatness” is an epithet of 
the Buddha. A buddha is called “omniscient” since he possesses the unhindered knowledge of all aspects of the knowable. The direct vi-sion of thatness (T ib. de 
kho na nyid) is synonymous with the vision of 
reality as it is, with the direct realization of emptiness, of the absolute truth, of the dharmadhatu or the sugatagarbha.
A being is called “fortunate” (Tib. skal pa dang ldan pa) when he has 
the karmic fortune or gift enabling him to practice the Dharma. The 
term “fortune” (Tib. skal pa) is equivalent to the frame of mind and the 
ability of a person. If, for instance, one wants to practice the teachings of the secret Mantrayana, one needs the respective karmic fortune or gift that consists of faith and pure vision. Without these one can study those teachings but will not be able to put them into practice.
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      349
“The Victorious One” is another epithet of the Buddha. The common 
explanation why this term is used is the fact that a buddha has been 
victorious through overcoming the four maras or demons (Tib. bdud). 
(See also Part Four , note three.)
Annotation 32:
Thro u
gh the topic “manifestation” the following is explained: Although 
in terms of the essence, suchness cannot be divided, there is a division 
into three different kinds due to the different individuals who are its basis. Therefore the classiﬁcation presented is only a classiﬁcation by means of the basis. As to space itself, for instance, there are no differ-ent kinds, nevertheless there 
is an eastern, a western, a southern, and 
a northern space, when space is viewed from the basis of the earth. Likewise, there is an inner and an outer space on the basis of a house and so on. Without such bases space cannot be divided at all. Cor-responding to this example, 
the dharmadhatu is classiﬁed into three 
kinds, that is, into the unpuriﬁed suchness, the partly puriﬁed and partly unpuriﬁed suchness, and the completely puriﬁed suchness, on the basis of three respective types of individuals.
When it is said that suchness manifests in the phase of a buddha in 
an unperverted way and as freedom from any conceptual elaboration, this refers to the following: In this phase the ordinary concept-bound mind (Tib. sems) is no longer present, but has been replaced by primor-
dial wisdom (Tib. ye shes
). The ordinary mind is characterized by the 
fact that there is the appearance of duality through the perception of an outer object by a perceiving inner subject or consciousness. In the phase of a buddha, the mind is equivalent to primordial wisdom. Thus it is unperverted, which is to say that it is free from any delusion. The different ways in which understanding will manifest can be shown by the example of dreaming: The understanding present while one recognizes that one is dreaming, and the understanding present while one does not recognize the dream for what it is, are not the same. There are two different ways of manifestation.
The terms “conceptual elaboration” (Tib. spros pa) and “freedom 
from conceptual elaboration” (Tib. spros med) are to be understood as 
follows: All thoughts (Tib. rtog pa) are conceptual elaborations. These 
elaborations are of two kinds: those of the perceiving subject and those of the object perceived. The thoughts that constitute the perceiving subject are conceptual elaborations. By means of these thoughts the conceptualization of the perceived object will come about. When, for 
350    Buddha Nature
instance, while dreaming one thinks “this is ﬁre,” “this is water,” etc., 
or “this is pure,” “this is dirty,” and so on, these thoughts are conceptual elaborations of the perceiving subject. Accordingly there are “water,” “ﬁre,” “friend,” “enemy,” etc., a multitude of conceptualized outward appearances. Once the conceptual elaboration of the perceiving subject has arisen, the elaboration of the object will arise in the same measure. There is an interdependent origination in terms of the initial thought forming the support and the perceived object being supported by this thought. This is best understood by the example of dream. To body and speech themselves, thoughts do not arise, yet with regard to body and speech, perceiving thoughts will occur. All thoughts arise either on the basis of body or speech. Thoughts such as “my body,” “my head,” “my legs,” “my hands,” and so on arise on the basis of the body. Thoughts such as “this is good,” “this is bad,” “this is pure,” “this is dirty,” “this is a friend,” “this is an enemy,” and so on arise on the basis of terms, the expression of speech. All thoughts that arise on the basis of the body and the ones that arise on the basis of speech equally occur in connection with names. Thus all thoughts arise on the basis of terms and are therefore just nominal. Freedom from conceptual elaboration is the state of peace in which all thoughts have subsided.
Annotation 33:
The u
npuriﬁed phase corresponds to the tathagatagarbha in terms 
of the basis (Tib. gzhi de gshegs snying po). The partly unpuriﬁed and 
partly puriﬁed phase corresponds to the tathagatagarbha in terms of 
the path (Tib. lam de gshegs snying po), and the utterly puriﬁed phase 
corresponds to the tathagatagarbha in terms of the fruit (Tib. ’bras bu 
de gshegs snying po).
When 
it is said that during the partly unpuriﬁed and partly puriﬁed 
phase buddha nature is puriﬁed to a certain degree, this means the following: Once the buddha nature is puriﬁed from all the deﬁlements that are to be abandoned on the paths of seeing and meditation, the level of the fruit, the state of buddhahood, is reached. A bodhisattva has not attained this fruit, but is puriﬁed from these deﬁlements to a certain degree, corresponding to the level he has reached. When, for instance, the ﬁrst bodhisattva level is attained, one is puriﬁed from the veil to be abandoned through seeing. When one has reached the 
second or third bodhisattva level, one is puriﬁed from the veil to be abandoned through seeing; in addition to that, one is puriﬁed from the coarse aspect of the deﬁlements to be abandoned through meditation, 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      351
to a degree corresponding to each of these levels.
One may wonder why buddha nature, although it pervades all 
sentient beings, is expressed by the three different names of “being,” 
“bodhisattva,” and “tathagata.” This is due to a different degree of puriﬁcation from the adventitious stains of delusion. The true state itself is not of different kinds. Nevertheless there is a difference con-cerning the individuals who ar
e the basis of this true state or buddha 
nature: There are those who have not puriﬁed the adventitious stains at all, those who have puriﬁed them to a respective degree, and ﬁnally those who have completely puriﬁed all deﬁlements without exception. These three different types of individuals are explained by means of the aforementioned three names.
Annotation 34:
This section clariﬁes that as 
far as the essence is concerned there is not 
the slightest difference between the three aspects of the basis tathagata-
garbha, the path tathagatagarbha, and the fruit tathagatagarbha. This is the view of the Shäntong Madhyamaka. If one understands it well, one will ﬁnd it easy to understand the teachings on Mahamudra. These teachings also introduce the three aspects of basis, path, and fruit. In this context one speaks of basis Mahamudra, path Mahamudra, and fruit Mahamudra, the essence of which is considered as being insepa-rable
. The fact that the essence is unchanging has been shown in detail 
by means of the examples of the sky, of water containing mud, and of gold. The different phases of basis, path, and fruit as they are ex-plain
ed in this section are presented from the viewpoint of there being 
a difference only in the degree of puriﬁcation from the adventitious deﬁlements. With regard to the essence itself, to the tathagata-garbha, there is not the slightest difference. When the system of the Rangtong Madhyamaka speaks of the essence being undifferentiated, this es-sence is synonymous with emptiness, 
with freedom from conceptual 
elaboration. It does not refer to the inseparable union of spaciousness and primordial wisdom, as is the case in the Shäntong Madhyamaka system.
Annotation 35:
Space is characterized by being 
empty and providing an opportunity. 
Space is empty in that it is nothing at all, and it provides an opportunity 
in that it does not constitute the slightest obstruction and thus allows 
352    Buddha Nature
the appearance of any visible object. The quality of the dharma-dhatu 
is peace in the sense of freedom from all conceptual elaboration.
Annotation 36:
The characteristic of a thing 
(Tib. dngos po) is the power to fulﬁll a 
function (Tib. don byed pa’i nus pa).
Annotation 37:
When it is stated that 
the skandhas, the elements, and the sense facul-
ties are bound up 
with pollution (Tib. zag bcas), this refers to the fact 
that they are subject to arising and disintegration.
Annotation 38:
The skandhas are said 
to attract suffering (Tib. nye bar len pa dang bcas 
pa) since they come into existence due to the predominating inﬂuence 
of the karma and mental 
poisons of previous existences. Since former 
actions and mental poisons are the source of the skandhas, from the mere presence of these skandhas suffering will ensue. A human being, for instance, will invariably experience suffering by the mere fact that he or she has a physical body.
Improper conceptual activity (Tib. tshul bzhin ma yin pa’i yid la byed 
pa) is equivalent to wrong or perverted thoughts, such as taking some-
thing that is impur e 
to be pure, something that does not exist as a self 
to be an existing self, something that is impermanent to be permanent, suffering to be happiness, and so on.
Annotation 39:
The view expressed in 
this and the following section is very similar to 
the view as it is presented in the Mahamudra system. When the nature 
of mind is described as being the luminous dharmadhatu (Tib. od gsal 
chos kyi dbyings), this is to say that the nature of mind is not just empty, but has the aspect of clarity as well. The term “luminosity” or “clear light” (Tib. od gsal) refers to this aspect of clarity, whereas the term 
“dharmadhatu” refers to the aspect of emptiness. Thus the nature of mind is the inseparable union of emptiness and clear light (Tib. gsal 
stong
 dbyer med ). This nature of mind is similar to space, which provides 
the basis for all things but in itself has not come into existence on the basis of a cause, and is thus uncreated. Likewise the nature of mind does not depend upon productive causes (Tib. nyer len gyi rgyu), nor 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      353
on simultaneously active conditions (Tib. lhan cig byed pa’i rkyen). The 
productive cause of a ﬂower, for example, is the seed. The simultane-
ously
 active conditions befriending and furthering its growth are earth, 
water, warmth, and so forth. Since the nature of mind is not dependent upon causes and conditions and therefore also not dependent upon a gathering of these, it is free from an initial arising. If there is no initial arising due to a gathering of causes and conditions, there is also no ﬁnal cessation, nor an abiding in the meantime. Thus the nature of mind is free from arising, abiding, and ceasing, which are the three properties of anything created.
Annotation 40:
Bodhisattvas who have r eached 
the bodhisattva levels have directly 
realized thatness, or the nature of the tathagatagarbha. As long as one 
is an ordinary being, one only realizes this nature by way of deduction. Thus one’s meditation is tinged by a concept of it. When emptiness is realized directly, one has reached a state of freedom from the obscura-tion 
of thoughts. Emptiness is not an object for thoughts and concepts. 
It is realized immediately, just as it appears, in a state of freedom from conceptual elaboration in which all thoughts have subsided. Even now, for example, people like us will have meditative experiences connected with thoughts, and at times we will have experiences that are free from thought. These thought-free experiences, however, are not very subtle. At our stage a very subtle thought-free understanding will only occur while we are sleeping or, sometimes, while our mind is immersed in great bliss. Nevertheless, for the time being our mind is a coarse, conceptual one that constantly focuses outwards and con-ceptually perceives a conceptualized 
object. In this state one does not 
know experience that is free from thought. Within direct realization of emptiness there is neither conceptual perception nor a conceptualized object. It is nakedly realized, just as it appears.
Due to their direct realization of emptiness, bodhisattvas have devel-
oped gr eat 
compassion for all those sentient beings who have not yet 
gained this realization and must therefore undergo an immeasurable amount of suffering. This can be understood by means of the example 
of dreaming: If someone dreams that he is burnt by ﬁre, he knows the suffering connected with this experience. Once he recognizes it to be a dream appearance, no matter how often he dreams of being burnt by ﬁre, he will no longer feel the slightest suffering. Yet, when seeing 
354    Buddha Nature
others who have the same dream but do not recognize that they are 
dreaming, his own experience of suffering and his recognition of its being just a dream will generate compassion for these other beings. If at the time when one has recognized that one is dreaming and thus does not experience any suffering oneself, one sees one’s friends or one’s own father and mother dreaming that they are caught in a ﬁre and, not recognizing their dream for what it is, being helplessly delivered to their suffering, one will give rise to heartfelt compassion for them. In this way the bodhisattvas have great compassion for all those beings who in their state of unknowing are bound to the cycle of existence and the suffering it involves. 
Once one has directly realized buddha nature, one is free from karma 
and the mental poisons and thus free from birth, which comes about through their predominating inﬂuence. Being free from birth, one is also free from death, sickness, and aging, which occur as a consequence of birth. Thus one is free from the process of disintegration starting with birth and ending with death. One is not subject to any change. Though through their direct realization of buddha nature they are freed from birth and so on, bodhisattvas are fully activated and alert because of the power of their great love and compassion. Therefore they demonstrate birth, sickness, aging, and death and appear to the vision of others as if they were subject to disintegration and change.
In this context, one’s own vision (Tib. rang snang) and the vision of 
others (Tib. gzhan snang ) are to be distinguished. From the viewpoint of 
their own vision, the bodhisattvas do not have real skandhas in terms of the individual characteristic of the skandhas (Tib. rang mtshan par 
med pa). They appear in the form of skandhas to the vision of others. In order to understand this, one can look into the question of what kind of body is possessed by a person of whom one dreams. The body of this dream person does not have the individual characteristic of an outer physical body. It appears in the likeness of it. It appears as an enemy or friend, and one can see it experience suffering and misery. As shown by this example, bodhisattvas, once they have directly realized emptiness, do not have real skandhas themselves, but demonstrate real skandhas to the other beings. Though changeless, they show themselves to the vision of others as if they were actually changing. Although they are not subject to this process, they show themselves as if they were born, falling ill, aging, and ﬁnally dying, in order to help all ordinary beings gain the realization they themselves have attained.
The main force enabling bodhisattvas to take birth in an existence 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      355
corresponding to their intention is the power of their former wishing 
prayers for the beneﬁt of others. Even while a bodhisattva is still an ordinary being, and throughout the time that he travels the bodhisat-tva path, a very important 
means for his future ability to accomplish 
the beneﬁt of beings is his vast and sincere wishing prayers. These will contain the wish that he may gain this future ability and be only of help to others. An example is the Wishing Prayer for Entering the 
Bodhisattva’s Path by Shantideva, in which he prays that he may trans-form into food for the 
hungry, into clothes for the naked, into a bridge 
for wanderers who are stuck by turbulent water, and so on. In short, wishing prayers such as these are the cause that will lead one to gain the power to dispel the suffering of beings.
Annotation 41:
“The four means of attraction” 
(Tib. bsdu ba’i dngos po bzhi) are the 
giving of desired material necessities (Tib. mkho ba sbyin pa), speaking 
agreeably (Tib. snyan par smra ba), teaching in accordance with the 
beneﬁt of the worldly beings (Tib. ’jig rten don mthun pa), and conduct 
that is of beneﬁt to the disciples (Tib. gdul bya’i don la spyod pa). Once 
one has become a bodhisattva who dwells on the bodhisattva levels, 
one makes use of the four means to gather beings into an assembly and thus help them to reach realization themselves. The ﬁrst means of attraction is the giving of material things that a disciple needs or desires. The second is the fact that a bodhisattva knows what will make each individual sentient being happy. Thus he will speak to them in friendly words, he will sing, tell stories, and do whatever makes sentient beings feel warm and cozy. The third is the fact that a bodhi-sattva knows which of the 
teachings of the smaller or greater vehicles 
will be of beneﬁt to each individual being. Due to this knowledge, he will teach them accordingly. The fourth is the fact that a bodhisattva’s conduct will always be in accordance with the respective level of teaching he gives.
Annotation 42:
A bod
hisattva who dwells on the eighth bhumi has attained the 
level of non-returning in that he will not fall back to a stage in which 
one perceives in terms of characteristics during the post-meditative phase. Such a bodhisattva has completely abandoned the conceptual 
356    Buddha Nature
elaboration consisting of the perception of objects in terms of their 
characteristics, such as “this is a ﬂower,” “this is white,” “this is red,” and so on.
Annotation 43:
Bodh i
sattvas who dwell on the tenth bodhisattva level are called “those 
who have reached the last existence,” since the next step in the career 
of such a bodhisattva is the attainment of buddhahood. 
When it is said that 
these bodhisattvas are free from all thoughts 
and ideation, having eliminated these in the process of a complete transformation of state (Tib. ngas yongs su gyur pa), this means that the 
ordinary consciousness has been transformed into primordial wisdom. Through this transformation all concepts are also transformed and thereby relinquished. 
A bodhisattva who has reached the tenth bhumi is capable of ema-
natin
g an almost unimaginably great number of form kayas, of physical 
bodies, which are illusory appearances (Tib. sprul pa). A small amount 
of this capacity is ﬁrst attained when one reaches the ﬁrst bodhisattva level, and it will grow gradually throughout the following levels. On the ﬁrst bodhisattva level one is able to emanate a hundred illusory physical bodies, on the second level one is able to emanate a thou-sand, and so forth. (For 
further information see Hopkins, Meditation 
on Emptiness, p. 100.) 
These emanations, however, are not equivalent 
to the sambhogakaya and nirmanakaya of a buddha.
A bodhisattva who dwells 
on the tenth bodhisattva level appears 
to the disciples as an ordinary being, but is of a different nature. His or her very nature is the accomplishment of the welfare of all sentient beings.
Annotation 44:
Dolpopa Sangjä, the founder of 
the Jonangpa school, has written a 
famous commentary on the Uttara Tantra Shastra. The present com-
ment a
ry by Jamgön Kongtrül the Great is partly based upon Dolpopa’s 
work, representing a greatly expanded version. Thus their mode of 
explaining the meaning of the root text is very similar. The Third Karmapa Rangjung Dorjé has written a summary of this meaning. While according to Dolpopa and Jamgön Kongtrül the Great the root text does not differentiate between the qualities of a bodhisattva who dwells on the ninth bodhisattva level and those of a bodhisattva who has reached the tenth bodhisattva level, the Third Karmapa Rangjung 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      357
Dorjé interprets the three stanzas starting with “By the power of their 
former [prayers] . . .” slightly differently. In his opinion the ﬁrst two describe the qualities of a bodhisattva who dwells on the ninth bo-dhisattva level, while the last 
stanza starting with “Always [acting] 
spontaneously and without obstruction...” describes the qualities of a bodhisattva who has reached the tenth bodhisattva level.
Annotation 45:
When one has r eached 
the highest state of a shravaka arhat, one is an 
arhat without remainder. This refers to the fact that at this point even 
the subtle remainders of the skandhas have been overcome. In this state the stream of being is cut. There is no activity whatsoever and therefore no possibility to bring about the beneﬁt of beings. Such an arhat abides in a state of extinction similar to an extinguished ﬁre or stagnant water. Once the stream of being is cut there will be no further birth. One has reached the nirvana equivalent to mere peace. Even in the expanse of this nirvana without remainder the dharmakaya possesses inexhaustible and immeasurable qualities and is therefore permanent. When one attains the dharmakaya, one possesses these qualities. While the shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats who are without any remainder of skandhas are like an extinguished ﬁre and their streams of being are cut, a buddha does not cut the stream of be-ing. In the expanse of 
the nirvana without remainder he also has the 
thirty-two qualities of the dharmakaya. Arising on the basis of these qualities are the form kayas, which have the quality of being uninter-rupte
d in appearance. They are the means that bring about the beneﬁt 
of all sentient beings.
When 
someone who follows the Shravakayana or Pratyekabud-
dha-yana reaches the nirvana 
without remainder, any remainder of 
skandhas is merely extinct and has gone into nothingness, whereas someone who follows the bodhisattva path and employs the speciﬁc means of the Vajrayana will realize emptiness directly and thereby attain the form kaya of emptiness. Through the immediate vision of emptiness, the ordinary body, which is of the nature of ﬂesh and blood, is transformed into the nature of light and one attains what is called “the rainbow body.” On the level of buddhahood all skandhas are ut-terly puriﬁed and the form kaya of emptiness is ﬁ nally achieved. 
Annotation 46:
As has been explained befor
e, arhats have a birth in a body of mental 
nature. In consequence they undergo a subtle process of falling sick and 
358    Buddha Nature
aging, until they ﬁnally die in a way inconceivable to an ordinary being. 
This is because they have not yet overcome the very subtle obscuration consisting of the remaining imprints of ignorance. The dharmakaya is even free from these types of birth, death, sickness, and aging.
Annotation 47:
The tathagatagarbha (Tib. de bzhin 
gshegs pa’i snying po, lit. “essence or 
heart of a tathagata”) in the utterly puriﬁed phase is the dharmakaya 
of all buddhas. With respect to the classiﬁcation in terms of the three kayas, the dharmakaya of all buddhas is considered to be of one and the same essence. Of the form kayas, which manifest on the basis of this dharmakaya, the sambhogakaya is considered to be one and the same, whereas the nirmanakaya is considered as being of different kinds. This different manifestation comes about due to the wishing prayers uttered by a buddha while traveling the bodhisattva path.
The tathagatagarbha in the utterly puriﬁed phase is also the Tatha-
gata. The term “T athagata” 
(Tib. de bzhin gshegs pa), an epithet of the 
Buddha, can be explained as follows. De bzhin is short for de bzhin nyid  
(Skt. tathat›, suchness) and gshegs pa is a honoriﬁc term meaning “the 
One who has gone.” Thus the Tathagata can be described as the One who has traveled the path of suchness, of the true state (Skt. dharmat›, 
Tib. c 
hos nyid ), or in other words, the One who has relied on the path of 
suchness that abides in neither of the extremes of existence and peace, and thus has truly gone to great enlightenment. An equivalent for the term “Tathagata” is the term “Sugata” (Tib. bde bar gshegs pa). Accord-
ingly the tathagatagarbha is also 
called the sugatagarbha (Tib. bde bar 
gshegs pa’i snying po). The Tibetan term bde ba means “happiness” or 
“bliss.” The term bde bar is an adverb and means “comfortably.” Thus 
a buddha is called the Sugata, since he or she can be described as the One who has relied on the bodhisattva vehicle, which constitutes a comfortable path, and thus has gone to the fruit, the level of perfect buddhahood, which is bliss.
The t
athagatagarbha in the utterly puriﬁed phase is the noble truth, 
since it is the truth of cessation of all noble ones.
It is also the absolute nirvana. Only the state of buddhahood con-
stitu
tes the ultimate nirvana, whereas the nirvana reached by shravaka 
and pratyekabuddha arhats is a limited and temporary one.
The dharmakaya of all buddhas, the Tathagata, the noble truth, and 
the absolute nirvana are but synonymous terms, being just different aspects that have the same essence.
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      359
Furthermore, the ten powers and so on, that is, the thirty-two 
qualities of the dharmakaya, are also completely inseparable from the 
dharmakaya itself. In terms of essence there is no differentiation.
For these reasons there is no actual or true nirvana except for perfect 
buddhahood.
Annotation 48:
“Emptiness endowed with all supr
eme aspects” (Tib. rnam kun mchog 
ldan stong pa nyid) is a name for the true nature of mind, or the way the 
mind truly exists, which is the inseparable union of emptiness and clear light. The emptiness of all outer objects, such as forms, sounds, odors, tastes, tangible objects, and so forth, is called “emptiness endowed with the aspect of matter” (Tib. bem po rnam bcas kyi stong pa nyid).
Annotation 49:
The painter who is the 
only one to know how to paint the head of 
the king stands for discriminative wisdom fully and thoroughly dis-
criminating all phenomena. His having 
gone abroad and the painting 
staying unﬁnished signiﬁes the fact that without this discriminative wisdom, by means of the ﬁrst ﬁve perfections alone, it is impossible to accomplish the direct manifestation of the dharmakaya. This direct manifestation of the dharmakaya, or in other words, of emptiness endowed with all the supreme aspects of means, corresponds to the well-painted image of the king being fully perfected.
Annotation 50:
What is to be understood 
by primordial wisdom and discriminative 
wisdom is explained slightly differently in the Rangtong and Shäntong 
systems.
(1) According to the 
Rangtong view, there is a relationship between 
these in terms of cause and fruit. Discriminative wisdom is considered 
as being the cause and primordial wisdom as being the fruit. In this view discriminative wisdom is equivalent 
to the three discriminative 
wisdoms arising from learning, reﬂection, and meditation (Tib. thos 
bsam 
sgom byung gi shes rab ). According to the Rangtong tradition, 
ordinary beings do not possess primordial wisdom. This is only true of noble ones, of bodhisattvas who have reached the bodhisattva levels. In this context two aspects are distinguished: primordial wisdom present during meditation and the one present in the post-meditative phase (Tib. mnyam bzhag gi ye shes dang rjes thob kyi ye shes). Once emptiness 
360    Buddha Nature
is no longer a passing experience but realized directly, one has reached 
the ﬁrst bodhisattva level by means of this direct realization. From this moment onwards, the two primordial wisdoms are present. The primordial wisdom present during meditation is the one that realizes emptiness. It manifests while a noble bodhisattva rests in meditative equipoise, one-pointedly within emptiness itself. The wisdom present in the post-meditative phase is wisdom that realizes all phenomena as being mere appearances, as being dream-like or like magical illusions. This wisdom manifests whenever a noble bodhisattva does not dwell in meditation. 
(2) A
ccording to the Shäntong tradition, primordial wisdom is what 
is to be realized and discriminative wisdom is the means to realize it.
In this view, discriminative 
wisdom is of two kinds, these being 
the discriminative wisdom focusing outwards and the one focusing inwards. Generally speaking, discriminative wisdom is the ability to individually discriminate each and every object. This ability in its aspect of focusing outwards is also native to ordinary beings. In the Shäntong view, discriminative wisdom constitutes the ability to discern all relative phenomena, each individually, and to know them for what they are. While the relative phenomena are examined by means of discriminative wisdom, their way of existence and their way of appearance are understood. It is seen that they are empty, lacking inherent existence, that they do not truly exist and yet appear on a relative level like a dream image or a magical illusion. 
In the Shäntong view, primordial wisdom is considered as being 
within all sentient beings. This is because in this view it is no other than the mind itself in terms of its true existence. The essence of mind is emptiness and its nature is clear light. These two aspects being in-separable, primordial wisdom is 
equivalent to the inseparable union 
of emptiness and clear light, or of spaciousness and awareness. With regard to this primordial wisdom three aspects are distinguished: those of the basis, path, and fruit. The primordial wisdom present within 
all beings needs to be realized in order to reveal itself immediately or directly. This realization has to take place in such a way that primordial wisdom itself recognizes its own face (Tib. ye shes rang ngor shes pa). The 
primordial wisdom present from the very beginning within the stream of being, which is the true nature of the minds of all sentient beings, the inseparable union of emptiness and clear light, is called the basis primordial wisdom and also “ever-present wisdom” or “ever-pres-
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      361
ent dharmakaya.” The phase in which this nature of mind is initially 
realized and during which this realization is cultivated is called the path primordial wisdom. At the time when all the adventitious stains of delusion are eliminated, this inseparable union of emptiness and clear light is called the fruit primordial wisdom. 
(3) The view of Mahamudra is very similar to the Shäntong view. 
In this context one speaks of basis Mahamudra, path Mahamudra, and fruit Mahamudra. Once the primordial wisdom present since the very beginning, which in this context is called “the joint manifesta-tion of emptiness and clear 
light,” sees its face through discriminative 
wisdom having become self-liberated, the realization of Mahamudra has become immediate.
Annotation 51:
(1) The topic “essence” shows 
enlightenment as possessing two as-
pects of purity. The 
term “sphere” refers to the dharmadhatu being 
concept-free or free from any mental elaboration. The second type of 
purity marks the difference between an ordinary and a fully enlight-ened being. In the for 
egoing chapter the inconceivability of buddha 
nature was described by the words: “[The buddha element] is pure and yet has afﬂiction.” While the nature of mind is primordially pure, it is obscured by the adventitious stains of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge in the state of an ordinary being. A second type of purity needs to be achieved—this consists of the elimination of all these veils. Once total puriﬁcation has joined the ever-present purity of the nature of mind, there is the enlightenment of a buddha endowed with twofold purity.
(2) The cause bringing about this twofold purity is described as 
the practice of the path of the meditative and post-meditative phases. These consist of two types of primordial wisdom, which are “utterly non-conceptualizing wisdom in meditation” and “wisdom thoroughly discriminating all knowable objects in post-meditation” (Tib. mnyam 
bzhag
 rnam par mi rtog pa’i ye shes dang rjes thob shes bya rnam par ’byed pa’i 
ye shes). While abiding in total paciﬁcation of any mental elaboration one will eventually come to feel the nature of mind itself, which is the union of spaciousness and awareness. When during meditation one dwells evenly balanced and one-pointedly immersed in this nature of mind, there will be insight called “utterly non-conceptualizing wisdom in meditation.” This means that there is primordial wisdom that is not bound up with or does not involve any concept. By the power of this 
362    Buddha Nature
thought-free wisdom, there is “the wisdom thoroughly discriminating 
all knowable objects in post-meditation.” While not meditating, all phenomena are seen in their ultimate and relative aspects. Ultimately they are seen as being by nature not truly existent, as being luminous emptiness, and at the same time their way of appearance is known. On the relative level all phenomena are seen as being dream-like or like a magical illusion. This means that in post-meditation a ﬁrm and invin-cible certainty of knowing the 
absolute and relative truths will arise. 
Taking these two primordial wisdoms as one’s path, one will attain twofold purity, which is the essence of ultimate enlightenment.
Moving towards this aim, a noble bodhisattva will abide in the 
indivisible union of spaciousness and awareness while resting in meditative equipoise, and thereafter gather the accumulation of merit to the vastest possible extent. This accumulation is carried out while knowing that it is ultimately empty and relatively illusory, like a dream or a magical illusion. In the language of the Dharma there are vari-ous ways of expr essing 
this. Here non-conceptualizing wisdom and 
wisdom discriminating each and every phenomenon are described as the causes of buddhahood.
(3) Through r elying 
on the path of these two primordial wisdoms 
one attains the fruit, which is freedom from the two veils of the men-tal poisons and hindrances to 
knowledge. The topics “essence” and 
“fruit” are partly similar in meaning, but emphasize different aspects. While the ﬁrst describes enlightenment as a state of utter purity, the second stresses the fact that there is freedom from the pollution of the two veils.
(4) Through eliminating both 
veils—the mental poisons and hin-
drances to knowledge—a function unfolds, 
which is the accomplish-
ment of the beneﬁt of 
oneself and others. Without achieving beneﬁt 
for oneself, one is not able to achieve the beneﬁt of others. Though a bodhisattva mainly concentrates on bringing about the good of others and will not do so with his or her sake in mind, still one’s own beneﬁt or enlightenment has to come ﬁrst. Otherwise one lacks the power 
necessary to achieve the beneﬁt of others, just as someone who does not know English himself could not communicate in this language with others.
(5) The basis for the 
fulﬁllment of the two beneﬁts is provided by 
those buddha qualities that are the thirty-two qualities of the dharma-kaya. These are called “inconceivable” since they are very hard to fathom and an ordinary being cannot understand them as they truly are.
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      363
(6) Enlightenment manifests in terms of the three kayas, which are 
the svabhavikakaya or dharmakaya, the sambhogakaya, and the nir-
manakaya. The term “sambhogakaya” (T
ib. longs spyod rdzogs pa’i sku ) 
literally means “body of perfect 
enjoyment” and is explained as the 
kaya perfectly enjoying the Dharma of the Great Vehicle. The disciples of the sambhogakaya are the bodhisattvas who dwell on one of the ten bhumis. To them it manifests visibly as the ﬁve buddha families and so forth, teaching the Dharma by means of different aspects, such as ornaments, gestures, and so on, without needing to express the instruc-tions in words. The 
term “nirmanakaya” (Tib. sprul pa’i sku) literally 
means “emanation body” or “body of illusory appearance.” It teaches the ordinary beings by manifesting in various illusory appearances corresponding to their different kinds. To a human a nirmanakaya appears in human form, to a god in god’s form, to an animal in animal form, and so on.
Generally speaking, when explained in 
accordance with the Shän-
tong view, the thr
ee kayas are to be understood as follows: The joint 
manifestation of the realization of the essence and of liberated primor-dial 
wisdom of awareness is called dharmakaya (Tib. snying rtogs dang 
rig pa’i ye shes sgrol ba zung ’jug chos kyi sku). The form kayas manifest without moving away or being apart from this dharmakaya. The as-pect appearing to bodhisattvas of 
the ten bhumis in the form of signs 
and symbols is called the sambhogakaya, and the aspect appearing to ordinary beings in accordance with their aspirations, manifesting a reﬂection of buddhahood in whichever form appropriate, is called the nirmanakaya.
When buddhahood is pr esented 
in terms of ﬁve kayas, two further 
aspects are distinguished, which are called “the kaya of actual enlight-enment” and “the vajra kaya” 
(Tib. mngon par byang chub pa’i sku dang 
rdo rje sku). The ﬁrst refers to the fact that the realization of the three kayas does not involve any pride. When, on the path of training, we think of “reaching enlightenment,” we will believe that someone who has achieved this feat will feel extremely capable and special. In truth, 
though, the actual reaching of enlightenment does not entail any such notion. The vajra kaya denotes the fact that buddhahood is indivisible and that the three kayas, therefore, are of one and the same essence.
(7) Buddhahood is permanent in that the dharmakaya is as unchang-
ing as space and the 
form kayas are uninterrupted in appearance as 
long as sentient beings exist.
(8) When the ﬁrst bodhisattva 
level is reached, the dharmakaya or 
364    Buddha Nature
the dharmata, the true state of everything, is realized directly and an 
ordinary being becomes a noble bodhisattva. Until this realization has taken place the ﬁnal ultimate truth is inconceivable.
Annotation 52:
In the teachings pertaining to 
the middling turning of the wheel of 
Dharma, all the direct instructions on emptiness contain the deﬁnitive 
meaning (Skt. nit›rtha, Tib. nges don), wher eas anything else is relative 
and conveys a provisional statement (Skt. ney›rtha,  Tib. drang don ) lead-
ing up to the absolute 
truth, the direct vision of emptiness. Literally 
drang ba means “leading towards.” In the Shäntong view, which the Buddha taught during his third turning of the wheel of Dharma, the deﬁnitive meaning as presented by the second turning is not the ﬁnal and ultimate one. Deﬁnitively true are the teachings on the nature of mind clearly showing it as the indivisible union of spaciousness and awareness. (For the meaning of “nitartha” and “neyartha” see Part Four, note 10.)
Annotation 53:
As sh
own above (annotation 51) the enlightenment of a buddha comes 
about through two types of primordial wisdom. When one attains 
the utterly non-conceptualizing wisdom of meditation, the wisdom thoroughly discriminating all knowable objects in post-meditation will arise as well. Jetsün Milarepa, for instance, directly realized Mahamu-dra through the utterly 
non-conceptualizing wisdom of meditation. 
On the basis of this realization his mind became totally clear as to all phenomena, and in post-meditation he knew and remembered every-thing
 without having to rely on books. The Buddha himself has said that 
when ﬁrm realization of his words is achieved, full clarity of mind with regard to any relative phenomenon will be present simultaneously. In the light of the two types of primordial wisdom one will know all phenomena as being ultimately empty and like a dream appearance or a magical illusion on the relative level. Someone who has this vision will carry out any action, such as being generous, making offerings, and so forth, with the perception of discriminative wisdom not focused on the three spheres, or wheels, of subject, object, and action.
Luminous clarity, or clear light, is inseparable from the nature of 
primordial wisdom. This means that the qualities of enlightenment are inseparable from those of the basis, which is the nature of mind. They are of one and the same essence. If there was no clarity in the state of 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      365
the basis, there could not be the realization of clarity when attaining the 
fruit. In the Shäntong view the true nature of mind is the inseparable union of emptiness and clarity. Once it has been freed from all the adventitious deﬁlements, the realization of clarity will come about. If, as according to the Rangtong view, the basis did not hold any clarity, primordial wisdom would be something that newly arises. If this was the case, it would come about on the basis of causes and conditions. As such it would be created, and being created it would not last and would ﬁnally be destroyed. Furthermore, if the nature of mind was solely empty, there could not be the inseparable union of spacious-ness and primordial wisdom 
in the state of the fruit. Spaciousness is 
equivalent to emptiness. If spaciousness and awareness or clarity were not already inseparable in the state of the basis, they could not become inseparable in the state of the fruit.
Annotation 54:
When 
it is said that the dharmakaya is indivisibly manifest in the 
nature of all sentient beings, this means the following:
The only difference between the inseparable union of spaciousness 
and awareness, which is the nature of the minds of all sentient beings, 
and this union being endowed with twofold purity is the fact that the latter is free from all the adventitious stains, while the former is still obscured by these. The essence of the true state of mind is naturally pure, and with regard to this aspect there is not the slightest difference between an ordinary and an enlightened being. The empty sphere of space, for instance, is the same in all empty vessels. Nevertheless, a dif-feren
ce comes about due to the different kinds of vessels. Space itself is 
not of different kinds and without there being different kinds of vessels there will not be different kinds of space. Once the vessel is broken, the space around it and the space within will become inseparable. In the same way, the dharmakaya is indivisibly manifest in the nature of all sentient beings. Both the dharmakaya and the nature of the minds of beings are the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness. As to their essence there is no difference. For this reason, basis, path, and fruit are undifferentiated according to the terminology of the Shäntong and Mahamudra traditions. Though basis tathagata-garbha, path tathagatagarbha, and fruit tathagatagarbha are no different in essence, still the adventitious stains need to be abandoned in order to attain the fruit. In this respect, there is a difference, which is expressed in the lines: “All sentient beings are buddha but obscured by adventi-tious
 stains.” As has been said before, this can be understood by means 
366    Buddha Nature
of the example of gold when still contained in ore and when totally 
freed from all the surrounding dross. As far as the purity of the gold is concerned, there is no difference in both cases. Nevertheless, it will appear as if it has changed once all the dross is removed.
There is only a seeming change, though, and the inseparable union 
of spaciousness and awareness within all sentient beings will reveal itself as the ever-present dharmakaya, once freed from all its adventi-tious veils. The natur e 
of beings and the dharmakaya will merge and 
prove to be inseparable. This is shown in the Mahayanasutralamkara 
(Tib.
 mdo sde rgyan ) and similar scriptures by means of many examples. 
As was said before, space only appears as a variety due to vessels of various shape. Similarly, all small and great rivers on this planet ﬁnally ﬂow into the great ocean. Each takes its individual course through an individual country and has its individual name, but the moment it reaches the sea, its waters become inseparable from the ocean. Thus all water is the same. When many thousands of different butterlamps are burning in one place, each gives off its light and yet all these lights merge and become inseparable.
When it is said that the dharmakaya has spontaneously possessed 
all the properties of a buddha since beginningless time, this means that the qualities of buddhahood are not something newly attained. If they were, they would be conditioned. The empty nature of mind is not brought about by causes and conditions, and thus is uncreated and spontaneously present. If this was to be joined by newly arising—and therefore conditioned—qualities, these qualities could never become inseparable from the true state of the mind, which is emptiness present since the very beginning.
Annotation 55:
The statement that the stains 
obscuring the pure nature of mind have 
not been truly existent since beginningless time can be understood 
by the example of dream. When one dreams of being burnt by ﬁre or carried away by a ﬂood, this ﬁre and water have never existed in any way. If during a dream attachment towards pleasant objects and aver-sion towards unpleasant objects 
arise, these objects of attachment and 
aversion have had no existence since the very beginning. Therefore, the mental poisons based upon these objects are also not existent in the light of the ultimate truth. They come into the mind as something ﬂeeting and adventitious, like clouds in the sky.
While all faults are adventitious, the qualities are spontaneously 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      367
present. In the Shäntong view, all faults are self-empty (Tib. rang 
stong ), while the qualities are not empty of their own essence. They are 
other-empty (Tib. gzhan stong). This is to say that the nature of mind is 
empty of all faults, of everything foreign to it, but it is not empty of the 
spontaneously present qualities, of everything native to it. As it is stated in the section explaining the tathagatagarbha (B.II.2.2.2.1.3.5.2): 
The element is empty of the adventitious [stains],
which are featured by their total separateness.But it is not empty of the matchless properties,which are featured by their total inseparability.
While dreaming of being burnt by ﬁre, carried away by water, and so 
forth, all these outer faults that arise when the mind focuses outwards 
will prove to be adventitious once the dream is recognized. They come and go. Yet while this happens, the nature of mind, the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness, does not undergo any change. Based upon this fact, the practice of the secret Mantrayana unfolds its power. If the true state of mind was not the inseparable union of spa-cious
ness and awareness, what beneﬁt could arise from the meditation 
on a yidam deity? If there was no coexistence of the body having an impure nature and the mind being inherently pure, there would not be the slightest beneﬁt in meditating on any deity. Since the mind in terms of its true existence is spaciousness and awareness inseparable, the meditation on the pure form of a yidam deity will purify the impure appearance and perception of the physical body. Then the true deity, which is this spaciousness and awareness inseparable, will reveal itself and become immediately apparent. All yidam practices, such as meditating on Avalokiteshvara, Amitabha, Vajravarahi, and so forth, singly serve the purpose of purifying this impure appearance that the physical body seems to be. When the true deity is the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness, the meditation on a deity being visual-ized in its likeness has 
the power to lead one to the achievement and 
realization of the true deity, of the nature of mind. If spaciousness and awareness inseparable was not present in the impure phase already, if everything was nothing at all or mere emptiness, and if both faults and qualities were like space, one could not attain any quality.
The faults consist of the veils of the mental poisons and hindrances 
to knowledge, the former being the obstacle to liberation and the lat-ter the obstacle to omniscience. 
When one has attained the level of 
a shravaka or pratyekabuddha arhat, one has only puriﬁed the veil 
368    Buddha Nature
of the mental poisons and thereby reached liberation to the extent of 
being liberated from the cycle of existence. One has not yet attained the state of omniscience. In order to reach that state as well, one must abandon the veil of the hindrances to knowledge.
Annotation 56:
Generally speaking, correct r
ealization or “realizing as it is” (Tib. ji lta 
ba rtogs pa) refers to the direct understanding of emptiness; complete 
realization or “realizing as much as there is” (Tib. ji snyed pa rtogs pa ) 
refers to all r
elative appearances. In the explanations pertaining to the 
Shäntong system, ultimate correct realization is direct understand-ing o 
f the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness, and 
complete realization is direct understanding of all relative, artiﬁcial appearances.
The three r ealms 
are the desire realm, the realm of form, and the 
formless realm. Primordial wisdom, which is completely free from ideation, acts as the remedy for the mental poisons of the three realms, or in other words, for the concepts entertained by the beings of these realms. As for the term “concept” or “thought,” the veils of the men-tal p
oisons and hindrances to knowledge, when put concisely, are 
nothing but concepts. While the veil of the hindrances to knowledge consists of very subtle kinds of concepts, the veil of the mental poisons constitutes the very coarse types. If, for instance, desire arises on the basis of something pleasant, and aversion comes up on the basis of something unpleasant that is viewed as being hostile, these are very gross and rough concepts and a sentient being with these reactions has a coarse mind. The veil of the hindrances to knowledge has three aspects in terms of progressively subtler concepts. The ﬁrst is holding on to true existence (Tib. bden par ’dzin pa), the second is holding on to 
characteristics (Tib. mtshan mar ’dzin pa ), and the third is the appearance 
of duality (Tib. gnyis snang ). Towards the last-mentioned aspect people 
like us will develop an extremely subtle concept, whereas a bodhisat-tva who dwells on the 
tenth bhumi will perceive the mere appearance 
of duality as such without conceptualizing it any further. Here again the dream example is helpful to develop an understanding. What will happen if during a dream one realizes that one is dreaming? When one recognizes one’s dream for what it is, appearance will be there but holding on to its true existence will be ended. Then the power of direct recognition will arise. Similarly, bodhisattvas who dwell on one of the ten bodhisattva levels have realized the meaning of emptiness. 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      369
Not leaving it at this initial realization but cultivating it to ever subtler 
levels, one will gain a respectively ﬁrm ability that, having become unshakable, will lead one to attain the state of a buddha.
Primor dial wisdom completely fr 
ee from ideation is to be under-
stood as thought-free primor
dial wisdom or primordial wisdom re-
leased from any thought 
or concept. It can be explained, for instance, 
through the teachings on valid cognition. In this context four types of valid cognition are distinguished: direct valid cognition of the senses (Tib. dbang po mngon sum tshad ma), direct valid cognition of intellect 
(Tib. jid mngon sum tshad ma), self-aware direct valid cognition (Tib. 
rang rig tshad ma), and direct valid cognition in yoga or in meditation endowed with bliss (Tib. rnal ’byor mngon sum tshad ma). The last-men-
tione
d is described as “knowing, which arising from meditation, is free 
from mental elaboration and undeluded.” The term “knowing” is to be understood as being equivalent to primordial wisdom. Through cultivating the knowing or primordial wisdom which arising from meditation is free from mental elaboration and undeluded to its ﬁnal unlimited extent, one will reach the level of buddhahood.
The term “cultivation” or “meditation” (Tib. sgom pa) is deﬁned 
as follows: Once direct realization of the true nature is reached, one leaves the mind unwaveringly within this realization without giv-ing rise to distraction and 
thus puriﬁes one’s stream of being. In the 
traditions of Mahamudra and the Mantrayana it is appropriate to apply this cultivation in all daily activities and any form of conduct. Especially when one has attained a good realization of Mahamudra, one has the power to meditate on the meaning of Mahamudra while carrying out any work or activity. Since the ultimate true nature of Mahamudra is the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness, one will be able to work and act within this vision of spaciousness and awareness inseparable. If, as in the Rangtong system, the true nature of Mahamudra is viewed as being merely empty, one will meditate evenly balanced in mere emptiness and the consciousnesses of the six senses will cease. According to this tradition, the consciousness of all outer appearances, such as the eyes seeing form, the ears hearing sound and so on, must be stopped, whereupon one has to meditate one-pointedly on emptiness. According to the Mahamudra tradition, one has to gain the ability to meditate in everyday life while carry-ing out any kind of 
activity. This is what is meant by the inseparable 
union of spaciousness and awareness or of emptiness and clarity. The presence or non-presence of emptiness and clarity inseparable leads 
370    Buddha Nature
to different types of meditation. The difference is mainly marked by 
the aspect of clarity, by the question whether the nature of mind is viewed as holding clear light or not.
In hi 
s song for Rechungpa on turning daily behavior into a practice, 
Jetsün Milarepa said:
At times I eat, and while eating I meditate. 
When meditating while eating and eating, I know eating and drinking to be a ritual feast. These instructions I have, while others have not.
At times I sleep, and while sleeping I meditate. 
When meditating while sleeping and sleeping, mental blindness shines forth as clear light. These instructions I have, while others have not.
Once one understands well the view of the Mantrayana, and espe-
cially that of Mahamudra, one 
will be able to meditate in connection 
with any form of conduct and any mental poison that arises. At the 
time when the mental poisons are extremely coarse, one will purify one’s mental poisons by means of the mental poisons themselves. This is the principle of Mantrayana practice. One has to purify desire on the basis of one’s desire, anger on the basis of one’s anger, and so on. The term “secret Mantrayana” is used since it contains these deep and subtle methods of puriﬁcation.
Though, generally speaking, this is not the time to explain the secret 
Mantrayana, a short introduction is given here since the Shäntong view leads up to the secret Mantrayana. The Mahayana Uttara Tantra, which 
itself belongs to the Sutrayana level of teaching, is a shastra building a bridge between sutra and tantra, since the views presented by the Shäntong and Mantrayana systems are almost identical. On the basis of the essence of mind being the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness, the ultimate nature of mind is explained as empti-ness and bliss inseparable on 
the level of the secret Mantrayana. The 
aspect of clarity or clear light is experienced as bliss and the aspect of spaciousness is identical to emptiness. Without viewing the mind as the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness the experi-ence of the inseparable union 
of emptiness and bliss will not arise. 
“Inseparable” means that the essence is undifferentiated and not able to be divided.
Annotation 57:
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      371
“Calm abiding” (Skt. Ÿamatha, Tib. zhi gnas) and “special or vivid in-
sight” (Skt. vipaŸyan›, Tib. lhag 
mthong) ar e deﬁned as follows: “Calm 
abiding” means that all movements of the mind towards the outside 
are totally appeased or stilled and one abides one-pointedly focused on the virtuous or authentic object. “Vivid insight” means that within this state of calm abiding, or in other words, while the mind is free from thought, the authentic object is truly and individually discerned or analyzed. On the level of an ordinary being these two aspects of meditation are developed. This is not yet qualiﬁed special insight (Tib. lhag mthong mtshan nyid pa), which in the Mahayana tradition 
is deﬁned as direct realization of emptiness. With this realization, qualiﬁed special insight arises in one’s own stream of being. This is the path of seeing whereby one reaches the ﬁrst bodhisattva level and goes beyond that of an ordinary being.
The two beneﬁts are beneﬁt for oneself (Tib. rang don) and beneﬁt 
for others (Tib. gzhan don ). Through abandoning the veils of the mental 
poisons and hindrances to knowledge without leaving a trace, one achieves ﬁnal ultimate beneﬁt for oneself, and ﬁnal ultimate realiza-tion provides the beneﬁt 
of others. Without the vision of supreme 
realization one is not able to truly beneﬁt other sentient beings. “Ul-timate” (Tib. mthar phyin pa 
) means that there is nothing beyond or 
further. The bodhisattvas who dwell on the ten bhumis, for instance, achieve their own beneﬁt and that of others to a certain respective extent, but only a buddha embodies the ﬁnal ultimate perfection of the two beneﬁts. The same is true of nirvana, the state beyond the cycle of existence or beyond torment and pain. A shravaka or pra-tyeka
buddha arhat has only reached nirvana from the viewpoint of the 
coarse deﬁlements being eliminated. Similarly, someone who attains the bodhisattva levels within the direct realization of emptiness has only gone beyond samsara from the viewpoint of this coarse level. With respect to the extremely subtle deﬁlements, an arhat or a noble bodhisattva is not yet beyond the cycle of existence. In order to reach the ultimate nirvana one must attain the state of buddhahood. As is 
said above in the explanations of the tathagatagarbha (B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2. 8.2.3.2.2): “One will therefore not attain nirvana without attaining the state of buddhahood.”
When it is said that 
a buddha teaches in accordance with the dis-
ciples’ streams of being, 
this means that he teaches in accordance with 
their different temperaments, aspirations, wishes, mental capacities, 
and dispositions.
372    Buddha Nature
Annotation 58:
When it is said that true buddhahood is of an uncompounded nature, 
this means that it is not compounded due to causes and conditions. The Tibetan term here translated as “nature” is chos can. It is widely used in 
the context of the teachings on valid cognition (see above, annotation 11) and its literal translation is “that which has or is qualiﬁed by a prop-erty.” Here the 
term chos can is to be understood as being equivalent 
to the Tibetan term rang bzhin, which means “nature” in the sense of 
something unable to be separated from a particular phenomenon.
The nature of something compounded by causes and conditions 
can be understood, for instance, from the teachings on impermanence, where the samsaric condition is described as follows: 
All those who are born have the property of dying. 
All those who desire each other have the property of getting 
separated. 
All things that were gathered have the property of getting 
exhausted.
We are born from causes and conditions and thus have the property 
of dying. Death cannot be separated from our nature and we will have 
to die sooner or later. Nevertheless, truly mastering the practice of the creation and completion phases of the Vajrayana, one can attain deathlessness. If one knows all appearances to be of mental nature, illusory manifestations of the mind, and thus realizes the meaning of the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness or of Maha-mudra, which is unborn clear 
light, one attains the power of becom-
ing deathless. As Jetsün Milar
epa said in one of his songs to Pachig 
Dhampa Sangjä: 
Within unborn mind there is supreme immortality. 
The characteristics of being born and dying are liberated of 
themselves. 
How happy I am in the ﬁrm vision of the highest view!
Generally speaking, ﬁrst one needs to understand that everyone 
who is born is of the nature of dying. To think: “I am still young and 
will not die as yet” is of no beneﬁt. One will surely die and it can happen any time. Yet, if one practices the sacred Dharma well, and especially if one manages to carry out the practices of the Vajrayana in the proper fashion, one can be liberated from death and go beyond dying. Padmasambhava, for instance, attained an immortal body, and the disciples of Milarepa known as “the three sons and four daughters,” 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      373
Rechungpa and so on, did not die. Their bodies became like rainbows 
and they departed into the pure ﬁelds. This is called “the great trans-migration in rainbow body” (T 
ib. ’ja’ lus ’pho ba chen po). There were 
very many in Tibet who attained the kaya of great transmigration in rainbow body. A person who departs from the world in this way will leave hair and ﬁngernails behind, while his or her body will transform and become rainbow-like, thus vanishing from the earth. In order to achieve this, one does not have to be a very learned or important per-son. Anyone who r eceives 
the special oral instructions and puts them 
into practice as it should be can become a siddha (Tib. grub thob), an 
accomplished being.
One should therefor e 
apply the means to go beyond having the 
property of dying and to accomplish deathlessness, the kaya of im-morta 
lity (Tib. ’chi med kyi sku ). Only the Vajrayana holds these means, 
whereas the vehicle of characteristics (Tib. mtshan nyid kyi theg pa ) does 
not. Nevertheless, one needs it as a basis. In the context of the vehicle of characteristics, or in the course of the second turning of the wheel of Dharma, the two truths and the meaning of their equality are presented. If one does not understand this thoroughly, one will not understand the meaning of purity and equality (Tib. dag pa dang mnyam pa’i don ), 
which forms the basis of 
any Vajrayana practice. As long as this view 
is not understood well and is not truly adopted, the meditation on a deity, though it constitutes the heart of Vajrayana practice, will seem very easy and will become equally shallow. Any small child could do it, once he or she was taught what to visualize: “Oh yes, there is a body with one head, two arms, and two legs, and there is also a ﬂower in the left hand . . .”  With this approach one might wonder why the recogni-tion of the absence of 
a personal self as taught in the Shravakayana is 
so much more difﬁcult and why the Vajrayana is called “secret.” To be able to practice the Vajrayana one needs the ultimate view. This is the inseparable truth of purity and equality (Tib. dag mnyam bden pa 
dbyer med), meaning that all appearances that could possibly occur are equal in their state of utter purity (Tib. dag pa rab ’byams). One needs 
to develop unshakable certainty that all phenomena are equally pure and inseparable in their nature of purity, since otherwise doubts will arise. One day one will meditate very well with pure faith, but the next day it will be gone and one will wonder what one is doing. In this way, one’s diligence, discriminative wisdom, and faith will dete-riorate. Once one has developed 
ﬁrm conviction of one’s own inner 
view, there will be no doubt, and one’s diligence, wisdom, and faith, 
374    Buddha Nature
not getting weakened, will ever increase and lead one to the state of a 
siddha. What this means can be seen from the biographies of saintly beings such as Tilo, Naro, Marpa, Mila, and so forth.
In Tibet some among those who attained great transmigration in 
rainbow body mainly worked during their lives, as for instance cut-ting “Om Mani Peme Hung” 
in stones. The Vajrayana holds instruc-
tions on how to combine 
work with meditation. Someone who really 
understands these deep instructions will manage to meditate while working and carrying out everyday activities. This is a sign that practice is profound. Lacking profundity, one’s meditation will go away while one is working, and while meditating one will not be able to engage in any kind of conduct. Yet, once one has acquired the necessary skill, both one’s work and the innermost heart of Dharma will go well. One will beneﬁt the truth, beneﬁt sentient beings, and beneﬁt oneself. In my view this aspect is especially important nowadays, as the manners and customs on this earth have changed. The way to beneﬁt sentient beings best is not the same as it was at the time of the Buddha or of Jetsün Milarepa. When in those days a practitioner of Dharma renounced the world and stayed in the wilderness to meditate, people liked that very much and developed great faith. Thus this form of practice was extremely beneﬁcial for other beings as well.
The Buddha and his following of bhikshus, for instance, gave up 
all worldly activities. Yet, in order to communicate with people and to give them the opportunity to gather virtue, they went into the cit-ies and begged for alms. 
Then the people, before eating themselves, 
would offer food to the Buddha and his many thousands of monks, and would dedicate their own food to Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. In this way their faith and supplications were greatly strengthened. At the time when Jetsün Milarepa appeared, people greatly admired anyone who withdrew into a cave to dedicate his life to meditation, and felt deep devotion towards such a person. Therefore, a single man such as Milarepa, by meditating in the wilderness, would attract an extremely large number of disciples who would follow his example, and there would be many sponsors who would joyfully sustain this lifestyle. Thus it was very good for everyone.
Times have changed, though, 
and the present situation is different. 
When in our time someone decides to follow the ancient examples in the literal sense and gives up all work in order to meditate solely, he or she will be considered a very bad and useless person. One will be 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      375
called “work-shy” or “sluggard” and no one will have respect, let alone 
any faith. Yet, if on the contrary one works very hard and efﬁciently in everyday life, and at the same time manages to practice the Dharma, this is in my opinion very good for oneself and will become an equally good example to others. Working hard will increase one’s own capac-ity of diligence, and being 
seen to combine work with the practice of 
Dharma will arouse faith in one’s fellow beings. In this way one will manage to beneﬁt others and oneself as well.
With respect to the manners and customs of the world in these 
days, it is therefore extremely good to learn how to meditate while one is working. If there were no such instructions, this would be very difﬁcult. Nowadays many people think: “In order to practice as the Buddha taught I have to give up all worldly activities. Since this is not possible, I cannot practice Dharma. Therefore, a new style of Buddhism must be found.” This is not true. The Buddha taught gradually in three turnings of the wheel of Dharma. Following the system of the Shra-vaka-yana, which belongs to the 
ﬁrst turning of the wheel of Dharma, 
one has to abandon all worldly activities. In the teachings of the Great Vehicle, and especially in the context of the Mantrayana, the Buddha has taught how it is possible to practice while being engaged in any worldly activity. Thus we do not have to invent anything new, but are able to practice as the Buddha taught in our modern days as well.
When it is said that 
buddhahood is equivalent to one’s own beneﬁt 
being ﬁnally perfected, one may wonder whether a buddha desires personal welfare and strives for this aim. There is no such intention. Even while being a bodhisattva, a buddha never had any egoistic mo-tives
 but solely strove to bring about the beneﬁt of others. Yet in doing 
so one naturally achieves best possible beneﬁt for oneself.
When the text speaks of a saintly person with karmic fortune whose 
sense faculties have become supreme, this refers to a bodhisattva who has reached the bhumis. The sense faculties of someone who attains the ﬁrst bodhisattva level undergo a transformation of state, thereby acquiring speciﬁc qualities. In the state of an ordinary being, for in-stance, the eyes only per
ceive visible things but are shut to sound, and 
the nose only grasps smell but cannot experience taste or touch, and so on. On the path of seeing, though, the senses become utterly pure and the single sense-faculty of the eye can perceive all sensory objects at the same time. The consciousness behind the visual faculty of a bodhisattva is able to grasp every form, sound, odor, taste, and touch occurring 
376    Buddha Nature
in the ten directions simultaneously. This and many other qualities of 
the senses are attained once the ﬁrst bhumi is reached.
Annotation 59:
When it is said that 
manifold sensory objects are perceived as being 
merely relative (Tib. kun rzob tsam du ) or merely nominal (Tib. tha snyad 
tsam du), this is to be understood as follows: The various appearances 
arising in a dream, for instance, such as visible things, sounds, odors, tastes, and different kinds of touch, are not really there. They only ex-ist relatively or nominally
. Yet when the mind is deluded during the 
dream phase, these merely relatively existent sense-objects will seem [to be] real and be perceived accordingly. When while dreaming one recognizes that one is dreaming, one will know that whatever one perceives is only a dream appearance and does not really exist. Still, as long as one does not wake up from sleep, appearances will arise, but to the perception of someone who recognizes them for what they are they will only have a relative or nominal existence. There will be the perception of mere appearance (Tib. snang tsam du). Similarly, in 
ultimate truth all phenomena are luminous emptiness free from any mental elaboration; nevertheless, appearance is there, but only in terms of mere appearance, in terms of something relative or nominal. We practice the Dharma in order to exhaust all impure appearances, all delusions of impurity. As long as we have not managed to do so, these impure appearances will be there. Once all delusion of impurity has been exhausted, everything will shine forth as pure physical form and the appearance of primordial wisdom (Tib. dag pa’i sku dang ye 
shes kyi snang bar shar ba). The way in which this actually takes place is very difﬁcult to understand and people like us, lacking the actual realization, can only imagine it slightly through inference.
When it is said that pure vision comes about through the power or on 
the basis of having previously gathered the accumulations, this refers to the time when one has followed the path of training and accumulated merit in enacting the bodhisattva conduct. This power or ability will therefore be of different kinds.
The elements are of four kinds: earth, water, ﬁre, and air. “Being 
made from the elements” means that there are many phenomena in terms of visible things, sounds, odors, tastes, and different kinds of touch, all of which are made from or composed by these elements. As opposed to that, the form kayas are not made from the elements. They are not of the nature of these. The form kayas are the sambhogakaya 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      377
and the nirmanakaya, and one may wonder whether they are other 
than the dharmakaya. They are not, since the dharmakaya itself holds power or ability (Tib. nus pa), a multitude of qualities and types of 
activity.
Generally speaking, “a noble one” (Tib. ’phags pa) is anyone who 
has transcended the level of an ordinary being. “A great noble one” is someone who has reached the pure bodhisattva levels—the eighth up to the tenth, inclusively. (See also Part Four, note 5.)
Suppleness (Tib. shin sbyangs ) means that both body and mind have 
become extremely malleable, so that during meditation one does not experience any physical discomfort no matter what hardships one undergoes in order to practice the Dharma, and the mind is able to meditate on any subject. When this is reached, one’s meditation will go well, whereas until then one will feel physical pain and the body will not be spacious and relaxed. The mind will not keep its focus, but will wander and not rest evenly. Once one has attained physi-cal and mental suppleness, one 
should not listen too much to other 
people regarding the proper way to meditate. Otherwise another fault would arise. When, unlike before, the body is continuously relaxed and spacious during meditation, and the mind has a strong aspect of lucidity, managing to meditate on anything without thinking, this is samadhi itself manifesting naturally and spontaneously (Tib. ting 
nge ’dzin de kar rang
). Then one will attain the fruit of samadhi, which 
is the touch (Tib. reg bya) or experience of bliss arising from physical 
and mental malleability. This touch is not comparable to contact felt by the body. It is attained through samadhi and arises of its own force, so that body and mind are pervaded by bliss. This is not the same as the bliss practiced in the Mantrayana, but is the bliss of shamatha or calm abiding. Once the mind is fully settled and abides unwaveringly, bliss will arise in body and mind.
Generally speaking, this is a 
sign that the true nature of mind is the 
inseparable union of clarity and emptiness. When resting within this inseparable union of clarity and emptiness, bliss will arise in the mind and by the power of this mental bliss the body will become blissful as well. Especially on the level of the secret Mantrayana, one needs this quality, since according to this system, realization is equivalent to the direct revelation or actualization of the inseparable union of emptiness and bliss. Leading up to this view of bliss-emptiness inseparable is the view of the Shäntong system, in which the ﬁnal ultimate truth is the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness. If the ﬁnal ultimate 
378    Buddha Nature
truth is considered as being merely empty, one will absorb oneself into 
a condition of total absence of thought and the mind will gain an ac-cording experience. In this 
state of just empty emptiness (Tib. stong pa 
stong kyang), no bliss will arise. By knowing the ultimate nature of the mind as being the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness, one will rest within this spaciousness and awareness inseparable dur-ing meditation, and when tr
ue samadhi is attained, mind and body 
will be ﬁlled with bliss. With this basis one will understand the view of the true nature of mind being jointly manifest bliss-emptiness as taught in the Vajrayana or secret Mantrayana.
The phrase “the mode of the Dharma that is deep according to its 
own essence” (Tib. rang gi ngo bo nyid kyis) means that it is by nature 
deep, as a butterlamp is by nature radiant.
“The intelligence that analyzes the absolute” (Tib. don dam dpyod 
byed kyi rig pa) is equivalent to the intelligence or awareness analyzing emptiness. Mainly there are ﬁve kinds of intelligence, which are ana-lyzing the essence, the cause, 
the fruit, both cause and fruit, and mere 
appearance. They are called “the Five Great Established Meanings” (Tib. gtan thsigs chen po lnga). What is referred to here is the ﬁfth, of 
which Jamgön Kongtrül the Great has said in his Treasury of Knowl-
edge that analyzing or discerning mere appearance is the established meaning of interdependent origination 
(Tib. snang tsam la dpyod pa 
rten ’byung gi gtan thsigs) in that mere appearance is the appearance of interdependence. Elsewhere, in other traditions, the ﬁfth aspect of awareness is also called “the established meaning of the King of Awareness” (Tib. rig pa’i rgyal po’i gtan thsigs).
The term translated her e 
as “goodness” is dge legs, which consists 
of the words “virtue” ( dge ba ) and “deﬁnitive good” ( nges legs ). 
This means that the Sugata provides beneﬁt both temporarily and ultimately. Temporarily it is experienced as bliss, and ultimately it constitutes the cause through which one attains the fruit, the level of buddhahood.
The t
erm dbang ’byor can also be explained as dbang po’i ’byor pa, 
which means “the tr easur
e or wealth of the senses.” This refers to the 
fact that the sense faculties of a bodhisattva undergo a complete change 
of state once emptiness is seen directly, and thereby acquire a great multitude of qualities. As was said before, the single sense-faculty of the eye of a noble bodhisattva, for instance, can perceive all visible things, sounds, odors, tastes, and forms of touch simultaneously. These quali-ﬁed senses are beyond 
the ordinary sense-faculties and the sense-ob-
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      379
jects they experience are extremely subtle. The bodhisattvas who dwell 
on the ten bhumis perceive forms, sounds, odors, tastes, and contacts that are beyond the elements and all phenomena consisting of them. They appear through the power or creative ability of the dharmakaya. Thus the tathagata, though it is free from any reason generating a fruit, generates all goodness, displaying the illusory appearance of mandalas, the reﬂection of the sambhogakaya, and teaching Dharma by means of signs and symbols. All these appearances are not made from the elements and are seen by noble bodhisattvas whose sense faculties have been transformed through the path of seeing.
Annotation 60:
Of the ﬁve paths, the 
ﬁrst four, which are the paths of accumulation, 
junction, seeing, and meditation, constitute the path of training (Tib. 
slob lam). The ﬁfth is the path of no more training (Tib. mi slob pa’i 
lam).
The two aspects of ultimate 
abandonment and realization, which 
are presented here as the vimuktikaya (Tib. rnam par grol ba’i sku, “the 
body of complete liberation”) and the dharmakaya (Tib. chos sku, “the 
body of qualities”) are also called the svabhavikakaya (Tib. ngo bo nyid 
kyi sku,  “the essence body”) and the jnana dharmakaya (Tib. ye shes chos 
kyi sku, “the body of the quality of primordial wisdom”).
When it is said that 
both the vimuktikaya and the dharmakaya are 
uncreated or uncompounded (Tib. ’dus ma byas), this means that they 
are not made from causes and conditions. Anything made from causes and conditions is a created or compounded phenomenon (Tib. ’du byed ) 
and deﬁned as follows: 
All compounded phenomena have the quality of being de-
stroyed. 
All compounded phenomena have the quality of being imper-
manent. 
All compounded phenomena have the quality of being unreli-
able.
In the terminology of the teachings on valid cognition, created and 
uncreated phenomena have two opposite characteristics: “Being wont 
to arise, cease, and abide are the three characteristics of the created. Not being wont to arise, cease, and abide are the three characteristics of the uncreated” (Tib. skye ’gag gnas gsum rung ba ’du byed kyi mtshan nyid / 
skye ’gag gnas gsum mi rung ba ’dus ma byas kyi mtshan nyid). Ultimately buddhahood is truly uncreated in that it is beyond both the extremes of createdness and uncreatedness. This is to be understood in the sense as, for instance, the dharmakaya is described as being “true self” in 
380    Buddha Nature
the section explaining the tathagatagarbha (B.II.2.2.2.1.2.2. 2.2.1.2): “It 
is true self since all conceptual elaboration in terms of self and non-self is totally stilled.” In the Shäntong view, ultimate buddha-hood is already present in the state of the basis, and will reveal itself once all the pollution caused by the veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge is abandoned without leaving a trace. If it was to be newly attained and arose from something created, there would be no reason for it to become uncreated later. Having to be newly attained, it would be compounded, and being compounded it would have the quality of being unreliable, impermanent, and subject to destruction. Viewed ultimately, though, buddha is no other than the nature of mind when puriﬁed from all the adventitious stains. The nature of mind being clarity-emptiness or space-awareness inseparable, nothing else 
or further needs to be achieved.
Annotation 61:
Meditative equipoise (T ib. snyoms ’jug) is equivalent to samadhi. The 
obstacles to 
samadhi are mainly of two kinds: agitation (Tib. rgod pa) 
and dullness (T ib. ’bying 
ba). The ﬁrst means that the mind is scattered 
and wanders towards the outside, engaging, for instance, in thoughts 
about past, future, or present doings. Dullness means that the mind, though it is not distracted by outer objects but stays within, lacks the aspect of lucidity and its focus is not clear. Another fault is called rmugs 
pa in Tibetan, which might be translated as “stupor,” and is very similar 
to dullness. It means that the mind is very dense and hazy. Since these are mental states, they are difﬁcult to describe exactly.
Annotation 62:
The noble ones who have 
a wisdom body are those bodhisattvas who 
dwell on one of the three pure bhumis. The noble ones below are the 
bodhisattvas who dwell on one of the seven impure bhumis and the 
shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats.
Annotation 63:
The a
bsolute buddha (Tib. don dam pa’i sangs rgyas ) is the dharmakaya, 
whereas the sambhogakaya and the nirmanakaya are the relative 
buddha (Tib. kun rzob kyi sangs rgyas), since the form kayas appear to 
the sense faculties and consciousnesses of the disciples as something conceivable in terms of perceived and perceiver (Tib. yul dang yul can 
gyi rnam pa snang ba).
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      381
Annotation 64:
The characteristic of being unperverted (Tib. phyin ci ma log pa’i mtshan 
nyid) is not dwelling in either of the extremes of assertion and denial 
or of
 overstatement (Tib. sgror ’dogs, lit. “decorating with feathers”) 
and understatement (Tib. skur ’debs, lit. “casting abuse”), respectively. 
Claiming something that does not exist to be existent is an overstate-
ment and claiming something that 
exists to be not existent is an un-
derstatement. If one said, for 
instance, that a human being has horns, 
this would be a [false] assertion, and if one said that a human being does not have two legs, this would be a [false] denial. Similarly, if one claimed that the mind was the power of ﬂesh and blood, this would be an overstatement, since there are reasons to refute this assertion. The clear
 and aware essence of the mind could not arise from a gathering of 
ﬂesh and blood. If, on the contrary, one claimed that the mind did not have intelligence, this would be an understatement, since the mind is able to understand many things even without requiring any study.
A reasoner (Tib. rtog ge pa) is someone who is very skilled in rea-
soning and argumentation (T
ib. rtog ge ba), which generally means 
establishing or deﬁning all phenomena by means of proofs and logical conclusions. Thus the insight derived from reasoning (Tib. rtog ge ba’i 
rig pa) consists mainly of very good and pure thoughts. The dharma-dhatu is not an object for reasoning. Its nature of clarity has always been beyond the reach of any such thoughts. In order to realize it one has to meditate, as it is only to be experienced through the power of meditative equipoise. This marks a main difference between the Rangtong and Shäntong systems. According to the Shäntong view, anything deﬁned by means of proofs and logical conclusions (Tib. rtags dang gtan thsigs) is the ﬁeld of experience of thinking, to which the ﬁnal ultimate meaning is not accessible at all. Whatever is able to be grasped by thought is part of the relative, which is self-empty in that it is empty according to its own essence (Tib. rang rang gis ngo bo’i 
stong pa ) or empty of an existing essence. As such all aspects of the rela-
tive can be shown by 
means of logical reasoning. The ultimate object 
of experience, the true nature of mind, is empty of the adventitious stains that are other than it, but not empty of qualities that are native to it. It is spaciousness and awareness inseparable. This can neither be shown nor experienced by those means, but needs to be realized in yoga while dwelling evenly balanced within spaciousness-awareness itself. If one tried to establish the experience of clear light by means of 
382    Buddha Nature
logical reasoning, one would be immersed in thoughts. While think-
ing, there is no 
way to experience it. The true nature of mind is only 
to be realized through valid cognition in yoga (see above, annotation 56), which, arising from meditation, is free from mental elaboration and undeluded. When freedom from mental elaboration and from 
delusion has arisen, the ultimate truth reveals itself and becomes im-mediately appar ent.
When it is said 
that a tathagata never rises from the dharmata, this 
means that the vision and understanding of the true state of everything is uninterruptedly present throughout all meditative and post-medita-tive phases.
Annotation 65:
The three methods of 
teaching employed by a supreme nirmanakaya 
can be understood from the way Buddha Shakyamuni trained his 
disciples gradually. First he provided the means for a worldly being to gain access to the path of individual release resulting in the nirvana in terms of paciﬁcation of all suffering. Towards this aim he taught the Four Noble Truths, saying: 
Monks! One must understand suffering. 
One must abandon its origination. One must actualize its cessation and rely on the causal path.
To those who had entered the path of release and generated ﬁrm 
conviction with respect to the Dharma, he granted the teachings of the Great Vehicle in order to mature them thoroughly. In this context he started by giving instructions that were easy to understand, and then proceeded to ever profounder levels. In terms of the two emptinesses, for instance, he ﬁrst explained the relative level from the viewpoint of self-emptiness, whereupon he elucidated the ultimate level as being spaciousness-awareness inseparable from the viewpoint of emptiness of other. Finally, in the course of the teachings pertaining to the secret Mantrayana, he expounded the unchanging realization of a buddha as being the realization of the utter purity of all appearances that could possibly occur (Tib. snang srid dag pa rab ’byams). He gave these 
teachings in many gradual stages, explaining the view, meditation, and action in the light of the Vajrayana system throughout four or six classes of tantras. Thus the Buddha taught in gradual stages, reﬁning his instructions ever further up to the most sublime level. To those who were ready he granted prophecy as to their future enlightenment, predicting at what time, in what place, by what name and so forth they would reach buddhahood. This process can be compared to the 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      383
way in which one cultivates a ﬂower. First one will employ the means 
to make it grow, then the ones to make it ripen, and ﬁnally those to prevent it from decaying.
Annotation 66:
Self-awareness (Tib. rang rig 
) means that the duality of an object to be 
aware of and of an aware consciousness is not present (Tib. rig bya dang 
rig byed gnyis med pa ). Through abiding within spaciousness-awareness 
inseparable itself, one frees oneself from the two veils along with their remaining imprints. When this freedom is achieved, there is individu-ally discerning self-awareness, which 
is equivalent to ultimate direct 
realization in yoga.
Annotation 67:
When  
the union of means and discriminative wisdom (Tib. thabs 
dang shes rab zung du ’brel ba) is explained on the sutra level, means or 
method is equivalent to the practice of great compassion and so forth, and discriminative wisdom is equivalent to the wisdom realizing the non-existence of a self and so on. On the level of the Mantrayana it is to  be un
derstood as the joint manifestation of bliss and emptiness in  
that means is equivalent to 
great bliss and discriminative wisdom to 
emptiness.
The Tibetan translation of 
the Sanskrit term “yogi” is “naljorpa” 
(rnal ’byor pa) and can be explained as follows. The word rnal ma is 
synonymous with 
the words gzhi and ngo thog, and thus means “ba-
sic, fundamental state” or “r
eal, actual condition.” The word ’byor ba, 
whic h
 means “to stick or adhere to,” is the intransitive form of sbyor ba,  
which means “to fasten together” 
or “to apply.” Rnal ’byor, or “yoga” 
as it is called in Sanskrit, is therefore generally deﬁned as “applying primordial wisdom to the meaning of the basic state” (Tib. rnal ma’i 
don la ye shes sbyor ba); a rnal ’byor pa is someone who adheres to this 
application. The content of yoga in view and practice differs according to the progressive levels of the Buddha’s teaching.
In the Sutra tradition, yoga is “applying primordial wisdom to the 
meaning of the dharmata, which is the real condition of everything” 
(Tib. rnal ma chos nyid kyi don la ye shes sbyor ba).
In th
e Rangtong system one has applied primordial wisdom to 
the meaning of the basic state when one has realized the meaning of freedom from conceptual elaboration. This realization is reached once the nature of all phenomena is seen as their being empty of an exist-ing essence, or literally speaking, 
self-empty according to their own 
384    Buddha Nature
essence (Tib. rnal ma chos thams cad rang bzhin rang rang ngo bos stong 
pa’i spros pa dang bral ba’i don rtogs pa).
Acco r
ding to the Mahamudra tradition one applies primordial 
wisdom to the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness itself 
(Tib. dbyings rig dbyer med kyi rang du ye shes sbyor ba). This means that 
primordial wisdom is no other than spaciousness-awareness insepa-rable. Apart from that 
there has never been any primordial wisdom. 
There is no external realizing subject that could be applied. Once one has gained the capacity of resting in this very union of spaciousness and awareness, it itself holds the power to appease all the adventi-tious veils.
When one practices accor ding 
to the tradition of the secret Mantra-
yana, primordial wisdom is applied to the inseparable union of bliss and emptiness itself (Tib. bde stong byer med kyi rang du ye shes sbyor 
ba). This is done by applying primordial wisdom to the meaning of purity and equality being inseparable 
(Tib. dag mnyam byer med kyi don 
la ye shes sbyor ba) or by applying primordial wisdom from within the understanding of purity and equality (Tib. dag pa dang mnyam pa nyid 
kyi nang nas ye shes sbyor ba). For someone who has gained the realiza-tion of the unsurpassable ultimate 
view of the Mantrayana, there is 
not the slightest impurity. When people like us, who are bound to an understanding perceiving the truth of the relative, hear this statement, they will not believe their ears and it will not enter their minds. At our present stage we mainly experience the worldly deluded mind that perceives duality, having “valid cognition” based upon terms and names. Yet, when taking the dream as a basis of one’s reﬂection, any impure appearance that may arise does not exist in terms of impure matter. Whatever is there while dreaming is spaciousness-awareness inseparable. If there was not the inseparable union of spaciousness and awareness, no dream could ever occur.
Following the view of the highest tantra, one applies primordial 
wisdom to utter or universal purity (Tib. dag pa rab ’byams la ye shes 
sbyor ba), whereby one will eventually dwell within bliss-emptiness inseparable. This is the highest view and practice as it accords with the Annuttarayoga Tantra. Within the system of the Mantrayana the Buddha taught four classes of tantras: Kriya, Charya, Yoga, and An-nuttara-yoga or Mahayoga T antra. 
These are practiced gradually, and 
in their course view and meditation are reﬁned ever further up to the ultimate level. In Kriya Tantra, for instance, there is the duality of purity and impurity and a lot of emphasis is given to creating purity in every respect. Nevertheless, when practicing the highest Tantra, the 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      385
understanding of the utter purity of all appearances that might pos-
sibly occur is indispensable. One 
has to apply primordial wisdom to 
this true state of everything. There is no such wisdom to be imported from elsewhere. The understanding of utter purity is the application of primordial wisdom. When doing so, one is a yogi who will equally understand and experience the inseparable union of bliss and empti-ness. An ultimate yogi is a buddha.
Annotation 68:
The way in which a 
supreme nirmanakaya unfolds activity without 
moving from meditative equipoise within the dharmakaya can be 
illustrated by the modern example of television: a single person who is recorded in a studio will be seen by many people on a multitude of screens without this person moving away from the studio at all.
Annotation 69:
The three vehicles r
eferred to here are the Shravakayana, Pratyeka-
buddhayana, and Mahayana.
Annotation 70:
When  
the dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya are de-
scrib
ed as being permanent in terms of nature (Tib. rang bzhin gyi 
rtag pa), of uninterruptedness (Tib. rgyun mi ’chad pa’i rtag pa), and of 
continuity (Tib. rgyun gyi rtag pa) respectively, this means the follow-
ing: The dharmakaya has always 
been unchanging according to its 
own essence. The essence of the sambhogakaya is not permanence in 
terms of being unchanging but it uninterruptedly appears to the pure disciples, the bodhisattvas dwelling on the ten bhumis. A supreme nirmanakaya cuts the stream of his physical existence, but from the time of having reached buddhahood onwards he will display manifold different illusory appearances as they are ﬁt to train all sentient beings. Thus there is continuity of appearance.
Annotation 71:
When it is said that 
the great enlightenment of a buddha does not 
consist of existence or peace (Tib. srid bzi ma bsdus pa), this means that 
it is not contained in samsara and nirvana, since the state of buddha-
hood does not dwell in either of the extremes of existence and peace. Shravaka and pratyekabuddha arhats, for instance, have attained a state of mere peace and abide within this peace itself. When doing so, 
386    Buddha Nature
the continuity necessary to bring about the beneﬁt of beings is cut. Thus 
their state consists of peace in terms of extinction. As opposed to that, a buddha neither adheres to existence nor peace. By means of great discriminative wisdom he knows the nature of existence as being free from arising and thus does not abide in samsara. At the same time, by means of great compassion, he brings about the beneﬁt of beings and thus does not abide in a nirvana limited to paciﬁcation. Conduct carried out through the power and force of great compassion is like a 
magical illusion, and in the chapter on buddha activity is described as being free from any deliberate effort. To gain an impression, an ordinary being should reﬂect upon the question of how someone would act in a dream while realizing that he is dreaming. Buddha activity is conduct in terms of mere appearance.
Annotation 72:
Accor ding to the Shäntong 
view the ultimate dharmakaya is to be 
understood as spaciousness and awareness inseparable, in which all 
illusory appearances along with their remaining imprints are totally uprooted and exhausted. The visible kayas are said to be relative, since they become an object of perception for the sense faculties of sentient beings. Anything perceived by the sense faculties of beings, such as forms, sounds, and so on, is a relative appearance. A buddha has to rely on these relative appearances in order to bring about the beneﬁt of beings, since the ultimate truth, the total paciﬁcation of whatever illusion, is not a ﬁeld of experience for the sense faculties. Thus a buddha beneﬁts all sentient beings within the frame of their faculty of perception. He does so on the basis of the relative form kayas, which are the power or ability of the dharmakaya.
Annotation 73:
A sup
reme nirmanakaya in all his beautiful signs and marks is only 
seen by a sentient being who has puriﬁed the veil of negative karma, 
whereas to someone whose mind is still obscured by former very negative actions he may appear in a very ordinary or even revulsive form, just as the clear reﬂection of the moon is only seen in unpol-luted water. Once one 
has reached the bodhisattva levels one is able 
to open manifold doors of samadhi and to see the sambhogakaya. This capacity increases while traveling through the bhumis, and the supreme sambhogakaya is only seen by bodhisattvas who dwell on the tenth bhumi.
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      387
Annotation 74:
The path that deﬁnitively r
eveals release (Tib. nges ’byin gyi lam) con-
sists of the path of 
seeing, in the course of which truth is seen as it is, 
for the ﬁrst time, and of the paths above, that is, the paths of meditation 
and of no more learning.
When it is said that sentient beings are fully sustained or supported 
(Tib. yongs su ’dzin pa ) by buddha activity, this can be understood by the 
way in which a spiritual friend will support his or her disciples in any way, reﬁning their minds by teaching them what to adopt and abandon and guiding them onto the authentic path towards total release.
Annotation 75:
The ultimate dharmakaya is uncr
eated in that it is beyond both the 
extremes of createdness and uncreatedness as explained above (an-
notation 60).
Annotation 76:
The three types of 
miraculous display refer to the aspects of body, 
speech, and mind. “Displaying the miraculous effects of teaching the 
Dharma” represents buddha mind bestowing blessing and thereby awakening realization.
Annotation 77:
What 
Karma Thrinläpa says is that the drum sounding the Dharma can 
be heard by beings on earth who have the conducive karmic imprints, 
since this drum has arisen due to the blessings of the buddhas and the former virtue of the gods.
Annotation 78:
When it is said that 
the extremely subtle and profound teaching of the 
Buddha does not reach the ears of all the disciples, this means that the 
teaching of the Buddha is heard and understood in accordance with an individual’s karmic fortune and tendencies formerly acquired. Thus someone with the shravaka disposition, for instance, would not grasp the Buddha’s words when he gave the instructions pertaining to the second or third turnings of the Wheel of Dharma. For this reason the followers of the Shravakayana and Pratyekabuddhayana claim that the Mahayana and Vajrayana teachings do not originate from the 
Buddha.
388    Buddha Nature
Annotation 79:
In the Madhyamakavatara (Tib. dbu ma la ’jug pa) by Chandrakirti, three 
types of compassion (Tib. snying rje) are described: compassion focus-
ing o
n sentient beings (Tib.  sems can la dmigs pa’i snying rje ), compassion 
focusing on the nature (Tib. chos la dmigs pa’i snying rje), and compas-
sion free fr om 
focus (Tib. dmigs pa med pa’i snying rje). The ﬁrst type is 
compassion as it is developed by an ordinary being. It still goes along 
with the perception of duality and with attachment in terms of the belief that sentient beings truly exist. The second type is compassion that arises in recognition of their impermanent nature, while the third type is the compassion of a noble bodhisattva who has realized that sentient beings do not truly exist. All these three types of compassion, however, are given rise to by means of progressively subtler thoughts. As opposed to that, the great compassion (Tib. thugs rje chen po) of a 
buddha manifests without any thought or deliberate effort, since upon reaching buddhahood one undergoes a complete transformation of state (Tib. gnas yongs su gyur pa).
Annotation 80:
A bud
dha is the ground of everything that is best within the world and 
beyond it, since he has given the teachings of the three vehicles—the 
Shravakayana, Pratyekabuddhayana, and Mahayana. The latter again divides into the vehicle of characteristics and into the secret Man-trayana, which offers innumerable 
individual paths to liberation. If 
one practices these teachings, one will attain the best possible achieve-ment within the world and 
beyond it. If, for instance, one meditates 
on patience as it accords with the Buddha’s words and cultivates this practice, one will temporarily achieve the happiness consisting of the appeasement of anger and hatred. Ultimately one will attain the level of a perfect buddha, as patience is one of the six perfections, which will lead one beyond one’s ordinary perception and thoughts. Thus, through the power of practicing one teaching of the Buddha, such as patience, one will attain the best possible goodness in the world and beyond. Furthermore, having experienced the truth of one teaching through the result of one’s own practice, one will believe in the validity of all the teachings of the Buddha and will be a living example and source of inspiration even to those who have no connection with Dharma at all. Likewise, if following the Mahayana tradition one has cultivated love and compassion, and resulting from that has developed a genuinely 
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      389
benevolent heart towards all sentient beings, one will be convinced of 
the truth of the Buddha’s words and will take them to heart in their entirety. Thus one will temporarily harvest happiness through the practice of virtue, through everything beneﬁcial for oneself and all others, and ultimately achieve the level of buddhahood.
The be
st possible goodness to be achieved within the desire realm is 
mainly a very agreeable and pure sensation through the ﬁve doors of sense-perception, which comes about through the practice of virtue. Bad and hurtful visible form, sound, smell, taste, and touch are the main obstacles for a being of the desire realm to experience the goodness it can provide. The causes for the best possible achievement within the realm of form are the four levels of meditative stability and the four immeasurable contemplations—the cultivation of limitless love, compassion, joy, and equanimity. When one has developed the latter four, one will attain a rebirth comparable to that of Brahma, the lord of the gods. The best possible achievement within the formless realm consists of the modes of resting evenly in meditative equipoise. These are the experiences of boundless space (Tib. nam mkha’ mtha’ yas 
skye mched), of boundless consciousness (Tib. rnam shes mtha’ yas skye 
mched), of nothingness itself (Tib. ci yang med pa’i skye 
 mched), and of 
conscious non-conscious intuition (Tib. ’du shes med ’du shes med min 
skye mched).
390    Buddha Nature
 Explanations by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche      391
PART FOUR
Translator’s Notes
392    Buddha Nature
 Translator’s Notes      393
Annotation 81:
The intrinsic and general characteristics of all phenomena (Tib. rang 
dang spyi’i mtshan nyid ) 
are to be understood as follows: Whatever is 
accessible to the ﬁve sense-faculties of the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and 
body, and whatever appears as their object of perception, is an intrinsic characteristic. As to a general explanation, all phenomena that become an object of thought are included in the term “general characteristic.” The appearance of every form, sound, smell, taste, and touch that is unmixed with thought and yet experienced as other than oneself is the intrinsic characteristic (Tib. rang mtshan) of a thing. This is direct 
experience of the senses not entangled in thoughts. Whatever appears to and is recognized by thought is a general characteristic (Tib. spyi’i 
mtshan).
“Knowing all synonymous names” means 
that one and the same 
thing is expressed differently by many varying verbal expressions, which are all known without exception. For a buddha, for instance, many epithets are used. The term “buddha” itself means “being awakened, since the veils of the mental poisons and the hindrances to knowledge along with their remaining imprints are exhausted.” Apart from that, a buddha is called by the names of “the Victor,” “the Sugata,” “the Bhagavan,” “the Tathagata,” and many others. The fact that all phenomena are by nature not existent is also expressed as “not truly existent,” “non-existent according to its own essence,” “not existent in terms of being attained as form,” “not existent in terms of its basic nature,” “not existent in terms of how it is viewed,” and so forth. Though one meaning is intended, manifold terms are used. “Emptiness” is also called “the absolute truth,” “thatness,” “such-ness,” “dharmadhatu,” “the unborn,” “space 
of the appeasement of 
all mental elaboration,” “the great middle,” “the great gesture,” “the great perfection,” “the perfection of discriminative wisdom,” and so on. Thus many synonyms are used for one thing.
Note 1:
With regar d 
to the disposition of a tathagata or the disposition to bud-
dhahood ﬁve aspects are distinguished:
 (1) the cut-of f disposition
 
(2) the uncertain disposition
 (3) the shravaka disposition
 (4) the pratyekabuddha disposition
394    Buddha Nature
 (5) the disposition to the Mahayana.
(1) Those with the cut-off disposition have the following six char-
acteristics: They do not feel 
the slightest weariness of the suffering of 
samsara. They do not have the slightest faith, modesty, or compas-
sion, and they do not 
feel the slightest remorse. [The term “cut-off 
disposition” is used as it refers to sentient beings who are totally cut off or estranged from their true nature, not feeling its basic goodness, warmth, and light at all.]
(2) Those with the uncertain 
disposition depend upon conditions: 
When they rely on a spiritual friend who is a shravaka, or have friends who are shravakas, or see the shravaka sutras and thereupon develop faith in the shravaka view, their disposition turns into the shravaka disposition and they themselves really become shravakas. This is equally true when they rely on a spiritual friend who is a pratyeka-buddha, etc., or when they 
rely on a spiritual friend who is a follower 
of the Mahayana, etc.
(3) Those with the shravaka 
disposition are characterized by the 
fact that they are afraid of samsara, that they have faith in the quality of nirvana, that they strive for its attainment, and that they have but little compassion.
(4) Those with the pratyekabuddha 
disposition have the following 
six characteristics: They are afraid of samsara. They have faith in the quality of nirvana and strive to attain it. They have but little compas-sion. They are very 
proud. They keep their teacher secret and delight 
in dwelling in solitude.
(5) The disposition to the 
Mahayana is thoroughly presented by 
means of the following six points, which are (a) types, (b) essence, (c) synonyms, (d) the reason why it surpasses the other dispositions, (e) manifestation, and (f) signs.
(a) The disposition to the 
Mahayana is of two types, these being 
the naturally present disposition and the disposition accomplished through correct cultivation. 
(b) The essence of the naturally present disposition consists of the 
fact that it constitutes the power giving rise to the buddha qualities, 
that it has been present within beings since beginningless time, and that all sentient beings have attained it in terms of their true state. 
The essence of the disposition accomplished through correct culti-
vation consists of the fact 
that it constitutes the power giving rise to 
the buddha qualities, that it unfolds through the former practice of the roots of virtue, and that it is the cause of the sambhogakaya and 
 Translator’s Notes      395
the nirmanakaya.
(c) Synonyms of the term “disposition” are the terms “seed,” “ele-
ment,” “nature,” and “essence.”
(d) The r eason 
why it surpasses the other dispositions: The two 
dispositions to become a shravaka or a pratyekabuddha are lesser, 
since they turn into a completely puriﬁed disposition by the mere puriﬁcation of the veil of the mental poisons. The disposition to the Mahayana is most excellent, since it turns into a completely puriﬁed disposition through the puriﬁcation of both the veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge. 
(e) T
he disposition to the Mahayana has two ways of manifestation, 
which are the awakened and the unawakened disposition. In the case of the awakened disposition, the actual manifestation of the fruit is present and the signs are apparent. In the case of the unawakened disposition the actual manifestation of the fruit is not present and the signs are not apparent.
There are four conditions obstructing the awakening of the disposi-
tion. These are a 
birth in unfavorable circumstances, the non-presence 
of remaining imprints, the entertainment of wrong views, and the fault that consists of the presence of the veils.
There are two conditions conducive to the awakening of the dispo-
sition: an outer and an 
inner. The outer condition is the fact that the 
sacred Dharma is taught, and the inner condition is conceptual activity that corresponds to reality or truth.
(f) The signs of the disposition to the Mahayana, or in other words, 
the signs of a bodhisattva, are the following: Body, speech, and mind are naturally gentle without there being the need of applying an antidote. Deceit and hypocrisy are very minute and there is love for sentient beings. Love for sentient beings is the primary sign of a bodhisattva.
The above explanations ar e 
taken from the chapter “The Cause is 
the Sugatagarbha” of the text Jewel Ornament of Liberation (Tib. dam 
chos yid bzhin nor bu 
thar pa rin po che’i rgyan) by the Noble Gampopa. 
There are thr
ee English translations of this work: Herbert Guenther, 
The Jewel Ornament of Liberation  (London: Rider & Company, 1959); Ken 
and Katia Holmes, Gems of Dharma, Jewels of Freedom (Forres: Altea, 
1995); and Khenpo Konchog Gyaltsen Rinpoche The Jewel Ornament 
of Liberation (Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1998).
Note 2:
For f
urther information on non-Buddhist tenets see, for example, 
Hopkins, Meditation on Emptiness, pp. 186, 317-333.
396    Buddha Nature
Note 3:
Generally speaking the term “demon” (Skt. m›ra, Tib. bdud) refers to 
various difﬁculties and obstacles met 
by a person who endeavors to 
practice the teachings of the Buddha. The “four demons” are the demon 
of the skandhas (Skt. skandha-m›ra, Tib. phung po’i bdud), the demon 
of the mental poisons (Skt. kleŸa-m›ra, Tib. nyon mongs pa’i bdud ), the 
demon of the lord of death (Skt. m¸tyu-m›ra, Tib. ’chi bdag gi bdud ), 
and the 
demon of the 
divine child (Skt. devaputra-m›ra, Tib. lha’i bu’i 
bdud). The 
ﬁrst consists of the fact that one mistakenly believes the 
ﬁve skandhas to be an 
existing self. The second consists of the fact 
that one is overcome and steered by the mental poisons. The third represents death, which interrupts one’s practice of Dharma unless one has learned how to make the process of dying a part of it. The fourth represents the seduction that can be induced by the bliss experienced during meditation, as long as one is still on the level of the god realms within samsara.
Note 4:
(1) The ﬁve skandhas or 
aggregates (Tib. phung po) are forms (Skt. 
rÒpa, Tib. gzugs), feelings (Skt. vedan›, Tib. tshor ba), discriminations 
(Skt.
 sa˙jñ›, Tib. ’du shes), compositional factors (Skt. sa˙sk›ra, Tib. ’du 
byed), and consciousnesses (Skt. vijñ›na, Tib. rnam shes).
(2) The eighteen elements or 
constituents (Skt. dh›tu, Tib. khams) 
cons i
st of the six sense-objects, the six sense-faculties, and the six 
sense-consciousnesses.
The six sense-objects ar e 
forms, sounds, odors, tastes, tangible ob-
jects, and phenomena.
The s
ix sense-faculties are the eye sense-faculty, the ear sense-faculty, 
the nose sense-faculty, the tongue sense-faculty, the body sense-faculty, 
and the mind sense-faculty .
The six sense-consciousnesses ar
e the eye-consciousness, the ear-
consciousness, the nose-consciousness, the tongue-consciousness, the 
body-consciousness, and the mental consciousness. 
(3) The twelve entrances or 
sources (Skt. ›yatana, Tib. skye mched) 
con
si
st of the six sense-objects and the six sense-faculties, as mentioned 
above.
(For further information see, for 
example, Hopkins, Meditation on 
Emptiness, p. 271-274.)
 Translator’s Notes      397
Note 5:
On one hand the ten bodhisattva levels (Skt. bhÒmi,  Tib. byang chub sems 
dpa’i sa bcu) are related to the ten perfections (Skt. p›ramit›, Tib. pha rol 
tu phyin pa ), 
which are successively accomplished while one travels 
these levels. On the other hand they are related to the gradual process 
of puriﬁcation during which the two veils of the mental poisons and hindrances to knowledge are eliminated. They are called:
 (1) Supremely Joyful
 (2) Stainless (3) Luminous (4) Radiant (5) Very Difﬁcult to Overcome (6) Directly Manifest (7) Gone Afar (8) Immovable (9) Excellent Understanding (10) Cloud of Dharma.
These names can be explained as follows:(1) The ﬁrst bodhisattva level 
corresponds to the path of seeing. 
It is called “Supremely Joyful” since it is on the path of seeing that for the ﬁrst time the nature of mind is realized directly and as it is. This realization is not just an experience, but is lasting and will not fade. It contains the certainty of henceforth wielding the ability to be of true beneﬁt to all fellow beings. The dawning of this certainty is accompanied by great joy. The path of seeing, through which the ﬁrst bodhisattva level is reached, contains the far-reaching transformation of an ordinary being into a bodhisattva. At this level the perfection of giving is achieved.
(2) On the second bodhisattva 
level, ethics reach their perfection. 
Through this attainment the conduct of a bodhisattva who dwells on this level has become utterly pure. Since there are no faults of behaviors whatsoever, the second bhumi is called “the Stainless.”
(3) “Luminous,” the name of the third bodhisattva level, refers to 
an experience arising to a bodhisattva who dwells on this level during the post-meditative phase. At this time a copper-colored glow is seen, which is due to the fact that primordial wisdom shines through the phenomena perceived. In the system of the Sutrayana this experience is not developed, whereas in the Vajrayana system it is cultivated until gradually the streams of rainbow-colored light in which the dei-ties appear are seen. 
On the third bodhisattva level the perfection of 
398    Buddha Nature
patience is achieved.
(4) The fourth bodhisattva level is called “the Radiant,” since at this 
stage the copper-colored light, which is seen for the ﬁrst time on the 
third bodhisattva level, gains an extraordinary intensity. The Sutrayana system of teachings does not contain any further explanation, whereas in the Vajrayana teachings this light is described extensively in terms of ten stages covering all the colors of the rainbow. On the fourth bhumi diligence is perfected.
(5) O
n the ﬁfth bodhisattva level the perfection of meditative stabil-
ity i
s attained. Its name “Very Difﬁcult to Overcome” can be explained 
in two ways. On one hand it is difﬁcult to purify the veils that obscure the nature of the mind at this point. On the other hand it is difﬁcult to incite the disciples’ effort towards serious discipline and practice.
(6) The sixth bodhisattva level is called “Directly Manifest” since a 
bodhisattva who dwells on this level has gained the ability of directly seeing the illusory nature of samsara. Samsara and nirvana are seen to be one and the same. There is no longer the slightest difference between them. On the sixth bodhisattva level discriminative wisdom reaches perfection.
(7) “Gone Afar,” the name of the seventh bodhisattva level, can also 
be explained from two angles. On one hand it refers to the fact that the seventh bodhisattva level represents a state of development higher than that of a shravaka or pratyekabuddha arhat. When the Buddha sends forth light rays from his forehead to awaken these arhats from the state of extinction in which they abide, thus causing them to gain access to the Mahayana path, they take up this path at the beginning of the seventh bodhisattva level. On the other hand the name refers to the fact that during the seventh bodhisattva level the conceptual elaboration consisting of the perception of characteristics is completely abandoned, and that a bodhisattva on this level goes beyond this obscuration. On the seventh bhumi the perfection of means is achieved.
(8) The eighth bodhisattva level 
is called “the Immovable” since a 
bodhisattva who dwells on this level is neither shaken by the concept that thoughts are present nor by the concept that no thoughts are present. On the eighth bhumi the perfection of wishing prayers is accomplished.
(9) The ninth bodhisattva level 
is called “Excellent Understanding” 
since a bodhisattva who dwells on this level has gained the capacity of seeing all phenomena that are objects of knowledge, as well as their true state, in an all-embracing way. On the ninth level power is perfected.
(10) The name of the tenth bodhisattva level is “Cloud of Dharma” 
 Translator’s Notes      399
since a bodhisattva who dwells on this level conveys the sacred Dharma 
to beings in a way that is spontaneous and free from any deliberate effort. This is similar to the sky in which rain clouds gather and release their abundant waters spontaneously and without effort onto the earth, where the rain provides for a good harvest. On the tenth bodhisattva level the perfection of primordial wisdom is achieved.
The ten bodhisattva levels represent progressive stages of puriﬁca-
tion from the two 
veils, which are the veils of the mental poisons and 
hindrances to knowledge.
(1) The two veils ar e deﬁned as follows:
(a) The veil of 
the mental poisons (Skt. kleŸ›vara˚a, Tib. nyon mongs 
pa’i sgrib pa ) 
consists of the primary mental poisons, which are desire, 
hatred, and mental blindness, and of the secondary deﬁlements stem-ming from these. The 
literal meaning of the Tibetan term nyon mongs 
is “afﬂiction.” This term is 
used since the arising of the mental poisons 
causes suffering and torment to the mind. The way in which the mental poisons arise can be illustrated by the example of dreaming. Suppose one dreams of friends and enemies. A dream has a nature that is illusory and the dream-appearances do not truly exist. In spite of this, desire and aversion will arise when facing a friend and an enemy respectively, as long as one does not recognize that one is dreaming. This example shows that it is the afﬂiction of ignorance that constitutes the cause for the arising of all the other mental poisons.
The three primary mental 
poisons are eliminated by means of the 
following methods: Ignorance is abandoned by means of discriminative wisdom realizing the non-existence of a self. Aversion and hatred are eliminated by means of love and compassion. With regard to the aban-donme
nt of desire, different methods are used within the systems of the 
three vehicles. When following the shravaka path, desire is eliminated by means of its antidote. This is the meditation on revulsiveness, in the course of which one absorbs oneself into the fact that objects, which appear to be pleasant and are therefore desired, are in truth revulsive and thus undesirable. In the system of the path of the Mahayana, desire is abandoned by referring it back to emptiness and thus transforming it into this emptiness. Within the system of the Vajrayana desire itself is made use of as the means to overcome it.
(b) The veil of the hindrances to knowledge (Skt. jñey›vara˚a, Tib. 
shes bya’i sgrib pa ) 
consists mainly of the ﬁxation resulting from the 
fact that the so-called three circles or complexes, that is, subject, object, and their interaction, are taken to be truly existent. A subtler aspect of 
400    Buddha Nature
the veil of the hindrances to knowledge consists of the ﬁxation upon 
characteristics. This is to say, a perception that is freed from the belief in true existence is present, but it conceptually identiﬁes an object of perception by means of its characteristics, which are simultaneously labelled by a name. The subtlest aspect of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge is called “the appearance of duality as such.” This means perception is no longer ruled by the belief in the true existence of the perceived object nor by the concepts of its characteristics, but identi-ﬁes a mere “appearance 
as two” (Tib. gnyis su snang ba). These three 
types of hindrances to knowledge can also be illustrated by means of the example of dreaming. Suppose one dreams of giving a gift to somebody else. As long as one does not recognize that one is dreaming, one takes oneself (the giver), the other person (the receiver of the gift), and the action of giving to be truly existent. This action is virtuous since it springs from a good motivation. It cannot be said to be utterly pure, though, since the belief in the true existence of subject, object, and their interaction obscures the way of existence of these three aspects, which is the fact that they are empty of an existing essence. As soon as one recognizes that one is dreaming, the belief in the true existence of the giver, the receiver, and the action of giving is no longer present. What is present in the state of this realization is merely the perception of the appearance of these aspects, the characteristics of which are identiﬁed by a name. They appear as relative phenomena and are realized for what they are, as something empty by its very essence. Once the ﬁxa-tion 
on the conceptualized characteristics of phenomena is abandoned 
as well, there is nothing more than a mere “appearance as two,” which is completely free from any further ideation.
(2) The relation of the ten bodhisattva levels to the gradual removal 
of the veils is as follows: All beings who have not realized the way of existence of phenomena, who have not realized that phenomena are empty according to their essence, are infested by the ﬁxation consist-ing of the belief in 
their true existence. This ﬁxation is eliminated by 
direct realization of emptiness. Through this realization, by which the veil of the mental poisons and the coarse aspect of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge are removed, an ordinary being reaches the ﬁrst bodhisattva level and becomes a noble bodhisattva. From the ﬁrst up to the seventh bodhisattva level inclusively, the belief in the true existence of phenomena is no longer present. What is present is the subtler aspect of the ﬁxation upon characteristics. For this reason these stages are also called the “impure bodhisattva levels.” From the eighth up to the tenth bodhisattva level inclusively, the ﬁxation upon 
 Translator’s Notes      401
characteristics is also overcome and no longer present. At this stage 
there is merely the appearance of duality as such, not accompanied by any ﬁxation or concept. The last three are therefore called “the pure bodhisattva levels.” At the time when a bodhisattva leaves the tenth bodhisattva level, this subtlest aspect of the veil of the hindrances to knowledge is also eliminated and the state of buddhahood is reached. This implies complete freedom from any concept whatsoever. It is the state of a tathagata, a vast and open space, which is by essence empty and by nature clear light in a completely indivisible way. 
The division into the ten bodhisattva levels is therefore only due to 
a respective degree of puriﬁcation from the two veils. With regard to the nature of mind itself, which has been utterly pure since beginning-less time, there ar
e no different stages. This nature of mind is always 
the same, just as, for instance, the new moon and the full moon are equally the moon, and there is no difference between these as far as the moon itself is concerned.
(The 
above is a rendering of oral teachings by Khenpo Tsultrim 
Gyamtso Rinpoche. They were given while he explained the Jewel 
Ornament of Liberation by Jetsün Gampopa in the spring of 1978, in La Poujade, France, and in the course of his explanations of this present text in the summer of 1979 in Karma Zöpa Ling, Langwedel, Germany. For further information see, for example, Hopkins, Meditation on Empti-
ness, especially pp. 96-109, 255-271, 296-304.)
Note 6:
The ten kinds of mastery 
are (1) mastery of life (Tib. tshe la dbang ba ), 
(2) mastery of mind (T
ib. sems la dbang ba), (3) mastery of necessaries 
(Tib. yo byad la dbang ba), (4) mastery of karma (Tib. las la dbang ba), (5) 
mastery of birth (Tib. skye la dbang ba), (6) mastery of intentions (Tib. 
mos pa la dbang ba), (7) mastery of wishing prayers (Tib. smon lam la 
dbang ba), (8) mastery of miraculous powers (Tib. rdzu ’phrul la dbang 
ba), (9) mastery of primordial wisdom (Tib. ye shes la dbang ba ), and 
(10) mastery of Dharma (Tib. chos la dbang ba).
(1) Mastery of life is the capacity to live as long as one wishes.
(2) Mastery of mind is 
the capacity to rest in samadhi just as one 
wishes. Thus it is complete mastery of meditation.
(3) Mastery of necessaries is 
the capacity to cause an immeasurable 
rain of precious goods to fall onto beings.
(4) Mastery of karma is the capacity to transform the karma of other 
beings. A bodhisattva who has reached the tenth bodhisattva level is 
402    Buddha Nature
able to transform negative karma, the result of which would have to 
be experienced in a certain realm, in a certain place, as a certain being, as a certain type of birth, and at a certain time, into another karma that will result in a rebirth in the higher realms of existence.
(5) Mastery of birth means that such a bodhisattva is able to take 
birth in the realm of desire without leaving the state of meditative stability in which he is dwelling and without this state suffering the slightest deterioration. Although he is born there, he is not polluted by its faults.
(6) Mastery of intentions is 
the capacity to transform earth and so 
on into water and so on, just as one wishes.
(7) M
astery of wishing prayers is the capacity to utter wishing 
prayers that bring about the best possible beneﬁt of others and to accomplish the fulﬁllment of these prayers.
(8) Mastery of miraculous powers is the capacity to demonstrate 
powerful miracles in order to awaken aspiration towards the Dharma in beings.
(9) Mastery of primor dial 
wisdom is supreme and ultimate knowl-
edge with respect to 
all phenomena, to their meaning and deﬁnition, 
and with respect to one’s own courage. The former means that a bod-hisat 
tva who dwells on the tenth bodhisattva level knows the absolute 
and the relative truths. The latter refers to his capacity of fearlessly teaching the Dharma in every aspect and to any assembly.
(10) Mastery of Dharma means that a bodhisattva who has reached 
the tenth bodhisattva level is able to transmit the teachings of the sutras and so forth to all sentient beings by using the linguistic instruments, such as words, terms, names, and so on, in such a way that in manner and amount they correspond exactly to the respective mental capacity 
of each individual being. In doing so he is able to satisfy the minds of different beings through one single teaching, which is heard simulta-neously in their r espective native languages.
(The
 foregoing explanation is taken from the chapter “The Necessary 
Condition is the Spiritual Friend” of the Jewel Ornament of Liberation  
by Jetsün Gampopa.)
Note 7:
The Dharma in terms of 
instruction consists of the words of the Bud-
dha, which he expounded in 
twelve different ways called “the twelve 
branches of the supreme speech of the Buddha” (Tib. gsung rab yan lag 
bcu gnyis ). They consist of the sections of discourses (Tib. mdo sde’i sde ), 
of songs (Tib. dbyangs kyis bsnyad pa’i sde), of prophecies (Tib. lung du 
bstan pa’i sde), of poetry (Tib. tshigs su bcad pa’i sde), of commitments 
 Translator’s Notes      403
(Tib. chad du brjod pa’i sde ), of stories (Tib. gleng gzhi’i sde ), of expressing 
realization (Tib. rtogs pa brzod pa’i sde), of history (Tib. de lta bu byung 
ba’i sde), of expounding the lineage of great beings (Tib. skyes pa rabs 
kyi sde), of full and complete explanation (Tib. shin tu rgyas pa’i sde), of 
relating the wondrous deeds of saintly beings (Tib. rmad du byung ba’i 
sde), and of reasonings (Tib. gtan la ’bab pa’i sde). 
 Yet, the actual 
teaching of the Buddha is the Dharma in terms of 
realization. That is whatever genuine experience has dawned within one’s own stream of being through practicing the actual meaning of the words of the Buddha, through cultivating the qualities resulting from the three trainings and from the developing and perfecting stages [of the Vajrayana system], respectively.
(The above is taken from Clarifying Suchness: A Fool’s Note on the 
Developing and the Perfecting Stages [Tib. bskyed rdzogs kyi zin bris blun 
gtam de nyid gsal ba bzhugs so] by Dzogchenpa Shönnu Yeshe Dorje, who is also known by the name Do Khyentse Rinpoche.)
Note 8:
Karma Thrinläpa lived in the 
late ﬁfteenth/early sixteenth century 
and was an eminent teacher belonging to the Sakya school. He was 
the main disciple of Rongtön, though his root teacher was the Seventh Karmapa Chötrag Gyatso. Later Karma Thrinläpa himself became the teacher of the Eighth Karmapa Mikyö Dorjé.
The comparison with the noise 
of the rabbit is an allusion to the tale 
of the rabbit who, when a fruit (or branch) fell on his head, thought that this was a sign that the world was coming to an end. He ran off into the forest to tell everybody and thus initially caused a wild panic.
Note 9:
The four continents ar e 
Videha in the east, which is white and semi-
circu
lar; Jambudvipa in the south, which is blue and trapezoidal; 
Goda-niya in the west, which is red and round; and Uttara-Kuru in 
the north, which is green and square.
The seven possessions of a Chakravartin are the following:(1) The thousand-spoked wheel made of gold from the river Jam-
bud.
(2) T 
he eight-sided wish-fulﬁlling gem, which is bright as the rays of 
the sun and can be seen to shine from a distance of several yojanas.
(3) The beautiful queen possessing the thirty-two marks of feminine 
perfection.
(4) The minister who excels 
in both physique and intelligence and 
404    Buddha Nature
who can ﬁnd treasures buried underground.
(5) The golden-necklaced white elephant with his seven steadfast 
limbs, who can carry the Chakravartin anywhere.
(6) The excellent horse colored like a peacock’s neck, who can circle 
the four continents in an instant.
(7) The mighty general possessing the sixty-four special skills.
The above is taken fr
om The Torch of Certainty (Tib. gnes don sgron 
me) by Jamgön Kongtrül, translated by Judith Hanson (Boston and Londo 
n: Shambala Publications, 1994). For further information see 
there pp. 97-104.
Note 10:
The t
hirty-seven dharmas conducive to enlightenment (Skt. bodhi-
pak�ikadharmas, Tib. byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pa’i chos) consti-
tute the path to be traveled by a yogi and divide into seven sections:
(1) The ﬁrst section consists 
of the four aspects of the development 
of mindfulness (Skt. sm¸tyupasth›na, Tib. dran pa nye bar bzhag pa bzhi ), 
which are mindfulness with 
respect to the body, emotions, thoughts, 
and phenomena. The four kinds of mindfulness are cultivated on the 
small path of accumulation. They consist of the meditations on imper-manence, suffering, emptiness, and 
on the fact that one’s own body, 
thoughts, emotions, and the other inner phenomena do not exist as a self. A bodhisattva would extend his or her meditation to embrace the bodies, thoughts, and so forth of all other beings as well.
(2) T
he second section consists of the four aspects of thorough 
abandonment (Skt. samyakprah›˚a,  Tib. yang dag par spong ba bzhi ): 
abandoning mental poisons that have already arisen, not giving rise to mental poisons that have not yet arisen, generating pure dharmas that have not yet been generated, and increasing pure dharmas that 
have already been generated. The four kinds of thorough abandonment are cultivated on the middling path of accumulation. They are called “thorough” since their practice is suited to lead one to buddhahood, provided they are supplemented by the aspiration of wanting to reach supreme enlightenment in order to become able to beneﬁt all sentient beings. The development of pure dharmas or virtues is also called an “abandonment,” since in order to develop any virtue its respective contrary needs to be abandoned.
(3) The third section 
consists of the four supports of miraculous 
powers (Skt. ¸ddhip›da, Tib. rdzu ’phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi), which are the 
 Translator’s Notes      405
samadhis of longing (Skt. chanda, Tib. ’dun pa), of diligence (Skt. vırya, 
Tib. b
rtson ’grus ), of intention (Skt. citta,  Tib. sems), and of discrimination 
(Skt. mim›˙sa, Tib. dpyod pa). They ar e called “supports” since they 
are the prerequisites for a manifestation coming about miraculously. 
They are cultivated on the great path of accumulation.
(4) The fourth section consists of the ﬁve capacities (Skt. indriya,  Tib. 
dbang po lnga), which are faith (Skt. Ÿraddh›, Tib. dad pa), diligence (Skt. 
vırya,
 Tib. brtson ’grus), mindfulness (Skt. sm¸ti,  Tib. dran pa), samadhi 
(Tib. ting 
nge ’dzin), and discriminative wisdom (Skt. prajñ›, Tib. shes 
rab). They are attained on the levels “heat” and “peak” of the path of junction.
(5) The ﬁfth section consists 
of the ﬁve powers (Skt. bala, Tib. stobs 
lnga),
 which are faith, diligence, mindfulness, samadhi, and discrimina-
tive 
wisdom (see above) as they are attained on the levels “forbearance” 
and “highest mundane dharma” of the path of junction.
(6) T
he sixth section consists of the seven branches of enlightenment 
(Skt. bodhyaºga, Tib. byang chub kyi yan lag bdun), which are mindful-
ness 
(Skt. sm¸ti,  Tib. dran pa ), discrimination of phenomena (Skt. 
dharmapravicaya, Tib. chos rnam par ’byed pa yang dag), diligence (Skt. 
vırya, Tib. brtson ’grus), joy (Skt. prıti,  Tib. dga’ ba yang dag), suppleness 
(Skt. praŸrabhdi, Tib. shin tu sbyangs pa yang dag), samadhi (Tib. ting nge 
’dzin), and equanimity (Skt. upek�a, Tib. btang snyoms yang dag ). These 
are accomplished on the path of seeing.
(7) The seventh section consists of the noble eightfold path (Skt. 
›ryam›rg›ºga, Tib. ’phags pa’i lam yan lag brgyad) the branches of which 
are right view (Skt. samyagd¸�˛ı, Tib. yang dag pa’i lta ba ), right thought 
(Skt. samyaksa˙kalpa,  Tib. yang dag pa’i rtog pa ), right speech (Skt. 
samyagvac, Tib. yang dag pa’i ngag ), right action (Skt. samyakkarm›nta, 
Tib. yang dag pa’i las 
kyi mtha’), right livelihood (Skt. samyag›jıva, Tib. 
yang  
dag pa’i tsho ba ), right effort (Skt. samyagvy›y›ma,  Tib. yang dag pa’i  
rtsol ba ), right mindfulness (Skt. samyaksm¸ti, Tib. yang dag pa’i dran pa), 
and right concentration (Skt. samyaksam›dhi, Tib. yang dag pa’i ting nge 
’dzin
). They are attained on the path of meditation.
When  
arhathood is reached, all the thirty-seven dharmas conducive 
to enlightenment are accomplished.
(The above is taken from the eighteenth chapter of the Jewel Ornament 
of Liberation [Tib. dam chos yid bzhin nor bu thar pa rin po che’i rgyan] by 
the Noble Gampopa, teaching the ﬁve paths. For further information 
see, for example, Hopkins, Meditation on Emptiness, pp. 205, 206).
406    Buddha Nature
Note 11:
As a general guideline for a practitioner to take to heart, the Buddha 
advised that one should rely on four principles rather than upon four others. This advice is as follows:
Rather than on the words rely on the meaning.
Rather than on personalities rely on Dharma.Rather than on any relative truth rely on the ultimate truth.Rather than on the provisional rely on the deﬁnitive meaning.
As for the last statement there are, generally speaking, two ways 
in which the Buddha taught and in which his teachings are therefore 
presented. The ﬁrst is called “neyartha” in Sanskrit (Tib. drang don), 
which
 can be translated as “provisional meaning” or “meaning requir-
ing i
nterpretation.” This refers to teachings that are given for a speciﬁc 
purpose and are not identical to truth itself: they are meant to lead one gradually to the understanding of the actual truth. This does not mean that these teachings are false. They are true but not totally so. They are valid to a certain extent and on the relative level. One might call them a half-truth that will guide one into truth as it actually is. The Buddha has described these teachings by means of the following example:
Suppose there is a 
house with many children inside and this house 
is abundantly ﬁlled with all kinds of beautiful toys and very attractive pleasurable things. Then you suddenly see that the house has caught ﬁre and will go up in ﬂames any time. So you call the children: “Come out! Come out! Quickly! The house is burning!” Yet, being so immersed in their toys and pleasures they will not listen. All these playthings are far too exciting to be left behind and the children do not realize the danger. Therefore you have to decoy them and shout: “There are so many wonderful toys out here, much more and far nicer ones than in the house! You should come outside and have a look!” Hearing that, the children become curious and run from the house. There may not be any toys outside but the children are saved from the ﬁre!
This illustrates what is to be understood by the teachings conveying 
the provisional meaning: in a way one is not telling the full truth, but this is done for a purpose that otherwise would not be achieved. Then again it cannot be said to be totally untrue. One may not have any toys out there but it is possible to ﬁnd and provide some later. Since the children did not die, they are still able to play. If they had died, there would be no other chance for them to enjoy any toy. A statement that was not totally truthful at the time saved their lives and thus provided 
 Translator’s Notes      407
a future opportunity. For this reason it is called a provisional truth. 
All the teachings expressing the relative level are contained in this aspect. The second is called “nitartha” in Sanskrit (Tib. nges don). This 
can be translated as “deﬁnitive meaning.” It refers to those teachings that directly express the truth, the ultimate level, the way everything 
408    Buddha Nature
 Translator’s Notes      409
Dedication
May the merit resulting from the work with this text contribute in the 
greatest possible measure to the temporary and ultimate welfare of all sentient beings.