Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L34FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.285514
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 34	 				                                       10 August 2017
Q & A Review. The seed syllables. Calm abiding in tantra. Divine pride & arising as the deity—the three positions. 
Q & A
The seed syllables
Student 1: In relation to the explanation of the Nyung Nay sadhana, what is the meaning of the seed syllable Hrih at the heart? Different deities have different seed syllables but I don’t know the meaning of the seed syllable. 
Also the body, speech and mind of the deities are always marked by Om Ah Hum. What is the significance of the body, speech and mind being marked by Om Ah Hum? In the Yamantaka long sadhana, the various points of the face of the deity are also marked by different syllables. Can you please explain?
Khen Rinpoche: The five buddha lineages have their own seed syllables: 
Vairochana is Om
Akshobhya is Hum
Amitabha is Hrih
Ratnasambhava could be Ah—I’m not sure
Amoghasiddhi could be Tam
Assuming the correlation between the syllables and the five buddha lineages are correct, the point here is, for example, if you generate as Vairochana, it will be generated from Om. So Om is called the seed syllable of Vairochana precisely because Vairochana arises from that seed syllable. Perhaps that’s why it’s called the seed syllable. It’s called the seed syllable because the deity is generated from the syllable in question. 
If you look at a mandala, whether it is drawn or constructed, different syllables are shown at different places of the mandala to represent a specific deity. By looking at the syllable, you can have a rough idea about the deity in question. 
Sometimes, instead of syllables, the hand implements are drawn to represent the deity in the mandala. For example, the Amitabha lineage is represented by a lotus because Amitabha is from the lotus lineage.
Placing the three syllables Om, Ah and Hum at one’s three doors symbolize the exalted body, exalted speech and exalted mind. 
Om symbolizes the exalted body
Ah symbolizes the exalted speech
Hum symbolizes the exalted mind
Ah is supposed to symbolize the exalted speech but how does that work? It is said in tantra the syllable Ah is the supreme and is the root of all syllables. 
Student 2:  In the Nyung Nay, in the self-generation, we refer to the four complete purities:
The purity of the body is the pure body of the deity. 
Pure enjoyments are the offerings to the self-generation. 
Pure activities will be the emitting and absorbing of the light rays. 
What about the pure mind in the practice of the four purities?
Khen Rinpoche: That’s not one of the complete purities. The four purities are the body, the environment, the enjoyments and activities. 
Calm abiding in tantra
Student 2: The environment would be the mandala and the inestimable mansion. 
In the three lower tantras, calm abiding focussing on emptiness is achieved towards the end of the path of accumulation. So, in the beginning, when one enters the tantric path, the practitioner must already have achieved calm abiding focussing on objects other than the wisdom realizing emptiness. Am I correct to say that? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know whether you are correct or not. These are qualms to which there are no clear answers. If you follow the position of Jetsunpa whose position is adhered to by Sera Je College, then a person who enters the Mahayana path necessarily has calm abiding. 
If one takes this position—you need calm abiding to enter the Mahayana path—how are you going to explain it? In order to enter the Mahayana path, you need uncontrived bodhicitta, the mind that spontaneously thinks about achieving enlightenment day and night. It has to come effortlessly. 
If you adhere to this position, perhaps the reason would be in order to have this kind of mind day and night arising effortlessly in an uncontrived manner, it would be difficult without depending on a stable mind such as calm abiding. Then you would have to answer another question, which is more general. Is calm abiding a prerequisite for the generation of any path or not? This means also including the 
Hinayana path. Basically, in order to have uncontrived renunciation, do you need calm abiding or not? If you extend the earlier reasoning, then you might have to end up saying, “Yes!”
If you read our root text, Ngawang Palden’s presentation on the tantric stages, in the case of Action Tantra, he talks about the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation. Within the latter, there is the absorption on fire and the absorption on sound. He says you achieve calm abiding at the time of the absorption on sound. He seems to be saying that calm abiding is not achieved prior to that point. 
There are different positions taken by various great masters of the past. I think we have gone through them. According to one of the writings of Longdol Lama Rinpoche, he said the calm abiding that is achieved during the absorption on sound is taken to mean the calm abiding that has emptiness as its object of observation. He does not say it is calm abiding in general. So, you have to take the calm abiding that is achieved during the absorption on sound to be the calm abiding observing emptiness. This means it’s not an issue if you achieve calm abiding prior to that.
Then in one of the writings of Kachen Yeshe Gyaltsen, he thinks it is possible one can achieve calm abiding by observing the deity’s body prior to the absorption on sound.  
The first of the two yogas is the yoga with signs primarily involving generating oneself as a deity. You arise as a deity through the process of the six deities. The last deity is the sign deity during which the main practice is to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. In this context, personally, I think it’s possible to achieve calm abiding by observing the deity’s body. So basically, you can have calm abiding prior to the absorption on sound. 
I wonder whether you can call the calm abiding that’s achieved during the absorption on sound the uncommon calm abiding. I think the calm abiding achieved during the absorption on sound can be taken to be the calm abiding observing emptiness, not calm abiding in general.  If you say the calm abiding that’s achieved during the absorption on sound is the calm abiding observing emptiness, it fits nicely into the picture because you achieve the special insight observing emptiness during the absorption that bestows at the limit of sound. 
I think maybe you can say calm abiding can be achieved prior to the absorption on sound. Nothing is clear here but this is just to give you some idea. You can still think more about this.
Student 3:  I refer to your answer to Student 2 that there are the purities of the body, the enjoyments, the environment and activities. I think implicitly the deity’s mind and speech are actually the first purity. Otherwise, how do you practise divine pride where you actually see yourself as the deity?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no mind (among the four purities). 
Student 3: But I thought it’s implicit.
Khen Rinpoche: When you count the four purities, the mind is not included in there. 
Student 4: Can you please explain what the function of the three-tiered being—the commitment being, concentration being and wisdom being—is? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know why we need the three tiers. Does anybody have any idea why there are three tiers? I haven’t seen anything that talks clearly about this. 
We have a body. The commitment being is like a body or container within which the mind resides. The mind has to depend on a physical basis. The commitment being is essentially our own visualization (of the deity). 
Within the commitment being resides the wisdom being. It’s the wisdom being that makes it powerful. That’s why the wisdom being has to enter and absorb into the commitment being.
I’m not sure. I haven’t seen anything on this. The idea is something like that. 
Divine pride & arising as the deity
Student 1: It’s explained when we generate divine pride, we have the full confidence, “I am the deity!” My problem is that the use of the word, ‘pride,’ always has some negative connotation. Besides confidence, are there other aspects that pertain to this divine pride?  What is the proper way of practising divine pride during the post-meditation session?
Khen Rinpoche: You have difficulty going about your daily life when you think you are Chenrezig? 
You can’t do anything? 
Student 1: It’s not a matter of not being able to function whilst thinking, “I’m Chenrezig.” During meditation, I can say, “I am Chenrezig” but during the post- meditation session, what’s the proper way of thinking, “I am Chenrezig”? Are there other aspects to this divine pride we should be aware of apart from having this confidence? 

Khen Rinpoche: I think that’s it.  I think so. 
Student 1: If during post-meditation, I keep on having this strong idea I’m a deity, the negative mind may arise, “I’m superior to everybody else because I’m a deity.” I don’t know whether that negative mind can arise. Then how?
Khen Rinpoche: Then you sit down! 
First, you must understand what it means to arise as deity. Who is arising as the deity? Literally, oneself is arising as the deity. What is the basis of designation of this divine pride? What are you imputing the deity on? In the first place, the problem comes because of not knowing what this is. 
~ Position 1
We have the ordinary contaminated aggregates that are the bases of designation of the ordinary ‘I’. If this ordinary ‘I’ becomes the basis of identifying oneself as the deity, then you have a big problem. The afflictions such as pride can arise if you think the ordinary ‘I’ is the deity. Such a way of identification has no benefit. In fact, it is a wrong consciousness. Conceiving the coarse, ordinary ‘I’ to be a buddha is a wrong consciousness. You are not going to achieve anything useful whatsoever. 
~ Position 2
There’s a school of thought that says that the basis of designation in dependence upon which you impute, “I am the deity,” is one’s object of attainment, enlightenment. This object of attainment is what your bodhicitta is focussing on, the buddha you will become. One school of thought takes that object of attainment, the buddha you will become, as the basis of designation. Based on that, you identify, “This is me.” 
Khen Rinpoche:  What’s wrong with that? Is it OK or not OK? 
Student 5: Your future buddhahood is a non-existent because you have not achieved it yet. How can something you have not achieved be the basis of designation? 
Khen Rinpoche: There is causal refuge and resultant refuge. Does your resultant refuge exist? Does the enlightenment you will achieve in the future exist? It doesn’t exist now, but in general does it exist? Just because it exists doesn’t mean it has to exist now.
There is the buddha you will become. That’s your object of attainment. Taking that as the basis of designation, you identify with it. Then you elicit clear appearance and divine pride on that basis. Is that a problem or not?
The purpose of cultivating clear appearances and divine pride is to stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. As such, this position is incorrect. 
By focussing on your future object of attainment, the buddha you will become and taking that as a basis of designation and identifying yourself with that, there is no benefit. Are you are going to stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness? By focussing on this object of attainment—the buddha you will become—is there ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness or not? If there isn’t, then what’s the point of meditating and cultivating clear appearance and divine pride when in the first place there is no ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness to be stopped. 
It’s incorrect to conceive of the ordinary ‘I’ that is designated in dependence upon the contaminated aggregates to be the deity. 
Likewise, there’s no purpose and benefit in identifying yourself as being the buddha you will become in the future because it doesn’t stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. 
The divine pride conceiving the ‘I’ to be the deity is not the ordinary ‘I’. Neither is it
the ‘I’ that is imputed in dependence upon the future object of attainment, one’s 
future enlightenment.
~ Position 3
However, there is another school of thought that says it is the general ‘I’—the ‘I’ that pervades the past, present and future, not the specific ‘I’—that is to be identified and meditating on that as the deity. 
When we say, “arising as the deity”, who arises as the deity? What is this ‘I’ that is arising as the deity? You really have to think about who exactly is this person that’s arising as the deity. 
There is this general ‘I’ that pervades all times—the past, present and future— including enlightenment. Taking this general ‘I’ as the basis of designation, then visualizing and meditating on it in the aspect of the deity and holding on to divine pride and clear appearance—will this be OK? It’s definitely a better position than the previous two positions but is there still a problem with this position or not?
Student 6: I thought taking the resultant state of one’s enlightenment is the best position for the basis of designation of the ‘I’. If we take the general ‘I’ to be the basis of designation of the enlightened being, the deity ... 
Khen Rinpoche: If you take your object of attainment, your future enlightenment, as the basis of designation, what ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness is there in relation to the buddha you will become in the future?  Is there ordinariness or not? 
Student 6: There’s a difference in the time frame. But no, (there is no ordinariness).
Khen Rinpoche: OK then. And that is a better position because …?
Student 6: It helps you to maintain a pure perception. If we were to take the general ‘I’ of the past, present and future lives, we have been lower realm beings in our past lives and right now, we are deluded ordinary sentient beings. Taking that as the basis of designation of the ‘I’ that is the enlightened being, the deity—to me, things just fall apart.
Khen Rinpoche: This is not what we said. We are talking about the general ‘I’. There is a general ‘I’ and there is a specific ‘I’. The general ‘I’ exists at all times, right? It definitely exists at all times! We are not talking about the specific ‘I’—the ‘I’ as a hell being or the ‘I’ as an ordinary sentient being. We are not talking of this specific ‘I’. We are talking about the general ‘I’. So what is the problem then?  
Student 6: It’s too vague. There is no mental image of this general ‘I’ of the past, present and future arising in my mind. It’s really nothingness. If you ask me how do I think of myself as the general ‘I’ of the past, present and future, seriously right now my mind is a blank. 
However, if we have this perception of ourselves as the resultant state of enlighten-
ment, somehow, it helps us to be more focussed on the goal we want to achieve at the time of the path. There’s a difference in the quality of our perception because the problem with us right now is that we see ourselves as ordinary. We don’t see ourselves as a divine being. The goal we set is based on the resultant state we would like to achieve. This is why we make aspirational prayers. This is how I see it. Generally when people train, they always have a goal they want to achieve in mind. If we say the resultant state of enlightenment is not useful, then I think our refuge vows …
Ven Gyurme: Khen Rinpoche is asking—Is there ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness in the second position? If there is nothing to be abandoned, then what are you meditating on?
Student 6: There is something to be abandoned. Right now I’m not enlightened. So, that’s the object of abandonment. For me, I take it there’s a difference in the time frame, i.e., the person I am right now and the person I am in the resultant state of enlightenment are not two different people. The difference is in the time frame. Right now, I see myself as an ordinary deluded sentient being, but if I see myself … 
Ven Gyurme: No. I don’t think you got what Khen Rinpoche said. In your future enlightenment, do you as a buddha have ordinary appearance or not? 
Student 6: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Think about it. 
Think about the third position, which is mentioned in a particular presentation of the tantric stages of the path by a great master. There is a general ‘I’ that covers all time. It exists. If you take that as the basis of designation and meditate on that in the aspect of deity and so forth, is there any problem? Does the general ‘I’ that covers past, present and future exist or not? 
There are four pillars here. Is there a pillar that pervades all four pillars or not? Does such a pillar exist or not?
Student 6: There is a general pillar.
Khen Rinpoche: If you eliminate each of these pillars individually, in the end, do you have a pillar that pervades all the four pillars? Yes or no?
Student 6: No.
Khen Rinpoche: There is a pillar that covers all the four pillars. But when you eliminate all the four pillars, do you have any pillar left?
Student 6: No.
Khen Rinpoche: There is a pillar in this room that pervades all four of these pillars. You cannot say it doesn’t exist. Yet even as you say it exists, when you look for it, you cannot find it. This is why it exists in mere name. It is not findable upon further analysis. Is there a pillar that pervades all the four pillars? Yes. But if you were to look for this pillar that pervades all four pillars, is it pillar no. 1? No. Is it pillar no. 2? Pillar no. 3? Pillar no. 4? It is none of these four pillars, yet you cannot say it doesn’t exist. It exists. How? In mere name. 
They say if you think like this, there is benefit in understanding the emptiness of things existing from their own side. You look at this in general. It exists in mere name.  If you try to look for the imputed object, you cannot find it. It is not this. It is not that.  But you cannot say it doesn’t exist. 
It’s the same as the emptiness of the ‘I’. What is the ‘I’ or self that is merely designated in dependence upon the aggregates? It is nothing more than that. If you look for the ‘I’ within the basis of designation, there is nothing you can point to that is the ‘I’. 
There is an ‘I’ that moves from life to life, from hell to this life as a human being, from being a human being to enlightenment. There is such an ‘I’. This is the general ‘I’ that covers all time. Whereas the ‘I’ of this life, this human identity that is designated in dependence upon the human body and mind, this specific ‘I’, does not go to enlightenment or even the next life.
Student 6: What if we see ourselves as the resultant state of the enlightened being that we will become? Yes, there’s no ordinary appearance to be abandoned because the moment we see ourselves as a divine enlightened being at the resultant state, at the same time, we would have stopped the perception of seeing ourselves as an ordinary sentient being.  What I’m saying is that when we see ourselves as the resultant state of enlightenment, that’s the basis of designation of the deity. You cannot see yourself both as an ordinary being and as a divine being. It is quite impossible. When we cultivate that divine pure perception, immediately, ordinary perception is stopped simultaneously. 
Khen Rinpoche: So you think about it. 
If you take your object of attainment, your future enlightenment, as the basis of designation upon which you cultivate divine pride and clear appearance, is there any problem or not? 
Likewise, if you take the general ‘I’ to be the basis of designation and then cultivate divine pride and clear appearance, what is the problem?
Then, thinking that the ordinary ‘I’, the one that exists in dependence upon the contaminated body and mind is the deity. What’s wrong with that? 
Student 7: If we take the ‘I’ that has feelings and the aggregates and thinking that ‘I’ as the deity, this is going to be a problem because then we will never be able to develop divine pride. Rather, we will develop negative pride.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 7: I don’t think it’s a problem if we use the emptiness of the ‘I’ to generate 
divine pride as a deity. From the very beginning of the six deities process, we start with the empty deity, cultivating the emptiness of this self in order to arise as a deity. 
But there is a problem if I were to use my ordinary ‘I’ and the general ‘I’ to develop that divine pride. What is the problem? We all have buddha nature within us, but at the moment it is very clouded. If I were to think that I’m Chenrezig covered with all these defilements, I don’t think that’s correct. But if I were to use the proper technique and skilfulness in arising as a deity using the emptiness of the ‘I’, then I don’t think there is a problem. 
Khen Rinpoche: Think about these three positions. What would be the fallacy (of each position) if there is any?
What is wrong with saying the ‘I’ that is designated in dependence upon the contaminated body and mind is the basis of designation and then cultivating divine pride and clear appearance. What would be the problem? 
Likewise, by taking the buddha you will become in the future as the basis of designation and then cultivating divine pride and clear appearance—is there any problem with that?
The third one would be the general ‘I’. 
In tantric practice, what has to be stopped is ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. In the process of stopping these two, the main section of the process is the meditation on emptiness, which is the primary method for purifying ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.
In Highest Yoga Tantra, we practise having the clear light realizing emptiness, i.e., the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness, and then we identify ourselves as and hold divine pride in being the resultant dharmakaya, “This is my resultant dharmakaya.” This is at the level of make-belief and imagination but this is the method of practice in the beginning. We visualize manifesting the extremely subtle mind of clear light, causing it to realize emptiness and identify ourselves in this way: “I am the resultant dharmakaya.”  This is for the purpose of creating the cause to actually achieve this result in the future as mentioned in the sutra. What becomes the dharmakaya? Basically, it is the naturally abiding lineage together with the clear light.
In the beginning when one meditates on emptiness, one purifies in emptiness. This purification in emptiness stops ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. So, at the level of imagination, at the beginning of a Highest Yoga Tantra practice, this is what we think, “This is my extremely subtle mind of clear light realizing emptiness. This is the actual dharmakaya (truth body).” One imagines this is the resultant dharmakaya. And it is from within this resultant dharmakaya that the actual dharmakaya comes and one arises as the form body.  The form body is a display of the dharmakaya. It is the manifestation of the dharmakaya. After arising in the aspect of the deity with all its features, then one cultivates clear appearance and divine pride. 
When one arises in the form body with the features, faces, colours, implements and so forth, the deity’s body is appearing clearly. One thinks one is the actual deity.  One 
feels, “I’m the real deity completely devoid of all faults and endowed with all the qualities.” There is this appearance of a deity’s body with the feeling of being the actual deity. This is the basis of designation. This clear appearance of the deity’s body is the basis of designation in dependence upon which there is a sense of the ‘I’. This ‘I’ is designated in dependence upon the clear appearance of the deity’s body. This ‘I’ is the basis of designation of identifying yourself as the deity. 
In other words, there is this clear appearance of the deity’s body, completely devoid of all faults and endowed with all the qualities. You think, “This is me.” That’s possible, right? 
You start with generating divine pride as the dharmakaya by identifying at the level of visualization in the beginning, this extremely subtle mind of clear light realizing emptiness as the actual dharmakaya.
From this, one arises as the form body. Then you elicit clear appearance of yourself with all the necessary features, colours and so forth appearing clearly. It is the body of the deity that is completely devoid of all faults and endowed with all qualities that is appearing. 
This is one way you can say this is the basis of designation upon which you identify “This is me.” Then through constant familiarization and through progressing on the different levels of the Highest Yoga Tantra, at a very high level, this realization does not remain at the level of visualization. A fully qualified deity body actually arises. This is where the illusory body comes into the picture. This fully qualified deity’s body, the illusory body, is the actual substantial cause for the Buddha’s form body.
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra:
You imagine you ascertain emptiness with the extremely subtle mind of clear light. Although in the beginning, it is only at the level of visualization, this is what you think. 
This mind realizing emptiness is the resultant dharmakaya.
You generate divine pride as this dharmakaya. 
From that, you arise as the form body. 
Then you try to elicit clear appearance and divine pride with respect to that form body. 
In the beginning, one purifies in emptiness. This purification in emptiness in the beginning is very important. This really goes a long way in stopping ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. 
In the teachings, one common qualm is often raised: For those who have very powerful clear appearance and divine pride, how do they engage in purification practices like the Vajrasattva mantra and the 35 Buddhas during the post-meditation session? The idea is that they really have the clear appearance of themselves as the deity. Identifying themselves as the deity is very real and comes very naturally for them. There are different ways of going about this: 
According to one master, during the confession practice, one imagines the ordinary ‘I’, the ordinary person, at the heart of oneself as the deity. This is the person who is doing the confession.
Another option for such people is that they are advised to hold on to the clear appearance but they should loosen their divine pride. 
There’s no need for us to worry about this too much as it doesn’t apply to us! 
Student 2: In both sutra and tantra, dualistic appearances only subside when one sees emptiness directly. However, in the six deities, when we perform the very first deity,  the empty deity, when everything dissolves, are we supposed to also imagine the experience to be like someone who has directly realized emptiness, i.e., there is no dualistic appearance whatsoever? 
Khen Rinpoche: We imagine this to be the case but we cannot say that because we imagine it in that way, therefore, we have no dualistic appearance. Before the direct realization of emptiness is achieved, the mind is a conceptual mind. Necessarily, there is the meaning generality. If there is the meaning generality, there’s no way for there to be an absence of dualistic appearance. 
Student 2: In Lesson 22, we were talking about yoga without signs. You mentioned another name for yoga without signs, non-dual yoga. I just wonder what that means.
Khen Rinpoche: Next time.  
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 