Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L18FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.681124
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 18	 				                                           6 June    2017
Review. The post-meditative session & the three recognitions. Absorption not reliant on recitation: 1. Absorption on fire. 2. Absorption on sound 3. Absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound. Root text (p. 37). Q & A. Homework.  
REVIEW
As seen in the earlier classes, in the context of Action Tantra:
You generate yourself as the deity through the six deities.
On that basis, you visualize well all the four branches.
Then you engage in the two forms of recitation, whispered and mental.
There are two types of recitation:
the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra
the recitation observing the sound of the mantra
In the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity, there are three objects of observation:
the deity’s body in front
the moon disc at the heart of the deity
the  mantra garland on the moon disc
As you move to the practice of the recitation observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart, there are two objects of observation:
the moon disc
the mantra garland on the moon disc
When you move on to the recitation observing the sound of the mantra, then there is only one focal object—the sound of the mantra. 
You can see that progressively the object of observation becomes more and more subtle. This is a way of making the mind that is meditating subtler as well. You have to know these essential points.
As I’ve said before, when you engage in the recitation observing the sound of the mantra, there is only one focal object, i.e., the sound of the mantra. You focus on the sound of the mantra and engage in either whispered or mental recitation. What’s this sound of the mantra that you’re focussing on? It’s as if you’re listening to your own voice reciting the mantra. It’s your mind making that sound. 
This is the manner in which the four-branched recitation is performed. At the end of this practice, you arrive at the recitation observing the sound of the mantra.
I’m repeating what was covered earlier. As I’ve mentioned before, when you engage in the approximation of the deity, approximation here means getting closer to the deity.  What you’re trying to do is to get closer to the deity.  After you’ve finished with this practice, when you’re going to end the session, there’s a way of leaving the recitation session. 
Here we’re talking about leaving the session after having completed the recitation observing the sound of the mantra.  After you’ve completed the practice of the recitation observing the sound of the mantra, how do you leave the session? 
You move from observing the sound of the mantra to observing the letters of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity.  In the case of the Chenrezig practice, there are six letters, Om Mani Padme Hum.  
Then you move from observing the letters of the mantra to observing the moon disc. 
From observing the moon disc, you move to observing the body of the front generation deity.
You move from observing that to observing yourself appearing as the deity.  
The mind that’s visualizing the deity becomes subtler again, because from observing yourself as the deity, you move to observing the letters of the mantra at your heart. 
From observing the form of the letters at your heart, you move on to observing the sound of the mantra.
The sound of the mantra that you are focussing on gradually disappears into emptiness.
You arrive at the stage called the wisdom truth body that I think is essentially arriving at the mind that ascertains emptiness. The emptiness and the mind observing it become of one taste, i.e., they become inseparable. While what I’m going to say now is not mentioned in Action Tantra, essentially, you arrive at the point where you imagine it’s the mind of clear light that ascertains emptiness. 
You leave that meditative equipoise by arising as the deity into subsequent attainment. During the post-meditative session, you view everything as illusory-like. You arise as the deity with one face and two arms and you proceed with activities such as accumulating merit and purifying your negativities and obscurations.
THE POST-MEDITATIVE SESSION & THE THREE RECOGNITIONS
During the session, the main practice on the basis of the six deities is engaging in the four-branched recitation. As you leave the session, you arise from emptiness as the deity and enter into another phase of the practice called the post-meditative session. That’s not a time when you can do whatever you wish as if the practice is completed. During the post-meditative session, you’re supposed to be mindful always that you’re the deity. You cultivate the recognition or attitude that:
your body is the body of the deity 
your speech is the mantra of the deity 
your mind to be the dharmakaya
While maintaining these three recognitions in the post-meditative session, you then go about your activities such as reading texts, making offerings and tsa tsa images and so forth.
The manner in which you spend this time in between sessions—what we call the post-meditative session—is extremely important. It’s not the time for complete relaxation and doing whatever you like. If your meditation has culminated in achieving its purpose, that’s a different matter. But if that’s not the case, which means that you’ll need to engage in your meditation session again after the post-meditative session, this post-meditative session has to benefit the meditation session that follows. 
If you’re not careful about what you do during the post-meditative session, it’s not going to be helpful when you engage in the meditation session again. In fact, you may find it difficult to return to the practice. In general, definitely, the post-meditative session is a little more relaxed than the actual meditation session. Nevertheless, during the post-meditative session, whatever you do, you should not be separated from the three recognitions. 
In the context of the Mahayana sutra, we talk about the wisdom of meditative equipoise and the wisdom of subsequent attainment. During the period of subsequent attainment, the bodhisattvas work hard at the accumulation of merit. What’s the point of doing this? The purpose of doing so is that when they go back into meditative equipoise, their accumulation of merit will aid in their meditation on emptiness. Likewise here, in order for the post-meditative session to benefit the actual meditation session, during the post-meditative session, you must engage in activities without being separated from the three recognitions. If you do that, it’ll be much easier when you return to the meditation session again, focussing on the six deities and doing the four-branched meditation.  This is how the practice should be done for those who are eager to have the experience of realizations. This is serious business. 
But for people like ourselves, we may meditate during the session but once we get up from our cushions, it’s like being in a completely different world. We see no connection between the sessions and do not recognise there’s a connection between our meditation session and the time in-between the sessions. That’s why we’re not getting anywhere with our practice.
At least now, we can use whatever knowledge we’ve gained here and put it into practice. If you’re planning to do a retreat, then as much as possible, you should apply whatever you know and familiarize yourself with the theory and the practice. That’s how a habit can be built up. Even if you’re not in retreat, try to apply as much as possible whatever you’ve learnt to your daily recitations, thinking along the lines that have been explained. 
The path of Action Tantra can be condensed into three meditations:
the meditation on the body of the deity—the Mahamudra 
the meditation on the deity’s speech—the mantra recitation 
the meditation on the deity’s mind—the meditation on suchness 
The meditation on the body of the deity, the Mahamudra, is essentially the meditation on the six deities.
There are two absorptions (or concentrations) in the meditation on the deity’s speech as mantra. We have completed the presentation on the first absorption with recitation. Then under the absorption not reliant on recitation: 
Absorption on fire (or concentration abiding in fire)
Absorption on sound (or concentration abiding in sound) 
These two will come soon.
Then there is the meditation on the deity’s mind, suchness. This also falls under the absorption not reliant on recitation and refers to the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound (or concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound). 
You must know the terms well and be able to say them. This is the barest minimum. Otherwise, it will be really difficult. So starting from the six deities, you should be able to say straightaway what the six deities and the four branches are. 
With regard to the absorption with recitation, you should be able to say:
the absorption on the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra 
the absorption on the recitation observing the sound of the mantra
ABSORPTION NOT RELIANT ON RECITATION
With regard to the absorption not reliant on recitation, there are three divisions:
the absorption on fire 
the absorption on sound 
the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound
After you’ve meditated on the absorption with recitation, then you engage in the absorption not reliant on recitation. 
Absorption on fire 
What do you visualize when you are practising the absorption on fire? 
You visualize a tongue of flame at the heart of yourself as the deity. 
The tongue of flame is very stable, as if it’s undisturbed by any draft of wind. Visualizing the tongue of flame clearly means that you visualize the tongue of flame to be very bright.
Your wisdom realizing emptiness appears in the aspect of the sound of the mantra resonating within that tongue of flame. The entity of the sound of the mantra is your own mind realizing suchness appearing in the aspect of the sound of the mantra resonating within the tongue of flame. 
You then place your attention on the sound of the mantra. 
In the absorption on fire, there are two focal objects:
the tongue of flame
the sound of the mantra that is resonating inside it
Here when you are focussing on the sound of the mantra, it’s different from what you did before. Earlier on, in the recitation observing the sound of the mantra, you regarded the sound of the mantra as if you made it yourself. It’s as if you’re listening to your own recitation of the mantra. Here, it’s not like that. In the absorption on fire, you’re listening to the sound of the mantra as if it’s coming from within the tongue of flame. 
Since this is an absorption on fire, which is an absorption not reliant on recitation, there is nothing to recite here. So there’s no whispered recitation or mental recitation. The practice is just focussing on the tongue of the flame and the sound of the mantra resonating within it. 
After performing this meditation for a while, if it’s done well and correctly, it’s said in the teachings that there’ll be certain signs of proficiency such as being free from hunger and thirst and being endowed with a blissful feeling of heat in the body
Absorption on sound
At the heart of yourself as the deity, you visualize that there’s an orb of light. You don’t visualize the moon mandala in the usual way, i.e., lying down. You visualize it standing upright.  
Inside that orb of light, i.e., the upright moon mandala, you visualize a very small deity that looks exactly like yourself, the external deity. 
Inside the heart of this very small deity is a tongue of flame. 
The sound of the mantra is resonating inside that tongue of flame.   
You place your attention on that sound that’s like somebody else reciting. You don’t focus so much on the tongue of flame, just the sound of the mantra.
Student 1: Is the moon mandala or orb like a bubble? 
Khen Rinpoche: You can visualize it like that. 
Student 1: The sound of the mantra abiding within the flame is just sound, i.e., there are no letters of the mantra? 
Khen Rinpoche: There are no letters.
At the culmination of the absorption on sound, calm abiding is achieved. This is the case in Action Tantra, Performance Tantra, and maybe even Yoga Tantra. 
If you’ve read the text on your own, you should remember reading this sentence.  
Calm abiding 
You establish calm abiding … meditative absorption on sound. (p. 37)
What it’s saying is that after meditating well on the absorption on sound, when you reach the end of the practice of absorption on sound, you achieve calm abiding. 
Absorption bestowing freedom at the limit of sound 
From the limit of sound, you meditate on insight. (p. 37) 
Union of calm abiding and insight
If you apply … insight realizing emptiness. (p. 37)
When you [3b] … in the Perfection Vehicle. (p. 37)
The absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation up to the absorption on sound are the yoga with signs. 
The absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound, ‘sound’ here refers to the earlier absorption on sound. At the end of that absorption on sound, what are you bestowed with?  You are bestowed the final truth body so the freedom (or liberation) here means the final truth body. This is the absorption that bestows the final truth body (or the dharmakaya) at the limit (or end) of sound. 
What is it that will bestow this final truth body that is the freedom at the limit of sound? It’s the wisdom realizing emptiness. In this context, it refers to the special insight focussing on emptiness.
What happens after the culmination of the absorption on sound? You’ve already achieved calm abiding so what comes after that? In terms of the path, you have the special insight focussing on emptiness. With that, you enter the path of preparation followed by the path of seeing and so forth and progress towards liberation. So when does the real progress towards liberation start? It starts when you’ve the special insight focussing on emptiness. That’s what will liberate you. 
There are two absorptions: one with recitation and one that is not reliant on recitation. And within the absorption that is not reliant on recitation, there are three absorptions:  
the absorption on fire
the absorption on sound
the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound
The first two—the absorption on fire and the absorption on sound—fall under the yoga with signs. 
The absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound is yoga without signs.
Q & A
Student 2: Previously, we were taught that calm abiding was achieved through the nine stages. We fixate on one focal object. But here where we are learning all these different absorptions, our focal objects are constantly changing and we are moving our mouths, hands, using malas and so forth. At the end of the day, how is calm abiding achieved?  I don’t know how to reconcile the nine stages with the presentation here. 
Also in the last lesson, the apprehension aspect (or factor) of wisdom arising as the deity was mentioned. What exactly is this? Does it mean that there is an apprehender aspect of wisdom and if so, is there a difference between the two?
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s deal with the second question first. 
What is the apprehension aspect in the expression, the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity? In the literal translation from Tibetan to English, you’ll probably have to say that it is the aspect of the apprehended. 
There are a couple of ways to understand this sonam or apprehension aspect. It means the consciousness, i.e., we should not take it to mean the object but the consciousness.
If we talk about the wisdom realizing emptiness, what’s appearing to this wisdom? It’s emptiness that’s being apprehended. What is apprehending emptiness? The mind that takes emptiness as its object is the apprehender. So you have the apprehended and the apprehender. This apprehender has the aspect of the apprehended. 
In Lorig, we talked about the main mind and the mental factors having the concomitance of aspect. One of the five similarities is aspect. The concomitance of aspect is the same thing here. 
In the phrase, the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness arising as the deity, the apprehension aspect means the wisdom realizing emptiness. But why is it called the apprehension aspect or having the aspect of the apprehended? Because this is the mind that possesses the aspect of emptiness.
Student 2: So basically it’s just saying it’s the wisdom directly realizing emptiness arising as the deity. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say that.
Student 2: When the person is in meditative equipoise, what is the object that is appearing to this wisdom directly realizing emptiness? Isn’t it emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: We didn’t say it has to be the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. We only said that it’s the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
We talk about the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness arising as the deity. At the beginning of the practice, you may not have an actual valid cognition or realization of emptiness but you’ve some understanding of emptiness. You imagine that mind that has some understanding of emptiness arising as the deity. However, if you have realized emptiness, then it’s the wisdom realizing emptiness that arises as the deity.  In the context of the lower tantras, we talk about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. 
If you’re talking about the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, does the body of the deity appear to the consciousness or not? I don’t know whether to say it appears or not. But I think probably not, i.e., even in the context of tantra, the deity’s body does not appear to the wisdom of meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness.
If we’re talking about just the wisdom realizing emptiness, i.e., not a direct realization,  in the context of the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity,  that wisdom realizing emptiness is a conceptual realization. Then in tantra, there’s a position that says that the deity’s body appears, especially in the context of yoga with signs. 
When we engage in the practice of self-generation, we always start with the meditation on emptiness. We’re not meditating on mere vacuity or nothingness. At the very least, we must have some understanding of the emptiness of inherent existence. Even though we don’t have any realization of emptiness at all, with whatever understanding we may have of emptiness, we imagine that our mind ascertains emptiness. That mind ascertaining emptiness is of one taste with emptiness, i.e., it’s indivisibly conjoined with emptiness, in that there is no dualistic appearance whatever.  We imagine that mind arising as the deity. 
In tantra, the idea of purifying into emptiness first is to overcome ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. In order to overcome ordinary appearance, you have to withdraw and absorb all appearances into and purify them in emptiness. 
The essential point is to generate the mind ascertaining emptiness even if it’s make- believe. You imagine the mind that has ascertained emptiness becomes indivisibly one with emptiness. Imagine there’s no dualistic appearance. When we talk about the dharmakaya, that’s what we’re getting at. In this meditation, in particular, you imagine this mind has realized and is one with emptiness, believing this is the dharmakaya. 
If you talk about this from the sutric point of view, it is an introduction to the phrase “the mind is in the nature of clear light, or the mind is clear light”. 
Can you remember my question regarding who exactly the ‘I’ or person who arises as the deity is? There was some debate about that. There are different views about what exactly this ‘I’ is.  If we enter into such a debate without holding on to a position, then it’s going to be very confusing. If we’ve something to think about, start from one position and based on that, engage in the debate, then that’s much better and less confusing. 
Going back to the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. Let’s talk further about the apprehension aspect that’s basically the mind that has ascertained emptiness, i.e., the wisdom realizing emptiness. This mind is indivisibly one with the object, emptiness. There is thus no dualistic appearance. We identify this and think, “This is the dharmakaya,” and arise as the deity. The apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness that’s the basis of accomplishment is that which arises as the deity, i.e., it appears as the deity.
Whatever deity you want to appear as—Chenrezig and so forth—it’s that wisdom realizing emptiness that’s arising as the deity. After appearing as the deity, you meditate on what’s appearing and cultivate clear appearance. 
As you cultivate clear appearance as the deity, you’re also supposed to generate divine pride as the deity. What are you identifying yourself as? What’s the basis of this divine pride?
You’re supposed to identify and elicit clear appearance of yourself as the deity. The clear appearance of that deity becomes the basis of designation for you to think, “This is me.”
You need to understand this very well.  
In short, you meditate on emptiness. 
Your mind then realizes emptiness. 
That wisdom becomes the basis of accomplishment of the body of the deity.  That wisdom realizing emptiness is generated as the deity, appearing in the aspect of the deity. 
This aspect of the deity becomes the basis of designation. 
In relation to this basis of designation, there is the designated object—the merely imputed object that’s the ‘I’, “I’m an actual buddha. I’m Chenrezig (or whatever deity is being practised).”
Within this deity, the wisdom realizing emptiness is the basis of accomplishment appearing in the form of the deity’s body. This wisdom appears as the deity body. 
So within one consciousness, in one entity, there is both method and wisdom. You can see the meaning of Vajrayana here in how wisdom and method are found together in one consciousness. In the context of the three lower classes of tantra, we call this the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity: 
The mind realizing emptiness is the factor of wisdom. 
That mind appearing in the aspect of a deity is the factor of method. 
In the three lower classes of tantra, this yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity are the causes of the two bodies of the result: 
The form body and the truth body are one entity at the time of the result. 
The factors of method and wisdom are fused in one consciousness at the time of the cause. That’s the meaning of the vajra in Vajrayana.
This is the fundamental characteristic of Vajrayana and this is what the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is in the context of the lower tantras. With this understanding, our understanding of enlightenment also becomes more profound. When we talk about enlightenment, we talk about the body and mind of a buddha being one. Wherever the mind of a buddha pervades, there’s the body of the buddha. Wherever the body of a buddha is, there’s the speech of the buddha. Basically wherever the mind of a buddha is, his body and speech are there too. They are indivisibly one. 
How are we to appreciate this? We are better able to appreciate and understand how this is possible if we understand the Vajrayana. Because at the time of the cause, i.e., at the time of the path, both the factors of method and wisdom are present in one consciousness. This makes it possible to have a result where both bodies—the form body and the truth body—are in one indivisible entity.
In Vajrayana, the substantial cause of the form body is the meditation on the body of the deity. This substantial cause is called the method in Vajrayana.
The wisdom realizing emptiness is the substantial cause of the truth body. 
But actually whether we are talking about the substantial cause of the form body or the substantial cause of the truth body, it’s the same thing. We are talking about the mind, the wisdom that realizes emptiness.
Gaining an understanding of this is very important. It’s with this understanding that you can see the difference between sutra and tantra. Then you can see why tantra’s more profound and more powerful. It all comes down to understanding this point. 
In tantra, the point is to overcome ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. Therefore, first, you’ve to purify in emptiness and within the state of emptiness, that wisdom realizing emptiness is visualized to appear in the aspect of the deity. After you’ve appeared as the deity, then you meditate on clear appearance and divine pride to overcome ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.
Student 2: For the wisdom that realizes emptiness in meditative equipoise, only emptiness arises. For that mind, are wisdom and method there in the same entity?
Khen Rinpoche: If you’re talking about the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the context of tantra, does method appear—the body of the deity—appear? You would have to say no. 
But in the context of tantra, is this wisdom directly realizing emptiness deity yoga or not? Then what are you going to say? You have to say yes. You cannot say no to that.
Why is this still deity yoga? The answer will come soon in the root text.
Student 2: In relation to divine pride, what if the person propounds the tenets of the Mind Only school (MOS) or even the Autonomy Middle Way school (AMWS)? This person has the wisdom realizing the emptiness of the self-sufficient substantially existent self. He could also think of this wisdom arising as the deity. Is that still divine pride?
Khen Rinpoche: Ask (your questions) one by one. In the Shangri-la Dialogue recently, how did they ask questions? They ask four questions at one go. And they are answered in one go. Maybe you’ve copied from there. I don’t know. One by one is better for me. 
It’s mentioned clearly in the text that there are people who enter the tantric path with the view of the MOS. This means that such people meditate on deity yoga and generate clear appearance and divine pride. 
What about those (holding the view of the) AMWS? Nothing is said about that.  
What about people who enter the tantric path based on realizing the emptiness of the self-sufficient substantially existent person? I really wonder. Probably, you are not going to have people who enter the tantric path just by having the realization of the emptiness of the self-sufficient substantially existent person.
As to why the fact that it’s possible to enter the tantric path while holding the view of the MOS is singled out, I guess it’s to do with the MOS’s view about the emptiness of the subject and object existing as separate entities. According to the view of the MOS, everything’s in the nature of the mind and is established from the ripening of certain predispositions, producing both the subject and object. That’s how everything is in the nature of mind. When one has such a view, I guess it makes one closer to the Prasangika view of how things exist in mere name. By holding the view that everything is in the nature of mind, probably one will be able to move on to and really appreciate the Prasangika view of how everything exists in mere name. Anyway, it’s clear in the text that you can enter the tantric path while holding the view of the MOS, but I’m not sure about the AMWS. If I see anything (regarding this), I will let you know.
Student 2: An ordinary being who thinks he understands what emptiness is, and with that understanding arises as the deity, can that really be considered divine pride? It’s possible for a person to think that he’s a buddha and really believe in that hallucination. Then there are also people who claim they are buddhas but know that they’re not buddhas. In those circumstances, can it still be called divine pride? How do you draw the line between the divine pride and the other seven types of pride?
Khen Rinpoche: It’s strongly emphasized that prior to engaging in and practising tantra, one must have trained the mind well in the shared paths. In particular, one must have studied well and gained a good understanding of emptiness as explained by Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons. This is emphasized very much. 
Otherwise, without the correct understanding of emptiness, just meditating on nothingness or vacuity, thinking that’s emptiness and arising as the deity, certainly, that’s really a hallucination. Meditating in this way is nonsensical and pointless because it won’t lead to anything beneficial at all. Nothing positive can come out of it.
In the practice of tantra, when deity yoga is involved, you are always asked to meditate on emptiness. That mind realizing emptiness is then taken as the basis of accomplishment for arising as the deity. After that wisdom realizing emptiness arises as the deity, with the appearance of the deity as the basis of designation, you identify yourself as the deity. Then you meditate on clear appearance and divine pride. So you see how this whole exercise culminates in the practice of divine pride and clear appearance. 
Then two questions arise from this: 
What’s the point or purpose of doing this? What does it do for us?  
Is this practice of divine pride a wrong consciousness in the first place? 
There is a debate about this.
This is mentioned in the Pramanavarttika. Even though the mind may be mistaken, but sometimes there can be some benefit. There are also times when the mind is mistaken and no benefit ensues from that. There’s a difference between these two scenarios. To give an analogy, one mistakes the glow of a wish-fulfilling jewel to be the wish-fulfilling jewel. That’s a mistaken mind. However, if you were follow that glow, thinking it’s a wish-fulfilling jewel, eventually, you will see the wish-fulfilling jewel itself and get your hands on it. Yes, it was a mistaken mind but it helped you to fulfil the purpose.
HOMEWORK
You should think about the question raised by Student 2 just now. 
As you proceed from the absorption with recitation to the absorption not reliant on recitation culminating in the attainment of calm abiding, you move through a different number of focal objects. How do you end up achieving calm abiding if you are moving from one focal object to another? This is something for you to think about.
Khen Rinpoche: You need to think about this. I will talk about it on Thursday but you will have to explain your own idea. 
You also have to think about another question that was raised by a student in the last lesson.
As said in the text, in Action Tantra, calm abiding is achieved upon the culmination of the absorption on sound. Does that mean that when one enters the path of Action Tantra, one does not have calm abiding? Is it possible not to have calm abiding when you enter the tantric path?
You have to relate this to what was covered in the previous module. You cannot forget that. When we’re talking about the complete aspects application, this is attained when you have calm abiding and special insight. You’ve entered the Mahayana path of accumulation when you generate bodhicitta. From the onset of generating bodhicitta, you’ve the complete aspects application that involves calm abiding and special insight. That means that first, there’s calm abiding? How do you reconcile all this? Does there seem to be a contradiction?
Khen Rinpoche: Do you get the idea? There are many things to think about, not just one thing alone. The sutric path, the tantric path, all those topics. You have to think about how they are not contradictory and are one (unified whole). 
I’m telling you to think about it now. I will share my view in the next class. You must think and then compare my view with yours. Nothing’s clear in the text so I’ve to say something. So you think about it. You tell me your view. I will tell you my view. Maybe, we are all hallucinating. I don’t know. We are all going down the wrong path. I’ve no idea. It’s like the blind leading the blind! 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.