Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L30FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.485926
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 30	 				                                             25 July 2017
The practice of taking desire into the path. Root text: pp. 86—  . The type of body you need to obtain enlightenment.  The positions of Sakyamitra and Buddhaguhya. The position of Anandagarbha. Can the path of yoga tantra be added to the end of the Perfection Vehicle?
THE PRACTICE OF TAKING DESIRE INTO THE PATH
Student 1: Tantra is classified according to the desire the trainees generate from gazing, smiling, holding hands and so forth. They experience the bliss and transform that bliss into the path. Which part of the sadhana or meditation practice specifies the method of transforming desire into the path?
Khen Rinpoche: Does anybody know in which part of the sadhana is the time to smile?  
In Highest Yoga Tantra, it’s very clear in the self-generation practice. There’s a section called taking on the wisdom mother. But in the case of Action Tantra, for example, if you look at the sadhana of the Chenrezig practice, it’s not clear where you practice taking desire into the path, such as through gazing. 
In Action Tantra, there’s the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation. You engage in the absorption with recitation after which you move on to the absorption not reliant on recitation. When it comes to the absorption on sound, that’s when you achieve calm abiding. With further practice, one achieves the yoga without signs. That’s when you have the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.  Profundity here has to be a mind or the bliss ascertaining emptiness.  
In terms of Action Tantra, I’m not sure whether the practice of taking desire as the path where you generate the bliss derived from gazing comes in at this point in time.  
In the three lower classes of tantra, the practice of taking desire as the path in terms of gazing, smiling and holding hands is done only with a visualized goddess.  It’s not done with an actual karma mudra. In the lower classes of tantra, it is said that even looking at an actual karma mudra is not encouraged at all.  So, the practice is all done in relation to a visualized goddess.
In the three lower classes of tantra, it’s not clear at all with regard to the actual time when the practice of taking desire into the path is done. If you look at the self-generation rites of the lower classes of tantra, you don't see it mentioned in the sadhana, “This is the place where you should do this practice.”  It’s not clear in Action Tantra and Performance Tantra. I’m not sure for Yoga Tantra either as I didn’t get to look at the self-generation rite in detail.
~~~~~~~~~
Revisiting what we looked at in the last lesson, in the text, someone raises the qualm as to whether the mind of love, compassion and so forth in the continuum of an individual who is on the path of accumulation in Action Tantra is a Perfection Vehicle path or not? The answer is no. They are not Perfection Vehicle paths.
The type of body you need to obtain enlightenment
As to the method … this is the system of the Perfection Vehicle. (p. 86—87)
The way to attain enlightenment … was explained before. (p. 87)
The text says in the three lower classes of tantra, the basis for newly attaining enlightenment must be the support in Akanistha. This begets two questions:
Why is this so?  
Why can’t one achieve enlightenment with the desire realm support in the three lower classes of tantra?  
Why does the support for newly achieving enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle have to be a support in Akanistha?
Student 2:  Akanistha is the only place—no other buddha pure land—where one can attain the complete enjoyment body.   
Khen Rinpoche: Are there any other answers?  If you have an answer or an idea, speak up now. (It doesn’t matter) whether it’s correct or not.  If somebody asks you: Why? What do you say? You (can’t) say you don’t know, right?
Student 3: The body of the desire realm is very coarse so you need to be in Akanistha.
Khen Rinpoche: OK.  She says the desire realm body is very coarse so we need a better body in order to get enlightened.  That’s why you need to go to Akanistha to get enlightened. Correct. You can say that.  Anyone else?
If you think about this, the four bodies are actualized simultaneously. One of these bodies is the complete enjoyment body and one of its features is that in terms of its abode, it resides only in Akanistha.  Since it resides only in Akanistha, when it is actualized, that must occur in Akanistha. That being the case, the support that exists prior to achieving this complete enjoyment body must also be an Akanistha support.
This is just my idea. If you have any other different idea, maybe it is good to share.
The complete enjoyment body possesses the five certainties or definite characteristics. 
In terms of time, it abides until the end of samsara.
In terms of its body, it possesses the 32 major signs and 80 exemplifications. 
In term of the Dharma, it teaches only the Mahayana Dharma. 
In term of its retinue, it is surrounded by only bodhisattva superiors. 
In term of its abode, it resides only in Akanistha.  
I think we have looked at this before.  
We need to think whether it’s all right to say that the support for achieving enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle has to be a support in Akanistha because one of the five definite characteristic of the complete enjoyment body is that it only resides in Akanistha.
If somebody asks: Does the complete enjoyment body teach the Hinayana Dharma? What are you going to say? Doesn’t the complete enjoyment body work for the welfare of the trainees of the three lineages?  What are you going to say?  
Student 1: That there are no Hinayana disciples there?
Khen Rinpoche: So, you don’t teach. Then you can’t benefit all sentient beings.  You only benefit this group of arya beings and you cannot benefit all sentient beings.  Is that the case?
Student 1: Maybe it manifests in other forms to teach the Hinayanists. 
Khen Rinpoche: That means the complete enjoyment body can teach all sentient beings. It manifests and teaches the Hinayana teachings also? 
Student 1: Not in the form of a complete enjoyment body
There are three masters of Yoga Tantra. Two of them share this position.  
The positions of Śākyamitra and Buddhaguhya
In accordance with yoga tantra, …
…
… an enjoyment body. (p. 87)
. 
The author replies, “This is unacceptable.” 
Reply: However, we cannot accept … general system of the Mahāyāna. (p. 
88)
The author cites the Mantric Stages to show why this position is untenable. 
Mantric Stages states: …
…
… hold similar positions. (p. 88)
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand the conclusion, i.e., what they are trying to say? Who can state the conclusion in two or three sentences? I want to know after you’ve read the text whether you really understand what you’ve read.
Student 4: Their position is unacceptable because the Mahayana Vehicle asserts that Buddha Shakyamuni has achieved enlightenment long before that.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct! It is as simple as that. The conclusion from the two pages is that. 
What I want to know is whether you read (the text). The text is available. The commentary is there. The root text is there. What do you get after you’ve read them? Just now is an example of how within two to three sentences, you can get the point. You understand. So, that’s important.
This position is unacceptable because it contradicts the general presentation of the Mahayana. According to the Mahayana, Prince Siddhartha did not newly achieve enlightenment. All that was just a display. 
According to the Hinayana tenets, i.e., the Great Exposition School and the Sutra School, Prince Siddhartha was a sentient being and he newly achieved enlightenment. All the 12 deeds of were actually performed by Prince Siddhartha and was not a mere display or show. They were real. 
According to the Great Exposition School, after the Buddha achieved enlightenment, his physical body was not a buddha body but was true suffering. The Sutra School has a slightly better but essentially similar explanation. 
When it comes to the Mahayana tenets that talk about the four bodies, it is very different from what is presented in the Hinayana tenets. 
Then when it comes to tantra, the explanation becomes even more profound in that it talks about the inseparability of the Buddha’s exalted body and exalted mind and how these two are in union.
Even within tantra itself, there are four classes of tantra. Although they all talk about achieving the Buddha’s exalted body and exalted mind, if you look at the pre-sentations of the three lower classes of tantra, somehow, they are not entirely satis-
factory. They don’t really hit the mark and are not able to answer all the qualms. 
But when you look at the system of Highest Yoga Tantra, regardless of the angle from which you approach it, its way of explaining the method of achieving the Buddha’s body and mind and the union of the two is unassailable.  You will not be able to find any fault or fallacy with that presentation. As such, it is also called unsurpassed yoga tantra. 
What is our system? 
The position of Ānandagarbha
We must accept the position …
…
…  snapping their fingers and so forth. (p. 89)
According to the lower classes of tantra, in order to achieve enlightenment, one needs to accumulate the collections for three countless great eons. In his final existence, with the support in Akanistha, he entered into equipoise on the supreme limit of the fourth concentration. Then, he was awakened by all the buddhas who conferred on him the crown initiation after which he achieved enlightenment. 
Illuminating Lamp states:
Now the Compendium … 
…
… Akaniṣṭha field called Ghanavyūha. (p. 89) 
According to the tantras and the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas, it is not stated clearly whether Prince Siddhartha was in Akanishta or had a desire realm support. But in Vajra Peak, it is explained to be the Akanishta field. 
According to Yoga Tantra, the Buddha achieved enlightenment with an Akanishta support. So his final existence was in Akanishta. With that kind of support, he was awakened from his concentration by the sound of the finger snaps of all the buddhas.  Then he was conferred the crown initiation. Through that, he achieved enlightenment.
Someone said, “That explanation you just cited is an explanation of how after the bodhisattva Siddhartha reached the end of the Perfection Vehicle, the path of Yoga Tantra was added on to his practice. Through that he achieved enlightenment.” 
Can the path of yoga tantra be added to the end of the Perfection Vehicle?
One says: …
…
… the end of the Perfection Vehicle path. (pp. 89—90)
The author said that this position is unacceptable. What explanation is this:
that he reached the end of the Perfection Vehicle path
took a support in Akanishta
then with that support, he took initiation
and practised the path of Yoga Tantra
through that, he achieved enlightenment? 
This position is not acceptable. 
Can the path of yoga tantra be added to the end of the Perfection Vehicle?
Reply: This is unacceptable … 
…
… not explained in this way in yoga tantra. (p. 89—90)
The author then cites Illuminating Lamp: 
The system of highest yoga tantra …
…
… the end of the Perfection Vehicle path. (p. 90)
The system of yoga tantra …
…
…  This should be well examined. (p. 90)
The author is saying he wonders whether it is all right to say that according to the system of Yoga Tantra, the bodhisattva Prince Siddhartha entered the Yoga Tantra path from the onset and completed the end of the path of Yoga Tantra. In his final existence with the Akanishta support, he then achieved enlightenment. He wonders if this explanation is all right. 
This is a citation from Je Rinpoche’s Mantric Stages where Je Rinpoche said that he thinks that according to the explanation of the Yoga Tantra system, one enters the Yoga Tantra path on the onset and goes all the way to the end of that path of Yoga Tantra. In the final existence with the Akanishta support, one achieves enlightenment. 
Lama Tsongkhapa says, “I wonder…” i.e., he thinks maybe that’s the case. It is the position of the later scholars after Je Rinpoche that whenever Lama Tsongkhapa says, “I wonder” then one can take it to mean that’s the case. When he says, “I think maybe that is not the case,” then you can take it to mean that it’s definitely not the case.
But Lama Tsongkhapa himself said, “This should be well examined.” It is one thing to say we should investigate but if Lama Tsongkhapa himself said, after investigation, that perhaps we should also investigate, how is it really possible for the rest of us to investigate what he has already investigated?
Student 5: Does this mean that according to Yoga Tantra, there is no Causal Perfection Vehicle system because one attains enlightenment directly by entering the path of Yoga Tantra just like what Shakyamuni Buddha did? According to Yoga Tantra, that would mean every bodhisattva is of definite Yoga Tantra lineage. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think so. Probably, it’s not saying that in the perspective of Yoga Tantra, the Perfection Vehicle doesn’t exist. Probably, that’s not the case. 
This is an explanation of how our founder Guru Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment. According to the perspective of Yoga Tantra, Buddha Shakyamuni did not achieve enlightenment through entering the path of the Perfection Vehicle and then travelling all the way to its end. Then he entered the path of Yoga Tantra through which he achieved enlightenment. No, that is not the perspective of Yoga Tantra. Rather, Buddha Shakyamuni entered the path of Yoga Tantra from the onset and progressed all the way to the tenth ground. Then, with the support in Akanishta, he achieved enlightenment.
It could be the case that Action Tantra and Performance Tantra will also say the same thing. From their perspective, Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment through entering the path of Action Tantra or the path of Performance Tantra from the onset and travelled to the end of those paths and achieved enlightenment. 
Bear in mind this is a discussion of how Guru Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment from the perspective of Yoga Tantra. But this is not to say that from the perspective of Yoga Tantra, definitely, you have to enter the Yoga Tantra path from the onset. I don’t think you can say that from the perspective of Yoga Tantra, somebody who enters the Perfection Vehicle and at the end, for whatever reason, enters the path of Yoga Tantra is a problem. I don’t think you can say that. This means there could be people who enter the Perfection Vehicle and somewhere along the line, they enter the path of Yoga Tantra. 
Student 5: The root text says, “This system of yoga tantra does not appear to state that you append the previously explained yoga on to the path of the Perfection Vehicle.” (p. 90).  This applies only to the case of Shakyamuni Buddha? It says that this system of Yoga Tantra is not added to the Causal Perfection Vehicle.  
Khen Rinpoche: You apply this to mean Guru Shakyamuni Buddha’s way of achieving enlightenment because the text says that it is only in Highest Yoga Tantra is there an explanation of the two systems—either you enter the tantric path from the onset or you enter the Perfection Vehicle path and then add on the Highest Yoga Tantra path at the end of the Perfection Vehicle path. However, this is not the case for Yoga Tantra. 
Student 5: In this case, it would seem that other than Shakyamuni Buddha, other bodhisattvas would be able to do what is explained in Highest Yoga Tantra. This means you have two systems except for Shakyamuni Buddha if we were to take this position.
Khen Rinpoche: The reason why there is this discussion in the first place is because it all comes down from an earlier discussion of how Shakyamuni Buddha himself achieved enlightenment. This is from the perspective of Yoga Tantra. 
What we can think about is this—from the perspective of Yoga Tantra, can one achieve enlightenment just by depending on the Perfection Vehicle or not? From the perspective of Yoga Tantra, even if one enters the Perfection Vehicle path, does one need to enter the path of Yoga Tantra in order to achieve enlightenment? This is what we can think about. 
Since every class of tantra considers itself to be supreme and that their own path can lead to enlightenment, it is likely that from the perspective of Yoga Tantra itself, they will say you need to depend on this path to achieve enlightenment. In this case, you need to receive the crown initiation to achieve enlightenment. 
Probably, they are not going to say that every trainee is somebody who is definitely of the lineage of Yoga Tantra. This means that they are not going to say that everybody on the onset will enter the path of Yoga Tantra.
They are also not going to say that they do not accept the Perfection Vehicle as a path.  
When you put all this together, probably from the Yoga Tantra perspective, they would say that there could be people who enter the Perfection Vehicle path and after that, enter the Yoga Tantra path. Through that, they achieve enlightenment. They may have to say that. 
Therefore, if we take this particular citation from the Illuminating Lamp with regard to the ways of achieving enlightenment in Yoga Tantra, is it all right to take that to only apply to Shakyamuni Buddha?
Student 5: From the perspective of Yoga Tantra, those tenth ground bodhisattvas—whether they are from the paths of Causal Perfection Vehicle, Action Tantra or Performance Tantra—will eventually enter the path of Yoga Tantra. Do they enter from the path of seeing of Yoga Tantra? If not, where is their point of entry?
Khen Rinpoche: If we were to say that they only enter the path of Yoga Tantra at their final existence—because there’s no difference in their presentations with regard to the objects of abandonment, the manner of abandoning them, the two obscurations and so forth—is there any problem?
Student 5: According to Yoga Tantra, what is missing—what obscuration do they need to abandon with what practice—for the bodhisattva of sutra, Action Tantra and Performance Tantra in order to enter the tenth ground of Yoga Tantra to achieve enlightenment?
Khen Rinpoche: What practice is missing? I don’t know. I need to think about that.
If you were to say that it’s possible to enter the path of Yoga Tantra path after entering the Perfection Vehicle path, where is the point of entry? Either you say there’s a point of entry or you say there’s no such thing. Are we able to say that it’s  not possible? 
Khen Rinpoche: Can we say that it’s not possible? 
If you say, “Yes, you can enter the Yoga Tantra path after entering the path of the Per-
fection Vehicle. Of the five paths, where is the point of entry?  Let’s see whether it is all right to say they enter in their final existence on the tenth ground.
Student 6: So the person actually abandons some knowledge obscuration on the eighth or ninth ground in the Perfection Vehicle path. Then on the tenth ground, there are certain knowledge obscurations that the Perfection Vehicle, Action Tantra and Performance Tantra cannot abandon. What knowledge obscurations will these be? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know… 
Student 6: They would also have to propound that the arhats and solitary realizers will have to enter their path. They have been abstaining from attachment, desire their whole lives and suddenly, they have to switch paths …
Khen Rinpoche: Suddenly they have to hold hands? 
There is nothing definitive we can hold on to or say. From the perspective of Yoga Tantra, there are two things to think about: 
Can a practitioner of the Perfection Vehicle enter the path of Yoga Tantra? 
If yes, is it OK to say that they enter during their final existence of the tenth ground? 
It is not clear in Yoga Tantra but it is something that we can look at. These qualms are settled in Highest Yoga Tantra. It is clear in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
Even if we were to take the position that they enter the path of Yoga Tantra in their final existence, when they are in meditative equipoise, they have to be awakened by the buddhas who will confer on them the initiation. They then meditate on the five manifest enlightenments. Only through that do they achieve enlightenment. Won’t this be the case, i.e., they have to receive initiation and so forth?
It’s not clear in the text. Discuss this among yourselves and think about it—whether this works if we were to take this as our position.
Then the author states: 
Therefore, I wonder …
…
…  at the end of the Perfection Vehicle. (p. 91)
It seems two positions are given. The views expressed by the quotations from the two texts are different. There is one quotation from Illuminating Lamp and another from Explanation of the Two Investigations.
Student 5: It was explained in the Causal Perfection Vehicle desire is taken as an aid to enlightenment on the impure grounds. On the pure grounds, that practice is no longer done. The bodhisattva is unable to utilize desire as an aid on the path on the pure grounds because the afflictions are abandoned. 
Yet, when the bodhisattva eventually enters tantra, he is again able to use desire as a path to enlightenment. Hasn’t he already abandoned all the afflictions? How he is able to use desire when he enters tantra from the pure grounds?
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand the question? Answer it!
Student 6: I understand desire is always associated with the afflictive obscurations. If even the arhats, solitary realizers and tenth ground bodhisattvas do not have any afflictive obscurations and yet can enter the tantric path in all the four classes of tantras, perhaps the desire we know is not necessarily an afflictive obscuration?
Khen Rinpoche: What? Then? 
Student 5: Could it be the imprint of desire that, in the future, will produce similar appearances? Because the function of imprints for knowledge obscurations is that it will produce similar appearances in the future. Could it be the appearance of desire due to the imprints that are knowledge obscurations still exists on the pure grounds and is not the seeds?
Khen Rinpoche: From the perspective of the Perfection Vehicle, on the three pure grounds, desire and attachment have already been abandoned together with their seeds. But you say that there’s the imprints or predispositions of attachment that produce some pleasant appearances.
Having said that, if you look at what is posited as knowledge obscurations, there are two:
One is the factor that is manifest, i.e., the appearance of true existence. They do not posit any other appearances. 
The other is the predisposition of ignorance itself.
This is something to think about—how desire is taken as the path when it is already abandoned.
Student 7: I remember you mentioned in the module on the Ornament for Clear Realization the main object of abandonment of the bodhisattva is not necessarily attachment but ignorance, the view of transitory collections and pride, because attachment does not harm them in their practice. In fact, they can use it to benefit sentient beings. 
Khen Rinpoche: That’s not a problem if you’re talking about the first seven impure grounds, because they do not specifically target overcoming attachment. Also, they have not abandoned the afflictive obscurations yet on the seven impure grounds. So then, you can say that attachment can be utilized for whatever purpose. 
But now we are talking about the three pure grounds. How are you going to explain the three pure grounds? That’s our discussion here.
Student 8: Perhaps the words, “taking desire into the path,” is the interpretative meaning and not the definitive meaning. 
The definitive meaning could be taking bliss into the path because in the three lower classes of tantra, what is mentioned primarily is the bliss that’s derived from gazing, holding hands, embracing and sexual union. They did not specifically mention the desire derived from (these activities).  
In fact, the arhats experience the bliss of nirvana. The term for the Buddha, Sugata, means “the One Gone to Bliss.” So, bliss is neither an afflictive obstruction nor knowledge obstruction. That’s how I see it. 
My question is this: What is the boundary for the attainment of the common siddhis in the three lower classes of tantra? I’m not sure with regard to the starting point—is it when calm abiding is achieved or after calm abiding is achieved?
Khen Rinpoche: I think for the small attainments, you don’t need to depend on concentration because there are other ways of accomplishing them. To achieve those common siddhis like the siddhi of immortality and so forth, I think you will need to have the union of calm abiding and special insight.
Student 5: Is there a difference between worldly, trans-worldly, common and supreme siddhis? Because these are used so interchangeably, it is very confusing.
Khen Rinpoche: For the common siddhis, you can have the worldly and the transcendental siddhis.
When we talk about common and supreme siddhis, the supreme siddhi refers to actual enlightenment.
Perhaps, transcendental siddhis are those that are obtained upon one achieving the superior paths. Just like the superior and ordinary paths. The ordinary paths are the achieved by worldly people. As for the transcendental, that happens when one achieves the superior path.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.