Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L32FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.718997
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 32	 				                                        3 August  2017
Action Tantra and the Nyung Na self-generation practice. Review. Offerings to the self-generation. Blessing the offerings. Presenting the offerings. Praise. Blessing the rosary. Aspect concordant with the pure abode. Mantra recitation. Visualization during mantra recitation. How to meditate on the front generation. Invocation. Empowerment. Blessing the offerings. Presenting the offerings. Offering the Two Waters, the Five Enjoyments and Music. 
REVIEW
In the last lesson, we looked at the practice of self-generating as the deity through the six deities or the six enlightened ones. That has been completed. 
After generating oneself as Avalokiteshvara (or Chenrezig), the commitment being, at one’s heart is the wisdom being, Avalokiteshvara having one face and two arms. In the heart of that wisdom being is the concentration being in the form of a white syllable, Hrih.
Ideally, when one recites the words of the ritual, one should meditate well on the meaning of the words. In the practice of the self-generation here, we started with the ultimate (or empty) deity. That is essentially enlightenment (or the enlightened one) by way of emptiness or enlightenment in emptiness. One has to reflect well and thoroughly on emptiness. 
When that’s done, one then moves on to the next deity, enlightenment by way of sound and so on. 
The word here for enlightenment is jang chub. This basically has the meaning of being proficient, skilled or good at something. For example, one may be proficient in
cooking.
Khen Rinpoche: Proficient in cooking? Proficient in swimming? Do you say that? Is anyone proficient in swimming?  Proficient in swimming means being able to swim like a fish. Up and down underwater for 100 meters. That’s the idea.
Here, of the six enlightenments, the first is enlightenment in emptiness. This means one is proficient in the meaning of and the meditation on emptiness. The manner of practice is that as one goes through the words of the ritual mindfully, one is supposed to meditate on them and become good at them before one moves on to the next section. This is the way of the practitioner. This is how it must be done. One has to practise by going through the words mindfully. 
However, people here are busy with all kinds of things. They don’t have time and are always rushing for time. Even just going through the words of the ritual takes so long. Just going through the ritual tires people. They want to finish it in a short time. If one needs to finish it quickly in a short time, then there is no time to meditate.
Khen Rinpoche: So what can be done? Sometimes I wonder. It takes an hour and a half to finish reading the sadhana. Either you read or you don’t read. And if you want to meditate, then when you are going to finish the sadhana? 
For us, to do a real practice, meditation is difficult. Maybe for us, we just go through the words to develop some idea of what is in the practice. “Oh, the practice involves this. When I reach this section, this is this and that is that.” It’s like an overview and that’s about it.
Since one can do a meditation review on the lam-rim by bringing the topics to mind, likewise, one can also do a brief review as one goes through the words of the sadhana. One needs to remind oneself, “This is this and that is that.” It is good if one can think a little bit about these points. At the same time, one also develops some familiarity with the practice. At least one knows there is such a practice with these elements. We can develop some familiarity and understanding of the essential points of the practice and generate some kind of conviction, “This practice involves this and that. These are the important points that have to be done.” It may inspire some people to do serious practice in the future.
Khen Rinpoche: To go to the mountains!
After arising as the deity, one seeks to develop concentration without being affected by mental sinking or laxity and excitement for the purpose of eliciting clear appearance and divine pride. This section is the yoga with signs. 
After arising as the deity, in this case, the Great Compassionate One, one identifies oneself as being the actual Great Compassionate One. The idea is that you are not looking at a deity from the outside. Rather, it is a practice of self-generation. The essential point of the self-generation practice is clear appearance and divine pride. 
You identify yourself to be the actual Great Compassionate One. On the basis of appearing as the deity, whatever appearances that arise—in this case the deity’s body appearing to the mind that is meditating—appear to be truly existent. It is said it’s extremely important to remember to meditate that that appearance is empty of existing in the way it appears. Although it appears as truly existent, it doesn’t exist as truly existent. This meditation involves meditating on the side of the appearance and also on the side of emptiness. In fact, emptiness and appearance must come together in one mind. This is why the practice of cultivating the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is essential.
When we reach the sixth deity, the deity of sign, having arisen as the deity, then training in clear appearance and divine pride is extremely important. 
Clear appearance is training to elicit a very clear appearance of the deity’s body.  Sutra and tantra are differentiated by whether there is the meditation on the aspects concordant with the four complete purities of the time of the result. Therefore, here in the practice of self-generation, the process of arising as the deity and training in clear appearance and so forth is the meditation on the aspects that are concordant with the complete purity of the body. In this case, the pure body refers to the pure body of Avalokiteshvara that is adorned with the 32 major marks and 80 exemplifications. 
Although that’s not the reality—we don’t have that body yet—but in tantra, there is the practice of meditating on the aspects concordant with the complete purities, i.e.,   in this case, the complete purity of the body. That’s what makes it a tantric practice because such a practice is not found in sutra.
Those of you who have been around for a while should know this. For those of you who are relatively new to the topic, I am repeating over and over again in order to help you to remember. The point is that you must listen and also try to understand. Here we say the practice of self-generation arising as the deity is a meditation on the aspect concordant with the pure body. You have to understand what this means. Why is this so? If you think about it, generally speaking, it’s not difficult. It’s very straightforward.
Khen Rinpoche: I heard that people are lost in tantra. They don’t understand anything. Some of you said that you don’t understand. That’s why I try to make it simple. But if it’s simple, then many of you may be bored. 
I’ve mentioned before one of my teachers would repeat a point 20 times until we got bored. I know myself very clearly. He would teach and teach and teach until we understood and then he would repeat again. Sometimes, we don’t want to listen anymore, “Don’t tell me anymore!” 
Maybe for some of you, it’s the same thing here. But for me, that was very helpful. I still
remember some of those topics because of his kindness. He repeated a hundred times (and as a result), I still remember (those topics) until now. If you are very intelligent with a good memory, you may be OK after hearing it once. But for me, I needed those
hundred repetitions. Some of you may be like that.
If you were asked: In relation to this means of accomplishment, the sadhana, for the Great Compassionate One, where is the practice or meditation on the aspect concordant with the pure body? It’s essentially what we have said from the beginning up to here—the practice of self-generation that is done via the six deities. This is it.
~~~~~~~~~~~
The practice is divided into:
the preparatory ceremony (or the preliminary) (pp. 7—87)
the actual ceremony (pp. 89—139)
the concluding ceremony (pp.139—179)
We have finished the preparatory ceremony and we have started on the actual body of the practice.  The actual ceremony of the practice starts with the self-generation through the six deities. This section is the practice or meditation on the aspect concordant with the pure body.
OFFERINGS TO THE SELF-GENERATION (p. 101)
Next is the practice of making offerings to the self-generation.  Before that, we have to bless the offerings. The blessing is exactly as what I explained in the last lesson. The procedure is the same. Essentially, there are four outlines:
dispelling 
purification 
generation 
blessing
Dispelling means dispelling interferers. We can expand this idea of interferers to include the afflictions. The conventional kind of interferers we talk about may adhere or stick to the individual offerings. We call them the outer interferers but I think the real interferers are the inner afflictions. So we can look at them as the inner interferers.
Next is purifying the offering substances in emptiness where we generate the offerings from within emptiness, the purpose being to stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.
Blessing the Offerings (p. 101)
As we saw in the last lesson, the offerings possess three characteristics: 
What is the nature of the offerings? They are by nature empty.
What are their aspects? They are in the aspect of the individual offering substances.
What is their function? Their function is to confer special uncontaminated bliss in the continuum of those who partake of the offerings. 
When it is time to present the offerings, instead of interspersing the names of the offerings with the syllables Om,  Ah and Hum, you say Om Arya Lokeshavara-saparivara  argham praticcha svaha, instead of saying Om Ah Hum. 
Here is the practice of making offerings to oneself as the deity. You are making offering to the self-generation deity. As such, when you emanate the offering goddesses, once they are emanated, they have to face you and present the offerings to you as the deity. They also offer the praise to the self-generation deity. Here, the practice of making offerings and the praise to the self-generation deity are the practices or the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure enjoyments. 
We have already gone through the topic of the four complete purities. At least in relation to the practice of the Great Compassionate One here, you should have an idea, “This section of the self-generation practice goes with the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure body. Here the practice of making offerings and the praise to the self-generation is the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure enjoyments.” 
Khen Rinpoche: You have the sadhana. You must read the sadhana.
Blessing the Rosary (p. 102)
Next is the practice of recitation but before that, one blesses the rosary (or mala). Blessing the rosary starts first with paying homage to the guru and deity. 
Aspect concordant with the pure abode
In this particular self-generation ritual or at least this section on the self-generation, there is no explicit indication of visualizing the mandala. This means there’s no indication of the practice or meditating on the aspect that is concordant with the pure abode. I think at the time of blessing and consecrating the offerings for the self-generation, you can also think you are transforming the environment into a pure land. Perhaps this may be considered to be the practice of meditating on the aspect that is concordant with the pure abode or environment. 
In Highest Yoga Tantra, it is straightforward and very clear. In the beginning of the self-generation practice, you generate the four elemental mandalas, upon which you generate the protection wheel. Inside the protection wheel, you generate the celestial mansion. 
What I am talking about here is in the context of just doing the self-generation practice without talking about the practice of the front generation. Otherwise, in this context, where would the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure abode or pure environment fit in?
After you have blessed the rosary, you then engage in recitation. At this point, you have arisen as the deity. In the very centre of your heart on the moon disc is the concentration being, the syllable Hrih,  surrounded by the mantra garland.
In the context of just the self-generation practice, oneself as the deity is the self basis. 
Visualizing the moon disc at your heart there is the mind basis.
The mantra garland on the moon disc is the sound basis. 
So, out of the four branches, now we have three—the self basis, the mind basis and the sound basis. 
Mantra Recitation (pp. 105—107))
After placing the moon disc and the concentration being at your heart:
Light rays radiate outwards from which an incalculable assembly of deities of the Great Compassionate One are emitted, purifying the negativities and obscurations of all sentient beings and setting them in the state of the Arya (Avalokiteshvara). (These then) collect back and dissolve into the Hrih at one’s heart. (p. 105)
This is the practice of emanating and recollecting. 
Visualization during mantra recitation
One of the frequently asked questions about mantra recitation is: What should I think? What should I visualize? This is the general idea of what we should visualize. Light rays radiate from the mantra garland, filling your entire body and dispelling all physical difficulties, sicknesses, diseases and whatever mental challenges, unhappiness and problems you may have. 
The more concentration you apply while you are reciting the mantra, the greater the benefit. Since mental unhappiness and mental problems are created by the mind, if you are able to engage in mantra recitation single-pointedly, it will help to dispel those difficulties. Often the mind is like a broken record reviewing the same unhappy event over and over again. When we are unhappy or angry over something, we think about it over and over again. This does nothing except increase our unhappiness or anger. 
If we harbour some resentment or grudge, if we were to think about it over and over again, we will be more and more unhappy.  This is created by the mind. If we are doing the mantra recitation with concentration and decide from the heart, “I am not going to follow after those (negative thoughts). I will get rid of them and not follow after them!” then those thoughts are gone. At the end of the recitation, commensurate with how strongly we think that the problem has been eliminated, the greater the benefit we will receive. 
Next, you emanate light rays going out again. From the light rays come many Avalokiteshvaras. They go to all sentient beings, purifying them of all their negativities and obscurations. Then imagine finally, all sentient beings are placed in the state of Arya Avalokiteshvara’s enlightenment. At the end of the practice, you collect back whatever was emanated. The light rays dissolve into the Hrih at the heart. 
In the practice of emanating and collecting during the mantra recitation, whatever is emanated is always gathered back and absorbed into the heart. Likewise, the offering goddesses we emanate have to be dissolved into our heart. This is the condition to be able to bring the subtle energies, the winds, back into the central channel. Although such an explanation is not given in the lower tantras, this is the purpose of doing so when you explain it from the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra. 
Here, during the mantra recitation, we do the practice of emanating and collecting in relation to purifying sentient beings of their negativities and obscurations and placing them in the state of enlightenment. I think this is the practice or the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the pure activities of Buddha. 
You need to think about how you connect the different sections of the practice to the meditations on the aspects that are concordant with the four complete purities of the body, environment, enjoyments and activities.  
In relation to the four branches;
Generating the self-generation deity is the self basis. 
Visualizing the moon disc at the heart of the self-generation deity is the mind basis. 
Placing the mantra garland on the moon disc is the sound basis.
Out of the four, three bases have been completed. If you add in the meditation on generation of the front generation deity, then you have the other basis. 
After the recitation is done, you go on to accomplish the front generation. This is the other basis. There is a basis for accomplishing the front generation whether it be a coloured-sand mandala or painted-cloth mandala. Whatever it is, first, one must dispel the interferers and follow that by purifying it in emptiness. 
How To Meditate On The Front Generation (pp. 109—113)
The basis of accomplishment mandala is the basis for accomplishing the front generation and must be purified in emptiness first. From within the state of emptiness, you emanate the syllable Bhrum from the syllable Hrih at your heart. This syllable Bhrum that is radiating five- coloured light rays goes to the place where the basis of accomplishment mandala is. 
The basis of accomplishment mandala has already been purified in emptiness as you have already meditated on its emptiness. At that place where the basis of accomplishment mandala is, you visualize the syllable Bhrum emanating from your heart and going there. 
From the syllable Bhrum arises the entire celestial mansion, resting on a central hub that rests on a big lotus. This whole section is in the text. The entire celestial mansion arises from the syllable Bhrum. The significance of that is like what I mentioned in the last lesson—it is to signify how all things exist in mere name and are merely imputed by thought. 
For someone who is really meditating, then this person has to know all the measurements and essential characteristics of the entire inestimable mansion with all its features and so forth. 
In the middle of the celestial mansion:
there is an eight-petalled lotus 
on top of which is a precious throne 
on top of which is a lotus and moon disc 
on top of which Avalokiteshvara is generated
Essentially in the middle, the principal figure is eleven-faced thousand-armed Avalokiteshvara. You generate the four (dhyani) buddhas on the petals in the four cardinal directions are. Altogether, you have the five buddha lineages. 
Avalokiteshvara himself in the middle is under the Amitabha lineage. 
On the eastern petal is Akshobhya.
On the southern petal is Ratnasambhava.
On the western petal is Vairochana.
On the northern petal is Amoghasiddhi.
Those of you who are interested can read the ritual on the means of accomplishment on your own. It is very clear in the text. 
This is generating the front generation commitment being. Just like what happens during the self-generation practice, in relation to the front generation practice, after generating the front generation commitment being, you invite the wisdom beings to absorb into the front generation commitment being. This is why it says:
    Upon the lotus and moon disc at the heart of the principal deity, there is a white syllable Hrih, from which light rays radiate and invoke from Potala and so forth Arya Avalokiteshvara ... (p. 113) 
Invocation (p. 113) 
When inviting the wisdom being to dissolve into the commitment beings, one does so respectfully. If possible, kneel down with the gesture of invocation. Then you invite the wisdom beings with the verse, “Protector of all sentient beings without exception …” If possible, you can recite that verse with a pleasant tune. 
The wisdom beings are invited and become inseparable from the front generation commitment being. All the deities are marked at their three places with the three syllables Om, Ah and Hum.  
Empowerment (p. 115)
Next, we invite the empowering (or initiating) deities. The empowering deities are invited and offerings are made to them. After offerings are made to the empowering deities, one makes a request. 
The empowering deities starting with Pandaravasini (“the Goddess Dressed in White”) and so forth emanate from the hearts of the empowering deities and hold aloft vases filled with nectar with which they confer empowerment. Once the entire bodies of the front generation deities are filled with nectar, they are adorned with the individual buddha lineage. This is the other basis. 
You meditate on and generate the inestimable mansion. Inside the inestimable mansion, you generate the front generation deities, the samaya or commitment beings. Then you invite the wisdom beings to absorb into them and then you do the empowerment and sealing the impression.
(Student’s question is inaudible). 
Khen Rinpoche: Good question! All defilements are purified. 
The text says that empowerment is bestowed, “the entire body is filled and all defilements are purified.” Here, we are talking about the front generation. What are the defilements of the front generation deities? 
The idea behind doing ablutions or offering a bath is basically the same. We offer ablutions to the gurus, deities, buddhas, bodhisattvas and so on. We are not offering the bath to them because they need it and because there is something to be purified from their side. It is because of our defilements and obscurations that we perceive defilements in them. When we do the bath offering, its purpose is to purify our own obscurations. I guess probably the principle is the same here. As long as the mind is impure, then the appearances to the mind will be impure. So, it is for the purpose of purifying our mind. 
Blessing the Offerings (pp. 115—116)
Next is blessing the offerings for the front generation. The way of doing that is the same. It involves dispelling, purifying, generating and blessing. Generally, in the practice involving the front generation, very often there is an extensive practice of making offerings to the front generation. 
Presenting the Offerings (pp. 117—131)
Offering the Two Waters, the Five Enjoyments, and Music (pp. 117—121)
A host of oceans of drinking water from an ocean of realms 
Composed of an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors, 
I offer with an ocean of faith to the conquerors and their retinues,
who have oceans of qualities. Please accept it. (p. 117)
Just like the way the buddhas, bodhisattvas and Samantabhadra emanate offerings, likewise, the offerings we are going to present should be like their offerings. This is what is meant by, “an ocean of offering substances of the conquerors.” 
The text says, “A host of oceans of drinking water” (or libations). “Oceans” here means we are talking about the offerings being limitless and very vast and extensive. 
This shows what we need to visualize and imagine. The first two lines indicate the
offering substances and how we should conceive them. 
“To the conquerors and their retinues who possess an ocean of qualities” indicate the recipients of our offerings. They are the buddhas and bodhisattvas who possess incalculable and inexpressible qualities We really need to understand the qualities of the recipients of the offerings. We should recall how the buddhas accumulated the collections of the three countless great eons and so on. Then you have an idea of what a buddha is and who you are offering to. 
“I offer with an ocean of faith …Please accept it.” This indicates the quality of the person making the offerings, i.e., the person who is practising. We are offering with “an ocean of faith.” In this context here, “ocean” has the meaning of limitless, i.e., with very strong and boundless faith. 
If you can reflect well on the offering substances and the qualities of the recipients of the offerings and you are also able to offer with strong and boundless faith, then you 
can accumulate a lot of merit. 
Essentially, the offering verse is saying, “You are offering with boundless faith to the conquerors and bodhisattvas who have limitless qualities.” What are you offering them? You are offering them limitless, countless offerings. If you put these three together, then there is reason for saying the merit accumulated will also be limitless. 
If you get the idea from the first verse, then you extend the same idea to the rest of the verses. This is because there are many other things to be offered—foot bathing water, flowers, incense, lights, scented water, food and music. These are offered by reciting the offering verses and the mantras slowly. The idea behind reciting these verses with a tune is to give you time to meditate. Otherwise, if you do it quickly, you may not have the time or be able to meditate well on these verses. 
In relation to the four branches, there is the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation. There is an explanation on the long dharani of Avalokiteshvara. We will look at that in the next lesson. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.