Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L50FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.027809
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson                                                                    50
 17 October 2017


The Six-Session Guru Yoga.


THE SIX-SESSION GURU YOGA

Since all of us recite the Six-Session Guru Yoga daily, I thought  it  would
be beneficial if we go through the practice.  In general,  it  is  not  that
you don't already know what to visualise. Anyway, we just  go  through  this
here in class.

Khen Rinpoche: You brought the text or have you already  memorized  it?  You
must know it by heart now!

People often ask,  “What  kind  of  practice  should  I  do?  How  should  I
practise?” In a way, the answer is very simple.  Whatever  practice  it  may
be, the point is all of us have made a pledge and taken different  types  of
vows and commitments (samayas) so the practice is  to  guard  the  vows  and
commitments one has taken.  There is no  other  practice  apart  from  that.
Therefore, that is the practice.

All of us here have taken the three types of vows—the pratimoksha vows,  the
bodhisattva vows and the tantric vows. We  possess  these  three  vows.  The
meaning  of  practice  is  to  protect  these  vows  and  to  practise   the
commitments. You can call someone who keeps the vows as purely as he  can  a
practitioner.

Tantric vows—Samayas of the five buddha lineages
We have taken the tantric vows that consist of keeping the specific  samayas
of the five buddha lineages:
1. Vairocana
2. Akshobhya
3. Ratnasambhava
4. Amitabha
5. Amoghasiddhi
If the practice of the Six-Session Guru Yoga is  done  well  and  mindfully,
then one would have practised the 19 samayas of  the  five  buddha  lineages
and one would have been keeping those samayas.

 • There are the six samayas of Vairocana that consist of:
   1-3. observing and practising the three types of ethical discipline
   4-6. the practice of going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha
 • The four samayas of Akshobhya are:
   1. the mind samaya of the vajra
   2. the speech samaya of the bell
   3. the body samaya of the mudra
   4. the samaya of devoting to the vajra master.
 • The four samayas of Ratnasambhava are the practice of the four  types  of
   giving. It is in the Six-Session Guru Yoga where  it  reads,  “From  this
   moment on, without any sense of loss,/I send forth my body and, likewise,
   my wealth/ And my virtues amassed throughout the three times/In order  to
   help all being, my mothers.” (Verse B4)[1].
The practice of the four types of  giving,  six  times  every  day,  is  not
applicable only to the four samaya of Ratnasambhava. One has  to  understand
that it’s applicable to all  the  samayas  of  the  other  buddha  lineages.
Whatever samayas there are of the buddha  lineages,  they  all  have  to  be
practised six times a day.
 • There are the three samayas of Amitabha:
   1. to uphold the samaya of the outer, pledging to  train  in  Action  (or
      kriya) Tantra and Performance (or charya) Tantra.
   2. to uphold the samaya of the secret, pledging to train in  Yoga  Tantra
      and Highest Yoga Tantra
   3. to uphold the samaya of the three vehicles
Here, what we have promised to do is to practise  the  Buddhadharma  in  its
entirety.
 • There are two samayas of Amoghasiddhi:
   1. do not transgress the three types of vows
   2. to make as many offerings as possible

|Five buddha    |No. of   |Details of the samayas                     |
|lineages       |samayas  |                                           |
|Vairocana      |6        |1-3. practising the three types of ethical |
|               |         |disciplines                                |
|               |         |4-6. practice of going for refuge to the   |
|               |         |Buddha, Dharma and Sangha                  |
|Akshobhya      |4        |the mind samaya of the vajra,              |
|               |         |the speech samaya of the bell              |
|               |         |the body samaya of the mudra               |
|               |         |the samaya of devoting to the vajra master |
|Ratnasambhava  |4        |The practice of the four types of giving   |
|Amitabha       |3        |to uphold the samayas of the outer—pledging|
|               |         |to train in Action  (or kriya) Tantra and  |
|               |         |Performance (or charya) Tantra             |
|               |         |to uphold the samaya of the secret—pledge  |
|               |         |to train in Yoga Tantra and Highest Yoga   |
|               |         |Tantra                                     |
|               |         |to uphold the samaya of the three vehicles |
|Amoghasiddhi   |2        |not to transgress the three types of vows  |
|               |         |to make as many offerings as possible      |


Verse A1
The Six-Session Guru Yoga starts with the verse  of  going  for  refuge  and
generating bodhicitta.

      I go for refuge, until I am enlightened,
      To the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Highest Assembly.
      From the virtuous merit that I collect
      By practicing giving and other perfections,
      May I attain the state of a buddha
      To be able to benefit all sentient beings.

It’s said we start off with three repetitions of this verse.  The  point  is
not so much about whether it is three repetitions  or  one  repetition.  The
point is to generate refuge and bodhicitta.

One starts by visualizing the objects of refuge. We visualise them  as  they
are normally explained in the teachings.
• In the space in front of us, on a very expansive throne, is a lotus, moon
  and sun discs.
• On top of that sits one’s kind root guru  in  the  aspect  of  Shakyamuni
  Buddha.
• He is surrounded by the root and lineage gurus and all other  objects  of
  refuge—the  deities,  buddhas,  bodhisattva,   dakas,   dakinis,   Dharma
  protectors and so forth.
It will be good if right  from  the  beginning,  we  try  to  visualise  the
objects of refuge as clearly as possible.

Imagine we are surrounded by all the six types of migratory  beings  in  the
aspect of human beings.

In order for refuge to arise, we need to meditate on the  cause  of  refuge.
We reflect on the suffering of the lower realms and the suffering of  cyclic
existence. Only then can we imagine that all the sentient beings  around  us
also have the strong fear of those sufferings.

The objects of refuge are the only  ones  who  possess  the  power  to  free
oneself and all sentient beings  from  these  sufferings.  That  belief  and
conviction must come from deep within us.  They are the  only  ones,  nobody
else.

This practice of refuge is so important. If we have that attitude of  refuge
from the beginning, the rest of the practice will come when  there  is  real
refuge in the first place.

All of you have studied the two causes of refuge—fear and faith.
 • The fear of the suffering of  the  lower  realms  and  the  suffering  of
   samsara.
 • A personal heart-felt faith and conviction that only  the  guru,  Buddha,
   Dharma, and Sangha have the power to free us and  other  sentient  beings
   from that suffering.
So, as much as possible, we need to reflect, analyse and  meditate  till  we
are able to generate such faith and  conviction.  Without  these  two,  it’s
very difficult to have real
refuge.

“I go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and the Highest Assembly.” Since  all
of you have already studied this, when these words come up,  what  comes  up
in your mind?
 • The Buddha who is in the nature of the four bodies—the nature body, truth
   body, enjoyment body and emanation  body—is  the  buddha  that  you  take
   refuge in.
 • The Dharma can be  seen  in  terms  of  the  scriptural  Dharma  and  the
   realizational Dharma. The actual Dharma is included  in  true  paths  and
   true cessations. This is the real Dharma Jewel.
 • The Sangha Jewel refers to those Mahayana bodhisattva  superiors,  hearer
   superiors, solitary realiser superiors and the qualities  of  abandonment
   and realizations in their continua.
So, you really need to have a very good  understanding  of  the  objects  of
refuge.

I’ve mentioned a few times before the  differences  between  having  studied
well the Buddha's teachings and not having studied well.  You need  to  know
that there’s a huge difference.

For example, somebody who has studied well knows what the Three Jewels  are.
Right from the beginning of going for refuge, this person will have so  much
material to draw on, a big picture and a very good understanding,  and  draw
(the relevant) connections. There are so many things  that  the  person  can
reflect and  meditate  on.   You  really  have  to  see  this  point.   It’s
important to understand that if you have done some studies, you will have  a
lot of resources to draw on for your practice.  Since  you  have  done  some
studies already, then in whatever you are  doing,  you  should  extract  the
relevant information and material in your head and apply them in  the  right
context in your practice.

Having a good practice of the refuge at the  beginning  of  the  Six-Session
Guru Yoga constitutes keeping three out of  the  six  samayas  of  Vairocana
since half of the samayas of Vairocana have to do with going for refuge.

We need to remind ourselves what refuge is. We go for  refuge  six  times  a
day so we have to remind ourselves three times  during  the  day  and  three
times at night.

“From the virtuous merit that I collect/  By  practicing  giving  and  other
perfections,/ May I attain the state of a buddha/ To be able to benefit  all
sentient beings.”:   Basically, this  is  the  aspiration  to  be  like  the
objects of refuge, “May I quickly become like you  so  that  I  can  benefit
sentient beings. I will do this by practising the six perfections,  such  as
the perfection of generosity and also the four ways  of  gathering  sentient
beings and bringing them into my fold.”

A2
The next paragraph is the meditation on the four immeasurables.

      May all sentient beings be parted from aversion and clinging,
          feeling close to some and distant from others.
      May they win the bliss that is specially sublime,
      May they find release from the ocean of unbearable sorrow,
      And may they never be parted from freedom's true joy.

This starts with immeasurable equanimity. Our way of  perceiving  others  is
not balanced as we don’t see everyone in an equal  way.  As  such,  we  feel
closer to some and distant from others. This is related to the  attitude  of
anger and attachment.  Then pure love and compassion  become  difficult  and
they don't arise. So, first, we have to equalise.

There is a longer version of  the  prayer  of  the  four  immeasurables.  If
possible, it will be good if you can  recite  and  meditate  on  that.   The
extensive version goes like this:

      How wonderful it would be if all sentient  beings  were  to  abide  in
            equanimity, free from hatred and attachment,  not  holding  some
          close and others distant.
      May they abide in equanimity.
      I myself will cause them to abide in equanimity.
      Please, Guru-Deity, bless me to be able to do this.

The point is not so much to just recite the prayer.  We  have  to  feel  the
prayer within. So it’s better to think of the prayer and  feel  the  meaning
of what you are reciting. Then, when there is some feeling, you  can  recite
it out loud.

Next is immeasurable love. May all sentient beings enjoy the special  bliss,
joy and happiness, which in  the  ultimate  sense  is  the  purest,  highest
happiness of enlightenment. We wish all sentient beings  to  have  this.  If
you recite the longer version, it goes like this:

      How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings had happiness and the
          causes of happiness.
      May they have happiness and its cause.
      I myself will cause them to have these.
      Please, Guru-Deity, bless me to be able to do this.


Next is the meditation on immeasurable compassion.

      May they find release from the ocean of unbearable sorrow.


It is the wish for sentient beings to be free  of  the  oceans  of  samsaric
suffering. If you can, you can recite the extensive version.

      How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings were free from
         suffering and its causes.
      May they be free from suffering and its cause.
      I myself will cause them to be free from suffering and its cause.
      Please, Guru-Deity, bless me to be able to do this.


The last one is the meditation on immeasurable joy.

      And may they never be parted from freedom’s true joy.

May sentient beings never be separated from the happiness of nirvana,  i.e.,
the happiness of liberation from cyclic existence and may  they  also  never
be parted from the joy of non-abiding nirvana, i.e., full enlightenment.  If
you can, you can recite the extensive version.

      How wonderful it would be if all sentient beings were never separated
           from the happiness of higher rebirth and liberation.
      May they never be separated from these.
      I myself will cause them never to be separated from these.
      Please, Guru-Deity, bless me to be able to do this.


So the second  paragraph  is  the  meditation  on  the  four  immeasurables.
Instead of doing  that,  you  can  recite  the  long  version  of  the  four
immeasurables. The point is not the recitation per  se,  but  as  we  recite
this prayer, to mix the meaning of those four immeasurables with our mind.

A3
The next verse is generating aspirational bodhicitta with a pledge.

What  this  verse  is  saying  is  that  from   now   until   one   achieves
enlightenment, one will never give up, even at the cost of one’s  life,  the
thought of wanting to achieve enlightenment in order to  free  all  sentient
beings from the extremes of samsara and nirvana. Since it is said  that  one
will not forsake this intention  even  at  the  cost  of  one’s  life,  then
needless to say, one should not give up that thought for the  sake  of  mere
worldly possessions, the comforts of this life,  reputation  and  so  forth.
Since we have taken the bodhisattva vow, we have to  generate  this  thought
every day.

A4
Next is the verse on the engaging bodhisattva  vow.  It  is  good  to  think
again of the objects of refuge in the space in front  of  us.  This  is  the
verse of taking the bodhisattva vow. We imagine that we repeating the  verse
in front of the objects of refuge in the space before us.

The verse starts with calling out  for  the  attention  of  the  objects  of
refuge. It starts with, “O gurus, buddhas and bodhisattvas,  please  listen/
To what I now say from the depths of my heart.” Then, you repeat  after  the
objects of refuge. The idea is to think of the meaning of the verse  and  as
much as possible to feel its meaning. So what the verse is saying  is  this:
Just as all  the  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  of  the  past  have  developed
bodhicitta, training gradually in the six perfections and the four  ways  of
gathering sentient beings into their fold, likewise, one will also  generate
bodhicitta and train in the bodhisattva deeds. This is what we should  think
and feel when reciting this verse of taking the bodhisattva vows.

You need to understand what you are reciting. Here, you are making a  pledge
to train in the bodhisattva deeds, not just to generate  bodhicitta.  It  is
saying, “Just as the buddhas of the past have trained gradually, now I  make
a promise to all of you that I will follow  in  their  footsteps.”  Then  we
should try our best to do what we have promised. That is the idea.

We have to examine  whether  we  are  actually  able  to  practise  all  the
bodhisattva deeds or not. Anyway,  we  have  made  the  promise  to  do  so.
Therefore, among the bodhisattva deeds that we know we are  capable  of,  we
should implement them right away. Those that are  relatively  difficult  and
challenging for us at the present moment, they can be practised at a  mental
level now. Those we find really difficult to do now, at the very  least,  we
must generate the aspiration to be able to do them in the  future.  We  pray
that in the future, may we be able to perform  that  particular  bodhisattva
deed.

This is what the teachings advise. Those we are actually capable  of  doing,
we do them now.  Those  we  can’t  do,  at  least,  review  those  practices
mentally and then generate a strong wish to  be  able  to  do  them  in  the
future.  This  is  how  we  should  practise  rather  than  dismissing  them
straightaway, “This cannot be done so I can just forget  it.”  That  is  not
correct.

So, as much as possible, we should meditate to be able to develop that  kind
of feeling. This is the very idea of the prayer, to  be  able  to  feel  the
prayer. If there is time,  this  is  how  it  should  be  done.  Also,  it’s
possible that after having thought deeply,  you  have  the  feeling,  “I  am
going to generate some feeling of bodhicitta, some heartfelt wish  to  train
in the bodhisattva deeds.” When that kind  of  feeling  is  present  in  the
mind, then we can get up and kneel on one knee, like  when  we  were  taking
the bodhisattva vows. If we  can  pull  all  that  together  mentally,  then
physically we can kneel with devotion. Definitely, there will some  positive
impact on the mind. If you can do it in this way regularly, definitely,  you
will see some change in the mind.

After taking the bodhisattva vows, the objects of refuge that surround  Guru
Shakyamuni Buddha all dissolve into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. Then  you  focus
on Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. Then with  some  faith  towards  Guru  Shakyamuni
Buddha, he dissolves into light and dissolves into us through the  mid-brow.
Our body transforms into light and we appear as Guru Shakyamuni  Buddha.  It
is OK to do this. We transform ourselves into  Guru  Shakyamuni  Buddha  and
imagine we are adorned with all the signs and exemplifications.

A5
Next is the meditation on feeling joyful.

      At this moment my life has become truly fruitful,
      For having attained an endowed human body,
      Today I have developed the true buddha essence,
      Bodhicitta, and thus have become Buddha's child.

The idea is to think this: In this life, I have  the  opportunity  to  think
about bodhicitta, generate bodhicitta and take the  bodhisattva  vows.  This
is the most meaningful thing in my  life!  This  is  aspirational  joy.  The
extent to which we can actually feel this prayer very much  depends  on  how
much joy we feel at  the  time  of  generating  bodhicitta  and  taking  the
bodhisattva vows. If  the  generation  of  bodhicitta  was  heartfelt,  then
making the promise to practise the  bodhisattva  deeds  will  be  heartfelt.
Then  one  will  see  how  that  makes  life  so  meaningful.  To  have  the
opportunity to do that, naturally, joy will arise.

A6
The next verse is applying conscientiousness.

We are declaring that one’s actions and behaviour will  not  contradict  the
bodhisattva ideal and one’s bodhisattva  training.  We  need  to  understand
what we are saying.  We  are  committing  to  implementing  mindfulness  and
vigilance in our lives so as not to go against the trainings  that  we  have
promised to undertake and to make sure that we are not  stained  by  any  of
the downfalls.

A7
The next  verse  is  the  actual  body  of  guru  yoga.  What  you  have  to
visualise—the description (of Vajradhara)—is  all  there.  If  you  read  it
mindfully and slowly, it is all there.

It says to visualise “in the sky before me.” As for what that  means,  there
are many different ways of understanding this. If you take it literally,  it
is just the empty space in front of you where there  is  a  jewelled  throne
and sun disc. On top of that sits your own kind root guru in the  aspect  of
Vajradhara. Just thinking that your root guru is in the space  in  front  of
you is the literal meaning of space. Another understanding of  space  is  to
do with emptiness. You start with the meditation of emptiness. While  it  is
empty, you visualise that your root guru appears within emptiness.  That  is
another take on the meaning of the space before you.

In the space in front on the jewelled throne is one’s kind root guru in  the
aspect of Vajradhara, embracing the wisdom mother. Their  three  places  are
marked with the three syllables. This is the commitment being.

Then from the Hum at Guru Vajradhara’s heart, light rays go out in  the  ten
directions, inviting the wisdom being,  Guru  Vajradhara,  to  come,  absorb
into and become inseparable from the commitment being.  The  four  syllables
Jah Hum Bam Ho are accompanied by this visualisation:
 • When you recite Jah, the wisdom being you have invited gather at the  top
   of the commitment being you visualised earlier.
 • When you recite Hum,  the  wisdom  being  absorbs  and  merges  with  the
   commitment being.
 • When you recite Bam, they become of one taste.
 • When you recite Ho, it means they abide happily with delight.
Essentially, the visualisation of Jah Hum Bam Ho is that you invite all  the
wisdom beings  to  dissolve  into  the  commitment  being  and  they  become
inseparable. Then think that is really  the  object  of  refuge  abiding  in
front of you. This practice of inviting the wisdom being to absorb into  the
commitment being is useful for our mind.


A8
Next is the verse of prostration. This is the verse of  prostration  to  the
kind root guru, the one who has the capacity  and  power  to  grant  us  the
final non-dual wisdom of bliss and emptiness,  enlightenment  in  one  brief
lifetime of this degenerate age. To this inconceivable one, this  particular
lama, this root guru, you prostrate. You prostrate after having that  faith,
conviction, belief and devotion. Then you prostrate.

If you think about it, generating real faith in the guru is not  easy.  Why?
Because it depends on what you are looking for in life. Here,  for  somebody
who is really looking  for  enlightenment—especially  enlightenment  in  one
short lifetime of this degenerate age—who really from  the  heart  wants  to
work for sentient beings, when this student can find such  a  guru  who  can
show the entire path from beginning to end, “This is how you do it,” such  a
disciple will have that kind of unbelievable devotion to that  guru  because
he has found the one who can give him what he wants.

This is how real faith is generated. It is very much  depends  on  what  you
want. Somebody who wants the Dharma,  who  wants  what  the  Dharma  has  to
offer—enlightenment here and now—and then finds that  person  who  can  give
him that, that person has found what he  needs.  Of  course,  that  person’s
faith will be unshakeable. He will have irreversible faith.

When such a disciple finds such a lama, this disciple  will  have  no  issue
about bowing wholeheartedly to the lowest point  of  the  guru’s  body,  his
“lotus feet.” In that way, the person dedicates his body,  speech  and  mind
to his guru. Otherwise, it is difficult. Set aside touching the lotus  feet,
even just bowing slightly to the guru is very challenging.

This discussion is in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra. It is  a  practice
of tantra and within that, the highest level of tantra. We  are  talking  in
the context of someone who wants enlightenment in  one  short  lifetime  and
finds the lama who can give him that.

A9
Next is the recitation of the Praise in Eight Lines. It is said  that  there
is a lot of benefit from reciting this praise.

A10
Next is the verse of the making of offerings, both owned and unowned.


 • We should offer as much as we can, including those that  are  visualised.
   This is making the outer offerings.
 • Since this is a practice of Highest Yoga Tantra, there is the practice of
   making the inner offering that is in the nature of  the  five  meats  and
   five nectars.
 • Then there is the  secret  offering.  Everybody  here  has  received  the
   Highest Yoga Tantra wang. Emanate from the heart  of  oneself  the  fully
   qualified  wisdom  mother.  This  wisdom  mother  dissolves   into   Guru
   Vajradhara’s wisdom mother who is Vajradhatu  Ishvari.  As  a  result  of
   that, Guru Vajradhara is in  union  with  the  wisdom  mother.  Then  you
   imagine that they generate the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness  in
   their minds. This secret offering is made through visualisation  in  that
   you imagine the guru generates the wisdom of great bliss.
 • There is the suchness offering. You can think  that  the  guru  with  the
   wisdom of great bliss that he experiences  through  the  secret  offering
   ascertains emptiness. This great bliss  and  emptiness  become  non-dual.
   This experience that is generated in his mind is the suchness offering.

In the Guru Puja, there are  verses  for  the  inner  offering,  the  secret
offering and the suchness offering. If you  can  think  of  the  meaning  of
those verses or even use those verses, then in this context  here,  you  can
accumulate a vast amount of merit.

A11
Next is the mandala offering.


This verse mentions offering the  body,  speech  and  mind  of  oneself  and
others and all possessions including all the merit and virtue of  the  three
times. One gathers all of them altogether, heap it as a  mandala  and  offer
it.

You can  apply  the  offering  visualisation  of  Samantabhadra  during  the
mandala offering. I think I have described that visualisation to you in  one
of the previous modules. You can apply that visualisation here.

A12—A13
This is followed by two verses, the meaning of  which  is  the  practice  of
correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. The point is that here you  bring
to mind the qualities of your root guru. Then you  generate  faith.  In  the
next verse, through remembering  the  kindness  of  the  guru,  you  develop
respect.

A14
The next  verse,  “Every  supreme  and  mundane  attainment  …”  comes  from
following after the virtuous friend. I think  this  shows  the  practice  of
correctly devoting to the virtuous friend in action.

We have talked about common attainments earlier in this module. The  supreme
attainment  is  enlightenment.  So  this  verse  is  saying  that   whatever
attainment it is, supreme and common, all of them come  in  dependence  upon
correctly devoting to the virtuous friend.

Be convinced of that. Then one practises accordingly. Essentially,  we  have
to think about the benefits of correctly devoting  to  the  virtuous  friend
and the faults of not devoting  or  devoting  incorrectly.  Through  knowing
both the benefits and the faults, then at all  times,  the  training  is  to
stop the mind that looks  for  and  sees  faults  in  the  guru  and  always
focusses instead on the qualities and kindness  of  the  guru  in  order  to
engender devotion in one’s mind towards the guru.

First, you have to realise, feel and understand,  not  only  intellectually,
that all attainments, both supreme  and  common,  without  exception,  (come
from the guru). It is saying that every single good  thing,  no  matter  how
big or how small, comes from correctly  devoting  to  the  virtuous  friend.
People who realise this from the heart are people who will never  ever  give
up their gurus. Even if they have to lose their  lives,  they  will  not  do
that. These people will never do that and will do everything in their  power
to please their virtuous friend.

But in the first place, in order for us to never give up  the  guru  at  all
costs and to always please the guru, we must be really convinced that  every
single good thing comes from correctly devoting to the virtuous  friend.  We
have to be convinced of  that  first.  If  that  doesn’t  happen,  then  the
practice doesn’t happen.

If you look at the Six-Session Guru Yoga, all the  essential  practices  are
gathered in one place.

B1—B3
After this verse, it would be very good if you can  insert  the  verse  from
the Guru Puja
that says:


      You are the Guru, you are the yidam,
      You are the dakinis and Dharma protectors.
      From now until enlightenment I shall seek no other refuge than you.
      In this life, the bardo, and all future lives,
      Hold me with your hook of compassion;
      Free me from samsara and nirvana’s fears,
      Grant all attainments,
      Be my constant friend and guard me from interferences. (LC 53)

You can recite this three times, the idea being  to  do  so  with  devotion.
Thereafter, you can insert the next verse in the Guru  Puja,  i.e.,  LC  54,
which is a short way of taking the four initiations as a blessing. There  is
also an extensive way of taking the four initiations. So if you know how  to
think, this can be inserted at this point. According to Verse LC 54  in  the
Guru Puja:
 • First, you visualise from the Om at the guru’s forehead, white light rays
   and  nectar  come  and  enter  your  forehead.   You  receive  the   vase
   initiation. Then  think  that  you  are  empowered  to  meditate  on  the
   generation stage and the potential to actualise  the  emanation  body  is
   planted.
 • From the red syllable Ah at the guru’s throat comes red  beams  of  light
   and nectar into your throat. Imagine you receive  the  secret  initiation
   and the negativities and obscurations of your speech  are  purified.  You
   are empowered to meditate on the completion  stage  of  the  conventional
   illusory body. Then the potential  has  been  planted  to  actualise  the
   resultant enjoyment body.
 • Next, from the blue Hum at the heart of the guru comes  blue  light  rays
   and nectar that enter into your heart. You receive the  knowledge  wisdom
   initiation. All  the  negativities  and  obscurations  of  the  mind  are
   purified. You are empowered to meditate on  the  ultimate  meaning  clear
   light of  the  completion  stage  and  the  potential  to  actualise  the
   resultant dharmakaya is planted.
 • Lastly, visualise light rays and nectar from the three places of the guru
   emerge simultaneously and dissolve into your three places. Think that you
   have received the precious word initiation and all the  negativities  and
   obscurations that are common to the body, speech and  mind,  particularly
   their imprints, are purified.  This  empowers  you  to  meditate  on  the
   completion stage of the inseparable two truths and imprints  are  planted
   to actualise the unification of no more learning.
 • Then you imagine that the root guru is pleased. With  great  delight,  he
   comes to the space above  your  crown,  dissolves  into  you  and  become
   inseparable from you.
 • You dissolve into light from top and bottom. In  emptiness,  you  imagine
   that  you  manifest  the  dharmakaya.  Imagine  that  you  dissolve  into
   emptiness and manifest the wisdom of great  bliss.  You  then  enter  the
   meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness.

You can do the visualisation that includes the essential  points  of  taking
the three bodies as the path:
 • First, taking death as the path of dharmakaya, what is essential here  is
   the meditation on emptiness.
 • Then imagine that mind arises as a  white  shaft  of  light,  taking  the
   intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya.
 • Then that white shaft of light becomes as what is said in the Six-Session
   Guru Yoga, “With the pride of being Vajrasattva/ I embrace  (my  consort)
   Bhagavati.”  This  will  be  like  taking  birth  as  the  path  of   the
   nirmanakaya.

B4
The next verse I think is about the practice of generosity.

B6—B10
What follow are a few verses that list all the trainings of the three  vows:
the pratimoksha, bodhisattva and tantric vows. The idea is that  by  knowing
what the downfalls are, as one goes through all of  them,  if  one  has  not
incurred any transgression or  downfalls,  then  one  can  rejoice.  If  one
discovers that there is some infraction and transgression, it is  said  that
one should confess and do the practice of Vajrasattva.

If any infraction or transgression has been  committed,  at  all  times,  we
should always have the attitude of very strong remorse  and  regret  coupled
with strong restraint, i.e., the determination to really try  our  best  not
to make the same mistake and incur those infractions again in the future.

Then you finish the practice and dedicate well. That’s it.

Khen Rinpoche: I think I don’t have anything much to talk about anymore.  On
Thursday, I thought we could do Tara Puja together. I am not going to  teach
you to do Tara Puja.
At the same time, I will give you some homework that you have to do.  So  on
Thursday, we do Tara Puja together. Then that  is  the  conclusion  of  this
year’s classes. Come together and  pray  to  clear  all  obstacles  and  for
success in your studies.

The five group leaders, please do the set up for the Tara Puja.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed  by  Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Alison
Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau
Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] In the Guru Puja text, when we take the tantric vows,  it  is  mentioned
as, “I pledge to practise the four types of giving, six times each day.”

