Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L16FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.835267
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 16	 				                                            30 May 2017
Is it necessary to enter the sutric path before entering the tantric path?  Root text (p. 21, 29). Absorption with recitation—review. 
IS IT NECESSARY TO ENTER THE SUTRIC PATH BEFORE ENTERING THE TANTRIC PATH?
In the Foundation of All Good Qualities, renunciation was mentioned first followed by the development of bodhicitta and the need to practise the bodhisattva vows.  After that, it says:
Once I have pacified distractions to wrong objects
And correctly analyzed the meaning of reality,
Please bless me to generate quickly within my mind-stream
The unified path of calm abiding and special insight.
So after bodhicitta is discussed, there’s a separate statement on calm abiding and special insight. Only after that is there a discussion of tantra. 
Having become a pure vessel by training in the general path,
Please bless me to enter
The holy gateway of the fortunate ones:
The supreme vajra vehicle.
From this, you can see that one enters tantra only after having trained the mind “in the general path,” i.e., the common or shared paths. This is what’s mentioned in the lam-rim. 
The question now arises. Does one have to complete the training in renunciation, bodhicitta, calm abiding and special insight before one enters into tantra? Isn’t this verse saying that only after one has trained in and generated renunciation, bodhicitta, calm abiding and special insight does one then enter into tantra? 
This question is another way of asking what I’d asked in the previous class, “Do you need to enter the sutric path before entering the tantric path?” 
Another way of asking this is: “Do you need to realize emptiness before entering the tantric path?”
If you say, “No, it is not necessary,” then you’ve to give a reason why it’s not necessary. What are you going to say to rebut the verse in the Foundation of All Good Qualities: “Having become a pure vessel by training in the general path”?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting my question or not?  If you get the question, you know what I’m asking. What’s the best way to answer the question? That’s the whole point. The same question can be asked in different ways.
~~~~~~~~~~~
After having trained the mind in the shared paths, in order to enter into tantra, you’ve to take an initiation. 
After taking the initiation, you’ve to guard purely the vows and samaya that you took during the initiation.  
On that basis, you perform the prior approximation of the deity while abiding in the vows and samaya. This is where we’re in the outline.
How to progress on the path of action tantra
This has four divisions: …
…
… having achieved approximation (p.21)
We’re now at the third outline of the action tantra section. How do we approximate the deity while abiding in the vows and samaya? To approximate the deity means to get closer to the deity.
How to approximate the deity while keeping the commitments
The third has two parts: …
… not reliant on recitation (p. 29)
ABSORPTION WITH RECITATION—REVIEW
One starts with the absorption with recitation (or concentration with repetition) and begins the practice by generating oneself as the deity.
I’m going to summarize what I’ve said in the previous sessions. Just focus as much as you can.  If you have the interest and really want to learn, my words will stay in your mind. If you sit there with the attitude of whatever comes is OK, it’s difficult for the material to stay in your mind. 
Khen Rinpoche: People have asked me how to improve their memory and how to listen to the teachings. Of course everyone learns differently. 
From my own experience, I don’t learn by listening to the audio or with charts and visual aids. For me, I learn by just listening well. When the teacher teaches, I really listen.  
Of course it goes without saying that first you must have the interest. Then you listen well.  You must listen and catch the main point. You don’t have to catch every single word I say but you must grasp the point that I’m trying to make. You hold on to that.  “This is right.” You must get that.  Then after that, you’ll keep that point in your mind for a long time. For me, that’s how I learn. Some of you do listen single-pointedly. These people really get the point. 
I noticed many of the others are listening, but at the same time, they’re reading or writing their notes. I wonder how much can go in.  But everybody learns differently. If you’re learning that way, that’s fantastic. 
You’re all tired from your work, physically and mentally. So I can’t say much. For us in the monastery, we are studying full time. We have good rest and that works better for us. In your case, I do understand that you’re all physically and mentally tired from the job. There’s nothing much I can do. There’s nothing much you can do.  But what I’m trying to say is that you have to put in a little bit more effort to try and catch the point of what I’m saying.  
I’ve mentioned earlier that approximation means getting closer to the deity. Here, we’re supposed to get closer to the deity through the absorption with recitation. We’ve to figure out how the recitation of the mantra can make us closer to the deity.
Here, the recitation is done within the context of deity yoga. Prior to such recitation, we’ve to generate ourselves as the deity. In the context of Action Tantra, that’s done through the six deities:
the empty deity
the sound deity
the letter deity
the form deity
the seal deity
the sign deity
I’ll not go over them again.  
At the end of that process, when we reach the sign deity, we have already arisen in the complete aspect of the deity that’s being meditated on. After that, the main practise is to develop a stable mind focussing on the body of the deity. We try to elicit the clear appearance of ourselves as the deity and generate divine pride. 
While abiding as the deity, we engage in the recitation. As said in the root text, we are supposed to recite the mantra “without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion” (p. 30). The four branches are:
the self basis 
the other basis 
the mind basis 
the sound basis
We’ve gone through that already. 
We have to know what the four branches mean:    
The self basis refers to the self-generation, i.e., oneself arising as the deity. 
The other basis is the front generation, i.e., visualizing the deity in front. 
The mind basis is imagining one’s mind that realizes emptiness taking on the aspect of a moon disc, be it the moon disc placed at one’s own heart or at the heart of the front generation deity. 
The sound basis is placing the mantra garland on that moon disc. 
When you go through these different bases, you have to do so with an undistracted mind. This is the process for stabilizing the mind, by placing the mind undistractedly on the focal object.
Generally, in the practice of Action Tantra:
After the self-generation practice, there’s the practice of the front generation. 
After the front generation has been established, there’s the practise of offerings.
These offerings are to be made to the front generation. 
This is then followed by the recitation of praises to the deity and so forth.
Making offerings in tantra
In the practice of tantra, whenever we make offerings, the offerings have to be blessed. This is done by first dispelling the interferers that may be abiding on the basis of the offerings. By reciting the appropriate mantras and with a concentrated mind, we imagine that these interferers are dispelled. This is followed by purifying the offerings into emptiness and from within that state of emptiness, we generate the offerings. 
In the practice of tantra, whether we are talking about the generation of the deity, the blessing and transformation of the offerings and so forth, these are always done from within the state of emptiness. This is extremely important.
This is an essential reason why the practice of tantra has to be preceded by training the mind in the shared paths. At the very least, we should have the meditative experience of love and compassion and, in particular, the correct view of reality, emptiness. When we have that, then when we engage in the practice of tantra—even the practice of generating and making the offerings—it makes a huge difference in the mind of the practitioner.
After dispelling the interferers that may be abiding on the basis of the offerings, we purify them in emptiness and generate the offerings from within the state of emptiness. At the end, we bless or consecrate the offerings. Generally, this is done through concentration (or samadhi), mantra and mudra. 
I’m not exactly sure what concentration means in this context here, but perhaps I think it’s this: because the offerings are generated from within the state of emptiness, I guess if one has some level of concentration, in this context, concentration may refer to our ability to visualize clearly those offerings that have been generated. 
For example, with regard to the first offering, the offering of libation or drink. In the mantra for blessing this offering, the word argham is interspersed with Om, Ah and Hum—Om Argham Ah Hum. When argham is interspersed with the three syllables, Om 
Ah Hum, it means it is blessed by Om Ah Hum. This is what the three syllables do. They bless. It’s the same with the rest of the near enjoyments. That’s how you bless them. You bless the waters by reciting the mantra Om Argham Ah Hum.  
In Action Tantra, external activities such as performing the appropriate hand mudras (or hand gestures) is essential. Since the offering has to be blessed through the combination of concentration, mantra and mudra, while you recite the mantra for blessing the offering, you have to do the appropriate hand gestures. All these are done within the state of concentration.  
After the offerings are blessed, you present the offerings. Usually before the offerings are made, you prostrate to the deity.  
With regard to the offering mantra for, say, the first offering of libation, you don’t say Om Argham Ah Hum. The mantra is slightly different. It is Om Argham Pratichha Svaha.  
It is good to know the general procedure in the practice. At the beginning of the practice, you see the mantra, Om Argham Ah hum. Then later, if you don’t notice it, you’d think it’s the same mantra, but it’s actually Om Argham Pratichha Svaha. You may wonder why the mantra is being repeated. 
You should know that the offerings have to be blessed. After the offerings are blessed, they are offered. When the offerings are consecrated, you’ve to perform the hand gestures. Likewise, when you’re actually making the offerings, you also have to perform the hand gestures.
In short, before engaging in the recitation, you’ve to meditate on the four branches, doing them well and clearly without distraction before you proceed to the mantra recitation.  
The mala to be used
Just before the mantra recitation, you’ve to consecrate or bless the mantra rosary or mala. In the text, different substances for the mala are prescribed according to the lineage of the deity being practiced.
If you’re doing an approximation of a deity of the tathagata lineage, it’s recommended that the mala be made of bodhi seeds.
If you’re doing an approximation of a deity of the lotus lineage, it’s recommended that the mala be made of lotus seeds. 
If you’re doing an approximation of a deity of the vajra lineage, it’s recommended that the mala be made of ruksha seeds. 
There’s properly a difference when one adheres to what’s recommended due to the dependent arising related to the substance itself. Some people lose sleep over this, going everywhere to find this or that mala and worrying about what it is made of. But this should not be the main focus. It’s good if you can find the mala of the recommended substance but if you cannot find it, it’s also OK. You can use whatever you can lay your hands on. If you can’t find a mala, that’s also alright. 
These things make a difference and if you have them, it’s good but the main thing is the practice. If the practice is done on the basis of having all these external conditions coming together, of course, it will be better. 
When you engage in the recitation in dependence upon the four branches, there are two kinds of recitation: 
the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra 
the recitation observing the sound of the mantra
With regard to the first recitation of observing the form of the letters of the mantra, it can be divided into two:
the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the deity in front
the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart with oneself as the deity 
Recitation observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front 
By this time, you’ve already visualized the deity in front. 
Then you visualize a moon disc at the heart of the deity in front. 
On that moon disc, you visualize the mantra garland of the mantra you’re going to recite. 
So when you engage in this recitation, you’re supposed to focus on three objects: 
the body of the deity in front
the moon disc at the heart of the deity in front 
the mantra garland of the mantra you’re going to recite that’s on that moon disc
Then without distraction while focussing on these three objects, you engage in the recitation. 
There are two forms of recitation: 
the verbal or whispered recitation
the recitation through restraining the vitality exertion (mental recitation)
The recitation’s to be done within a state of non-distraction. You don’t lose the visualization of the body of the deity in front, the moon disc and the mantra garland on that moon disc. You’re supposed not to lose mindfulness of these three objects.  With some clarity of these three, you engage in the recitation. 
Faults to be avoided in mantra recitation
When you recite the mantra, there’re faults to be avoided such as reciting too quickly so that the mantra becomes unclear or certain syllables are missed out or reciting the mantra too slowly. 
In the course of the mantra recitation, if you were to lose mindfulness, then you’re supposed to start all over again and try to get a clear visualization of the three objects again, i.e., the deity’s body and the moon disc and mantra garland within, before you engage in recitation again. 
You’re supposed to recite the mantra:
without being too fast or too slow 
without any additions or omissions 
without being excessively loud
without making any sound at all
That’s whispered recitation. By doing that well, it helps to stabilize the mind and bring it to a more concentrated state.  
Then you move on to the recitation through restraining the vitality exertion. You’re supposed to bring the upper winds down and the lower winds up so that they meet at the level of the navel. By restraining the winds there, you engage in the mental recitation. 
When you restrain the vitality exertion in such a way, you’ll not be doing any verbal recitation. Instead, mental recitation is done. When you do mental recitation, again you focus on those three things:
the deity’s body in front 
the moon disc at the heart of the deity 
the mantra garland on the moon disc
The whole idea of restraining the vitality exertion is that you hold the winds at the navel. As the winds are abiding in the body and not moving about, this will help the mind stay focussed. This kind of recitation through restraining the vitality exertion is more profound than the whispered recitation. 
Student 1: When one is bringing the upper and lower winds to the navel, one is actually focussing on these winds. Yet the mental recitation is accompanied by focussing on the three objects of the body of the deity, the moon disc and the mantra garland. Won’t there be some difficulty in doing this because one is focussing on the winds within one’s body and at the same time focussing on the front generation?
Khen Rinpoche: The winds are brought together at the navel but this is not where we place our mental attention. We place our mental attention on the three focal objects that I’ve mentioned earlier. 
Student 2: With regard to the mantra garland, do we have to visualize them in Tibetan syllables or can we visualize them in English alphabets?
Khen Rinpoche: The best way would be to visualize them in Sanskrit syllables because that was the original language used by the Buddha in pronouncing the mantras. If we can recite the mantras and visualize them in the original Sanskrit language, it makes a difference with regard to receiving the blessings of the mantras. That’s ideal. 
If this is not possible, then you can visualize the mantra in Tibetan or English.  The idea is to focus your attention on it. 
Having said that, whatever language in which you visualize the mantra, it should be able to convey what the original Sanskrit mantras were trying to convey—its symbolism, sound and so forth. The Tibetan language is able to do this. I doubt the English language is able to do so.
For example, there are so many elements to the Tibetan syllable Hum. You can explain Hum in term of its symbolism, meaning and its implication that can be correlated to the original Sanskrit. You can’t do that with English. In English, it’s just the alphabets, Hum. That’s the problem. 
The Tibetan syllable Om when deconstructed is made up of three parts. There’s an explanation of how these three parts correlate to the body, speech and mind. The Tibetan language has such characteristics, which I don’t think you’ll find in any other language. 
Student 3: This relates to the question from Student 1. When the winds are gathered at the place below the navel, what’s the technique that we need to use in order for us to be able to focus our mind on the external three aspects? Do we exert a slight tension at a point four fingers width below the navel to prevent the winds from dispersing? 
Khen Rinpoche: I’ve not really done this practice myself so I can’t say much. But I guess the point is that when you hold the winds at the navel, you have to draw the upper winds in and somehow they find their way down to the navel. In order to bring the lower winds up, you have to apply a pulling force or tension that’s able to draw the winds to the navel and hold them here. 
We’re not trained and have no experience or any idea of how this is done. It’s really difficult. Usually, we only talk about holding the breath and that’s held at the chest level. To talk of holding the breath in other parts of the body, especially the lower parts, sounds strange. 
When you do yoga, they do teach you to keep your breath at the chest, stomach, navel and lower parts. They also teach this in yoga. 
Student 3: I am asking Khen Rinpoche because in some tai chi and qigong methods, you don’t hold your breath. You put the tension (at the navel) and continue to breathe normally. If you were to hold your breath as suggested, there’s only a limited amount of mental recitation you can do because you will run out of breath. 
So we don’t actually hold the breath when we do that technique. Instead, we put the tension there. It actually eliminates a lot of discursive thinking and allows the mind to focus on the mental recitation of the mantra. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think so because our qigong master, Hup Cheng, said to hold the breath. When he taught qigong, he said that we’re to breathe, hold and release the breath. Like that.
Student 3: But there is also a technique where you can actually breathe, hold and you continue to breathe, and you actually hold the tension there. I am just wondering because I do part of it like that. So I’m wondering whether it’s the right thing to do when you talk about holding the breath there. Thank you. 
Khen Rinpoche: It’s clear in the texts. The instructions are that you have to hold the winds at the navel. You have to bring the upper winds down, the lower winds up, and hold them at the navel. That’s clear. 
What’s the term that’s used here? You’re supposed to engage in recitation, especially mental recitation, through restraining the vitality exertion. Vitality here means the winds and exertion here means the movement of the winds in and out of the sense doors. That’s vitality exertion. You have to restrain that. Restraining the vitality exertion means stopping the winds from moving in and out of the sense doors. So you have to hold the winds internally, in this case, at the navel. The instructions states that if you’re able to hold the winds in such a way, then the mind will stabilize and will not be running all over the place. You’ll also be able to hold the mind.
This is the practice of restraining the vitality exertion in lower tantra. 
The meaning of restraining the vitality exertion is very different in Highest Yoga Tantra. In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, restraining the vitality exertion means to stop the winds from coursing in the left and right channels. Most of the time, our winds never enter and abide in the central channel. Rather, they move about in the other channels, such as the left and right channels. So in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, restraining the vitality exertion means to stop the coursing or movement of the winds in the left and right channels and cause those winds to enter and then to abide in the central channel. If one’s able to do that, it’s said to bring about unbelievable stability of the mind. 
In the context of Action Tantra here, it’s clear in the instructions that you hold the winds at the navel and by restraining the vitality exertion in this way, you engage in mental recitation. When you’re no longer able to hold your breath, that’s when you exhale. You then switch to whispered repetition and so forth. 
Student 4:  What’s the reason for generating the self-generation via the six deities? 
Khen Rinpoche: Why six and not seven? 
Student 4: I can understand the need for the empty deity because a lot of things have to be generated from emptiness. But why after that are there the deities of sound, letter, form, seal and sign? 
Another question: Before a written language was created, how does anyone visualize the letter deity? 
Khen Rinpoche: Whether the letter has beginning or not? 
Student 4: If it’s in another world system, will the letter be in Sanskrit?
Kriya Tantra is very much about physical practices. Does that mean a person who is handicapped will have a problem completing them? For instance, if the hands were handicapped, how to do the mudras?
Khen Rinpoche: That’s why we talk about the eight freedoms and ten endowments. They characterize a perfect and ideal situation. But it’s never said that we need them all to engage in Dharma practice or tantric practice. 
If you were to have all these conditions, then you can do many things. But if the individual’s physically challenged or missing a body part, what to do? If you don’t have hands, nobody is going to blame you if you don’t do the hand gestures. What can be done then? You can still sit there, meditate and do the practices with your mind.
I remembered Rinpoche told the monks in Kopan, “When you recite the names of the 35 Buddhas, put your palms together.” Normally, nobody does that in the monastery. They don’t do that in the pujas either. In the monastery, sometimes, you’re not allowed to take your hand out of your robes. You’re supposed to keep them inside. So when they recite the names of the buddhas, normally, the monks in the monastery don’t put their palms together. 
Rinpoche said, “If you have hands and when you recite the names of the buddhas, you don’t put your two hands together, they are wasted. You are wasting your two hands. Your two hands are useless.” It’s very good advice. 
If you don’t have hands, then nothing can be done. If you have hands, whenever you hear the Buddha’s name, just put your palms together and think of the Buddha. That creates so much merit. It’s important to remember this. 
So physically, if you don’t have hands, you don’t have to do the hand mudras. But you can still meditate, can’t you? But if you can’t think at all, then nothing can be done. It’s like that. 
In the context of Action Tantra, we generate ourselves as the deity through the six deities. It’s just a technique of generating the deity slowly and mindfully. 
In Highest Yoga Tantra, when you arise as the deity, you don’t arise as the deity out of nowhere. There is also a process. In some of the practices of Highest Yoga Tantra, they talk about the five manifest enlightenments—the manifest enlightenment from the moon, the manifest enlightenment from the syllable, the manifest enlightenment from the hand implements and so forth.
There’s a process that’s laid out for the practitioner to be able self-generate well in a slow and steady fashion so that you can have a good practice. I don’t think it’s necessary all the time. It depends on the level of the practitioner. In the case of Action Tantra, if the practitioner has already reached a high level of the practice of yoga with signs and yoga without signs, I don’t think he would need to go through everything step-by-step. Such people have the realization and they’re able to generate themselves as the deity instantaneously. In an instant, they arise as the deity. Clear appearance’s there. Divine pride’s there. So for such individuals, there’s no need for them to go through every step. 
The path of Action Tantra can be explained in terms of the meditation on the deity’s body, speech and mind. Maybe I will do this in the future.
Now we’ve finished with the recitation observing the form of the letter at heart of the deity in front. In short, the three focal objects are: 
the deity in front
the moon disc at the heart of the deity 
the mantra garland that’s placed on the moon disc
By focussing on these three focal objects without distraction, one engages in whispered recitation and mental recitation through restraining the vitality exertion.
Recitation observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart
After engaging in the recitation observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front, you move on to the recitation observing the form of letters at your own heart. 
How do you engage in the recitation observing the form of letters at your own heart? According to one instruction, this is how you do it:
As you inhale, you visualize the moon disc at the heart of the deity in front together with the mantra garland on it coming in with your inhalation and settling at your heart.
With that moon disc and mantra garland abiding at your heart, you engage in the recitation. I think perhaps here, you can do both the whispered recitation and the mental recitation. 
When you exhale, the moon disc at your heart together with the mantra garland leaves your body and goes back to the heart of the deity in front. Then you observe that and engage in the recitation. 
You alternate the process. As you inhale, you bring that moon disc and the mantra garland back to your heart. 
So you engage in these meditations alternating between the front generation and the self-generation.
To keep it simple, if we look at the recitation observing the form of letters at your own heart on its own, you just think of the moon disc at your heart with a mantra garland on it. That’s the focal object. Then you engage in both whispered and mental recitation. 
While there is the instruction in one text to alternate the practice between the heart of the front generation deity and the heart of oneself as the deity, one may ask, “What’s the purpose of doing this?” I am not sure.
Student 1:  Can I confirm that in this instance, while inhaling and exhaling, the whispered and mental recitation are not done simultaneously, i.e., the whispered recitation is done during inhalation and when one restrains the life force exertion,  one does the mental recitation and when one is exhaling, one does the whispered repetition?  
Khen Rinpoche: Of course, these cannot be done simultaneously. 
Student 1:  There is the alternation of inhaling, holding the breath and focussing on the mantra garland on the moon disc at one’s own heart. After that, one exhales and focusses on the mantra garland on the moon disc of the front generation. So at the time of inhaling and exhaling, can we say that one is doing the whispered recitation? Whereas when one is focussing on the mantra garland and moon disc at one’s own heart and later at the heart of the front generation, can that be considered mental recitation?
Khen Rinpoche: You move the moon disc and mantra garland at the heart of the front generation deity to your own heart as you inhale. The inhalation is just moving them. After the moon disc has settled at your own heart, it doesn’t mean that you have to hold your breath. You breathe normally. It just happens that as you breathe in, (the moon disc and mantra garland of the front generation) come in with your breath. 
Once the moon disc has settled at your heart, you have the choice of doing either whispered or mental recitation. If you are doing whispered recitation, then you had better breathe! If you decide to do the mental recitation, then you have to restrain the vitality exertion.
Student 1: In the Nyung Na sadhana, there are only two occasions when one does the mantra recitation—after generating the self-generation and after generating the front generation. I don’t see a recitation that corresponds with meditating on the four branches without deterioration, observing the moon disc and mantra garland at the heart of oneself as the deity.
Khen Rinpoche: In the Nyung Na sadhana, after you have arisen as the deity through the six deities, you engage in mantra recitation. Definitely, the four branches are not complete here because the front generation has yet to be visualized. You establish the front generation only after the first mantra recitation. 
After the front generation is established, there is the mantra recitation again. At this point, since both the front and self-generations have been fully established, you can then engage in the four-branched recitation, which is a means to develop concentration.
In the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the deity in front, you have three focal objects: 
the body of the deity in front 
the moon disc at its heart 
the mantra garland on that moon disc
Without any distraction, you engage in recitation. 
When you engage in the recitation focussing on the form of letters of the mantra at your own heart, you have only two focal objects:
the moon disc at your heart 
the mantra garland on the moon disc
Your focus and practice become subtler. Instead of focussing on three objects, now you place your attention on just two objects—the moon disc and the mantra garland at your heart. 
In the beginning of the practice, you visualize everything without leaving anything out. But as you progress in your meditation, you zoom in on certain objects. So the practice is becoming progressively subtler. 
Recitation observing the sound of the mantra
Khen Rinpoche: This is not in the root text. It appears in your handout.  
In this recitation, you don’t focus on the deity’s body, the moon disc or the form of the letters of the mantra garland. Your focal object is the sound of the mantra. You then engage in whispered and mental recitation. This focal object is subtler and more profound than before. There’s this progression in the training of the mind and is a method for the practitioner to progress towards achieving calm abiding.
Student 5: The whispered recitation of the mantra is done first with the recitation observing the form of the letters, followed by the recitation observing the sound of the mantra. After we’ve mastered these two methods, we go back and do the mental recitations observing the form of the letters and observing the sound of the mantra. Is that correct? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think so. The sequence of the practice is outlined as follows:
First, you do the recitations focussing on the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front. You engage in whispered recitation followed by mental recitation. 
Then you move on to the recitation focussing on the form of the letters at one’s own heart and engage in whispered recitation and mental recitation.  
After that, you move on to the recitation focussing on the sound of the mantra. First, you engage in whispered recitation followed by mental recitation. 
Why is there this sequence? In the first practice, the objects of observation are considered coarse relative to what is going to come. In the recitation focussing on the forms of letter in one’s own heart, the objects of observation become subtler. When you come to the recitation focussing only on the sound of the mantra, the focal object becomes subtler still. 
Student 5:  Are the whispered recitation and the mental recitation done sequentially in one session or is it the case that we go through many sessions practising our whispered recitations? Only when those are stable and well done, then we move on to the mental recitation in other sessions. 
Khen Rinpoche: I will talk about that another time.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
  Source: FPMT Master’s Program, ILTK