Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L10FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.502400
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 10	 				                                               2 May 2017
Classifications. Hinayanist vs. proponent of Hinayana tenets. Review—Differentiating the Hinayana & the Mahayana. Why realizing emptiness is required even for achieving liberation alone. The Hearer’s Vehicle vs. the Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle. The Mahayana. The practice of method in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. The practice of deity yoga in the Resultant Vajrayana. 
CLASSIFICATIONS
As I mentioned before, those seeking liberation must engage in the study of the teachings of the Buddha.  With regard to the teachings of the Buddha, the Dharma, there are two aspects:
the scriptural Dharma—the three scriptural collections 
the realizational Dharma—the practice of the realizations of the three higher trainings that are the subject matter of the three scriptural collections 
Engaging in the realizational Dharma means entering one of the paths of the three vehicles:
the hearer’s path 
the solitary realizer’s path
the Mahayana path
When one is entering a path, it has to be one of these three.
If one were to talk about engaging with the Buddhadharma from the perspective of the Buddhist tenets, there’s the Dharma of the Great Exposition school (GES), the Sutra school (SS), the Mind Only school (MOS) and the Middle Way school (MWS).  The MWS is further divided into two:
the Autonomy Middle Way school (AMWS)
the Consequence Middle Way school (CMWS) 
I have been emphasizing recently that when you are listening to the teachings, you have to listen with single-pointed attention and try your best to grasp what is been said.  You have to stay alert.
Please try your best. If you don't try your best and you don’t pay attention, then it’s going to be difficult. You’re not going to get anything at all.  If you do pay attention, while it may not be possible for you to understand everything, at least, you’ll get the gist of what I am trying to tell you.  
It is important that you come to class with a heartfelt desire to learn. You need to have the attitude “I really want to learn. This is why I’m coming to class. I’m not just coming to class but I’m coming to class to learn.” 
You have to keep in mind that of the four Buddhist tenets, 
the GES and the SS are Hinayana tenets while  
the MOS and the MWS are Mahayana tenets.
That is, the four Buddhist tenets can be subsumed into:
the Hinayana tenets (the GES and SS)
the Mahayana tenets (the MOS and the MWS)
You must also know that there are three yanas or vehicles:
the Hearer’s Vehicle
the Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle
the Mahayana or the Great Vehicle
These three vehicles can be subsumed into:
the Hinayana Vehicles (the Hearer’s Vehicle and Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle)
the Mahayana (the Great Vehicle)
HINAYANIST VS. PROPONENT OF HINAYANA TENETS
Another thing you have to note is that a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana tenets are not necessarily the same thing. Therefore, when we are talking about a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana tenets, we are not talking about the same thing. 
When you hear a statement like this—“There is a difference between a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana tenets”—right away, you should wonder what that difference is. You shouldn’t just accept this statement. Immediately, your mind must raise the question, “Why is this so?” It’s a different matter if you know the reason. However, if the thought arises in you, “Why is there a difference?” then this is a sign that you are alert.  
Khen Rinpoche: If this question does not arise in you, then you are not alert.  How many of you are alert?
First, you must have this question in your mind. Then if I were to follow up with the explanation, you’ll get something out of it.  
When we talk about the Hinayana, it’s the same as talking about the Hinayana path. The Hinayana path is either the hearer’s path or the solitary realizer’s path.  
However, a person who enters a hearer’s path is not necessarily a proponent of Hinayana tenets. Likewise, the person who enters the solitary realizer’s path is also not necessarily a proponent of Hinayana tenets.
Why is this so?  This is because there can be proponents of the MWS—i.e., those who hold the MWS’s view of reality—who enter the hearer’s path. There can also be proponents of the MOS who enter the hearer’s path.  This can also apply to the solitary realizer’s path. 
Likewise, a proponent of Mahayana tenets and the person who enters the Mahayana path are not necessarily the same thing. It is possible for a bodhisattva to be a proponent of the GES.  It is also possible for a bodhisattva to be a proponent of the view of the SS.
For instance, a bodhisattva who is a follower of the GES:
from the perspective of tenets, he is a proponent of Hinayana tenets
from the perspective of the yana, he is a Mahayanist, i.e., a person who has entered the Mahayana path.  
Therefore, a proponent of Mahayana tenets is not necessarily a person who has entered the Mahayana path.
From this, you’ll know that there can be a difference between a proponent of Hinayana tenets and a Hinayanist, a person who enters the Hinayana path.  For example, there can be a proponent of the MWS who has entered the Hinayana path. 
A person who is on the Hinayana path of accumulation is a Hinayanist who has entered the Hinayana path
But from the perspective of tenets, he is a proponent of the MWS, a Mahayana tenet.
To summarize, when we talk about the yana (or vehicles), there are two yanas—the Hinayana and the Mahayana.  If we were to expand this further, there are three yanas:
there are two vehicles in the Hinayana:
the Hearer’s Vehicle 
the Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle
the Mahayana  
REVIEW—DIFFERENTIATING THE HINAYANA & THE MAHAYANA
How are the Hinayana and the Mahayana differentiated?  As I said in a previous lesson, the Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated on the basis of the view but on the basis of conduct.  But just being able to make this statement is not sufficient.  You have to know the reason why the Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated on the basis of the view.  
If you don’t know the answer, right away, this question must arise in your mind. You must be alert and want to know the reason why the Hinayana and Mahayana are not differentiated on the basis of the view?  
The Hinayana and the Mahayana are not differentiated by their view of reality because they have the same view.  The view that we’re talking about here is the wisdom realizing emptiness.  
Although that’s the answer, you should not stop there. Yes, in the Mahayana, we talk about the wisdom realizing emptiness, but why is the wisdom realizing emptiness needed in the Hinayana too?  You can find many citations in the sutras and the works of Nagarjuna and his spiritual sons that talk about the need to realize emptiness even when one is on the Hinayana path.
Not being differentiated on the basis of the view—why the wisdom realizing emptiness is required to achieve just liberation 
The answer is that in order to achieve liberation from cyclic existence, one needs to realize emptiness.  This has to be proven and established so this is still not the end.  If you don’t know the answer, at the very least, you should wonder, “Why does one need to realize emptiness to achieve just liberation?”
One needs the wisdom realizing emptiness to achieve liberation from cyclic existence and when one achieves this liberation, one is called a foe destroyer.  Why is one called the foe destroyer?  Because one has destroyed the enemy, the afflictions.  
In order to answer the question, before you can even talk about liberation from samsara, there is no choice. You really need to understand well what exactly samsara and liberation are. You cannot answer the question if you don’t know what these two are. 
When one has to circle in cyclic existence under the power of karma and afflictions, that is samsara.
When one does not have to circle in samsara over and over again due to karma and afflictions, that is liberation.  
You’ve been told that there’s something that causes us to accumulate karma. The teachings state that it is the afflictions that motivate the accumulation of karma. Once we’ve accumulated karma, then we circle in samsara. 
Now we’ve to know in detail what exactly the afflictions are.  There are the three mental poisons—anger, attachment and ignorance. It’s said that anger and attachment have their roots in ignorance. This means ignorance is the source or origin from which attachment and anger arise. From there, other afflictions arise. As such, the root of samsara is ignorance.
What exactly is ignorance? There are different views among the four Buddhist tenets as to what ignorance is.  
According to the highest school, the CMWS, the ignorance that is the root of the afflictions is the self-grasping ignorance or the grasping at true existence. This ignorance is the mind that believes that everything that exists exists from its own side. Hence, according to the CMWS, ignorance is not simply not knowing something but rather the ignorance that is the root of all the afflictions is posited to be self-grasping ignorance. It is essentially an erroneous conception. 
Only on the basis of identifying correctly what this self-grasping ignorance is will we be able to pinpoint exactly and correctly what the root of cyclic existence (samsara) is. When we can pinpoint correctly what the root of cyclic existence is, then we can talk about its antidote, the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
In order to be free from cyclic existence, we have to cut the root of cyclic existence. This means we have to overcome self-grasping ignorance. Without overcoming self-grasping ignorance, there is no way to cut the root of samsara. In order to overcome self-grasping ignorance, we must generate a wisdom whose mode of apprehension is completely opposite to the mode of apprehension of self-grasping ignorance. There is no other way to overcome ignorance.
If you know all these points after this long line of enquiry, the end result is that you’ll  really understand the reason why you need the wisdom realizing emptiness just to achieve liberation. In order to achieve liberation from cyclic existence, we have to free ourselves from the root of cyclic existence, ignorance. In order to overcome ignorance, we have to generate the wisdom realizing emptiness whose mode of apprehension is completely opposite to that of the mode of apprehension of ignorance. 
In conclusion, you must know that the Hinayana and the Mahayana are not differentiated in terms of the view and you must be clear as to the reason why this is so.   
Differentiated on the basis of conduct
How then are the Hinayana and the Mahayana differentiated?  The answer is that the Hinayana and the Mahayana are differentiated on the basis of conduct.
In the uncommon Hinayana scriptural collections, there is no presentation on generating bodhicitta, i.e., developing the mind generation, on the basis of which one goes on to practise the six paramitas  or perfections.  These are not taught in the uncommon Hinayana scriptural collections.
Since the method for generating the mind generation and the practice of the six paramitas are not taught in the uncommon Hinayana scriptural collections, as such, the intended trainees of the uncommon Hinayana scriptural collections will not have the opportunity to engage in these practices. The Hinayana and the Mahayana are thus differentiated on the basis of whether there are these teachings for cultivating mind generation and the practice of the paramitas. They are absent in the Hinayana but they exist in the Mahayana.  
The ‘great’ in the Mahayana, the Great Vehicle, means that it is supreme or the best.  This refers to the quality of mind of the person who enters the Mahayana path. That mind is very expansive and is likened to the sky and the inestimable mansion.
Those who have generated mind generation and train in the path tend to have very expansive and vast minds. Those who are still under the influence of self-cherishing and are not primarily concerned with working for the welfare of others follow a smaller path, i.e., a path that is not as vast. As such, that path is called the Hinayana, literally, the Lesser Vehicle. 
When the Hinayana is divided, there are the Hearer’s Vehicle and that Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle. On top of that, there is the Mahayana, the Great Vehicle.  Therefore there are three vehicles. Relative to one another:
The Hearer’s Vehicle is called the lower vehicle.
The Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle is called the middling vehicle.  
The Mahayana is the great vehicle. 
THE HEARER’S VEHICLE VS. THE SOLITARY REALIZER’S VEHICLE 
The way the Hearer’s Vehicle and Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle posit the path and the mode of progress on the Hinayana path are basically the same but there is still a point of difference. What is that difference? This is how it is normally explained in the teachings:
The solitary realizer has the determination to practise the collections over a hundred eons before he achieves the enlightenment of the solitary realizer.  It is for this reason that the Solitary Realizer’s Vehicle is called the middling vehicle in that the solitary realizer has the determination and courage to work on their collections for a long period time. 
The hearer, unlike the solitary realizer, doesn’t have this determination to cultivate the path and accumulate the collections for a hundred eons in order to achieve the fruit of his attainment. Rather, the hearer becomes a hearer arhat in three lifetimes. As such, the Hearer’s Vehicle is called the lower vehicle.
It is mentioned in the presentation of the tenets that there is a difference in the fruit of attainment of the hearers and solitary realizers in that one is lower and the other one is higher respectively but they both achieve liberation from samsara. This is what the texts say but we need to think about what this means and what the difference between their fruit of attainment is. 
The answer lies in: 
The difference in the time they spend on the path accumulating the collections 
The difference as to whether the collections they accumulate are greater or smaller.
Both of them are the exactly the same in that they are liberated from cyclic existence and they are both arhats. Both of them have vanquished the afflictive obscurations. That being the case, is there a difference in their level of attainment? This is something you have to think about. Since you have finished the tenet module already, you should take out your tenet texts and revisit that topic. 
THE MAHAYANA
The Mahayana is the yana that has the practices of cultivating the mind generation and the six perfections and it can be divided into two:
the Causal Paramitayana (or Causal Perfection Vehicle)
the Resultant Vajrayana (or Resultant Vajra Vehicle or Secret Mantra Vehicle)
How are these two vehicles differentiated? As before, the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajra Vehicle are not differentiated by the view. Again, their difference lies on the basis of the conduct.
You have to go beyond what I am about to say. Generally speaking, we can answer like this:
The Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajra Vehicle are not differentiated by the view because both are Mahayana vehicles. 
What both of them are looking for is omniscience, i.e., full enlightenment. 
In order to achieve full enlightenment, they need the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
As such, they are not differentiated by the view.
Therefore, the difference between the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajra Vehicle is made on the basis of the conduct. In this context, the conduct here is called the method. They have to be differentiated on the basis of the method.
You must get this very important point. We’re saying here that the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajra Vehicle are differentiated on the basis of the method, i.e., they are differentiated on the basis of whether there is the perfect method for actualizing the form body of a buddha. 
THE PRACTICE OF METHOD IN THE CAUSAL PERFECTION VEHICLE
In general, in the Mahayana sutra, the Causal Perfection Vehicle, we talk about the basis, i.e., the two truths, practising the path that is method and wisdom and through that actualizing the result of the two bodies. 
Method refers to the meditation on love, great compassion and especially the mind generation. In dependence on the practice of this factor of method, one actualizes the form body.
Wisdom in the Causal Perfection Vehicle refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness.
By practising the wisdom aspect of the path, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness acts as the direct substantial cause of the dharmakaya, the truth body.
Therefore, when we are talk about achieving enlightenment, we talk about accumulating the two collections in dependence upon which one achieves the two bodies. 
But it is only in the Resultant Vajrayana that you will find the detailed and complete explanation of how in dependence upon the two collections, one comes to actualize the two bodies that are their result. 
You will not find this complete and detailed explanation in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. In this vehicle, they only talk about achieving the form body in dependence on the collection of merit. If you were to look at their explanation as to how this is so, you’ll see that their explanation is inadequate. 
What constitutes this collection of merit and how does this collection of merit come about? They explain that the practice of method is primarily the meditation on love, great compassion and mind generation. This is the accumulation of the collection of merit. But to posit that this collection of merit as the substantial cause for the form body is extremely difficult. You’ll find this explanation inadequate. How can this collection of merit act as the cause of a continuum of a similar type that can proceed to enlightenment and become the form body? Therefore, the explanation offered by the Causal Perfection Vehicle is not adequate.
In the Causal Perfection Vehicle, when one achieves the three pure grounds—the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds—the bodhisattva is said to acquire a mental body. If you think about this, it is very difficult to assert that the mental body of that bodhisattva superior will transform into the form body of a buddha.
Why is it extremely difficult to posit that the mental body of the bodhisattva superior on the pure grounds can act as the substantial cause for the form body of a buddha? If you remember the Uttaratantra module on buddha nature, the mental body of a bodhisattva superior arises from the level of predispositions of ignorance and uncontaminated karma. How can something that arises from the level of the predispositions of ignorance act as a cause for a buddha’s form body?
The Causal Perfection Vehicle asserts that in dependence upon the collection of merit that comes from the practice of method, one can achieve the form body of a buddha. However, if you were to really analyse their explanation, you will find that it is totally inadequate and not ideal at all. 
This is why we have the Resultant Vajrayana. It is only in the Resultant Vajrayana that we will find a perfect, detailed and complete explanation as to how the form body is achieved. Therefore, these two yanas—the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajrayana—are differentiated by method.
THE PRACTICE OF DEITY YOGA IN THE RESULTANT VAJRAYANA
What is this special method that exists in the Resultant Vajrayana? Essentially, it is the meditation on deity yoga, a meditation on the aspect that is concordant with the result, the form body of a buddha. Such a meditation can be done while one is on the path. This is the distinctive feature of the Resultant Vajrayana and is the special uncommon cause for actualizing the form body. This is the method aspect. 
With respect to the wisdom aspect of the path, in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is asserted to be the substantial cause of the truth body of a buddha. From the perspective of tantra however, this wisdom directly realizing emptiness taught in the Mahayana sutra is considered to be a coarse wisdom realizing emptiness. As such, this coarse mind can abandon the afflictive obscurations but it can only abandon the coarse knowledge obscurations. It cannot abandon the subtle knowledge obscurations. 
The presentation of the mind that is able to abandon the subtle knowledge obscurations is found only in tantra. It is only in the Resultant Vajrayana—in particular, Highest Yoga Tantra—that there is an explanation of the extremely subtle mind and a presentation of the techniques to manifest this mind, transforming it into the entity of bliss. By using this blissful extremely subtle mind to ascertain emptiness, one progresses on the path towards achieving full enlightenment. It is only this extremely subtle mind in the entity of bliss directly realizing emptiness that can act as the antidote to the subtle knowledge obscurations. This extremely subtle mind directly realizing emptiness is the substantial cause of the dharmakaya, the truth body. Therefore, the Resultant Vajrayana, especially Highest Yoga Tantra, offers an explanation of actualizing the dharmakaya that is far more profound than the explanation offered by the Causal Perfection Vehicle.
In general, we talk about the buddha lineage that enables us to transform into a buddha body. You will find an explanation of the statement, “The nature of the mind is clear light.” When we say that the very entity of the mind is clear and knowing—that is, referring to its factors of clarity, luminosity and awareness—at the end of our investigation, what we have at its deepest, most profound level is not the gross mind but the extremely subtle mind. This explanation of the existence of this extremely subtle mind and the methods of utilizing it on the path can only be found in Highest Yoga Tantra.
SUMMARY
In short, the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajrayana are differentiated on the basis of method with the latter presenting its special method for actualizing the form body of a buddha. 
We use these terms, ‘Causal Perfection Vehicle’ and ‘Resultant Vajra Vehicle’ for a reason so it is good to know what they mean. 
Briefly, the Causal Perfection Vehicle can be explained to mean:
a vehicle that has the method for presenting the causes for actualizing the form body of a buddha.
These causes are the mind generation and the practice of the six paramitas.
The Resultant Vajrayana is so called because at the causal stage, there is the meditation on the path that is concordant with the aspect of the four complete purities of the result. 
Student 1: If the hearer takes three lifetimes to achieve their goal whereas the solitary realizer takes a hundred eons to do so, isn’t the hearer’s path the superior path? 
I understand that the Hinayana and the Mahayana are differentiated by their conduct and not their view. I thought that they are also differentiated by their goal. For the Hinayana, it is self-liberation. For the Mahayana, it is liberating everybody and bringing them to enlightenment. Isn’t that correct?
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s think about this. Is it absolutely necessary to accumulate the collections for a hundred eons before one becomes a solitary realizer arhat? And can one become a hearer arhat after three lifetimes? 
When you asked that question, I was also wondering about the same thing at that time. 
But I have nobody to ask. You all understand what he is asking? He is very good. He thinks and then he asks. So I have to think about how to answer that question.
Student 2:  Assuming there is a bodhisattva who enters the path and yet holds the view of a Hinayana tenet. This person will at least have a doubting consciousness tending towards the factual of the Prasangika view. If he has doubt tending towards the factual of the Prasangika view, he will have doubt towards the Hinayana tenet too.
Khen Rinpoche: He believes in the Hinayana tenet. He doesn’t believe the Mahayana tenet. He won’t have a doubting consciousness as he totally believes in the Hinayana tenet and he doesn’t believe the Mahayana tenet.
Student 2:  We said before that for the dull facultied bodhisattva, before he enters the path, at the very least, he will have a doubting consciousness tending towards the factual.
Khen Rinpoche: That depends on the object that you’re talking about.
Student 2:  So this person would have a doubting consciousness tending towards the factual with regard to the Prasangika view.
Khen Rinpoche: That is not necessarily the case. 
Student 2:  I am wondering how you can hold on to a Hinayana tenet yet still enter the Mahayana path. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why not? He may find Shakyamuni Buddha very inspiring so he aspires to be like him.
What is there to stop a proponent of Hinayana tenets from generating bodhicitta? There is nothing to stop him from generating bodhicitta. 
Can such a person meditate on the sevenfold cause and effect instructions? He can see all sentient beings as his mother, realize their kindness, develop the wish to repay their kindness and so forth. 
The proponent of the Hinayana tenets accepts the Buddha and talks about buddhahood too. There is nothing to stop this individual from generating bodhicitta.
Student 2:  So this person definitely thinks that enlightenment is possible because there is the example of the Buddha?
Khen Rinpoche: Of course.
Student 2: You can say that a dull facultied bodhisattva can hold such a (Hinayana) tenet. My understanding is that the minimum criteria for a dull facultied bodhisattva to enter the Mahayana path is to have a doubting consciousness …
Khen Rinpoche: (The minimum criteria is to have generated) bodhicitta.  He doesn’t need tenets.
Student 2:  I was reviewing the tenets with regard to the solitary realizer arhats. The only mention of the lifetimes taken appears in the GES. It was mentioned there that the hearer accumulates merit for a minimum of three lifetimes and up to 14 lifetimes on basically all the four learning paths. Whereas the solitary realizer accumulates a hundred eons of merit during the path of accumulation. Then in one sitting, he actualises the heat level of the path of preparation all the way up to the path of no more learning.  I don’t understand why this is so. 
Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure whether it is just the assertions of the GES. 
Student 2: When the hearer and solitary realiser attain the path of no more learning, they will remain in meditative equipoise? I am wondering what happens after that. A buddha emanates (bodies to work for sentient being) but the arhats just die. Their minds are in meditative equipoise but they never emanate anything or do anything.
Khen Rinpoche: There is the nirvana with remainder and nirvana without remainder. What are the meanings of these two according to the CMWS? It has nothing to do with the severing of the body. Rather, it pertains to whether one remains in meditative equipoise or not.  
Student 2:  Nirvana without remainder is in meditative equipoise. Nirvana with remainder has a body. What is that body?
Khen Rinpoche: Nirvana without remainder means being in meditative equipoise. When the arhat arises from meditative equipoise, he has the nirvana with remainder. This is the meaning according to the CMWS. The nirvana with remainder and nirvana without remainder from the CMWS’ point of view are posited on the basis of whether there is an appearance of true existence or not.  Basically, it is saying that definitely the arhats are not always in meditative equipoise. This is the implication.
(If you are still wondering what kind of body such arhats have), they don’t have the suffering aggregates like us. I guess you will have to say that they have the mental body.
Khen Rinpoche: There was a question by a student earlier on the divisions of the knowledge obscurations. There are different ways of positing that. 
According to the textbooks of Sera Je, the position is that on the eighth ground, the big knowledge obscuration is divided into two. Other colleges posit that this division occurs on the tenth ground.
Student 3: What exactly is the entity of the subtle knowledge obscuration? We were taught that there are two divisions of the knowledge obscuration—the seed and the manifest knowledge obscuration. Is it an object or consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche:  I will explain this in the coming class.  
Student 4:  We had an earlier discussion on whether there were different qualities of the buddhas because the causes are different and therefore the results have to be different. Now we learn about the different levels of merit accumulated by the hearer arhats and the solitary realizer arhats. These are my questions: 
1. Are the arhats equal when they attain arhatship? Is the hearer arhat inferior to the solitary realizer arhat? 
2.  My second question came from our homework assignment. We were told when they enter the Mahayana path, the arhats will still take three countless great eons to achieve full enlightenment. I have a problem with that because it then appears that all the practice they have done to achieve arhatship doesn’t seems to help them at all when they are on the Mahayana path. 
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is that if you have a problem with that, then don’t go through the Hinayana path! Go direct (into the Mahayana path).
Student 4:  I am wondering whether that has to do with the fact when they are practising on the Hinayana path, none of their practice is conjoined with bodhicitta. I don’t know whether there is something to do with that.
Does it also mean that although the Hinayana arhats have abandoned the afflictive obscuration, they still have the imprints of grasping of true existence in their mental continua?
Khen Rinpoche: Because the arhat has not abandoned the knowledge obscurations, therefore, they have the imprints of ignorance.
Student 4:  That means their journey is incomplete. 
Khen Rinpoche: Of course it is incomplete. This is why the buddhas come to them.
Student 4:  My biggest problem is trying to understand why the Hinayana arhat still needs three countless great eons to achieve enlightenment. They practise so long to achieve arhatship and when they enter the Mahayana path, none of that means anything. It is like starting from ground zero with no realizations at all!
Khen Rinpoche: Their goal is different. They worked for that goal and they achieved it. But when it comes to another goal, they have to work at it all over again.  
This is why my answer is don’t go through that route. If you go that way, then this is what you have do. There is no choice so don’t complain.
Student 4:  Can I put my question in another way then? If that is the case, when the Hinayana arhat enters the Mahayana path, are the length of time to be spent on each path the same or different? They have already realized emptiness. They just have to work on the knowledge obscurations. I am wondering whether instead of one countless great eon on the pure grounds, the Hinayana arhat may have to take two countless great eons to work on the knowledge obscurations.
Student 2:  In the Heart Sutra, we talked about the perfection of wisdom on the five paths. If this person is holding a Hinayana tenet, at the Mahayana great path of accumulation, what perfection of wisdom is this person accumulating? 
Khen Rinpoche: You remembered the achieving through armour? This is basically the courageous mind with the intention of wanting to practise all the six perfections within the practice of each specific perfection such as the perfection of generosity. 
In the achieving through armour, we are not saying that you need the wisdom realizing emptiness. Rather, you need to have the intention wanting to practise all the six perfections within the practice of the specific perfection. As long as you have the wish to train in those six perfections within these six perfections, that is enough. You do not need to have the wisdom realizing emptiness. So on the path of accumulation, achieving through armour is there.
Student 2:  So the perfection of wisdom is not necessarily wisdom.
Khen Rinpoche: We have already settled this. A bodhisattva doesn’t necessarily have to realize emptiness. There are bodhisattvas who have not realized emptiness, aren’t there? So there is no problem positing that there are bodhisattvas with Hinayana tenets. But if you were to look at this from the viewpoint of the Prasangikas, there is no way for such a person to get anywhere.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.