Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L23FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.981032
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 23	 				                                            22 June 2017
Meditation session with Khen Rinpoche. 
(Khen Rinpoche taught this class in English in the absence of the interpreter). 
Aryadeva said in his Four Hundred Stanzas, “When you understand dependent origination, ignorance does not arise in your mind. Therefore, put all your effort into understanding dependent origination.” 
Lama Tsongkhapa said, “When you follow the Buddha’s teachings, you are able to eliminate all problems. You are also able to eliminate the root of the problems. But if you were to follow (teachings) other than the Buddha’s teachings, then no matter how long you practise and whatever hardships you put up with, you are just calling the problems to come because you are only making your self-grasping stronger.” 
The point is if you follow teachings other than those of the Buddha, however hard or long you may practise, you’re only making your self-grasping stronger. Therefore, Lama Tsongkhapa said, even if you don’t want problems, you’re creating problems for yourself. But by following the Buddha’s teachings, you’ll be able to part with all the problems by cutting the root of the problems. Therefore, understanding dependent origination is extremely important. 
That’s why Lama Tsongkhapa composed this prayer (Dependent Arising: A Praise of the Buddha) because he saw how extremely important the Buddha is. That’s the kind of teachings he gives, especially those teachings on dependent origination. Lama Tsongkhapa has so much devotion towards the Buddha. He sees only the Buddha’s teachings being able to cut the root of samsara. No other teachings can do that. So he developed great faith in the Buddha.
When you meditate on tantra, from the very beginning, it’s extremely important to understand what emptiness is. 
We talked about the self-generation before. In order to do the practice of the self-generation, you must have a good understanding of emptiness.
I won’t talk so much. We’re supposed to do meditation today. We’ll meditate for one hour. We’ll stop at 9 o’clock.  Make your mind a little bit alert. We try together, OK? So bring your energy back here.
GUIDED MEDITATION
It’s good to start with the nine-round breathing meditation. 
Probably you all know the correct seven-point meditation posture of Vairochana. Try to sit comfortably with your back straight. I suggest you spend a minute to scan your body to check if you are sitting in the seven-point Vairochana posture. Sometimes you’re very tense. Your mind is very tight.  Wherever you feel is very tight, try to relax. 
(Body scan). 
(Khen Rinpoche demonstrates a technique for doing the nine-round breathing meditation according to the Six Naropa tradition). 
Focus your mind on the breath. Don’t think about anything else. If you’ve any problems, think all the problems come out from the nostrils—attachment problem comes out, anger problem comes out, your ignorance comes out … 
When you breathe in, think blessings or white light coming in. When you breathe out, whatever difficulties, problems, sicknesses you may have come out from the nostril.   
The technique is the same—to bring the mind to the present. Otherwise, we have so many thoughts. So this is to reduce the thoughts and bring your mind to the present. It’s very good to do that. Whatever problems you may have, just let go. When you really believe that, then your mind’s totally relaxed. Then there’s nothing there. If you just hold on to it, there’s the problem. If you carry a heavy load, but if you let it go, putting down the 100 kilos on your back, then you’re relaxed. 
It’s the same thing. The emotions. Whatever you’re feeling in the heart, difficulties, thinking so much about the past, thinking so much about the future. Actually, there’s nothing there. The present moment is perfect! But so much worry about the past, the future. The mind becomes so tight and heavy. Sometimes, you cannot even breathe. The problem becomes so huge.  
(Nine-round breathing meditation). 
If you have some pleasant feeling, good feeling now, focus on that. 
The empty deity
After that, we meditate on the empty deity. That means meditating on emptiness. Meditate on the emptiness of oneself and the emptiness of the deity. Both are equal in emptiness. 
Here, it’s very good to recall the Heart Sutra—“Form is empty. Emptiness is form.” You change “form” to the ‘I’, meaning yourself. “I, myself, am empty. Emptiness is myself.” Try to get that understanding. 
Understand the ‘I’ does not exist from its own side. It exists only as merely labelled on its (basis of) designation. 
Imagine this mind understanding the merely labelled ‘I’ becoming a moon disc. 
The sound deity
In the space above the moon disc suddenly appears the sound of the mantra, Om Mani Padme Hum. In reality, it’s the Compassionate Buddha, Chenrezig, in the aspect of sound above the moon disc. 
The letter deity
The sound of the mantra slowly takes the form of the letters of the mantra. They slowly come down and settle on the moon disc. You visualize the mantra garland on the moon disc, Om Mani Padme Hum. Not just one but four, five, six (mantra garlands covering the surface of the moon disc). Visualize that clearly.  
In the middle of the moon disc, visualize the seed syllable, Hrih.  
From the mantra garlands and the Hrih on the moon disc, infinite light rays are emitted. At the tip of each ray of light, you can imagine beautiful offering goddesses holding different types of offering, offering them to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
 Then these light rays absorb back into the mantra garlands. 
Again from these mantra garlands, light rays emanate. At the tip of each light ray is Chenrezig, the Compassionate Buddha. From each Chenrezig at the tip of the light ray, nectar flows into all the six realms’ sentient beings such as the hungry ghosts, animals, all the hell beings, all human beings, all suras and asuras. They purify their suffering—physical and mental. All their negativities and obscurations are purified.  You can visualize these six realms’ sentient beings being free of suffering. You can also visualize all these six realms’ sentient beings become enlightened, become like Compassionate Buddha. 
Then the light rays absorb back into the mantra garlands at your heart. These mantra garlands and moon disc become even more brilliant and radiant than before. 
The form deity
Slowly, these mantra garlands turn into light. Not a clear shape but some kind of light. This light slowly becomes Compassionate Buddha. To make it easy, you can visualize two-armed one-face Compassionate Buddha, left hand holding the lotus, right hand in mudra of giving sublime realizations. Maybe that’s easier to meditate on. 
Slowly, the light shape there becomes Compassionate Buddha. Try to see that clearly.
That’s the basis of designation of Chenrezig. That’s the basis of yourself as Chenrezig. On that, you label Chenrezig, “That’s me!” That’s the meditation on the form deity. 
The seal deity.
Make the mudra of the lotus lineage. Put your palms together. First, touch your heart. Then touch your forehead, the throat, the right shoulder and the left shoulder. Touching the five points.
The mind basis
Visualize at your heart the moon disc that’s your own mind understanding emptiness in the aspect of the moon disc. That’s the mind basis. 
The sound basis
On top of the moon disc is the mantra garland. That’s the sound basis. 
In the middle of the moon disc, you visualize the syllable letter Hrih.   
The self basis
Meditate on this for a while. Seeing yourself clearly as the Compassionate Buddha, the moon disc and the mantra garland. Try to put your mind there. That’s the self basis. 
The other basis
After that, visualize the front generation. From the syllable letter Hrih at your heart suddenly the syllable letter, Bhrum, comes out. Slowly this becomes multi-coloured light in four directions. Slowly it becomes the beautiful mandala, the palace of Compassionate Buddha. 
In the middle of the mandala, visualize the Compassionate Buddha. It’s the same thing. At the heart, visualize the moon disc. On the moon disc, visualize the mantra garland. 
So far we have completed the meditation on the four branches: 
The self basis is generating yourself as the deity.
The other basis is visualizing the front generation.
Visualizing the moon disc in the heart is the mind basis.
Visualizing the mantra on the moon disc is the sound basis.
Within these four branches, we do the recitation of the mantra. 
Whispered recitation
First, as we visualize the front generation, at its heart is the moon disc. On top of the moon disc is the mantra garland. So these are the objects of meditation:
Inside the mandala, there’s the deity. 
At his heart, the moon disc. 
On the moon disc is the mantra garland.
These are the three things. Try to meditate and focus your mind on these three things, as clearly as possible. With your mind focussed on these three things, then you recite the mantra, Om Mani Padme Hum, without distraction. This is the whispered recitation.
Om Mani Padme Hum, Om Mani Padme Hum, Om Mani Padme Hum … You can recite like that. 
This is the practice you can do—focus your mind on the three objects, then you recite the mantra without letting your mind wander. For ten minutes, twenty minutes, half an hour.  Like that. This is very, very powerful. This is an extremely powerful way of reciting the mantra. Your mind is very focussed. 
Then when you are very good at this meditation, the text mentions the mental recitation. 
Mental recitation
That’s more difficult but just to get an idea. 
Hold the breath at the navel. Breathe in.
Bring upper wind down to the navel.
Bring wind below up (to the navel).
Try to hold the breath at the navel.
Normally we hold our breath at the (level of) the heart. We don’t have this practice of keeping the wind at the navel. If we have a good practice of keeping the wind at the navel, we can keep the wind there (for a) longer (period of time). But for us, keeping the breath inside is very short. After a while, we have to breathe. It’s a bit challenging. 
Objects are the same—the front deity, moon disc, mantra garland. Then try to breathe in and keep the wind at the navel. Your mind is there, focussing on the objects. 
When you can no longer hold the breath, as your breath goes out, then you can do the whispered recitation— Om Mani Padme Hum, Om Mani Padme Hum, Om Mani Padme Hum … Then again breathe in and hold the breath at the navel and concentrate on the objects. 
That will be at a deeper level but it’s also said when you have calm abiding, you do not really feel the breath. The feeling of the breath at the tummy also stops. That happens. So this is just the practice for that. When you hold the breath, you have more concentration. You are less distracted. I think that’s the idea. 
I think we took too long. I thought to finish everything today. 
So next Tuesday, we will continue with our meditation practice. We do quickly one more round. Then we complete the last part. 
This is good. When you learn so many things. You write so many things. But when we do (the meditation), it stays better in your mind. 
Q&A

Student 1: During the mental repetition, at that time when we are holding our breath and our mind is focussing on the deity of the other basis, in our mind, do we have to recite Om Mani Padme Hum or should we just keep quiet and focus on the image?
Khen Rinpoche: You should keep quiet. Mentally, you are thinking Om Mani Padme Hum. There’s no sound coming from the mouth. 
Student 1: I must still think of the mantra Om Mani Padme Hum and focus on the image? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. There are three objects. I’ve already talked so much about this so now I thought it’s maybe better to make it simple and meditate. So that’s good.
Student 2: Do we visualize the self-generation and the front-generation in the form of one face and two arms? Seated or standing?
Khen Rinpoche: I mean just keep it simple. Of course, you can visualize thousand-armed Chenrezig too. Should be seated. If you’re standing, your legs will hurt from standing for a long time so it’s better to be seated! 
Student 3: In the method you taught us for the nine-round breathing meditation, do we hold our hands in that manner throughout the meditation or should we follow the Vairochana hand position? 
Khen Rinpoche: The hands don’t matter. You can hold them in whatever way you feel comfortable. 
Student 3: Is there a significance to holding the hands in this way? Because there were moments when I could feel some kind of strong energy going through the fingers by just holding the hands like that. 
Khen Rinpoche: That’s the reason.  Really going inside. I’m not sure but in one of the texts I saw, there are different nerve systems related to your heart. Normally when we chant mantras, we put our mala on our ring finger. It is mentioned that ideally we should do that. (Khen Rinpoche demonstrates). But it’s quite difficult as we’re not used to it. 
Also, when you make the inner offering, you also use the ring finger. 
One of the texts I saw said to use the (ring finger on the left hand) to recite the mantra but we are not used to it. It’s quite challenging. The nerves of bodhicitta are said to be there. Something like that. That’s what I heard. I don’t know. So you decide. Maybe it makes it easier for you to develop compassion. 
There must be some reason but I’ve not seen that. 
This breathing meditation is good. You can do it every morning especially when you’re stressed. It’s very helpful especially when you are very stressed.
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Aki Yeo and Cecilia Tsong; edited by Cecilia Tsong.