Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L06FINAL_.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:03.643105
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 6	 				                                             6 April 2017
Motivation & dedication. Mahayana path of accumulation. Mahayana path of preparation. Signs of irreversibility. Mahayana path of seeing. Mahayana path of meditation. 
MOTIVATION & DEDICATION
As I mentioned before, whenever we study or listen to the Dharma or engage in any Dharma practice, it is important to do so with the correct motivation. If these activities are done with the correct motivation, then they become meaningful and you will achieve the goal of those practices. 
When we use the word, “motivation,” it refers to what we are looking for, what we desire. If we are seeking to achieve a goal and we engage in activities that will help us to achieve that goal, definitely, we will achieve it because we have that desire. 
At the end of the activity, it is important to dedicate the roots of virtue that were accumulated from that activity. Dedicating the roots of virtue makes a huge difference because the roots of virtue acquired will not go to waste. So it is important not to forget to dedicate the merit. 
Therefore, when we engage in virtuous activities such as learning the Dharma and so forth, it is important to have the right motivation in the beginning and to dedicate the merit at the end. Generating a good motivation and dedicating the merit do not refer to just having some thoughts in our head or merely verbalizing some words with our mouth. Rather, they should be heartfelt. When we say, “motivation,” it should come from our heart and be mixed with our mind. Likewise, when we say, “dedicate the merit towards a particular goal,” it should not be mere words from our lips but rather, our mind is mixed with the dedication because we want specific results from that dedication. So it is important to keep this in mind all the time—the motivation at the beginning and the dedication of merit at the end. Whenever we set the correct motivation or dedicate the merit, they have to be heartfelt and they have to merge with our mind. 
MAHAYANA PATH OF ACCUMULATION 
We were discussing the entry into the path. When the thought seeking liberation—be it for oneself or others—arises day and night, that is the measure of having generated renunciation. When this thought seeking liberation is heartfelt and arises effortlessly day and night, this is when the path has arisen in one’s mind. One is said to have entered the path. 
When one enters the path, one enters the path of accumulation. This path bears this name because one sees the purpose of practising and one does not find it difficult to accumulate merit. The real accumulation of merit starts after one enters the path of accumulation. This means that the real accumulation of merit starts with the arising of uncontrived renunciation—when the thought seeking to achieve liberation arises day and night, continuously and effortlessly. Such a person will have no difficulty in accumulating merit. 
As for the paths, there are the five Hinayana paths and the five Mahayana paths. Whether it is the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path, they are:
the path of accumulation 
the path of preparation 
the path of seeing 
the path of meditation  
the path of no more learning 
The path of accumulation is divided into three:
the small path of accumulation
the middling path of accumulation
the great path of accumulation
In the context of the Mahayana path of accumulation, when a bodhisattva reaches the middling path of accumulation, his mind generation will never degenerate. As shown in the chart given to you earlier, once the middling Mahayana path of accumulation is attained, it is not possible for the bodhisattva to fall to the Hinayana. Why? Because his mind generation will never degenerate whereas on the small Mahayana path of accumulation, it is still possible for some individuals to lose their mind generation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Look at the chart. There are different ways of learning. It is possible that some of you do not need any chart to learn. Some people need the chart to learn. That’s why I gave you the chart. But that’s not necessary as you can listen. You think you know then you don’t need the chart. Those who need it, you must look at the chart so that is easier for you.
The question now is this: Can we say that from the moment the great Mahayana path of accumulation is attained, one necessarily has realized emptiness?
If you think about this, it seems that even on the middling Mahayana path of accumulation, one would have realized emptiness already, the reason being that when one achieves the great Mahayana path of accumulation, one has the calm abiding focussing on emptiness. For that to happen, one must have realized emptiness on the great Mahayana path of accumulation. If that is the case, would it be alright to say that probably, one would have realized emptiness on the middling Mahayana path of accumulation? Do you see the reason for saying that probably emptiness is realized on the middling path of accumulation?
The mind generation of the bodhisattva on the great path of accumulation is called the mind generation like the waxing moon. The “waxing moon” refers to the moon in its early waxing phase, probably on the second or third day of the month in the lunar calendar. As the moon gradually becomes fuller and fuller, likewise, his mind generation grows and grows.  
On the great path of accumulation, the bodhisattva is said to have attained a very special concentration called the concentration of the stream of doctrine. It is said that because of having this concentration, the bodhisattva remembers all the words and meanings of the lungs (oral transmissions) and teachings that he has received over a long period of time, even eons before he attained this concentration. 
In the last module on the seventy topics, in terms of the 37 harmonies of enlightenment, the four legs of magical emanation (or the four legs of magical manifestation) are achieved on the great path of accumulation. It is said that with the meditation on these four legs of magical emanation, the bodhisattva can see numberless buddhas and pure lands and go to those buddhas fields and pure lands to receive teachings. They can also make offerings to these numberless buddhas. 
Because of all these concentrations that the bodhisattva has attained on this level, his accumulation of merit becomes much more exalted, i.e., his ability to accumulate merit is greatly enhanced. That makes a great difference to his mind generation. Enhanced by this merit, his mind generation likewise increases. As such, his mind generation is called the mind generation like the waxing moon.
At this level, with his calm abiding focussing on emptiness, the bodhisattva seeks to achieve special concentration (or meditative stabilization) that is a union of calm abiding and special insight. He trains to achieve the special insight focussing on emptiness. When that special insight focussing on emptiness is achieved for the first time, that marks his attainment of the path of preparation. The bodhisattva enters the heat level of the path of preparation.  
MAHAYANA PATH OF PREPARATION 
The path of preparation is divided into four levels:
heat 
peak 
forbearance 
supreme mundane qualities (SMQ)
On the four levels of the path of preparation, although the bodhisattva has realized emptiness, he has yet to realize it directly. The bodhisattva still realizes emptiness via a meaning generality. 
Why are there four levels on the path of preparation? If he has realized emptiness already, what is the difference in his realization of emptiness? This has to do with the extent to which dualistic appearance has subsided while he is in meditative equipoise. The four levels of the path of preparation are commensurate with the level of subsidence of dualistic appearance during meditative equipoise. As one progress along the path, the presence of dualistic appearance becomes subtler and subtler. 

On the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation, while the bodhisattva is in meditative equipoise, the bodhisattva experiences the presence of dualistic appearance and is also aware of that dualistic appearance. 
On the forbearance level of the path of preparation, while there is still dualistic appearance, it has become subtler. It appears as if dualistic appearance has completely disappeared but this is not the case. However, the bodhisattva is not aware of this. 
After the four legs of magical emanation of the 37 harmonies with enlightenment come the five powers and the five strengths (or forces). 
The five powers are posited in relation to the first and second levels of the path of preparation.
The five strengths are posited in relation to the third and fourth levels of the path of preparation. 
We have discussed the difference between them in the last module.
The ability of the bodhisattva to reduce the manifest apprehension of true existence starts only after achieving the union of calm abiding and special insight. As the bodhisattva progresses on the path of preparation, his ability to counteract the manifest apprehension of true existence grows. 
We can see from this that the process of realizing emptiness is not easy. 
In order to realize emptiness, we have to accumulate a vast collection of merit. Only then can we realize emptiness. 
Also, we need to realize emptiness with a mind that has achieved calm abiding. However, having the calm abiding focussing on emptiness is not enough. 
We need to achieve the special insight focussing on emptiness. 
But even achieving the special insight focussing on emptiness—we enter the path of preparation with the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness—we are still unable to do any real damage to the seeds of our apprehension of true existence. 
However, the bodhisattva gains the ability to subdue the manifest apprehension of true existence on the path of preparation. 
From this, we can see that this is a multi-level process.
To overcome the manifest apprehension of true existence, we need the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness. Only then can we start to damage the manifest apprehension of true existence through the subsidence of dualistic appearance as one progresses along the path. But in order to directly destroy ignorance, one needs the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
SIGNS OF IRREVERSIBILITY
In the last lesson, there was a question about whether the bodhisattva of different faculties become equal after realizing emptiness directly. The answer is, “No.” The bodhisattvas are classified into those with sharp faculties, middling faculties and dull faculties. But even after realizing emptiness directly, the bodhisattvas do not become equals. 
There are signs of irreversibility experienced by the bodhisattva that indicate he is definitely going to achieve enlightenment. There is no turning back. 
When do they occur? 
The bodhisattvas of different faculties receive the signs of irreversibility at different points of the path. 
The sharp facultied bodhisattvas receive the signs of irreversibility on the heat level of the path of preparation.
The middling facultied bodhisattvas receive the signs of irreversibility on the path of seeing.  
The dull facultied bodhisattvas receive the signs of irreversibility on the eighth ground. 
Just because their enlightenment is irreversible does not necessarily mean that they have achieved the signs of irreversibility. From the middling path of accumulation, one can say that all bodhisattvas will irreversibly achieve enlightenment. Since their bodhicitta will never ever degenerate from that point onwards, they will never fall back. It is only a matter of time that they will achieve enlightenment. In that sense, it is irreversible. 
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand?  I think I have not talked about this before. It is the first time I’m talking about this subject.   
With regard to the signs of irreversibility, you could say that there are:
external signs—signs that are shown in conduct
internal signs—signs that appear in one’s mind
Internal signs
Let’s look at the internal signs. When do the bodhisattvas achieve the internal signs? It is when the bodhisattva will never develop the thought to achieve liberation for his own purpose alone. When there is no possibility of that thought arising, then it is said that he has achieved the internal sign. The bodhisattva has abandoned the manifest thought, “Maybe I will achieve liberation for myself.” It is impossible for it to ever arise again.  
We should use the term, “abandon.” Otherwise, we could also say that it is impossible for the bodhisattva on the middling path of accumulation to entertain thoughts of self-liberation alone. When we talk about the internal signs of irreversibility, we say that the bodhisattva has abandoned any opportunity for the manifest thought of achieving liberation for himself to arise. In this context, “abandon” means the bodhisattva has achieved the confidence that this is so.
Although from the middling path of accumulation onwards, the bodhisattva would never have the thought only to achieve self-liberation, it doesn’t mean that prior to achieving the signs of irreversibility he is confident about this.
You will recall that on the forbearance level of the path of preparation, the bodhisattva gains the confidence and certainty that he would never fall into the lower realms. This is not to say that on the earlier levels of the path of preparation he will fall into lower realms. Probably, we can say that it is impossible for the bodhisattva to fall into the lower realms once he has achieved the path of preparation. Nevertheless, it is only on the forbearance level of the path of preparation that he gains the 100% confidence that this is the case. 
Likewise, with regard to gaining the complete confidence that one will never generate the manifest thought to only seek one’s own liberation: 
for the sharp facultied bodhisattva, this happens on the heat level of the path of preparation, 
for the middling facultied bodhisattva, this happens on the path of seeing and 
for the dull facultied bodhisattva, this happens on the eighth ground. 
External signs
What does the external signs of irreversibility or the signs in conduct mean? It means that the bodhisattva needs to possess a stable exalted realization of method and wisdom. 
How do you posit having achieved this external sign? The bodhisattva knows that he will definitely achieve enlightenment and he knows he possesses this special realization of method and wisdom. Not only is he aware of this himself but others who associate with him over a period of time can see this. He displays his realization so that others are able to recognize that this bodhisattvas has attained the external signs of irreversibility. 
When are these signs achieved? It is not in the first moment of the heat level of the path of preparation but in the second moment. During the first moment, he is still in meditative equipoise. These signs are achieved after meditative equipoise. 
These bodhisattvas’ way of teaching emptiness is very different from others. They are able to teach emptiness using numberless reasons. They also show signs of extraordinarily powerful compassion. When they think of the sufferings of others, they will shed tears, their hair will stand on ends and so forth. 
So, to recap: 
The sharp facultied bodhisattvas achieve the signs on the heat level of the path of preparation. The bodhisattva gains the confidence that she has destroyed all opportunities for the manifest thought seeking liberation for herself to arise. She also possesses a very stable exalted realization of method and wisdom. 
The middling facultied bodhisattvas achieve the signs on the superior path, the path of seeing. 
The dull facultied bodhisattvas achieve the signs on the eighth ground.
Now, the question is this: Are the paths of the dull facultied, middling facultied and sharp facultied bodhisattvas different or are they the same?
Since there is a difference in the cause, therefore, there has to be a difference in the result. As such, are there dull facultied, middling facultied and sharp facultied buddhas?
This is how it sounds when we debate. We show the consequence: It follows that there are buddhas of dull, middling and sharp faculties because at the time of the path, the causes are different. 
Isn’t it the case that there will be a difference in terms of the result if at the time of the cause they are different? 
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it the case that since the cause is different, the result has to be different? 
Isn’t the difference in the results due to the difference in the causes? 
If it is not the cause then what is it that makes the result different?
The enlightenment that is achieved by the dull facultied bodhisattva is different because of who he is. It has to be different from the enlightenment achieved by the middling facultied bodhisattva. Then what about the sharp facultied bodhisattva?
Student 1: The reason that causes the bodhisattva to have dull faculties or sharp faculties are the factors that obscure buddha nature
Khen Rinpoche: My question is: 
Shouldn’t there be a difference in the result since there is a difference in the cause?
Student 1: The difference in the cause is the difference in terms of the obscurations that obscure the buddha nature. So the cause for us to …
Khen Rinpoche: You just answer that part. You got my question? The result is different because the cause is different. Is that logical or not? 
Student 1: Yes, it is logical.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, there are three different types of buddhas because there are three different types of causes. 
Student 1: The cause of buddhahood is not due to the level of the faculties of the bodhisattvas. It is due to buddha nature.
Khen Rinpoche: You are not following the logic. The result is different because the cause is different. The cause is different, the result has to be different. 
Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, I’m saying that there also have to be three levels of buddhas because there are three levels of causes. 
Student 1: OK.
Khen Rinpoche: So now what are you going to say? 
Student 1: I don’t know. I need help.
Khen Rinpoche: Cecilia (name of student who raised question in Lesson 5) asked whether the bodhisattvas of different faculties are equal after reaching the path of seeing. The answer is that they are not equal. So now we go one step further. After buddhahood is achieved, do they become equal then? Maybe not. 
Student 2: The cause for attaining buddhahood is the same in the sense that it is based on whether one has abandoned the obstructions to omniscience. So there is no difference. Even in terms of the paths—the path of accumulation, the path of preparation, the path of seeing, the path of meditation and the path of no more learning—although the bodhisattvas traverse the same paths, they have different attainments but those are not to be considered as different causes for buddhahood. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because the abandonments are the same, therefore, there is no difference?
Student 2: The cause is whether or not the bodhisattva has abandoned the obstructions to liberation and the obstructions to omniscience. 
Khen Rinpoche: So your answer is that the abandonments are the same, therefore, there is no difference (in the result). Is that your final answer?
Student 2: At the time of the cause, whatever abandonments they have are the same. Therefore, the result of attaining buddhahood will remain the same. I don’t see any different causes, whether or not one is a sharp facultied bodhisattva or dull facultied bodhisattva. 
Khen Rinpoche: Just answer what I’m asking: Do the buddhas have three levels of faculties or not? 
Student 3: No. There are no buddhas of three different faculties. The bodhisattvas when they become buddhas are equal. You can’t say, “Manjushri is inferior to Chenrezig.”
Khen Rinpoche: Of course, Manjushri has more wisdom. 
Student 3: But they are all bddhas. 
Khen Rinpoche: Doesn’t Manjushri have more wisdom than Tara? 
Student 3: I disagree with that. I think the buddhas are all equal in their qualities and their power. If that is the case, if I work backwards, the final result is the same. Even though the causes are different, the final result is the same. Why is that so? This is an exception to the rule where you say that different causes will yield different results. In the case of buddhahood, even though the faculties of the bodhisattvas are different, the final result when they attain buddhahood on the path of no more learning, the power of that buddha is equal. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because?
Student 3: It is an exception to the rule. It is like when we were learning about the workings of karma. It is said that karma is definite and you will definitely experience the result of the karma that you have created. But then later on, you learn about the possibility of purification. If you practise purification well, then you will not experience the result of the negative karma that you have created. So there is an exception to the rule. 
I’m thinking that in this particular discussion, it is the same thing. Although there are different causes, the ultimate result will be the same, whether you start off as a dull facultied, middling facultied or sharp facultied bodhisattva. Because buddhahood is the dharmakaya. You can’t say, “There is low quality, medium quality and high quality dharmakaya.” Dharmakaya is dharmakaya.
Khen Rinpoche: My argument is that because the cause is different, there should be a different result.
Student 3: Yes, generally speaking this is so. But in this discussion, my position is that this is an exception to the rule.
Khen Rinpoche: Why is there an exception?
Student 3: Because I say so! I’m just relating it to the other …
Khen Rinpoche: Why is there an exception?
Student 3: I believe all the buddhas are equal in power. 
Khen Rinpoche: If they are all equal in power, then why is there Manjushri, Tara and so forth?
Student 3: Because disciples have different inclinations and dispositions. Different disciples have different connections to different buddhas. Some people have a connection with Chenrezig or Tara. This is why we have different yidams as well. Even as a buddha, they manifest in these different forms to help us sentient beings. Some of us look at Chenrezig and feel an immediate connection. But when we look at Manjushri, nothing happens. 
So if we posit that they always manifest in a way that will benefit a specific disciple, therefore, you have buddhas manifesting in different aspects. That’s what I think. 
I have a question. What is a middling facultied bodhisattva? 
Khen Rinpoche: Before you only heard there were two. Now I give you middling. You have three. 
Student 3: I gather the middling facultied bodhisattva is the one who is half-half.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say that. Middling is easy to understand.
It is clear in the text that even the dull facultied bodhisattvas will achieve the signs of irreversibility on the eighth ground. Henceforth, are they all the same? 
Khen Rinpoche: Do they become equal on the eighth ground, ninth ground and tenth grounds? Why are they equal?
(Students’ response are inaudible). 
His goal is to catch up and gain enlightenment but he still has not caught up yet. He still has some way to go. So how can he be equal with the others after the eighth ground? I don’t know. I’m not sure.
Before enlightenment on the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds, I think we have to posit the different facultied bodhisattvas—dull facultied, middling facultied and sharp facultied. But once they are enlightened, then they are the same. 
We have to say that when they are enlightened, they are all the same and equal because we cannot say that there is a difference among the buddhas. Yet, at the time of the path, if you say there is a difference in the cause, you have to also say that there is a difference in the result.
MAHAYANA PATH OF SEEING
So on the path of preparation, the bodhisattva realizes emptiness via a meaning generality. Come the time when the bodhisattva directly realizes emptiness, he attains the path of seeing. The path of seeing is so called because the bodhisattva is directly seeing the truth for the first time. 
From the path of preparation, one enters the path of seeing when the bodhisattva directly sees the truth. Only from this point on does the bodhisattva begin to truly damage ignorance, the apprehension of true existence. The process of overcoming ignorance only starts from here. 
There are two divisions for the apprehension of true existence:
the artificial conception of the apprehension of true existence 
the innate conception of true existence 
Of the two, the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing acts as the direct antidote to the artificial conception of true existence. When the artificial conception of true existence is abandoned, that is when the bodhisattva achieves the path of release of the path of seeing. 
When the bodhisattva enters the path of seeing, he enters the path of seeing in meditative equipoise.
In that state of meditative equipoise, the mind that directly realizes emptiness is called the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing. That uninterrupted path of seeing is the direct antidote to the artificial (or intellectually acquired) afflictive obscurations. 
In this case, let us look at the artificial conception of true existence. When the artificial conception of true existence together with its seeds are abandoned, that phase of the meditative equipoise is called the path of release of the path of seeing. 
When the bodhisattva arises from meditative equipoise, he achieves the subsequent attainment of the path of seeing. During the phase of subsequent attainment, the bodhisattva primarily concentrates on accumulating the collection of merit. Here, the bodhisattva on the first ground focusses on the perfection of generosity among the six perfections.  
He then enters into meditative equipoise directly focussing on emptiness again. 
MAHAYANA PATH OF MEDITATION
Comes the time when the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise is powerful enough to act as the antidote to the innate conception of true existence, he achieves the uninterrupted path at the end of the first ground.  This uninterrupted path at the end of the first ground is the direct antidote to the innate conception of true existence. 
The innate afflictions are divided into nine levels:
three big 
three middling 
three small
Within each of these levels—three big, three middling and three small—they are further divided into big, middling and small. So there are the big of the big, the middling of the big and the small of the big and so forth. These are the nine levels of the innate afflictions to be abandoned. 
I guess we can finish looking at this in the next lesson. Then I think we can start on the tantric paths and grounds. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.