Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L58FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.040289
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson                                                                    58
          7 April 2018


Reviewing the four  levels  of  practitioners.  Root  text:  Pages  112—116.
Abandoning ordinary appearance and conception. How  ordinary  appearance  is
stopped. Analytical and placement meditation.


We have arrived in the section of the  text  where  we  are  discussing  the
generation stage.  There  are  two  types  of  generation  stage—the  coarse
generation stage and the subtle generation stage.

REVIEWING THE FOUR LEVELS OF PRACTITIONERS

We have discussed also the four levels of practitioners  of  the  generation
stage and the completion stage.

Beginners
The first of  these  four  levels  of  practitioner  is  the  beginners.  As
explained:
 • The beginner is someone who is beginning to train in tantra.
 • This beginner will read slowly the self-generation sadhana and  tries  to
   contemplate and meditate on what is stated in the sadhana.
 • In accordance with the stages of the  sadhana,  this  practitioner,  from
   time to time, cultivates clear appearance and divine pride.
 • Such a practitioner meditates according to what is stated in the  sadhana
   without any additions or omissions. Such a practitioner meditates on  the
   coarse aspects of the supported and supporting mandala and tries  to  see
   the mandala clearly.
 • Sometimes,  the  practitioner  can  give  rise  to  divine  pride  in  an
   uncontrived way.
 • Eventually, through such practice, the practitioner will be able  to  get
   an  uncontrived  experience.  This  means  any  time  this   practitioner
   meditates on the sadhana, he is able to give  rise  to  this  uncontrived
   experience. When this occurs, this practitioner is said to  have  entered
   the path of the generation stage, i.e., this
   person has become the person of the generation stage.

Such a description is found in the explanations of Yangchen Gawai  Lodrö  as
well as Kirti Losang Trinlè.  By doing such  a  practice,  the  person  will
become a person of the generation stage.

~Objects of abandonment of the generation stage
A person who is at the stage of the beginner trains in clear appearance  and
tries to cultivate divine  pride.  This  is  because  the  main  objects  of
abandonment of the generation stage are the appearance of  ordinariness  and
the adherence to ordinariness.  So,  by  cultivating  clear  appearance  and
divine pride, such a practitioner wants to  abandon  these  two  objects  of
abandonment.

~ Becoming a person of the generation stage
~~The view of Aku Sherab Gyatso
In the Vajrabhairava generation stage commentary of Aku  Sherab  Gyatso,  he
talks about how, in the Vajrabhairava generation  stage,  by  meditating  on
the supporting and supported mandala, one will be able to give rise to  this
clear and stable appearance of the mandala.  By  generating  an  uncontrived
experience of this, one becomes a person of the generation stage.

According to Aku Sherab Gyatso, you will attain this  stage  of  becoming  a
person of the generation stage upon attaining the second stage,  i.e.,  upon
having  attained  some  pristine  wisdom.   But  according  to  some   other
scholars, on the first stage—the stage of a  beginner—you  will  already  be
able  to  eventually  achieve  this  attainment  called  a  person  of   the
generation stage.

~~The view of Yangchen Gawai Lodrö and Kirti Losang Trinlè
The former explanation is  better.  This  means  the  explanation  given  by
Yangchen Gawai Lodrö and Kirti Losang Trinlè of when one attains becoming  a
person of the  generation  stage.  When  you  are  able  to  generate  clear
appearance and divine pride in an uncontrived experience, then you become  a
person of the generation stage.

If you read the description given by Ngawang Palden in the  middle  of  page
109, he talks about how “all practitioners from those  first  meditating  on
the generation stage up to but not including …” and so on and so  forth,  he
sets the basis for being included in the level called the beginner.

Slightly before that, he talks about the four types of practitioners.

      Reply: There are four types of practitioners …
      …
      … perfect control over pristine wisdom (p. 108—109)

This expression, “according to when the path is generated  in  their  mental
continua,” means that even at the level of the beginners, we can talk  about
the path having been generated in their mental continua. So,  it  is  better
to posit this path having been generated during the level of  the  beginner,
the first level, rather than the second level, i.e., those  having  attained
some pristine wisdom.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what I am talking about or do you  have  no
idea of what I am saying?

As we have explained in the previous class, the beginner is a  certain  type
of practitioner. This means that when we mention the beginner, you  have  to
know what this person refers to.

A beginner will read the sadhana slowly and try to meditate on  the  sadhana
from beginning to end. The practitioner tries to cultivate clear  appearance
and divine pride in a gradual way. By cultivating the practice in this  way,
eventually, this person will be able to have an uncontrived  experience  and
without much effort, this practitioner is able to mediate  on  the  sadhana.
When this uncontrived  experience  arises,  this  person  is  said  to  have
entered the generation stage. So, this is the  initial  realization  of  the
generation stage. This is an explanation by Yangchen Gawai Lodrö  and  Kirti
Losang Trinlè.

~~The view of some other scholars
But there is another explanation by other scholars.  They  say  that  simply
having that experience is  not  sufficient  for  you  to  be  considered  as
someone who has entered the tantric path.  In order to be considered such  a
person, you should have attained the second level of  having  attained  some
pristine wisdom.

According to the latter explanation,  you  cultivate  clear  appearance  and
divine pride and you are able to bring about a clear, stable  appearance  of
the mandala and so on to arise in a short instant  of  a  finger  snap.  So,
without hardship, you are able to cause this to happen. It is at this  stage
that you are considered to have entered the tantric  path.  It  is  at  this
stage that you are considered  to  have  generated  the  initial  generation
stage of realization.

You need to know that there are these two different explanations offered  by
different scholars.

In brief,
 • there is one  explanation  that  says  you  can  become  a  person  of  a
   generation stage on the first level and
 • in the second explanation, you only become a  person  of  the  generation
   stage at the second level, the level of  having  attained  some  pristine
   wisdom.

Perhaps it is better to adopt the first of the two explanations, the  reason
being that when we talk about these four  levels  of  practitioners,  it  is
said that they are differentiated according to when the  path  is  generated
in their mental continua as pointed out just  now.  This  means  these  four
levels of  practitioners  correspond  to  the  occasion  when  the  path  is
generated in their mental continua. For that reason, it seems to  be  better
to adopt the first explanation.

Khen Rinpoche: Is the point I am making clear or not?  If  there’s  anything
that’s not clear, you can  ask.   I  think  it  should  be  clear.  I  don’t
understand why it is not clear.

Student 1: Can I confirm that according to the first explanation,  there  is
a difference between:
 • generating the uncontrived experience of meditating on the coarse mandala
   and
 • being able to generate the coarse mandala within a finger snap?

Answer: They are  different  in  the  sense  that  according  to  the  first
explanation, during the level of a beginner, you are  able  to  meditate  on
the coarse mandala.  However, this is done in stages and you  are  not  able
to do it in a short instant of time. That means you are not  on  the  second
level.  When you are on the second level, you can generate this  mandala  in
a short period of time.  On the first level, you are not able to do that  as
you have to do it gradually.  So, there are differences  between  these  two
levels.

Khen Rinpoche: So, what is your question?

Student 1: I have a question with regard to  the  beginner's  boundary.  For
the first explanation, you can say it is the coarse generation  stage  where
there is the uncontrived  appearance  of  the  mandala.   Before  that,  you
cannot call that person a beginner.

Khen Rinpoche: Of course that  person  can  be  called  a  beginner!  It  is
possible for there to be beginners who have not entered the path.

Student 1: They are included within these four types of practitioners?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

Student 1: This means the stage of the beginners can be divided  into  these
two:
 • those who have not entered the generation stage
 • those who have entered the generation stage.

Khen Rinpoche: You can do that.

Student  1:  How  long  does  it  take  for  the  beginner  to  generate  an
uncontrived visualization of a coarse mandala? I’m  just  trying  to  figure
out  whether  there  is  a  difference  between  generating  an  uncontrived
visualization of the coarse mandala and doing it within a finger snap.

Khen Rinpoche: I have no idea how long it takes!

Student 1: As for the second explanation, the uncontrived appearance of  the
coarse mandala and generating it within a finger snap is simultaneous?

Khen Rinpoche: Not necessarily.

First, you  have  a  contrived  experience.  Afterwards,  you  can  have  an
uncontrived experience.  It is  not  possible  to  generate  an  uncontrived
experience from the very beginning.

Student 1: Those beginners before they generate the  uncontrived  experience
necessarily  have  to  do  all  the  preliminaries.   When   they   generate
uncontrived appearance  of  the  coarse  mandala,  renunciation,  bodhicitta
excluding emptiness but including the appearance of the coarse mandala,  all
these  come  simultaneously.  Uncontrived   means   there   is   uncontrived
renunciation, uncontrived  bodhicitta  and  uncontrived  appearance  of  the
course mandala.  They come simultaneously.

Answer: You can  say  that  if  this  person  is  definite  in  the  tantric
lineage—meaning this person has  not  entered  any  path  before,  and  this
person, before that, has been training in the common path—when  this  person
enters the tantric path, at the same time, renunciation and  bodhicitta  are
also attained.

Student 1: The difficulty with that is that you have the  practices  of  the
lower tantras that the person who enters Highest Yoga Tantra from the  onset
have to master. That means the visualizations of Action Tantra,  Performance
Tantra and Yoga Tantra that are considered as preliminary practices for  the
person who has entered Highest Yoa Tantra  from  the  onset.   Would  it  be
correct to say that?

Sze Gee: Are you saying that a  person  who  is  training  in  Highest  Yoga
Tantra must be preceded by training in the lower tantras?

Student 1: This is the difficult part because if you enter  it  from  onset,
yet you still need to do all these as preliminaries.

Khen Rinpoche: No need because there is such a person  who  is  definite  in
the lineage of Highest Yoga Tantra. This person does not need to go  through
the three lower tantras first.

Student 1: That is what I understand. Would he be able to uphold  and  teach
the lower tantras upon generating this uncontrived coarse mandala?   Because
in one of the 19 vows of Amitabha, a person necessarily needs to uphold  the
three vehicles together with the lower tantras.  In other  words,  he  needs
to know all of them.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. He can teach to others.

Student 1:  I was wondering about the uncontrived stage  of  generating  the
appearances. Khen Rinpoche already said that one does not  necessarily  need
to  realize  emptiness  before  entering  the  generation  stage.  Is   that
definitive or does it need interpretation?

Khen Rinpoche: That is definitive.

Student 1: I find it difficult for someone who enters the path  without  the
realization of emptiness does not give up the  path.   I  mean  there  is  a
possibility of the person giving up the path but then we  were  taught  that
once we entered the path, we will not lose the path.

Sze Gee: It is hard to understand that somebody can enter the  tantric  path
without a realization of emptiness.

Student 1: And reconciling that with the statement that you  will  not  lose
the path once you have achieved it.

Khen Rinpoche: In the sutra system, there  is  an  explanation  that  it  is
possible to fall away from the path after you have entered it.

However, I am not sure about tantra. It seems that this  is  also  possible.
I have not seen any specific explanations in the texts. Perhaps, it is  also
possible to enter the tantric path and then degenerate and  fall  away  from
the path.

It is very clear from the  texts  that  you  don’t  need  a  realization  of
emptiness to enter the generation stage.  Many texts  clearly  explain  that
one can enter the generation stage while holding the views of the Mind  Only
School (MOS) or the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS).  So, the  realization
of emptiness is not needed for one to enter the generation  stage  or  enter
the tantric path.

Sze Gee: I just try to clarify exactly what  is  the  criterion  for  having
entered the generation stage path.  Khen Rinpoche gave two explanations:

 • According to the first explanation,  the  criterion  for  someone  having
   entered the generation stage path is having this uncontrived  experience,
   i.e., having trained in clear appearance and divine pride  meditating  on
   the coarse mandala. First, generating a  contrived  experience  and  then
   moving on to eventually attaining the uncontrived experience.   Once  the
   person is able to do that, then this person has  entered  the  generation
   stage path.
 • According to the second explanation, this is not sufficient because  this
   person has to do this within a short period of time.   According  to  the
   second explanation, you need to meditate on  the  coarse  mandala,  clear
   appearance and divine pride. First generating the  contrived  experience,
   then later generating the uncontrived experience and  being  able  to  do
   this within a short instant of time. Only then are you considered to have
   entered a generation stage path.

Khen Rinpoche: Still not clear? I think it should be  clear.  I  don’t  know
why you are confused?

The main difference between those two explanations:
 • According to the first explanation, you are able to  do  this  slowly  or
   gradually and then you get  the  uncontrived  experience.  Then  you  are
   considered to have entered the tantric path or  have  initially  attained
   the generation stage realization.
 • According  to  the  second  explanation,  if  you  get  this  uncontrived
   experience slowly or gradually, it is not good enough.  You  need  to  be
   able to get this uncontrived experience in a short instance of time  like
   a finger snap. Then you are considered to have entered the tantric  path,
   i.e., considered to get the initial realization of the generation stage.

You have to understand exactly what these two levels are:
 • What is the level of the beginner?
 • What is the level of those who have attained some pristine wisdom?
You have to hold this in your mind. If you understand what  those  two  are,
then this explanation  of  the  generation  of  the  uncontrived  experience
should not confuse you.

Student 2: For the case of the Yamantaka practice, when you  say  generating
yourself as a deity, does it include oneself generating the  subtle  deities
like the eye sense into Kṣitigarbha, the ear sense  into  Vajrapani  and  so
on?

Khen Rinpoche: Last class you were not here? You  were  here  for  the  last
class? If you were not here, then that's different.

Answer: On the first stage, the stage of  the  beginner,  you  are  able  to
meditate on the entire mandala gradually and cause  it  to  appear  clearly.
So, you have clear appearance and sometimes you have divine pride.

On the second level, the level of those  who  have  attained  some  pristine
wisdom, you are able to cause the entire mandala  to  also  appear  clearly.
You have clear appearance and divine pride. This takes place in an  instant.
You are able to do this in a very short instant of time.

When you reach the third  level,  the  level  of  those  who  have  attained
partial control over pristine wisdom, not only are  you  able  to  have  the
visualization of the coarse mandala, you are also  able  to  generate  clear
stable appearance of the subtle  deities  of  the  sense  sources  or  sense
bases, for example, Kṣitigarbha at the eye sense power and so  on.  You  are
able to do so instantly in this very short period of time.

This means that on the second level, you are not  yet  able  to  cause  this
clear appearance and uncontrived divine pride of the deities  of  the  sense
bases to arise instantly. However, you are able to  do  that  on  the  third
level. In order to be able to do that, you have to be on  the  third  level.
At this third level, the person can exist on the  generation  stage  or  the
completion stage. This person on the third level does not  necessarily  have
to be on the generation stage.

At the fourth level, those who have attained perfect control  over  pristine
wisdom only exist on the high levels of the completion  stage.  It  is  said
that they need to have attained the impure illusory body.  What  this  means
is that a person who has attained the high levels of  the  completion  stage
will eventually attain the  fourth  level,  the  level  of  those  who  have
attained perfect control over pristine wisdom.

On the third  level,  not  only  are  you  able  to  generate  stable  clear
appearance of the coarse deity, you are also able to generate  stable  clear
appearance of the subtle deities in a very short instant. When you are  able
to do this and focus on it for four hours,  then  you  are  said  to  attain
stability in the coarse generation stage.
When you are able to this for a month, a year and so on, then you  are  said
to have  completed  the  coarse  generation  stage.  This  is  explained  by
Yangchen Gawai Lodrö.

Having completed the coarse generation stage,  then  one  will  move  on  to
cultivate the subtle generation stage. So, there are  these  two  levels  of
the generation stage—the coarse and the subtle.

After having completed the coarse generation stage, then you  will  move  on
to cultivate the subtle generation stage.

In the meditation on these deities, if you are able to meditate not only  on
the coarse deities but also the subtle deities,  having  this  stable  clear
appearance for years, months, and in an instant, a  short  period  of  time,
then you are said to have completed the coarse generation stage.

Now taking the example of Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava, you meditate  at  your
navel within this subtle drop or  minute  drop  the  entire  supporting  and
supported mandala.  If  you  can  meditate  on  the  entire  supporting  and
supported mandala inside this small drop that is the size of a mustard  seed
instantly, which means in a short instant of time, and if you  are  able  to
do that with stable clear appearance for four hours, then you  are  said  to
have attained stability in the subtle generation stage.

If you are able to meditate in this way for a month, a year and so  on,  you
are said to have completed the subtle generation stage.

So, there is this explanation of the four  levels  of  practitioners.  These
are clearly explained in the text.

Khen Rinpoche: That is just the review from the last class

      4. Those attaining perfect control over pristine wisdom


      It is said that some … the higher  levels  of  the  completion  stage.
      (p.112)


Abandoning ordinary appearance and conception (p. 113)

      The specific objects … appearance and conception. (p. 113)


      Ordinary appearance is not … to mental awareness. (p.113)

What are the uncommon objects of abandonment of the generation  stage?  They
are:
1. the appearance of ordinariness
2. the adherence to ordinariness

Does this ordinary appearance or the appearance of  ordinariness  appear  to
the sense consciousness or mental consciousness? It does not appear  to  the
sense consciousness. It is said the appearance of  ordinariness  appears  to
the mental consciousness.

This ordinary appearance or appearance  of  ordinariness  is  an  object  of
abandonment
of the generation stage. What is the antidote?

      The antidote to this … supported deities. (p. 113)

One meditates on the supporting and supported  mandala  using  one’s  mental
consciousness. One meditates on the mandala as mentioned and  thinks,  “This
is the actual celestial mansion.” One meditates on the deities  and  thinks,
“These are the actual deities.” Such meditation is not performed by a  sense
consciousness. By meditating  with  the  mental  consciousness,  eventually,
ordinary appearance  will  be  replaced  by  this  appearance  of  the  pure
supporting mandala and supported deities.

      The antidote to the conception … and its supporting maṇḍala. (p. 113)

When there is the appearance of ordinariness to  the  mental  consciousness,
then  the  mental  consciousness  can   adhere   to   this   appearance   of
ordinariness. The antidote to this adherence to ordinariness  is  meditating
on divine pride. So, this means that one  meditates,  thinking,  “I  am  the
actual mandala. I am the actual deity.”

      Further, it is stated that divine pride … secondary branch of it.  (p.
      114)

First, when  one  meditates,  one  meditates  so  that  the  supporting  and
supported mandala can appear  clearly.  Afterwards,  one  cultivates  divine
pride. So this cultivation of divine pride is the main practice.

As mentioned  earlier,  there  are  four  types  of  practitioners  who  are
differentiated according to when the  path  is  generated  in  their  mental
continua. Starting from the stage of a beginner,  one  meditates  gradually.
One tries to generate clear appearance and divine pride.  One  also  has  to
combine the view of emptiness. If one can  have  the  combination  of  these
three—clear appearance, divine pride and the view of emptiness—then one  has
the antidotes to the appearance of ordinariness, adherence  to  ordinariness
and the conception of true existence. One meditates on the generation  stage
in this way

How ordinary appearance is stopped (p. 114)


      When equipoise in deity yoga …
      …
       … apprehend other objects. (p. 114)


      Thus, when mental awareness strongly engages …
      …
      …  appearance to sense awareness. (p. 115)

On the generation stage, one meditates on deity yoga. When  such  meditation
is cultivated intently, basically there is this  appearance  to  the  mental
consciousness. The mental consciousness is meditating. During such a  stage,
the eye consciousness does not manifest, i.e., it is not operating. It  does
not do any work. Since this eye consciousness is not  manifest,  then  there
is no appearance of ordinariness to the sense consciousness.

In order to have a sense consciousness, the uncommon immediate condition  is
necessary. However, when the mental consciousness  is  strongly  engaged  in
its object, i.e., it is involved in equipoise and deity yoga intently,  then
the capacity of this immediate condition to generate  an  eye  consciousness
will degenerate.  This  means  that  there  is  no  generation  of  the  eye
consciousness. This means that there is no ordinary appearance to the  sense
consciousness. There is just the  appearance  that  appears  to  the  mental
consciousness that is meditating on the deity yoga.

      Mantric Stages states:


      Therefore, your purpose is accomplished …
      …
      ... uncontrived divine pride is generated. (p. 115)

On the generation stage, you  meditate  on  the  mandala  with  your  mental
consciousness. This mandala appears clearly to  your  mental  consciousness.
When this  happens,  there  is  no  ordinary  appearance  appearing  to  the
consciousness. On top of that, you also cultivate  divine  pride,  thinking,
“I am the actual mandala. I am the  actual  deity.”  By  cultivating  divine
pride you are able to stop the conception of ordinariness or  the  adherence
to ordinariness. You meditate on the generation stage in this way.

But it is not the case that functional phenomena turn into deities. So,  you
accomplish your purpose when you are able to cultivate clear appearance  and
divine pride to stop ordinary appearance and the ordinary conception.

The main point here is that you meditate  on  yourself  as  the  deity,  you
generate  yourself  as  the  deity  and  you  meditate  with   your   mental
consciousness.
 • When you have this clear appearance of yourself as the  deity,  then  you
   are able to stop the appearance of ordinariness.
 • When you cultivate divine pride, thinking, “I am the resultant  deity.  I
   am this body at the resultant time,” then  you  are  able  to  stop  this
   adherence to ordinariness or conception of ordinariness.
When you are able to do this, it does not mean  that  you  have  become  the
deity. You have not become the  deity.  That  is  all  right.  There  is  no
problem. The main point is that you are able to  stop  the  two  objects  of
abandonment—the  appearance   of   ordinariness   and   the   adherence   to
ordinariness.

Analytical and placement meditation (p. 116)

      When meditating on clear appearance …
      …
      …  “I am actually this deity.” (p. 116)


When you meditate on the mandala, you have to focus on the  pure  supporting
and
supported  mandala  with  your  mental  consciousness.  You  use  analytical
meditation to generate a clear appearance because you have  to  analyze  how
the mandala looks, what the deities are, what their colours  are,  how  many
hands there are and so on. Through such analytical meditation you cause  the
supporting  and  supported  mandala  to  appear  more  and   more   clearly.
Therefore, analytical meditation predominates.

By performing this meditation again and again in a  stable  way,  eventually
you are
able to cause the supporting and supported mandala to appear clearly.  After
you have caused the supporting and  supported  mandala  to  appear  clearly,
then you cultivate divine pride, thinking, “I am the actual  mandala.  I  am
the  actual  deity.”  At  this  point,  what  you  are  doing  is  placement
meditation. There isn’t this previous analytical meditation going on.

You place your mind on this thought, “I am the actual mandala.” You have  to
practise both analytical meditation and placement meditation in this way.

We have mentioned the uncommon objects  of  abandonment  of  the  generation
stage—the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness.

There is a discussion of these two objects of abandonment. It is  said  that
the appearance of ordinariness  or  ordinary  appearance  is  the  knowledge
obscuration  or  obscuration  to  omniscience,  whereas  the  adherence   to
ordinariness  or  the  conception  of   ordinariness   is   the   afflictive
obscuration of tantra.

 • The afflictive obscuration of tantra  is  posited  as  the  adherence  to
   ordinariness or the conception of ordinariness.
 • The knowledge obscuration  or  obscuration  to  knowledge  of  tantra  is
   posited as the appearance of ordinariness.

First,  the  adherence  to  ordinariness  is  abandoned.   Afterwards,   the
appearance of ordinariness is abandoned.

This parallels the explanation of the  Prasangika  school  (the  Consequence
Middle Way School) where it is said that:
 • the afflictive obscuration is the conception of true existence
 • the appearance of true existence is an knowledge obscuration

When we circle in  samsara,  the  main  cause  of  our  circling  in  cyclic
existence is not the appearance but rather, it  is  our  adherence  to  that
appearance that causes hatred, attachment and so on. That is the main  cause
of our circling in samsara. This is something you have to think about:
 • What is this appearance of ordinariness?
 • What is the adherence to ordinariness?
Are they the objects of abandonment? What are they?

Khen Rinpoche: This is the question.  What  are  they?  What  does  ordinary
appearance mean? Why are they the objects of abandonment?
 Ordinary beings have ordinary appearance. There is no need to  abandon  it,
right? As ordinary beings, we  have  ordinary  adherence.  This  means  it’s
actually very agreeable.
Why should they be wrong consciousnesses? Why should they be abandoned?

It should be a correct mind for them to be adhered to ordinariness. It is  a
factually concordant mind. It is not a  wrong  consciousness.  Since  it  is
correct and factually concordant, then there  is  no  need  to  abandon  it.
There is no need to get rid of it.
Student 3:  Actually, I have this problem. Because even if you were to  talk
about divine appearance, I can make divine appearance look very ordinary.

Khen Rinpoche: What? Divine pride is ordinary? You believe  yourself  to  be
ordinary?

Student 3: Before I came to Tibetan Buddhism, I only  know  how  the  Buddha
looks like. It is only coming to Tibetan Buddhism, then I know a buddha  can
be green in colour. Sometimes, I really wonder: How do  you  know  a  buddha
really looks like that? What makes it divine?

Sze Gee: How do you know there is a Green Tara? What so divine about it?

Khen Rinpoche: What? After a while, you look at Yamantaka he  is  no  longer
wrathful?

Student 3: No.

Khen Rinpoche: Must be because you like him!

Student 3: How do we differentiate an ordinary being from  a  divine  being?
In  essence,  seriously,  we  have  no  idea  what  a  buddha  is.  What  is
enlightenment? What is pure happiness with the absence of suffering and  the
absence of obscurations? I do not know what that is. To say I am  there  and
yet not knowing what it is, it is very  difficult  to  fathom.  I  can  only
guess what it would be like and try to be there.

Answer: In order to know what a buddha really is, it is necessary  to  study
the Dharma.

First, we have to  study  the  four  noble  truths.  In  order  to  have  an
introduction to the four noble truths, we need an introduction to the  three
objects of refuge.  To  understand  the  four  noble  truths,  you  have  to
understand true suffering. You  have  to  understand  where  true  suffering
comes from. The origins are karma and the  afflictions.  Then  you  have  to
understand that there  is  a  powerful  antidote  that  can  counteract  the
origins of suffering. It is on the bases of these that  you  can  appreciate
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.  That requires introduction to these topics.

It is not easy to really understand what these are. For example, we have  to
study the four tenet systems. The Vabhashikas simply posit things  based  on
what they can see. For example, they said that the body of a buddha  is  not
buddha because the body is true suffering.

However, a buddha is posited mainly in terms of the mind—the mind  that  has
overcome all the afflictions, all the faults and so on. So a buddha  is  not
the body.

Even with respect to the enlightenment or the attainment of  the  buddhahood
of Shakyamuni Buddha, the Hinayana  tenets  and  the  Mahayana  tenets  have
different explanations. According to the Hinayana tenets, the  Buddha  newly
attained enlightenment at Bodhgaya. According to the  Mahayana  tenets,  the
Buddha had become enlightened a long time ago. He was simply displaying  the
12 deeds at Bodhgaya in India. It wasn’t the case  that  he  newly  attained
enlightenment then.

In the Mahayana tenets, we have this explanation of  the  Buddha  displaying
the 12 deeds long after he had attained enlightenment. The dharma body  that
he attained, the dharmakaya, is the empowering condition for  the  two  form
bodies, the enjoyment body and the emanation body.  Mainly,  there  is  this
dharmakaya in which the two obscurations  had  been  exhaustibly  abandoned.
That gives rise to the enjoyment body and the emanation body.

In the Hinayana system, there is no such explanation. There is  no  talk  of
the enjoyment body and the emanation body, the dharmakaya and so on.

In the Mahayana tenets, you find the explanation of a buddha that is in  the
nature of the four buddha bodies. There  is  also  the  explanation  of  the
union of body and mind. Wherever the mind of a buddha pervades, the body  of
a buddha  also  pervades.  In  tantra,  you  find  very  detailed  and  good
explanations of such a union of body and mind.

The body and mind of a buddha is one entity. As I had mentioned  before,  at
the time of the cause, it is necessary for the method and the wisdom  to  be
inseparable in order to give rise to a buddha body and  mind  that  are  one
entity.

In tantra, you can find techniques for practising  this  method  and  wisdom
inseparably within a single mind. Method and wisdom are one entity  even  at
the time of the cause. This explanation cannot be  found  in  sutra.  It  is
found only in tantra.

If you think about this in a detailed manner, you have to be able  to  posit
the potential of a buddha body, of the buddha mind at the time of the  bases
in such a way that they are one  entity.  So,  we  said  that  all  sentient
beings naturally have  the  potential  for  buddhahood,  for  attaining  the
dharmakaya (the dharma body) and the rupakaya (the form  body).  This  means
that we have to be able to posit these potentials at the time of  the  bases
in an inseparable way. In tantra, you find good explanations  of  what  this
is. The very subtle wind and the very  subtle  mind  exist  as  one  entity.
Here, we are not talking about the coarse wind or the coarse mind,  but  the
very subtle wind and the very subtle mind existing as one entity.

We have these potentials to attain the  buddha  body  at  the  time  of  the
bases. This means that these two potentials for  the  dharma  body  and  the
form body have to exist as a  single  entity.  We  said  that  all  sentient
beings have buddha nature. All sentient beings have  the  naturally  abiding
lineage. We have this lineage that is suitable  to  be  transformed  into  a
buddha body. Such a lineage  pervades  all  sentient  beings.  All  sentient
beings have this lineage naturally. You have to think about these points.

We have to understand that at the time of the bases  now,  we  already  have
the two
potentials for attaining the two buddha bodies—the dharma body and the  form
body—existing as an inseparable entity.

During the generation stage, we engage in meditation  through  visualization
or imagination. On the completion stage, we are  able  to  achieve  actually
this body and mind as we have meditated upon them on the  generation  stage.
This very subtle wind arises as the deity’s body, as the illusory body,  and
the very subtle mind becomes the deity.

With that kind of attainment, then eventually, we will attain the  learner’s
union. After the learner’s union, we have the attainment of the union of no-
more-learning. This is a state of the union of body and mind  in  which  the
two objects of abandonment—the appearance of ordinariness and the  adherence
to ordinariness—have been overcome. This is the state of a buddha.

In tantra, we find detailed explanation  of  how  wherever  the  mind  of  a
buddha pervades, a buddha’s speech  pervades.  Wherever  a  buddha’s  speech
pervades, the buddha’s body pervades.  There  is  this  explanation  of  the
union of a buddha’s body and mind in tantra. This explanation is  not  found
in sutra. This explanation is not easy but you have to understand it.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what I am talking  here.  So,  long  talk  after
your question. An introduction of Buddha. You are asking about  the  Buddha,
yes?

This is not easy at all. We say that a buddha  is  omniscient,  all  knowing
and his mind pervades all objects of knowledge. There  is  nothing  that  is
not known by a buddha. There is no place that is not pervaded by a  buddha’s
mind. That being case, then we says that whatever is pervaded by a  buddha’s
mind is pervaded by a buddha’s speech. Whatever is pervaded  by  the  speech
of a buddha, it is pervaded by the mind of a buddha.

These points are not easy to understand. Take the example  of  our  teacher,
Shakyamuni Buddha. We have  to  ask:  What  are  his  powers  after  he  had
attained buddhahood? Does he simply display one aspect or  does  he  display
many aspects?

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Is he  always  like  that?  When  you  see
Buddha Shakyamuni, you only see that—he holds an  alms  bowl  and  his  hand
touches the ground? Is he always like  that  or  can  he  manifest  in  many
different forms?

The Buddha displayed many deeds. The reason why he  attained  buddhahood  is
so that he can perform the welfare of sentient beings. He  became  a  buddha
for the sake of sentient beings. Now, since sentient beings are very  varied
in their dispositions, mentality and interests, he has to  benefit  them  in
accordance with their different dispositions and so on. If he only  displays
one single aspect,  he  wouldn’t  be  able  to  benefit  all  these  various
sentient beings.

A buddha has many different manifestations. But it is difficult  for  us  to
be able to determine who is a buddha and who is not a buddha. We don’t  know
who is a buddha, who are the manifestations of a buddha. This is difficult.
Regardless of which deity you practise, be it Tara, Yamantaka or some  other
deity, first, you practise the path by engaging in the three  principles  of
the path. After that, you enter the generation stage  practice  and  you  do
all the practices of the generation stage. Indeed, there  are  practitioners
who through sincere practice obtain a vision of the deity. They  engaged  in
purification of negative karma  and  accumulating  merit  and  so  on.  They
actually obtained a vision of the deity. However, it is hard for us  to  say
whether this vision is true or not. The generation stage is  very  powerful.
It is said that after you have practised the subtle  generation  stage,  you
have achieved the high realization of generation stage. Simply  by  thinking
that there is a bridge over the river, a bridge will exist.

Khen Rinpoche: So you can walk (on that bridge)!

It is all about the power of our mind. Our mind has immense  power.  It  has
tremendous power. Whether it is positive or negative, it  has  great  power.
Think about the fact that we have been suffering since  beginningless  time,
i.e., over countless lifetimes and eons. Now, we are still suffering. As  of
now, we are still ordinary beings. It is because of  our  mind.  If  we  are
able to practise the path, if we are able to practice the generation  stage,
the completion stage and so on, it is also due to the mind. It really  boils
down to the power of our own mind.

Indeed, there are many accounts  of  how  practitioners  of  the  generation
stage are able to receive these pure visions of deities and  so  on.  It  is
through their practice that they are able  to  receive  these  visions.  For
example, in the historical accounts  of  tantra,  it  is  said  that  Buddha
Shakyamuni, when teaching tantra, displayed the aspect of having  attachment
with a  consort.  For  example,  in  the  Guhyasamaja  Tantra,  there  is  a
description of how King Indrabhuti came to receive teachings and so on.  The
Buddha did not take the aspect of a fully ordained monk, a bhikshu  teaching
the Dharma.  Rather,  he  took  on  this  aspect  of  being  accompanied  by
attachment by having a consort to teach the tantra. The King Indrabhuti  had
many  queens.  He  requested  the  Buddha,  “Please  teach   a   path   with
attachment.” Buddha Shakyamuni then took  on  the  aspect  with  attachment,
arose in the aspect of Guhyasamaja and taught tantra to this King.  This  is
how it came about and how it is taught in the Guhyasamaja tantra. This  King
was given instructions on how to meditate on  the  complete  supporting  and
supported mandala. Those meditations were recorded in the sadhana  and  then
pictures of the Guhyasamaja deities were painted, the  images  were  painted
and so on. This is how the practice came about.

When we do the self-generation sadhana, we can  recall  the  fact  that  the
sadhana are composed or written by qualified teachers  who  have  experience
with the practice of the deity. Then they wrote the sadhana. By reading  the
sadhana, then we engage in the practice of the deity.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know whether I am answering  your  question  or  not?
Maybe in some way.

It is not really easy to introduce what  a  buddha  is.  We  say  sangye  in
Tibetan but it is not so easy to introduce it.

|Objects of Abandonments |Antidotes      |meditationS                |
|of the Generation Stage |               |TO BE DONE                 |
|                        |               |Focus on the pure          |
|Appearance of           |Meditating with|supporting and supported   |
|ordinariness or ordinary|the mental     |mandala with the mental    |
|appearance—knowledge    |consciousness, |consciousness.             |
|obscuration or          |ordinary       |Use analytical meditation  |
|obscuration to          |appearance will|to generate a clear        |
|omniscience of tantra   |be replaced by |appearance as one needs to |
|                        |the pure       |analyze how the mandala    |
|                        |appearance of  |looks, what the deities    |
|                        |the supporting |are, their colours, the    |
|                        |mandala and    |number of hands they have  |
|                        |supported      |and so on.                 |
|                        |deities.       |Through analytical         |
|                        |               |meditation, one causes the |
|                        |               |supporting and supported   |
|                        |               |mandala to appear more and |
|                        |               |more clearly.              |
|                        |               |Cultivate divine pride,    |
|Adherence to            |Meditating on  |thinking, “I am the actual |
|ordinariness or the     |divine pride,  |mandala. I am the actual   |
|conception of           |i.e., thinking,|deity.” By doing placement |
|ordinariness—afflictive |“I am the      |meditation, you place your |
|obscuration of tantra   |actual mandala.|mind on this thought, “I am|
|                        |I am the actual|the actual mandala.” In    |
|                        |deity.”        |this way, you have to      |
|                        |               |practise both analytical   |
|                        |               |meditation and placement   |
|                        |               |meditation.                |


Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing  team:  Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Lau  Geok
Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng;  edited  by
Cecilia Tsong.



