Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L47FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:21.252954
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 47 				                                                   5 October 2017
The intermediate state (cont’d). 
THE INTERMEDIATE STATE (CONT’D)
The intermediate state is achieved when the winds are stirred while the individual is in the clear light of death. That establishment of the intermediate state is simultaneous with the arising of the mind of near-attainment of the reverse process. The indestructible drop abides at the heart for as long as one is alive. At the very end of the dying process, when that indestructible drop splits open, the intermediate state is established with the arising of the mind of near-attainment of the reverse process. 
The mind of the intermediate state being becomes increasingly coarse. The mind of near-attainment is followed by the mind of increase, the mind of appearance and the 80 indicative conceptions. Although the body of the intermediate state being is not composed of the coarse elements, nevertheless the signs associated with the dissolution of the elements arise. 
From the mind of 80 indicative conceptions comes the appearance of the glow of the flame of a butter-lamp, the appearance of fireflies, smoke and the mirage. They are the signs associated with the dissolution of the wind element into the fire element, the fire element into the water element and the water element into the earth element. 
When the coarser minds such as the 80 indicative conceptions and the afflictions arise, the intermediate state being experiences all kinds of hallucinations. Some are joyful and positive while others are frightening hallucinations. So the intermediate state being is said sometimes to be in a very joyful mood. At other times, it can be in a very sad or unhappy mood or it can be experiencing many fears. 
The intermediate state being can only enjoy smells. They are always on the move searching for their place of next rebirth.
How rebirth occurs
When the intermediate state being sees the mixture of egg and semen of the future parents, due to karma, the egg and semen of the future parents appear as a man and woman lying in sexual intercourse. 
If the intermediate state being is to be born as a male, it develops aversion and anger towards the appearance of the man and develops a very strong attachment for the woman with a strong desire to embrace her. 
If the intermediate state being is to be born as a female, it is said that this intermediate state being develops aversion and anger towards the appearance of the woman and develops a very strong attachment for the man with a strong desire to embrace him. 
Due to the strong desire to embrace the man/woman, it approaches closer and closer to the couple till the appearance of the man or woman that was there earlier disappears. What the intermediate state being sees are only the genitals of both the male and female. Because of only seeing the genitals of the male and female and not being able to find its object of desire or attachment, the intermediate state being gets upset and very angry and becomes unconscious. 
Then the signs of dissolution arise again:
The earth element dissolves into the water element.
The water element dissolves into the fire element.
The fire element dissolves into the wind element.  
The wind element dissolves into the consciousness. 
The mind of white appearance arises and is followed by the mind of red increase, black near-attainment and the clear light of death.  
The intermediate state being then dies and reaches the clear light. When the clear light ceases, the mind of near-attainment arises. Simultaneous with that is the entering of the intermediate state being into the fertilized egg.  This is the first moment of rebirth. When the intermediate state being dies and takes rebirth, the mind of that intermediate state being becomes increasingly coarse.  From the clear light of death arises the mind of near-attainment of the reverse process followed by the mind of increase, the mind of appearance and so on.  So the mind becomes increasingly coarse again. 
Qualities of the intermediate state being
Back to the intermediate state being, it is said the intermediate state body is a very subtle form that’s made up of energy and is not obstructed by most things. It also possesses some miraculous abilities.
It is said in Vasubandhu’s Treasury Of Manifest Knowledge that the size of the intermediate state being that is going to be born as a human will be that of a five or
six year old child. It’s not definite but generally speaking, that’s the size of an intermediate state being. It’s also clearly stated in the teachings if one is going to be born as a human being, the intermediate state being will look like a human being.
It’s said in the teachings the intermediate state being possesses complete faculties and all the limbs are established at the same time as it is a miraculous birth.
But what if that individual is going to be born from the womb and comes out of the womb as a baby without limbs? That does happen, right? Then where is the concordance of aspect? An intermediate state being has complete faculties but this doesn’t mean he or she will look exactly like what he or she is going to be reborn as. Rather, only the general aspect will apply. If one is going to be born as a human being, then one looks like a human being.
More about the intermediate state being
The teachings talk about the appearance of the intermediate state being. 
If one is in the intermediate state of a hell being, the body looks like a charred log. 
If one is in the intermediate state of a preta, the body looks like liquid. 
If one is in the intermediate state of an animal, the body has a smoky appearance. 
If one is to be reborn as a human or a desire realm god, the body has a golden complexion. 
If one is going to be born in the form realm, the body has a whitish glow. 
As for how the environment appears to them: 	
For intermediate state beings who are going to be reborn in the lower realms, the environment looks very dark and gloomy.
For those who are going to have a good rebirth, the environment looks like a night sky pervaded by moonlight.
In general, this is how they move: 
For intermediate state beings who are going to be born in the lower realms, they move with their heads (facing) downwards, i.e., inverted. 
For those who are going to be born as human beings, they walk upright.
For those who are going to be born as gods, they travel in an upward direction.
Those who are going to be born in the desire and form realms necessarily take rebirth via the intermediate state while those who are going to be born in the formless realm do not have to go through the intermediate state. With the cessation of the mind of the clear light of death, in the next moment, the concentration associated with one of those four formless realm manifests. In a text by Yangchen Gawa’i Lodro, he states for those who are taking rebirth in the formless realms, with the cessation of the clear light of death, in the next moment, they are in the formless realm where they actualize one of the minds of the formless realms without having to go through the minds of near-attainment, increase, appearance and so forth. 
Following what he said, the coarse mind comes into being. The question then arises: Why is it like that? This seems to be an exception. It is clearly said in Yangchen Gawa’i Lodro’s text that there is no mind of near-attainment. Why? This is what I am wondering. 
It is clearly mentioned in the text:
Immediately upon the establishment of the intermediate state, the connection to the previous body is severed right away. There is no dependency on that body any more.
There are exceptions to this. For example, in the case of untimely death, it is possible for the intermediate state being to re-enter the body. 
The intermediate state being can also see and talk to their former relatives and loved ones, but it is only a one-way communication.
While it is not clear in the text, since the intermediate state being can see their former relatives, loved ones and friends, it is possible that they rejoice when they see them engaging in virtue for their sake. 
It’s also said that intermediate state beings possess some miraculous abilities and have some level of clairvoyance. 
Prayers for the dead
People often ask the same question. What is the point of doing all these prayers and practices for the deceased for 49 days? The person is already dead. Do they really help? 
We discussed in the previous lesson the positions taken by the Lower and Higher Abhidharma. In the Higher Abhidharma, the Compendium of Knowledge by Asanga, he said that even if the person is already in the intermediate state of the lower realms, for example, in the hell realms, if strong virtue is created, then there is hope and it is possible to change the intermediate state of that person. 
The teachings tell us that a person stays in the intermediate state for a maximum of 49 days. If the intermediate state being has not taken rebirth after seven days, he will undergo a small death. Then the intermediate state is established again. This happens for up to a maximum of seven times. 
It doesn’t mean that everybody has to take 49 days to take rebirth. This can happen almost immediately after death occurs or a day later. There is no certainty with regard to this. 
Non-human entities 
You hear a lot of people saying, “It has been more than 49 days but they are still hanging around.” I don’t know how they know the (deceased) are still hanging around. Maybe he or she appears in their dream? I don't know. But some people seem to experience their deceased loved ones returning to ask for things or to tell them something. These things happen but it is mentioned in the teachings that this is not the actual person. It is another non-human entity disguised as the former deceased. 
When Jetsun Milarepa was alive, people would report to him, “This person has died 
49 days ago but after doing all these pujas, the person still appears and says things.”
In some of those accounts, Jetsun Milarepa was able to tell those relatives, “The person has already taken rebirth. The person you saw is not the actual person but someone else.”
If you look at local customs such as Qing Ming, every year, people make it a point to visit the graves, make a lot of offerings and pay homage. Why are they doing this? Essentially, they believe that their father, mother or relative is still there in the grave. However, from the Buddhist point of view, it all depends on whether the person has taken rebirth or not. If the person has not taken rebirth and is hanging around the grave, then that’s a different thing. But if the person has already taken rebirth and maybe has a good rebirth, then who are they praying to? 
People make offerings and pray to their ancestors, thinking that their ancestors are still around. In fact, they are not around anymore. In place of their ancestors are all kinds of non-human entities. You never know. It’s possible some of these non-human entities pretend to be the deceased, take on their form and start to communicate. People make offerings and there’s always the possibility that some of these non-human entities are happy when they are being worshipped and offerings are made to them. These non-human entities may then within their own power perform some miracles to help the person who is making offerings to them who may then experience some small success. But all you need is for one person to experience such success and the word spreads. Then more and more people who want that would also start to pray. They may worry that if they don’t pray, something bad will happen to them.  
But once the 49 days are over, it is definite that the deceased has taken rebirth though we do not know what kind of rebirth they will take. What I’m saying here is that some people feel that the deceased are still hanging around the grave. That is why they clean the grave and make offerings. 
Exiting of the consciousness
The initial place where the consciousness exits from the indestructible drop is at the heart because the drop splits open. 
As for its final exit in relation to the body:
If the person is going to be born in the intermediate state of the hell realms, the consciousness exits via the lower orifice. 
If the person is going to be born in the intermediate state of the pretas, the consciousness exits from the mouth after exiting from the indestructible drop at the heart.
If the person is going to be born as an animal, the consciousness exits through the opening of the sexual organ. 
If the person is going to be born as a human, the consciousness exits through the eyes. 
If the person is going to be born as a desire realm god, the consciousness exits from the navel. 
If the person is going to be born as a form realm god, the consciousness exits through the mid-brow. 
If the person is going to be born as formless realm god, the consciousness exits through the crown.
The exits through which the consciousness leaves the body was taught by the Buddha in one of the sutras.
It is stated in the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge that the intermediate state beings can only see those of a similar type and those who are either at the same level or a lower level than them. So, a person in the intermediate state of the form realm can see other fellow intermediate state beings of the form realm and the intermediate state beings of the desire realm. A person in the intermediate state of a human being can see fellow intermediate state beings who are like them and intermediate state beings who are going to be born as animals. 
You need to have some idea of how the intermediate state is established. Arising from the clear light, the mind of near-attainment of the reverse process manifests. Simultaneous with that, the intermediate state is established. I guess in some cases we have to assume that it is possible that the intermediate state being can re-enter the old body.
Khen Rinpoche: They die and after that, they come back. First, they die. After they die, then they are alive again! 
There is a real story I heard from someone. In India, there was a girl who suddenly fell down from the rooftop and became unconscious. I think she was not so very young, around nine or ten years old. She was brought to hospital and the doctor said that she was already dead. Her mother couldn’t believe it and she begged the doctor to help. The doctor had already said nothing much can be done. The mother was crying. 
After a while, this girl started to move. The small girl became conscious again and started to talk but when she talked, she didn’t seem to be the same person. She was a different person. She said, “I am so and so and you are not my mother.” She said that. Her mother was confused. 
She continued, “My house is somewhere there. My parents’ names are …” Before (the accident) she didn’t know how to write. Then they said, “If you write down the address, we will bring you there.” Then she wrote the address and they brought her to the place. Somehow, they were able to find the place. When they reached there, the daughter (of this family who lived there had) passed away on the same day. Somehow, this daughter’s consciousness had gone into the other girl’s consciousness. She talked about everything to her own mother. She knew everything exactly. This daughter didn’t want to go back with her parents. She wanted to live there and told them, “This is my home and my parents are not you.” Afterwards, from time to time, she will visit the other side. 
I don't know how this happened.
If you look at the accounts of those who seem to be able to remember their past lives, they died relatively young or due to some accident. There is another account of a boy who died and then took rebirth. He was able to identify himself as the boy (who died) and he could remember things. 
Khen Rinpoche: You can watch the documentary about those people who can remember their past lives.
Student 1: Will you be going through what the 80 indicative conceptions are? What do they refer to? It comes up a lot with this topic. 
We were given the categories of the different kinds of minds—the coarse, subtle and then the very subtle. You mentioned that the coarse mind covers the root afflictions and the 20 secondary afflictions and so forth. Where will the virtuous mental factors for ordinary beings be classified—under a coarse mind or subtle mind?
Khen Rinpoche: The virtuous minds are also coarse minds just like anger, attachment and those afflictions. Among the 80 indicative conceptions, there are some that are virtuous and some that are non-virtuous. There are also some that are unspecified (or neutral). 
How do you get 80 (indicative conceptions)?  The division goes like this:
There are 40 associated with the mind of appearance.  
There are 33 associated with the mind of increase. 
There are seven associated with the mind of near-attainment. 
If there is time, we may go through them. 
Student 2: When a person is able to use the clear light to ascertain emptiness directly and achieve the meaning clear light, from there, the pure illusory body arises. In such cases, does one still have to go through the impure illusory body?
Khen Rinpoche: If you are talking about someone who enters the unsurpassed yoga tantric path from the onset without having entered the Paramitayana path, then for such a person, the impure illusory body is necessarily achieved prior to the meaning clear light. That is definitely the case for someone who enters the tantric path from the onset. 
Otherwise, there are exceptions. For example, our kind guru, Shakyamuni Buddha the founder had finished the accumulation of the three countless eons of merit. On the tenth ground, he entered the tantric path via the fourth stage meaning clear light. This means he didn’t have to achieve the impure illusory body first.
Student 2: Is the projecting karma activated before the eight stages of dissolution? If not, at which stage is the projecting karma activated?
Khen Rinpoche: In sutra, you find the explanation of the twelve links of dependent origination.  There are the afflictions, craving and grasping, that nourish the karmic
seed to the point it’s certain to give rise to an effect. This is the link of potential 
existence that itself is karma. That karma is an actualizing karma. 
We cannot say for sure. If we think about it, perhaps, we can make the argument that it’s possible that the coarse minds are still present. Where are we going to draw the line? Among the 80 indicative conceptions, there are some afflictions there.  Those are coarse minds. If they haven’t dissolved, perhaps, you can make the argument that it’s still possible for potential existence to come into being. I’m not saying that for sure. You need to think about it. 
I guess we probably have to say that the nourishing of the karmic seeds by craving and grasping is only done when the coarsest minds are manifest. It is quite difficult to imagine how that can be done when the subtle minds, such as the mind of appearance, already manifest. By then, the 80 indicative conceptions have dissolved. I am not exactly sure but I think it’s probably difficult to say that the karmic seeds can still be nourished when the subtle minds are in operation.
Student 2: At which stage of the eight stages of the reverse order does the intermediate state being see various appearances?
Khen Rinpoche: I would think that the appearances arise when the coarse minds are manifest. I don’t know exactly when.
Student 3: Upon clinical death when the heart stops beating, it could be the case that the death process is still going on. We are talking about organ donation here. If the indestructible drop is still residing in the heart and they actually take out the heart and transplant it into another body, what will happen then? 
Khen Rinpoche: If one is a very good practitioner, has a very good experience of bodhicitta and emptiness, always engage in deity yoga and has great familiarity with the different levels of mind, then at the time of death, if the person can stay undisturbed while the subtle minds come into play, it would be better, isn’t it? 
Anyway, it’s just my opinion. Otherwise, it will be better just to give the body away so that at least it benefits somebody if there is no hope of returning as you are dying for sure. You are not going to realize emptiness with the clear light mind so it is better to just give the body away and at least benefit somebody. 
I think some people worry that if the dead person is being cut up, that person may experience pain. I don’t think that is the case. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know exactly. Many people ask this kind of question. What I think is something like that. It is better if your organ is useful. Then someone can use it. If you have some hope of meditating with (your) clear light (mind), then please keep it.
Student 3: Actually, it’s not so much about the meditation. I think I am far away from
(that level of) meditation. It is just that I am wondering what really happens if one is
being disturbed.
Khen Rinpoche: Nothing happens. I don’t know what will happen. 
(Student’s question is inaudible). 
Khen Rinpoche: That is not necessary. Some people die in the hospital. They carry (the body) all the way for two hours in the car. (The mind) is still there. It is not necessary. Even if you donate (your organ), I’m not sure whether the subtle consciousness leaves or not. That is a question mark. Maybe it is still there.
In the monastery, some monks die in the hospital. They have to bring the bodies (by travelling over) three hours over the bumpy road. After that, they still live (i.e., meditate for) one week. This happens. So I don’t think just moving (the body), (the subtle consciousness) just goes like that. 
Sometimes, it’s hard to know. The very subtle mind is in the very centre of the central channel in the indestructible drop. It’s not easy for it just to come out (through some movement). Otherwise, we move around every day. Then it may come out! I don’t think that it comes out so easily.
I am not saying, “Donate.” I don’t know whether it’s OK but I don’t think there is so much of an issue there. We worry but after we die, there is nothing much to worry about. 
Student 4: The body of the intermediate state being is not made of constituents, is it?
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 4: The entire death process with the eight dissolutions has nothing to do with the channels, right?  The whole basis is that this body is so special. If the person is going to be reborn, he may not be reborn as a human. He may take the form of a jelly fish in the bardo state of an animal. If the (body of the) bardo state doesn’t have any channels, the dissolution will still happen.
Khen Rinpoche: It is stated very clearly in the text that intermediate state beings experience the signs of dissolution, which means that you probably can say that it is not absolutely necessarily to possess the white and red bodhicittas in order to experience the signs of dissolution. Then you probably have to say that the form realm gods also experience the signs of dissolution.
Student 4: Does the extremely subtle mind still have the five omnipresent mental factors?
Khen Rinpoche: What are the five? I have forgotten (what they are). Tell me the five. Do you remember the discussion about what appears to the clear light of death, the clear light of the basis? 
According to Panchen Sonam Dragpa, he said that actual emptiness appears to the mind but it is not ascertained. For him, that mind will be an awareness to which real
emptiness appears but it is not ascertained.
But according to Yangchen Gawa’i Lodro, he said that emptiness does not appear. What appears is a vacuity that is just the mere cessation of coarse dualistic or conventional appearances. So there are these two views. Yangchen Gawa’i Lodro takes the position that actual emptiness does not appear because if it appears, he points out this consequence: “It follow that all sentient beings would have realized emptiness effortlessly at the time of death.” For him, if emptiness appears, then it necessarily must be ascertained. If we think about it, it abides in the form of a potential. 
When the clear light of death is manifest, there aren’t the usual feelings that we are usually used to, like feelings of joy, sadness or unpleasantness. Those feelings are very coarse. 
Student 5: This is regarding potential existence. At the time of death, it is possible that the actualized karma happens before the coarse mind dissolves. After that, all the imprints and all the coarse minds dissolve into the clear light. They should become dormant and non-functional. How then does the intermediate state being come about? Because prior to the clear light, everything is dormant and not functional. That’s my qualm.
Khen Rinpoche: When you sleep, how do you wake up? All the senses close down when you sleep, isn’t it? The five doors—the eye consciousness, ear, smell and so forth—shut down. When you wake up, they all come up again, don’t they?
Student 5: How does that work?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, I am asking you how that works. You think about it. Tomorrow morning when you wake up, how do you wake up? You ask your question. Then answer me in the next class. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 