Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L39FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:05.523133
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 39	 				                                 7 September 2017
Q & A. The coarse and subtle body and mind. Q & A. 
Q & A
Khen Rinpoche: Are there any questions related to the last two classes with regard to the three bodies of the basis, the path and the result? If you have any questions, ask now. 
Student 1: In the last lesson, you mentioned the two truths. Why is the ultimate truth attributed to a wisdom, which is a mind, rather than emptiness itself?
Khen Rinpoche: In tantra, when the clear light is discussed, it is done in terms of the objective clear light and the subjective clear light. 
The object, emptiness, is the objective clear light. 
The extremely subtle mind that takes emptiness as its object and realizes emptiness is the subjective clear light. 
Since one can talk about the clear light in terms of the object and subject, when one talks about the ultimate truth, likewise, we can talk about the ultimate truth in terms of the object and subject. 
In tantra, particularly Highest Yoga Tantra, the main concern is with the subjective clear light, the wisdom of great bliss that ascertains emptiness. When we talk about the ultimate truth in Highest Yoga Tantra, the primary emphasis is on the subject, the wisdom of great bliss realizing emptiness that will go on to enlightenment. 
In the texts dealing with Highest Yoga Tantra, the conventional truth here refers to the illusory body. The conventional truth constitutes the method because the illusory body is the substantial cause of the form body. 
Student 1: We have to thank our parents for our six constituents, which came from them. But if we trace back how human beings have the six constituents in the first place, it is due to consuming coarse food. In the end, we have to thank our parents for having attachment to the coarse food. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you do not know how to work with attachment, then you get samsara. If you know how to work with attachment, then you have this path. 
Student 1: We have to thank our parents for having attachment to the coarse food to get the channels and drops. I find tantra difficult because how do you prove we have channels and drops?
Khen Rinpoche: In general, you can see the existence of channels and drops. It can probably be explained by science. As for the explanation of the mind, setting aside the extremely subtle mind, I think scientists cannot even explain the coarser level of consciousnesses as we understand them. 
The consciousness is formless and cannot be seen with the eye. We can only infer that it exists. I guess it is only through experience mainly that you can probably certify that it exists. 
Student 2: (Recaps her question from Lesson 37).  After one has taken the Highest Yoga Tantra initiation with the said downfalls and secondary breaches, it is said you should restore them by confessing according to the rite—the self-initiation rite or taking the initiation again. I am just wondering whether the 100-syllable Vajrasattva purification or confession and prostrations to the 35 buddhas will purify those mistakes of the ten non-virtues and downfalls. Speaking for myself, honestly, the probability is very high (that I have committed those downfalls).
Khen Rinpoche: We are talking specifically about tantric root downfalls here. If a tantric root downfall occurs, engaging in purification with the four opponent powers alone will not purify the downfall. In order for the vows to be restored, you would have to take the wang (or great initiation) again or through the practice of self-initiation. 
With regard to the transgressions that are not root downfalls, I guess perhaps, the confession can purify them.
In an earlier lesson, one of the students mentioned it was said in class that the consciousness to which the phenomenon source form appears is a non-conceptual mental consciousness. I think this is something we need to think about. You can say that the consciousness to which a phenomenon source form appears is a mental consciousness but saying it has to be a non-conceptual mental consciousness is a different matter. I wonder if that is the case or not. I think we need to reconsider this if this was indeed said in class.
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, the practice of deity yoga starts with the generation stage. There will come a time, especially when calm abiding is achieved, when the meditator will have a very clear appearance of the body of the deity but that appearance is appearing to a conceptual consciousness.
What is appearing? You have to posit what is appearing is a form. If it is a form, then of all the divisions of form other than a phenomenon source form, what else could it be? If that is the case, if it is a phenomenon source form, which consciousness is it appearing to? It is appearing to the conceptual consciousness.  If that is the case, a phenomenon source form need not necessarily appear only to a non-conceptual mental consciousness. That’s the point I’m trying to make here. 
In Je Rinpoche’s Illumination of Intent, there’s an explanation of a meditation on how the whole world is filled with skeletons. It is an exercise to counteract attachment for those who have very strong desire. It is said in that text for that meditator there is the appearance of skeletons filling the whole world appearing to his wisdom. 
There are forms that appear to a mental consciousness. If you think about it, other than being a phenomenon source form, what else could it be?
Student 1: In lorig, when you talk about the conceptual consciousness, there is the generally characterized phenomenon and the specifically characterized phenomenon. I understand it has something to do with meaning generality. Yet, there is a form that appears to a conceptual consciousness. That form will be a phenomenon source form. 
Khen Rinpoche: Can you say that coarse form cannot appear to thought?
Student 3: In Lesson 3 of lorig,  there was a statement that form cannot appear to a conceptual consciousness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Who said that?
Student 3: I read that somewhere. 
Khen Rinpoche: Where? In the dream? Must be in the dream. I don’t remember. You go and read and bring back. 
Student 1: During our discussion, with regard to a dream elephant, I asked what the substantial cause of that phenomena source form was. In the end, the answer to that question is that the substantial cause for a phenomenon source form is the imprint.  In the view of the lower tantras, if it is the imprint, then what exactly is the cause for that imprint? Is it a contaminated or uncontaminated imprint? The entry into tantra is to take the initiation. The initiation is said to plant an imprint. What is the substan-
tial cause of this imprint? 
Khen Rinpoche: For the generation stage practitioner, there is the clear appearance of the body of the deity. That appearance is a phenomenon source form.  I think there was a question similar to that given in the discussion. What is the substantial cause of that?
Naturally, with that question, one would ask: Is the substantial cause of form necessarily form? For the sake of discussion, if we were to take the position the substantial cause of form has to be form, then with regard to this phenomenon source form, we have to posit something that is form to be its substantial cause. 
If we were to posit (the substantial cause) to be the wind that is the mount of the consciousness, would that be OK? Then if you were to pursue this further, what would be the substantial cause of that wind (or energy)?
At the end of the day, you will have nothing to point to except the extremely subtle wind. This extremely subtle wind is not like the coarser level of energy. It is dormant and is not manifest. It exists in the form of a potential. 
So, what you have left is the extremely subtle wind-mind. But if you were to look for a real extremely subtle wind-mind, you are not going to find anything. It cannot be found. Now that we are tracing everything all the way back to their very root, i.e., the extremely subtle wind-mind, we may feel there has to be something there. But this cannot be the case. That is totally wrong because it cannot be found. 
We have this idea that the extremely subtle wind-mind is the basis of designation. But it is not the basis of designation. The extremely subtle wind-mind exists only in mere name. Yet, this extremely subtle wind-mind is the root of the entire samsara. It is also the root of nirvana. It is the root of everything. 
If you are talking about experiencing ordinary death, one arises at the clear light of death. When one arises from that, one will enter the intermediate state. From there, rebirth follows. So, samsara comes from this extremely subtle mind. Because you are not able to stop that process, samsara is endless.
The reason why there is ordinary death is because this extremely subtle mind, the clear light of death, is manifest. Before the clear light of death manifests, it is dormant. Because it manifests, this is why you have samsara. If it doesn’t manifest, then there is no intermediate state. 
Here, we are talking about ordinary death, the clear light of death. Because it manifests, there is the intermediate state and then there is rebirth. As such, the mind of death, essentially the extremely subtle mind, is the root of samsara.
When an individual is able to mix the mother and the son clear light, i.e., if the extremely subtle mind is made to realize emptiness, he will achieve the path clear light. First, there is the example clear light. When the example clear light on the final mental isolation is actualized, essentially, that is the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. Once that is achieved, there is no more samsara. That individual is certain to achieve enlightenment. Therefore, in this case, we can say that this extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness is nevertheless also the root of nirvana. 
This individual definitely will achieve enlightenment in that lifetime. Why? Because arising from that meditative equipoise, he achieves the impure illusory body. In that same life, he will go on to achieve the meaning clear light of the fourth stage. He will arise from that into the pure illusory body. Then he achieves unification of learning and the unification of no more learning definitely in that life. 
Student 4: (1) Since the basis of emanation of Shakyamuni Buddha is the complete enjoyment body in Akanishta pure land, having achieved enlightenment there, that basis will not have relied on the coarse white and red bodhicitta that we possess. How does one achieve enlightenment there by generating the meaning clear light and the illusory body without relying on the coarse and subtle bodhicittas? How does one achieve enlightenment in Akanishta? 
(2) Why are the six constituents of semen, bone and marrow of the father, the blood, skin and flesh of the mother and the white and red bodhicittas at the crown and navel considered to be conducive conditions for achieving the illusory body? The beings of other realms also possess the most subtle wind-mind, yet their constituents are not (considered to be) conducive. In other words, why is it that the human being of the Southern Continent born from the womb is a suitable basis for achieving enlightenment? 
Khen Rinpoche: First, for a human being of the Southern Continent to enter Highest Yoga Tantra from the onset in order to achieve enlightenment in one short lifetime in this degenerate age in one body, he needs this physical body. 
In order to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age, you need to be a human being born from the womb, possessing the six constituents. As such, you need to be a human being of the Southern Continent. This means human beings in the North, East and Western Continents, if you subscribe to Buddhist cosmology, cannot achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime. 
If you think about it, it is fair to say that those human beings are also born from the womb and they also have the six constituents. What is there to stop us from saying that they have these conditions? 
Anyway, the explanation goes like this: They are all born from the womb and have the six constituents. But why is it that only human beings of the Southern Continent can achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age through the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra? 
It is a characteristic of this world, the Southern Continent, that the karma accumulated by beings here, especially if the karma accumulated is very strong, can ripen in this very lifetime.
In the lam-rim literature, it is mentioned there is karma that is so powerful that you can see it ripen in this life. Then there is also some karma that are weaker that ripens in future lives. It is just the nature of the beings of this world that the karma they accumulate can ripen in this life if it is a very strong karma. 
This is not really the case for human beings of the other continents. What is certain for them is that they have a certain level of enjoyments because of the previous karma they have accumulated prior to those rebirths in those three continents. Once they are born in those continents, they are guaranteed to have a certain level of enjoyments. But this is not due to any actions done in that very life.  They are just experiencing the results of their past actions. For the beings of those three other continents, it is not the case that if they accumulate some very strong karma, it can ripen for them in that very lifetime. But this is the case for the human beings of this world. I guess this is the explanation why, in order to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age, you need to have a human support of the Southern Continent. 
Then what about the desire realm gods? What happened to them? Why not them too? 
In the Abhidharmakosa, the enjoyment of the different desire realm gods are explained in this way: 
In two levels of the desire realm gods—the Land of the Four Great Guardian Kings and the Land of the Thirty-three—these gods engage in sexual intercourse but they do not emit both the white and red bodhicittas during sexual intercourse.  
In the level of the desire realm gods called Free of Conflict or Free of Combat, the desire realm gods do not engage in sexual intercourse. They only enjoy hugs or physical embrace.
In the level of the desire realm gods called the Joyful, they do not even engage in such embrace. They are satisfied just by holding hands. 
In the level of the desire realm gods called Enjoying Emanation, they don’t even need to hold hands. They are satisfied just by smiling at one another.
In the level of the desire realm gods called Controlling Others’ Emanations, they don’t even need to smile. They merely look at each other. 
The form realm gods do not possess the male and female sexual organs. 
The formless realm gods do not even possess form.
Many of the desire realm gods do not engage in sexual intercourse. For those who do
engage in sexual intercourse, since there is no emission of the white and red bodhicittas, how do the desire realm gods have children? If we talk about Devaputra, the son of the gods, how did he come about?  There is no fallacy in saying that beings born as desire realm gods are born miraculously. Literally, they appear in their parents’ lap miraculously. 
Starting from the first of the six levels of the desire realm gods, the first is the Land of
the Four Great Guardian Kings. They are born having the nature of being five years old. Then at the next level, the Land of the Thirty-three, six years old, seven years old, eight years old, nine years old and so forth.  
I don’t remember the details of how big these gods are but this is mentioned in the Abhidharmakosa.  They have immeasurably long lifespans compared to us human beings.
When you put all this together, you can see for somebody who is entering tantra from the onset—in this case, Highest Yoga Tantra—in order to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime, this individual has to be a human being of the Southern Continent born from the womb possessing the six constituents. 
In general, in the whole of samsara, among the three realms—the desire realm, form realm and formless realm—the form and formless realms are out. 
So you are left only with the desire realm. 
As for the desire realm, the desire realm gods are out. 
So you are only left with the human beings. 
As for the human beings of the four continents, the (human beings) of the Northern, Western and Eastern Continents are out. 
What is left are the human beings of the Southern Continent who are born from the womb possessing the six constituents that is the basis to achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age. 
The gods are out. The human beings of the other continents are out. Definitely, the beings of the lower realms are out. Forget about tantra. They cannot even achieve the path. 
Khen Rinpoche: So, at the end of the day, we are the best.  When you think about that, then there is no depression! 
(Student’s question is inaudible).   
Khen Rinpoche: You want to go there? I think there is some answer to that but I don’t remember exactly. I will find out next time. Some scholars have some answers to that. I will think about it. 
Here, in Highest Yoga Tantra, there’s a lot of explanation about the extremely subtle wind-mind. This extremely subtle wind-mind acts as the root of cyclic existence but it also acts as the root of nirvana. 
THE COARSE AND SUBTLE BODY AND MIND
As I have mentioned in the last lesson, in order to have a good understanding of the practice of the generation stage, you must have a good understanding of the death process. Here, in the commentary on Highest Yoga Tantra, there’s a presentation of the body and mind. 
The body is divided into two—the coarse body and the subtle body. 
When we talk about the coarse aggregates or the coarse body, there are the five aggregates.  The five aggregates are the basis of designation in dependence upon which the ‘I’ is imputed. This ‘I’ imputed in dependence upon the coarse aggregates can be called the coarse ‘I’.
You can take the subtle body to be the extremely subtle wind. An ‘I’ is imputed in dependence upon the extremely subtle wind acting as the basis of designation. You can call this the subtle ‘I’. 
Likewise, the mind is also divided into two—the coarse mind and the subtle mind. 
The coarse level of consciousnesses would include:
the sense consciousnesses, which are the coarsest level of consciousness  
the mental consciousness that is a little less coarse than the sense consciousnesses 
So, within the division of the coarse and subtle minds, you could include the mental consciousness and call that the coarse mind. However, within the mental consciousness itself, there are also different levels or different types of mental consciousnesses. 
To make it simple:
You have the consciousnesses related to the physical support, the sense consciousnesses.
Then you have the mental consciousness that come under the coarse mind. 
There is a set of consciousnesses called the 80 indicative conceptions. This is peculiar to Highest Yoga Tantra. The 80 indicative conceptions are conceptual in nature and are included as subtle consciousnesses. 
Within the category of the (extremely) subtle mind, there are four divisions: 
the mind of appearance 
the mind of increase 
the mind of near attainment
the mind of clear light
These four are considered as subtle minds. The mind of increase is subtler than the mind of appearance. The mind of near attainment is subtler than the mind of increase. This culminates in the extremely subtle mind of clear light that is one entity with the extremely subtle wind, its mount.
So, now that you know the body and mind are divided into the coarse and the subtle, you need to understand this clearly. 
As long as the coarse body and mind are active and manifesting, the subtle body and mind lay dormant and cannot manifest. They abide in the form of a potential, do not perform any functions and cannot engage in any activities. 
When the karma for the coarse body and mind to function is exhausted, i.e., when they stop functioning, they dissolve into the subtle body and mind.  Only then do the subtle body and mind become active and are able to function or manifest.
The coarse level of body and mind stop to function. 
The coarse level of wind (or energy) and mind dissolve into the subtle body and mind.
The subtle body and mind manifest.  
At the most subtle level, the extremely subtle wind-mind manifests.  This extremely subtle wind-mind is also called the eternal indestructible drop as it is eternal, has always been there, will never go out of existence and never changes. It is not born in that sense. It doesn’t die and will never go out of existence.
We have talked about the buddha lineage, the phenomenon that is suitable to be transformed into the body of a buddha. We have also talked about the developmental buddha lineage and the naturally abiding lineage according to the Sutra School, the Mind Only School and the Middle Way School, but the best explanation is found in Highest Yoga Tantra.  
The buddha lineage that is suitable to be transformed into a buddha’s body is essentially this fundamental mind of clear light together with its mount, the extremely subtle wind.  This is what can be transformed into the entity of the path and goes on to enlightenment. It can be transformed into the truth body and the form body and it is this that goes from life to life.  
Our coarse body doesn’t go from life to life. Our coarse level of consciousness—the sense consciousnesses and the mental consciousness of this life—do not go to the next life.  What goes to the next life is the extremely subtle wind-mind.
What do you think? Do the sense consciousnesses go from life to life or not?
When the coarse body and mind are present, active and functioning, the subtle body and mind cannot function or manifest and are not activated.  When the karma for the coarse body and mind is exhausted, they begin to stop functioning.  When they stop functioning completely, only then do the extremely subtle body and mind come into being and manifest.
For us, the extremely subtle wind-mind is only manifest at the time of death. That happens due to karma. Through the path of Highest Yoga Tantra—in particular, by actualizing some levels of the completion stage—and through the power of meditation, one is able to stop the coarser levels of body and consciousnesses from functioning and then activate the extremely subtle wind-mind. With that acting as the basis of designation, one can achieve the actual body of the deity, starting with the illusory body. It is explained in Highest Yoga Tantra that the yogi is able to accumulate an unbelievable amount of merit with the illusory body.
Q & A
Student 4:  The extremely subtle wind-mind is definitely impermanent. Yet it is unchanging and do not disintegrate. How are we to understand its impermanence yet it doesn’t go through momentary disintegration? 
Khen Rinpoche: The extremely subtle wind-mind is definitely an impermanent phenomenon. It is impermanent in terms of its continuum. Therefore, it definitely changes from moment to moment. But it is not like a coarse object that comes into being at a certain time and goes out of existence at a certain time. Definitely, it is not like that as it has always been there. But while it is there, it undergoes change momentarily.
Student 3: In Buddhism, we learn the mind is beginningless and doesn’t go out of existence. So, in Highest Yoga Tantra, this would mean the extremely subtle wind-mind? 
Because the sense consciousnesses of the previous life will go out of existence, can we say the substantial cause of the sense consciousnesses in the next rebirth will be the imprints due to projecting karma as explained in the twelve links? 
Khen Rinpoche: All consciousnesses have the extremely subtle mind as their root. Everything comes from this extremely subtle mind. We will look at this in the future. 
When you look at the reverse process—let’s say, a person taking rebirth—when one arises from the clear light of death:
First, there is the mind of near attainment, 
followed by the mind of increase, 
followed by the mind of appearance, i.e., the mind becomes increasingly coarser and coarser. 
Then comes the mind of the 80 indicative conceptions.
From there, one has the sense consciousnesses. 
Basically, everything goes back to the mind of clear light mind and arises from that mind. 
If you accept that there is a basis of infusion for the predispositions—the thing that holds the predispositions and carries them from life to life—is this extremely subtle wind-mind the basis of infusion for all these predispositions or not? 
There is much to think about. It is not straightforward as certain implications will follow. If you say the extremely subtle wind-mind has to be the basis of infusion of the predispositions because this is what is moving from life to life, obviously, this has to be the carrier (of the predispositions). 
But if this is the carrier, yet it’s not manifest when we are alive, then how can we put
something into a non-manifest container? 
However, if you were to say that it is not the basis of infusion, it follows that the basis of infusion would be a coarser level of mind. When this coarser level of mind ceases to exist, then all one’s imprints will disappear. 
So, there is much to think about. If you think about it, if you accept that there is a basis of infusion, you don’t have much of a choice other than to say that this extremely subtle wind-mind is the basis of infusion. The imprints must go from life to life. Likewise, its container, the basis of infusion, must go from life to life. What can you posit to be this container other than this extremely subtle wind-mind? 
You have the explanation of the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) of disintegratedness. The CMWS rejects the Mind Only School’s assertion of the mind- basis-of-all. This is an intellectual construct of this tenet system and does not exist whatsoever. 
The CMWS says there is no real need to talk about the basis of infusion. Instead, it talks about how the continuum of imprints is maintained through the concept of disintegratedness—how when an action ceases, it produces disintegratedness. Since it is a product, it is impermanent. Therefore, it maintains its continuum, producing the next moment and so forth without the need to talk about putting something somewhere.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 