Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L35FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.131897
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 35	 				                                       15 August 2017
Root text, p. 95—97 (& Handout given in class). Mainstream Highest Yoga Chapter Five: The Generation Stage. A detailed explanation of highest yoga tantra. The system of mainstream highest yoga tantra. How to become a vessel suitable for meditation on the path. Types of mandalas—Explaining the body mandala practice. Meaning of mandala. Wisdom of bliss and emptiness in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
MAINSTREAM HIGHEST YOGA TANTRA
CHAPTER FIVE: THE GENERATION STAGE 
A detailed explanation of highest yoga tantra
The detailed explanation … Kālacakra tantra
The system of mainstream highest yoga tantra
This has four parts: …
…
4. How to manifest the fruits of practice (p. 95)
How to become a vessel suitable for meditating on the path
You become a vessel … then you obtain empowerment. (p. 96)
In order to enter into Highest Yoga Tantra, you have to obtain an empowerment in the mandala of Highest Yoga Tantra. As such, first you have to enter the mandala of any suitable Highest Yoga Tantra and then obtain empowerment. If one enters the mandala, takes the empowerment and receives it, then one becomes a suitable vessel for meditating on Highest Yoga Tantra. This is the purpose of receiving or taking the empowerment.
	Further, from the perspective …  the four empowerments. (p. 96)
The four empowerments (or initiations) are:
the vase
the secret
the pristine wisdom (or knowledge wisdom)
the fourth empowerment (or the word initiation)
In order to practise both the generation and completion stages of Highest Yoga Tantra, one must obtain these four empowerments. 
Types of mandalas
There are three maṇḍalas … 
…
… there are four maṇḍalas. (p. 97)
What is the mandala in which one obtains these four empowerments?  Of the four, the first is the vase empowerment. With respect to the vase empowerment, one obtains it in either:
the painted-cloth mandala or 
the coloured-sand mandala or 
the body mandala
These are the three mandalas in which one obtains the vase empowerment. 
The painted-cloth mandala is one that’s drawn or printed on. The painted-cloth mandala is one of the bases of accomplishment. 
Another basis of accomplishment is the coloured-sand mandala, what we usually call the sand mandala. 
The body mandala is not just visualizing or placing the deities on the body.  Rather, the body mandala means generating deities with the body as a basis of accomplishment.  With the body or the body parts as the basis of accomplishment, one generates them into a deity. That is the body mandala.
For some special disciples, there is also the absorption mandala. We have mentioned the absorption mandala (or concentration mandala) before.  In the case where the person who is conferring the empowerment has a special level of meditative absorption and the disciples are similarly well qualified, then in those cases there could be a situation whereby a vase empowerment is conferred using such a mandala.
Therefore, in general, there are four mandalas in which one can obtain the vase empowerment.  
Explaining the body mandala practice
It is not suitable …
…
… but empowerment is not conferred there. (p. 97)
If we look at the method of accomplishment for Vajrabhairava, there is no mention of
the body mandala practice. As such, there is no initiation into the body mandala in the case of Vajrabhairava. 
If you look at the Vajrabhairava practice, there are sections that involve placing or meditating on deities on parts of the body but that alone does not constitute a body mandala practice. In order for something to be a body mandala practice, the basis of accomplishment for generating the deity has to be the body or the body parts. As such, although there is a practice of meditating on deities in the practice of Vajrabhairava, that alone does not make it a body mandala practice.
What you have to understand is this. The body mandala practice is not just a practice involving visualizing deities on different parts of the body.  That alone does not make it a body mandala practice.  In order for something to be a body mandala practice, the basis of accomplishment for generating the deities has to be any of the body parts. So if there is such a practice whereby you take any or specific body parts and use them as the basis of accomplishment for the generation of the deity, then it becomes a body mandala practice.  
Khen Rinpoche: You must know that first. 
For example, in the practice of Guhyasamāja, if you look at the means of accomplishment of the deity, you will find the practice of the body mandala.  But although there is the practice of the body mandala in Guhyasamāja, there is no initiation into the body mandala in Guhyasamāja.
As for Chakrasamvara (or Heruka), there are three different traditions:
Luipa
Ghantapada 
Krishnacharya
Of these three main traditions of Chakrasamvara, it’s said there is a practice of the body mandala in the Ghantapada tradition of the Chakrasamvara. There is also the initiation into the body mandala. Before one is a suitable vessel to receive the initiation into the body mandala of the Ghantapada tradition of Chakrasamvara, first, one must receive the initiation into the external mandala of Chakrasamvara in the Ghantapada tradition. As such, this example illustrates what was said earlier, “It is not suitable to confer empowerment in the body mandala on those who have not obtained initiation previously.”
How do we understand the word, empowerment here? Using the Ghantapada tradition of Chakrasamvara as an example, there is the outer mandala and the inner mandala. The inner mandala refers to the body mandala. So there is the empowerment in the body mandala in the Ghantapada tradition of Chakrasamvara.  But before one can receive this, first, one must obtain the empowerment into the outer mandala of the Ghantapada tradition of Chakrasamvara.
It is said that the three higher empowerments … the ultimate-bodhicitta
maṇḍala. (p. 97)
Of the three higher empowerments:
The secret empowerment is conferred in the relative-bodhicitta (or conventional bodhicitta) mandala.
The pristine wisdom (or knowledge wisdom) empowerment is conferred in the lotus (or bhaga) mandala. 
The word empowerment is conferred in the ultimate bodhicitta mandala.
Meaning of mandala 
What is the meaning of mandala?  Mandala means taking the essence.  The word mandala in Tibetan is kyil khor. Kyil means essence and khor means condition to take. In Sanskrit, it is mandala. So one meaning of mandala is taking the essence. 
When we talk about the mandala in the context of empowerments, please do not have this idea that it’s referring to something drawn or constructed out of sand.  If you apply the word, mandala, in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, keep in mind the meaning of mandala is taking the essence, the essence here referring to the wisdom of bliss and emptiness.
In the context of the secret, pristine wisdom and word empowerments, by entering into the mandala, one takes the essence for the purpose of generating that wisdom of bliss and emptiness in one’s mental continuum. As such, we are taking the essence.  
Another meaning of taking the essence is the final attainment of the four bodies. So, by entering in the mandala, we are taking the empowerments for the purpose of planting the seeds for the four bodies in one’s mental continuum. 
Wisdom of bliss and emptiness in Highest Yoga Tantra
In tantra, we talk about the inseparability of method and wisdom. Here, in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, it is the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
First, you need to get this right. 
Bliss is actualized or manifested. 
This bliss is then used to ascertain emptiness.
Within one’s blissful consciousness, method and wisdom are inseparably fused together.  
When we talk about the wisdom of bliss and emptiness, this is what we are referring
to. There is a blissful consciousness—bliss is a consciousness—that ascertains emptiness. These two are fused together inseparably. 
When we talk about method and wisdom being inseparable, it can have a different meaning. In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, when we talk about method and wisdom and bringing these two together, first, you need to identify them separately:
The method is the illusory body that is the method through which one achieves the form body.  
The wisdom refers to the clear light that is the method through which one achieves the truth body. 
It is said that all Highest Yoga Tantras are called the tantras of inseparable method and wisdom because all of them show the methods or practices for actualizing the wisdom of bliss and emptiness.
Divisions of Highest Yoga Tantra
According to Je Rinpoche, i.e., the Gelug presentation, Highest Yoga Tantra is only divided into two—Father Tantra and Mother Tantra. 
~ Non-dual tantras
There are other systems of divisions. In those divisions, you will see an additional division called non-dual tantra but this is not posited in the Gelug tradition because according to Je Rinpoche, this so-called non-dual tantra is not a division. Rather it is a basis of division. 
According to Je Rinpoche, all Highest Yoga Tantras are tantras of inseparable method and wisdom. As such, when we say the tantra of inseparable method and wisdom, we can also say the tantra of non-dual method and wisdom. As such, all Highest Yoga Tantras are the basis of division. Non-dual tantra is a not a division but rather a basis of division.
According to Je Rinpoche, all Highest Yoga Tantras are essentially non-dual tantras. What are non-dual tantras?  Non-dual tantras are tantras of the inseparable method and wisdom. In this context, when we say all Highest Yoga Tantras are non-dual tantras, this means they are tantras of inseparable method and wisdom. This method and wisdom here refer to the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
In this context, non-dual tantras mean tantras of inseparable method and wisdom and here, it means the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. The wisdom that realizes emptiness is the wisdom. This leaves bliss to be the method.
In this context, why is this bliss classified as the method?  That’s the question. How is this bliss a method for achieving the form body of a buddha? Such questions will arise.
Here, in this context, bliss cannot be posited as the method for achieving the form body because it is the illusory body (that is the method for achieving the form body),   not bliss. Here, in this context, perhaps if we say that the bliss is the method for achieving the method for realizing emptiness, then perhaps it will be OK.
According to Je Rinpoche, all Highest Yoga Tantras are tantras of inseparable method and wisdom. What is this inseparable method and wisdom? It is the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. Why is this so? Because all Highest Yoga Tantras explicitly teach the development of this wisdom of bliss and emptiness. As such, all Highest Yoga Tantras are non-dual tantras. Since the very essence of Highest Yoga Tantras is the wisdom of bliss and emptiness, all Highest Yoga Tantras teach the generation or development of this wisdom. As such, all Highest Yoga Tantras are non-dual tantras.
~Father Tantra and Mother Tantra
According to Je Rinpoche, all Highest Yoga Tantras when divided, there are basically two divisions—Father Tantra and Mother Tantra. 
What are the differences between these two? What makes a tantra a Father Tantra and not Mother Tantra?
Highest Yoga Tantras that mainly teach the method for the generation of the illusory body, the uncommon cause of the form body of a buddha, are Father Tantras. 
Highest Yoga Tantras that mainly show how to develop and actualize the clear light, the uncommon cause of the dharmakaya or the truth body, are called Mother Tantras. 
If Mother Tantras primarily talk about the development or generation of the clear light, it is essentially talking about generating the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. Other than that, what else is there?
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand why I am saying this? We haven’t started on Highest Yoga Tantra proper yet and you are already confused!  
Student 1: The non-dual tantra refers to the indivisibility of the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. Is it correct to say that the bliss here does not refer to the illusory body but refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: If it is bliss, it is not necessarily a bliss that realizes emptiness.
Student 1: In this context of non-dual tantra being the basis of division into Father and Mother Tantra, because this bliss is not related or associated with the illusory body, it is earlier asserted to be the wisdom realizing emptiness. So then, Mother Tantra is again a non-dual bliss and emptiness. Where does the bliss go to now? 
Khen Rinpoche: The bliss goes nowhere. The bliss is still there. 
Student 1: I get the problem now.
Khen Rinpoche: What’s the problem? There is no problem.
Student 1: Father Tantra is non-dual bliss and emptiness, yet bliss in the generality of tantra is not non-dual. Bliss is the wisdom realizing emptiness. Yet, non-dual tantra is 
divided into Father and Mother Tantras. That means there is bliss at the generality
level and there is bliss at the specific level of Mother Tantra. Am I right to say that?
Khen Rinpoche: All Highest Yoga Tantras are tantras that explicitly talks about the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. This is the purpose. 
Guhyasamaja is classified as a Father Tantra. Since it is a Highest Yoga Tantra, it necessarily talks about the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. If we say that Guhyasamaja on the basis of showing how one develops this wisdom of bliss and emptiness one comes to achieve the illusory body, this means it fits the definition of Father Tantra. With relation to the clear light and the illusory body, it primarily shows the development of the illusory body. 
The Heruka Chakrasamvara tantra is classified as a Mother Tantra. Of the two—the clear light and the illusory body—since it primarily teaches the development of the clear light, it is called a Mother Tantra. You can phrase it like that.
We will summarize again. 
All Highest Yoga Tantras are tantras of inseparable method and wisdom. 
In this context:
the method refers to bliss 
the wisdom refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness.
All Highest Yoga Tantras are also called non-dual tantras. 
Highest Yoga Tantra can be divided into two:
Father Tantras are Highest Yoga Tantras that primarily shows the development of the illusory body.
Mother Tantras are Highest Yoga Tantras that primarily shows the development of clear light.
Student 1: These two phrases—(1) the wisdom of inseparable bliss and emptiness in this context and (2) the inseparability of method and wisdom—am I right to say that the bliss is taken in this context to be wisdom realizing emptiness? You have the inseparability of method and wisdom. The method aspect is the bliss realizing emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: These two are inseparable.
Student 1: I am having a hard time trying to identify and locate this illusory bliss. What does it mean exactly? In these two phrases, it seems they are same and yet they seem very different. The inseparability of method and wisdom in this context, the method is the bliss realizing emptiness and you have the inseparability of …
Ven. Gyurme:  Are you trying to ask: In the context of the wisdom of non-dual emptiness, is it one mind or the coming together of two minds?
Student 1: No. We all know it is always just one consciousness. I am not going in that
direction. I’m trying to figure out what bliss in these two phrases mean. It seems like you have the inseparable wisdom of bliss and emptiness and this bliss is the wisdom realizing emptiness. You have the inseparable method and wisdom in the context of inseparable tantra that is the bliss realizing emptiness. Are these talking about the same thing? Or is there ...
Khen Rinpoche: Which two?
Student 1: These two phrases—inseparable method and wisdom in the context of inseparable tantra and the wisdom of inseparable bliss and emptiness. Are these two referring to the same thing?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes they are the same thing. I don’t know. If I am not wrong, I am hearing the same thing. When we say inseparable method and wisdom and inseparable bliss and emptiness, we are talking about the same thing. 
Student 1: Yet Father Tantra shows the method to eventually achieve the illusory body. Is it the bliss aspect of inseparable bliss and emptiness that leads to that? 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you OK with the inseparable method and wisdom and inseparable bliss and emptiness being the same thing? 
Student 1: Wisdom of inseparable bliss and emptiness. Yes. OK.
Khen Rinpoche: So inseparable method and wisdom and inseparable bliss and emptiness are the same thing. 
If we were to say in a general way, what are Father Tantras and Mother Tantras? 
Father Tantras are those tantras primarily showing the method aspect of the path.  
Mother tantras primarily teach the wisdom aspect of the path.
Here, when we talk about Father Tantras being tantras that mainly teach the method, the method we are referring to is the method for achieving the form body of a buddha. The method here does not refer to bliss. It refers to the illusory body.
Student 1: OK. That’s why I got confused. There is method and wisdom where method refers to the bliss. Here, the method does not refer to the bliss.
Khen Rinpoche: When we divide Highest Yoga Tantra into Father Tantra and Mother Tantra, the division is made on the basis of whether the tantra primarily teaches the method or wisdom. In this context here, the method is not the method that was talked about earlier. The method here refers to the illusory body, the uncommon cause for actualizing the form body. It is not bliss.
The question is not about the Father Tantras. The question is about Mother Tantras. Since we say that Mother Tantras are those Highest Yoga Tantras that primarily teach the wisdom aspect—in this case, we are referring to the clear light that is the uncommon cause for dharmakaya—the clear light for the wisdom here is the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. 
Again it becomes uncomfortable. This is the implication. It’s a bit of a problem. Every-
thing is talking about the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. Father Tantra is also Highest Yoga Tantra. It is also necessarily a tantra that teaches and shows the development of the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. If we say that Father Tantra is Highest Yoga Tantra, then it is a tantra that talks about the wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness. On that basis, then it primarily teaches the development of the illusory body that is the uncommon cause for actualizing the form body. What about the Mother Tantra then? 
Student 1: Rather than saying, it’s the method to achieve the form body, can we say it is the way to develop the form body, using the word “develop” to separate it from the method and wisdom? 
Khen Rinpoche: It teaches the illusory body that is the uncommon cause for the form body of a buddha.
Student 2: I don’t quite understand this Mother Tantra. So Mother Tantra doesn’t primarily teach us about the illusory body, the cause for the form body?
Khen Rinpoche: It boils down to the word, ‘primarily.’ It is not that Mother Tantra does not talk about the illusory body but primarily, it deals with the clear light. This is why there is the word, ‘primarily.’
In the teachings, Je Rinpoche’s assertion is that we don’t divide Highest Yoga Tantra into three divisions. Instead, we only have two divisions. We don’t have the division of non-dual tantras. 
DIVISIONS OF FATHER TANTRA
The Father Tantras themselves are classified in this way: 
Father Tantras that are desire or attachment method tantras
Father Tantras that are anger method tantras 
Father Tantras that are ignorance method tantras
The way the Father Tantras are classified explains why you see these terms in Highest Yoga Tantra—taking desire as the path. That’s common.  There is also taking anger or hatred as the path and taking ignorance as the path. These terminologies exist.
Although the Mother Tantras are not classified in such a way, in meaning, such tantras are there in the Mother Tantras. 
Anger method tantras
In Je Rinpoche’s Lamp Illuminating the Fives Levels of Guhyasamaja, this question is asked. Yes, there is taking desire into the path but what is the meaning of taking hatred as a path and taking ignorance as a path? 
How are we to understand the meaning of taking hatred as a path? There is the performance of wrathful activities such as killing, destruction, expelling and so forth. At the time of performing these activities, at the causal motivation phase, there is no hatred or anger but at the time of performing those wrathful activities, there is the generation not of an angry mind but a kind of forceful, harsh mind, i.e., it’s a harsh mind as opposed to a gentle mind. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is a very wrathful mind.
In the practice of the protection wheel, when we generate the protection wheel for the purpose of protection against interferers, there are the practices of expelling or destroying the interferers. At the causal motivation phase, one meditates on the protection wheel with a mind of compassion, but at the same time, one chases away the interferers, destroying them and so forth. It is said that at that moment, we generate anger and hatred literally. Malice and ill will are used.
Ignorance method tantras
The explanation is this: Whether it’s an anger method tantra or desire method tantra, since ignorance is always concomitant with anger and desire, as such, when it is an anger method tantra, by the way, you also have ignorance. As such, there is an ignorance method. When there is desire or attachment, since ignorance is always concomitant with that, by the way, ignorance is also there.
Je Rinpoche’s Lamp Illuminating the Five Levels of Guhyasamaja says that you must understand ignorance method tantra to mean that, by the way, ignorance is there concomitant with either anger or attachment. One is not focussing specifically on ignorance and using that as a method. There is no permission to do that. 
There is a ignorance method solely from the perspective of ignorance being concomitant with anger or desire. It exists through the force of either anger or attachment. Then by the way, ignorance comes into play as well. As such, from that perspective, it is called the ignorance method tantra. This is mentioned by Je Rinpoche in his Lamp Illuminating the Five Levels of Guhyasamaja. This is something for you to think about.
There is another explanation of the meaning of ignorance method—taking ignorance as the path. You should not take ignorance in ignorance method to mean actual ignorance. Rather, it refers to the clear light of sleep. This is given the name, ignorance. There is a way of sustaining the practice during the clear light of sleep. There are methods for doing that. As such, they are called ignorance methods.
Earlier on, we saw what Je Rinpoche said in his Lamp Illuminating the Five Levels of Guhyasamaja. In the context of taking anger as the path, at the time of actually performing wrathful activities—not during the causal motivation phase—Je Rinpoche said there is a “harsh mind” at the time of the actual performance of those activities. 
There are some scholars who say you cannot take that harsh mind to mean actual 
anger or hatred. 
Then there are other scholars who say that that harsh mind is actual anger or hatred. One is using that actual anger or hatred as the path.
When we looked at these phrases—taking anger, hatred or attachment as the path—
is the anger or attachment referring to the actual afflictions themselves or something else? This is something we really have to think about.
As for taking ignorance as the path, there are these two different interpretations of what ignorance is: 
One argument is that, for example, when you take desire as the path, since ignorance is always concomitant with desire, it’s a method of utilizing ignorance as well since ignorance is concomitant with desire. Likewise, it’s the same thing with anger. 
There is another interpretation. When we say taking ignorance as the path, ignorance is not the actual ignorance. Rather, it refers to sleep. So there are ways of sustaining the practice of utilizing the clear light of sleep.
Back to taking desire or attachment as the path. Does it mean that desire or attachment, i.e., the affliction itself, is transformed into the entity of the path or not? 
If we were to say, “Yes,” then it gets very complicated and difficult. There is one explanation that goes like this. Taking desire as the path means this:
With desire or attachment as the condition, the bodhicitta in the body melts. 
Through the melting of the bodhicitta, bliss is induced. 
This bliss is used to ascertain emptiness. 
Through that, attachment itself is exhausted and ceases. 
For somebody who does not possess the special method of Highest Yoga Tantra, in order for that person to melt the bodhicitta in the body, actual desire or attachment is needed.
For somebody who has the skilful method of Highest Yoga Tantra, he or she does not necessarily need actual desire or attachment to melt the bodhicitta in the body through which bliss is induced. Rather through the skilful means of Highest Yoga Tantra, by the coming together of external and internal conditions, one can melt the bodhicitta in the body through which bliss is induced.  One then uses the bliss to realize emptiness, cease the obscurations—even the knowledge obscurations—and through that one achieves enlightenment.  
The essence is that you don’t need actual attachment or desire to melt the bodhicitta. That’s not necessary. Rather, it’s like taking bliss as the path. Likewise, in taking hatred or anger as the path. At the time of performing the wrathful activities, there is a harsh or forceful mind. But that is not the actual hatred or anger.
We can take this as an answer to the question about how the bodhisattva on the pure grounds can engage in such a practice of taking joy or bliss as the path. Bliss is necessary. We cannot eliminate that because we need to induce the bliss without which we cannot use the bliss to ascertain emptiness. Without ascertaining emptiness, we cannot abandon the subtlest obscurations. But in order to induce the bliss, it is not necessary to have actual desire or attachment.
There are individuals who enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra from the onset. As
such, they enter the path with desire and attachment. But when working on inducing the bliss, they still depend on the special method of Highest Yoga Tantra, i.e., by depending on both external conditions and internal conditions. Nevertheless, it is probably all right for them to use their desire in their practice because for them, their desire or attachment will not harm them. At their level, it doesn’t harm them. They have it as they have not abandoned it yet.
Student 1: The not actual anger that is used as a path in Highest Yoga Tantra causes the bodhicitta to melt and ascertain emptiness at the most subtle …
Khen Rinpoche: Anger melts the bodhicitta?
Student 1: Yes, because you are taking anger into the path in Highest Yoga Tantra. Taking desire into the path of Highest Yoga Tantra means you caused the bodhicitta to melt and generate the extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness and achieve enlightenment. So you are taking that into the path to enlightenment. Therefore, I would understand taking anger into the path to enlightenment means that through anger, one also achieves enlightenment. Taking anger into the path would be the same as taking desire into the path in the context of using that path to achieve enlightenment. 
We can take desire as an aid to enlightenment in sutra. That is actually a branch for benefitting others and so on. Here, when we talk about the Highest Yoga Tantra practitioner, when the yogi who has achieved very high levels of attainment engages in killing, there is no actual anger. How does that cause him to achieve enlightenment when he manifests that anger?
Khen Rinpoche: The purpose of taking anger as the path is not the same as taking desire as the path. It is not for the purpose of generating bliss and so forth. It is called an anger method tantra. Why is it a method?  When you perform wrathful activities for the purpose of stopping certain individuals, let’s say, who bring about a lot of harm and negative karma, that’s a method to stop such sentient beings.
Wrathful activities such as killing, expelling and chasing away technically can only be achieved first by those people who must be bodhisattvas having uncontrived bodhicitta. But that alone is not enough. He must have high level of attainments and realizations. If that person can kill another sentient being, he must also have the power to revive him, i.e., he can put the person he killed back together again. He has that kind of ability. Otherwise then it is just …
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau
Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
Handout