Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L43FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:05.442787
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 43 				                                          21 September 2017
Review. The importance of the extremely subtle mind. The direct realization of emptiness in the three paths: The difference lies in the quality of the mind & the training in the limitless collection of merit. The power of the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. 
REVIEW
When the four elements—earth, water, fire and wind—dissolve in stages, the strength of the energies or winds become weaker as well. The earth element dissolves into the water element, the water element dissolves into the fire element and the fire element dissolves into the wind element. At the stage when the fire element dissolves into the wind element, the mind of the 80 indicative conceptions will be dissolving as well. 
Then the wind element dissolves into the mind of appearance. The energy of the wind that is the mount of the mind of appearance is definitely subtler and not as strong. When the 80 indicative conceptions dissolve into the mind of appearance, all conventional appearances dissolve, especially the coarse ones. When the mind of appearance manifests, all appearances to the coarser levels of consciousness would have ceased. What appears to the mind of appearance is vacuity. Although it is vacuity, it has this element of a whitish appearance. 
The mind of appearance then dissolves into the mind of increase. The mind of increase dissolves into the mind of near-attainment. The mind of near-attainment dissolves into clear light. Progressively, the mind becomes more and more subtle, culminating in the extremely subtle mind of clear light. During this process, the winds that are the mounts of those minds also dissolve and become increasingly subtler.
This is very interesting. As the winds dissolve during this entire process, becoming
less and less coarse, i.e., they become more and more subtle, the propensity for the
conceptuality of discursive thought also becomes weaker and weaker. 
By the time there is the mind of appearance, nothing else appears except vacuity.  Although it is a vacuity, it has the element of a whitish appearance. Coarse conceptuality has ceased and does not function. 
The mind continues to become increasingly subtler. With the mind of increase, there is a reddish appearance. There is pitch-black darkness for the mind of near-attainment. This culminates in the extremely subtle mind of clear light. From the point of view of the basis, in this case, this is the clear light of death. What appears is nothing except very clean clear vacuity. 
At these later stages of the dissolution, there is no coarse conceptuality. This means the mind’s potential for staying on an object can be stronger and stronger as naturally, there is the absence of laxity, excitement, distraction and so forth.  
By the time the extremely subtle mind manifests, all appearances would have subsided by then. What appears is clean clear vacuity. It’s said those individuals who already have great familiarity with or the realization of emptiness, when they reach this point where they are able to make use of the extremely subtle mind, this opportunity becomes an extraordinary experience because of the subtlety and quality of this mind. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE EXTREMELY SUBTLE MIND 
One of the special uncommon features of Highest Yoga Tantra is the technique of utilizing this extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness. Such a method is not found in the Paramitayana nor is it found in the three lower classes of tantra. 

It is said that this extremely subtle mind is very powerful and has great potential if one can gain access to this mind. One will be able to realize emptiness with it. This is an uncommon feature of Highest Yoga Tantra. This extremely subtle mind that realizes emptiness is said to be a very powerful antidote to the knowledge obscurations. 
It is important and very good if you can grasp the essential points here. What is the special and uncommon feature of tantra and, in particular, Highest Yoga Tantra? Even if you cannot understand all the details, you must try to grasp these essential points. 
For someone who is taking rebirth, one will not remain forever in that state of the extremely subtle mind. The mind will become coarser gradually. From the clear light of death, one enters the intermediate state with the mind of near-attainment. So the mind will become increasingly coarser. 
Having said that, does this mean the extremely subtle mind transforms into the entity of the mind of near-attainment? Personally, I don’t think this is the case because it would be problematic if you were to say that.
During the clear light of death, the mind is not focussed. What is appearing to that mind is clean clear vacuity. That vacuity will dissipate and a coarser level of mind arises together with the coarser wind that is grosser than the extremely subtle wind. The first thing to arise would be the mind of near-attainment of the reverse order followed by the mind of increase and the mind of appearance and so forth.  Increasingly coarser levels of mind arise. Correspondingly, the energies or the winds that are the mounts of those consciousnesses will also be coarser. This is what the teachings say—the mind becomes increasingly coarser. Likewise, the winds or energies. 
From the mind of appearance, increasingly coarser winds are generated. The 80 indicative conceptions arise together with the three mental poisons—ignorance, anger and attachment. 
What I’ve just said is mentioned in Arya Nagarjuna’s Five Stages and the principal commentary by his heart son, Aryadeva’s Lamp of the Compendium of Practices, and also a commentary by Je Rinpoche, the Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of Guhyasamaja. It is explained in this text here that birth and death is brought about by energy or wind. It is explained in Highest Yoga Tantra that the extremely subtle mind is the root of samsara and nirvana. This extremely subtle mind is the root of samsara because if the extremely subtle mind does not realize emptiness, then you have birth and death. If you cannot stop birth, you cannot stop samsara. So, if you look at it like that, it’s saying that without realizing emptiness with the extremely subtle mind, there is no end to samsara.
If you look at how it’s described in the tantric texts, in terms of the death process, after the four elements dissolve, as the winds become increasingly subtle, then the minds of appearance, increase and near-attainment arise, culminating in the clear light. These are the four empties. Then arising from the clear light of death, the minds of near-attainment, increase and appearance arise. The mind becomes increasingly coarse again. When these minds dissolve at the time of death, they become increasingly subtle. Arising from that, the minds become increasingly coarse. By the time the mind of appearance arises, then comes the 80 indicative conceptions and the three mental poisons and so forth. That’s samsara. This is how it is explained. 
THE DIRECT REALIZATION OF EMPTINESS IN THE THREE PATHS
How are you going to answer the question about the arhats and bodhisattvas abiding in the pure grounds? How are you going to explain their achievement of liberation as they have already achieved liberation from samsara? You cannot speak of the arhats realizing emptiness with the extremely subtle mind nor can you talk about the bodhisattvas of the Paramitayana path realizing emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. 
Even the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) posit arhats, so arhats do exist and they do achieve liberation. The bodhisattvas abiding on the pure grounds up to the tenth ground also exist. It is not acceptable to assert that they do not exist as they exist. 
The fourteenth root downfall of the bodhisattva vows is to despise the Hinayana. The definition of that downfall is to say that by practising the Hinayana, you cannot achieve freedom from the afflictions. If one asserts that by practising and actualizing the paths of the hearers and solitary realizers one cannot achieve liberation from samsara, one incurs this root downfall of the bodhisattva vow. This means you have to accept that they can achieve liberation.  
Khen Rinpoche: No choice!
In Nagarjuna’s Five Stages and Aryadeva’s commentary on that, the Lamp of the Compendium of Practices, there is the explanation of how the wind makes samsara possible. Je Rinpoche commented on this in his Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of Guhyasamaja. Je Rinpoche said that it is not the intent of these texts to say that ignorance or self-grasping is not the root of samsara nor are they saying that the winds are the principal cause (of samsara). That’s not the meaning. 
You need to keep in mind what Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkapa said in his Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of Guhyasamaja. What Je Rinpoche said in this text should be taken as the final conclusion, representing his final thought. You will see this in Je Rinpoche’s life. It is manifested in his compositions. His views sometimes seem to be different in the later part of his life. If you look at Lama Tsongkhapa’s Great Exposition of Mantric Stages (Sngags rim chen mo), some of his statements are not exactly correct. The Sngags rim chen mo was composed before the Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of Guhyasamaja, which was composed towards the end of his life. It represents his final thoughts, his ultimate intent and should be taken to be correct. If you analyse this text, you will not find much fault with the positions in it. You will also find such occurrences in relation to his compositions on sutra.
In his Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of Guhyasamaja on the completion stage of Guhyasamaja, Je Rinpoche says it’s not the intent of Nagarjuna or Aryadeva to say that ignorance or self-grasping is not the root of samsara. 
He cites Aryadeva’s Lamp of the Compendium of Practices to prove his point. In this text by Aryadeva, he says that due to the grasping of an ‘I’ and mine, one comes to accumulate virtuous and non-virtuous karma. From that comes good rebirth and bad rebirth in samsara. Aryadeva cites many quotes from the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra in Eight Thousand Stanzas and so forth. 
In the Lamp Illuminating the Five Stages of Guhyasamaja, Je Rinpoche also cites many of Nagarjuna’s writings that essentially state that by not realizing the nature of things, there is grasping or ignorance that leads one to accumulate karma and then, samsara. 
Je Rinpoche concludes it is the shared view of both sutra and tantra that the grasping at the self is the root of samsara. 
Regarding the presentation of how wind is the cause of samsara, Je Rinpoche says 
this is not necessarily so. Yes, wind is a cause of samsara because it is a cooperative condition, working together with the self-grasping. So, wind is a cooperative condition for samsara but it is not the main cause or the only cause. 
Hinayana superiors realize emptiness directly because when one achieves the Hinayana path of seeing, one realizes emptiness directly. But until one is an arhat, one is not able to stop birth and samsara. Although the hearer superiors (who are non-arhats) realize emptiness directly, they still take rebirth in cyclic existence. 
For a person entering the Mahayana path from the onset, when that bodhisattva realizes emptiness directly, he achieves the path of seeing after which there is no more rebirth in samsara due to the power of karma and afflictions. It doesn’t matter whether you are talking about the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajrayana Vehicle, it is the same. When one achieves the Mahayana path of seeing, from then on, there is no rebirth in samsara due to the power of karma and afflictions. 
However, if you are talking about somebody who is on the Hinayana path, even after achieving the Hinayana path of seeing, from then until the achievement of liberation or arhatship, there is rebirth in samsara due to the power of karma and afflictions. 
Are you clear about this? Naturally this question will arise: When you achieve the Mahayana path of seeing, whether it is the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajrayana Vehicle, why is it that henceforth, there is no rebirth in samsara due to the power of karma and afflictions? Doesn’t the Hinayana superiors realize emptiness directly too? 
The object, emptiness, that is realized directly on the Hinayana path of seeing and the Mahayana path of seeing, whether it is the Causal Perfection Vehicle or Resultant Vajrayana Vehicle, is the same.
The difference lies in the quality of the mind
The answer would have to account for this difference. If (the difference does not lie in) the object that is realized, what alternative would you have besides attributing the difference to the mind that takes emptiness as its object? So, the answer has to do with the quality of the mind. The difference lies in the mind. This is why those who realize emptiness on the Mahayana path of seeing are able to stop samsara. However, those on the Hinayana path are not able to do so even after achieving the Hinayana path of seeing. 
When one achieves the Mahayana path of seeing, the bodhisattva acquires a set of 12 qualities that increase exponentially as they progress on the grounds. These qualities are not achieved when one achieves the Hinayana path of seeing so there must be a difference in the mind. 
Then the next question arises: Why is there this big difference in the quality of the mind? The answer lies in whether there is the training in the limitless collection of merit or not. 
The training in the limitless collection of merit
On the Mahayana path of accumulation and path of preparation, the bodhisattvas are
training in the limitless collection of merit. Such training is not found in the Hinayana path. As such, the realization that follows from such a limitless collection of merit on the Mahayana path of accumulation and the Mahayana path of preparation leads to the quality of mind that realizes emptiness directly on the Mahayana path of seeing. 
The practitioners on the Hinayana path take a shorter time to realize emptiness directly whereas it takes a longer time for the bodhisattvas on the Mahayana path to realize emptiness directly. I think the tenets, the Vabhashika and Sautrantika, say that one can become an arhat in three lifetimes. So, in terms of speed, one realizes emptiness directly quicker on the Hinayana path. It is slower on the Mahayana path. 
Although realizing emptiness directly takes much longer on the Mahayana path as compared to the Hinayana path, the qualities achieved after realizing emptiness directly on the Mahayana path is likened to space whereas the qualities that are achieved after realizing emptiness directly on the Hinayana path is likened to that which can fit in the palm of the hand. So, it’s not such a great feat to be able to realize emptiness directly so much more quickly on the Hinayana path. 
The bodhisattvas are not in a hurry to realize emptiness quickly because the qualities gained after realizing emptiness directly on the Mahayana path are well worth the wait. So, to realize emptiness directly on the Causal Perfection Vehicle takes much longer than realizing emptiness directly on the Hinayana path. 
Then what about tantra? What do you think? 
Khen Rinpoche: Does it take much longer than these two paths?
The answer is it is much quicker than the other two paths. Je Rinpoche said that not only is the tantric path quicker in realizing emptiness directly but the qualities that are attained are also more extensive. So, the tantric path is excellent. It is a marvellous path. 
THE POWER OF THE PATH OF HIGHEST YOGA TANTRA
In the Causal Perfection Vehicle, you need to accumulate the collections for three countless great eons in order to abandon the knowledge obscurations. However, with Highest Yoga Tantra, the potential is there for any individual to abandon the two obscurations in one short lifetime of this degenerate age. So the tantric path, particularly the path of Highest Yoga Tantra, is unexcelled and truly extraordinary. It is very different from the other paths as it is much quicker and much more powerful.
In the Causal Perfection Vehicle, even after realizing emptiness directly, with regard to the afflictive obscurations, they are abandoned gradually. That process only starts after realizing emptiness directly. When one realizes emptiness directly, first, one abandons the acquired afflictive obscurations. Then the process of abandoning the many levels of the innate afflictive obscurations starts. So, it is a long process. 
But in the path of Highest Yoga Tantra, when one attains the Highest Yoga Tantra path of seeing, without differentiating the acquired and innate afflictive obscurations, both are abandoned at the same time by one uninterrupted path. So, it is an extremely powerful path. The path of Highest Yoga Tantra is exalted, special, very quick and very powerful in overcoming the two obscurations. This feature is not found in the other paths. 
If you compare the time taken to abandon the afflictive obscurations, it takes much longer in the Causal Perfection Vehicle path where they are only abandoned on the eighth ground. So, it takes a much longer time when compared to the tantric path.
What makes Highest Yoga Tantra such a quick and powerful path? 
The answer lies in the subject, the mind that realizes emptiness, because that mind that realizes emptiness in Highest Yoga Tantra is very different and is a very special mind. If the mind of the simultaneously born joy can be utilized to ascertain emptiness, all these abandonments happen quickly and powerfully. 
One of the critical reasons for achieving the Highest Yoga Tantra path is related to removing the subtle knowledge obscurations. The subtle knowledge obscurations cannot be removed if one cannot ascertain emptiness with the simultaneously born joy. That is, if we cannot utilize the extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness, there is no way the subtle knowledge obscurations can be abandoned. One can only access and generate this extremely subtle mind by depending on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. For that reason, sooner or later, for the purpose of achieving enlightenment, one needs to enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. 
When comparing the difference in the speed of the sutric path and the tantric path, tantra is far superior to sutra not just because it is faster and quicker in overcoming the afflictive obscurations. Rather, it is much quicker in overcoming the knowledge obscurations as well. That’s the key point. 
Within tantra, it is only in Highest Yoga Tantra that there is the technique to generate the extremely subtle object-possessor (or mind) that takes emptiness as its object.
If you look at sutra, the Causal Perfection Vehicle, even if one has the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, that alone is not the reason for achieving enlightenment or even liberation from samsara. Even if it is the antidote (to samsara), that alone is not enough. On the path of the Causal Perfection Vehicle, without training in the limitless collections over an immeasurable length of time, even with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, one will not achieve liberation or enlightenment. This is how it is explained in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. 
In order to achieve enlightenment in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, one also has to overcome the knowledge obscurations. For the purpose of overcoming the knowledge obscurations, the bodhisattva has to train in the limitless accumulation of the collection of merit for an immeasurable amount of time. Without that, it is not possible to abandon the knowledge obscurations. This is why it takes three countless great eons.
It is taught that in the Highest Yoga Tantra path, the individual does not need to train in the limitless collection of merit for a long period of time. Even though that’s not done, still one is able to overcome both the afflictive and knowledge obscurations in a very quick time. So, it is the special feature of Highest Yoga Tantra to be able to generate an exalted mind ascertaining emptiness. Essentially, this is the simultaneously born joy that is very powerful in overcoming even the subtle dualistic appearances. 
The reason why an empowerment (wang or initiation) and the generation stage practice are considered so sacred is because it is the practice of taking the three bodies as the path. That enables the individual to quickly generate this exalted mind that realizes emptiness.
If we are talking about Highest Yoga Tantra, after receiving the empowerment, one trains in the generation stage. Its main purpose is to take the three bodies as the path.  This acts as the ripener for generating the completion stage in the mind of the individual. Then the person enters the completion stage and trains in the different levels of the completion stage. There will come a time when he will be able to ascertain emptiness with his extremely subtle mind. Once that happens, that is the end of the story. That realization is made possible because the generation stage is the ripener of the completion stage. The generation stage has to be preceded by receiving the empowerment. This is the reason why the empowerment and the generation stage practices are considered so sacred. 
The hearers and solitary realizers are able to achieve liberation. They are able to abandon the afflictive obscurations. If you were asked: How do they abandon them? What answer do you have? The only answer is that it is because they can generate the wisdom directly realizing emptiness or selflessness. Other than that, what are you going to say?  You can say they have definitely abandoned the afflictions and relatively speaking, the afflictions are considered coarse. 
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what I have been talking about so far? Or you don’t understand anything I’ve said?
Q & A
Student 1: It was mentioned that in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, the bodhisattva after generating uncontrived bodhicitta needs to accumulate the limitless collections of merit before directly realizing emptiness. That takes one countless great eon. But the direct realization of emptiness is not a hindrance to accumulating merit, right? In
fact, it enhances that accumulation as he accumulates merit even faster. Why doesn’t 
the bodhisattva then quickly work to directly realize emptiness before accumulating
the limitless accumulation of merit? 
Khen Rinpoche: It is not a hindrance.
Student 1: Similarly, the afflictive obscurations of a bodhisattva and the afflictive obscurations of an arhat are no different. So, in fact they should quickly abandon the obscurations.
Khen Rinpoche: It is worthwhile for the bodhisattvas to wait, i.e., they are not in a hurry, so to speak. Even if he quickly realizes emptiness (directly), he will only get a handful of qualities. So, in order to achieve a sky full of qualities, he must put in more effort. That’s all.
Student 1: What I meant is that if he realized emptiness directly with bodhicitta, won’t he accumulate merit very quickly?
Khen Rinpoche: In order for the arhat to achieve enlightenment, he has to enter the Mahayana path of accumulation. There is no other way as he still has to accumulate merit. So it takes longer. 
Student 1: So, the direct realization of emptiness doesn’t help much in the accumulation of merit?
Khen Rinpoche: We stop here today. 
Sometimes it is good that you ask questions.  That gives me an opportunity to read more texts. If there are no questions, then I am too lazy to read texts.
In the next class, bring the self-generation rite of either Vajrabhairava or Vajrayogini. Then when we look at the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya—the meditation that is concordant with the aspects of death—you can see that concept clearly as you have an example in front of you. You have to bring the long self-generation rite as there is nothing much in the abbreviated version. 
We are going to look at the section on taking death as the path of the dharmakaya. You don’t have to bring the whole sadhana even if it is not that heavy because we are concerned only with that section. Just bring along that section if you are able to identify that section. I hope it would be more useful by relating it to the self-generation rite. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 