Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L61FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.104219
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 61 				                                                     28 April 2018
Homework questions. Root text, p. 119—First two levels—coarse generation stage. Third level—subtle generation stage: Emitting and reabsorbing the vajras. Calm abiding & special insight—simultaneous or sequential? Meditating on the sadhana. Practising between sessions.
HOMEWORK 
Khen Rinpoche: Those of you who are really interested and want to study, then you write down the questions. After that, you must answer the questions within a week. Next week, you give me back (your answers). This is only for those who really, seriously, want to study. 
If you are not so serious (about your studies) and you just want to listen, then it is up to you. You don’t need to write (anything). Relax, listen and leave positive imprints for the next life. You can take it easy. 
What I am saying is not a big thing. We have already covered these topics. The point is that by giving these questions, then maybe you will focus a little bit more, you write down a little bit and then you can also learn a little bit more. So, that’s the point. 
Question 1: On the generation stage, one meditates on bringing death, the intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the three buddha bodies for the sake of purifying ordinary death, the intermediate state and rebirth. How does the meditation purify ordinary death, the intermediate state and rebirth?
Khen Rinpoche: That’s is the long way of saying it but we can state it in one very short
sentence.
Basically, when you meditate on bringing death, the intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the three bodies, how are they purified? More extensively:
When you meditate on bringing death to the path as the dharmakaya or dharma body, you purify ordinary death. 
When you meditate on bringing the intermediate state to the path as the sambhogakaya or complete enjoyment body, you purify the ordinary intermediate state. 
When you meditate on bringing rebirth to the path as the nirmanakaya or emanation body, you purify the ordinary rebirth. 
You meditate on bringing the three buddha bodies to the path in this way. You have to give an explanation on how you do that. 
Khen Rinpoche: You can write 10 pages, 20 pages. It’s up to you. The number of pages you want to write is up to you. 
The explanations have been given. From your side, you have to be interested and then you have to make yourself understand. You have to read up and so on. The whole point is that you have to make yourself understand. 
Question 2: We have discussed the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom. What are these levels and what is the difference between these two levels? 
Question 3: How do we eliminate the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness on the generation stage? 
These three questions are related to the generation stage. Please think about the answers and then write them down. 
Khen Rinpoche: You can bring back (your answers) next Saturday. One week should be enough. 
~~~~~~~~~~
The first two levels—the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom—correspond to the coarse generation stage. 
During the third level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom, one cultivates the subtle generation stage. 
FIRST TWO LEVELS—COARSE GENERATION STAGE
As mentioned in the previous classes, the first two levels involve meditation on a subtle hand implement at the upper or lower openings. We said that the purpose for engaging in these meditations on the first two levels is to counter mental laxity and excitation. 
Meditation involving the subtle drop and their purpose
Beginners and those attaining some pristine wisdom …
…
… inside a hand symbol or subtle drop. (p. 119)
When you are meditating on the supporting and supported mandala, mental laxity and excitation can arise. In order to eliminate them, you meditate on the minute hand implement or the substance drop at the upper and lower openings.
If laxity is predominant, you can meditate on a tiny five-spoked vajra at the upper opening of the central channel between your eyebrows. 
If excitation is predominant, you meditate on a substance drop at the lower opening situated at the secret place.  
On the first two levels, you do not meditate on this subtle hand implement or substance drop for a long time. As soon as you have eliminated mental laxity and excitation, you return to the deity yoga. Therefore, on the first two levels, the main meditation is that of deity yoga, not the subtle drops. This is said in Ngawang Palden’s text and we have already gone through that section. 
When you are meditating on the sadhana, you meditate on yourself as the triple tiered being:
You have the form of Vajrabhairava.
At your heart, you meditate on youthful Manjushri.
At the heart of youthful Manjushri, there is the syllable Hum.
You meditate on a tiny vajra separating from the syllable Hum at the heart of Manjushri and rising to the top of the upper end of the central channel that is located at the point between your eyebrows. Inside the upper end of the central channel located between your eyebrows, you have to meditate on this minute vajra. This is not an ordinary vajra. You have to think that this vajra is actually the entity of your yidam or tutelary deity taking the aspect of a vajra. So, you need to hold your mind there single-pointedly. 
Similarly, you meditate on a substance drop that emerges from the letter Hum at your heart. This substance drop then goes to the lower end of the central channel that is located at your secret place. Inside this central channel, at its lower end, you have to meditate on this very tiny drop that is blue in colour. It is in the nature of Akshobhya and is the size of a mustard seed. So, this little drop has three attributes:
It is blue.  
It is in the nature of Akshobhya.  
It is the size of a mustard seed. 
You have to focus your mind on this tiny drop. Similarly, the vajra that we described earlier is also the size of a mustard seed. So, by focussing your mind on these tiny objects, you need to eliminate laxity and excitation. Once you have eliminated them, then you should resume your cultivation of clear appearance and divine pride of being the deity. 
On the coarse generation stage, you meditate in this way:
If laxity or excitation arises, you focus on the tiny hand implement or the subtle drop. In that way, you pacify laxity and excitement. 
Then you try to improve your meditation. 
Using the sadhana, you move on to reflecting on the purities. 
You recite the mantras. 
At the end, you offer the tormas. 
Finally, you end the session. 
During the cultivation of the coarse generation stage, you recite the mantra and you also cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. When you do so in a proper way, accumulating say 100,000 mantras and so on, basically, you will achieve the effectiveness of the mantras and the substance. These mantras and substance become powerful. Then you will be able to perform the four kinds of activities—pacification, increase, control and wrath. If you want to practise in a way that causes you to gain this kind of proper experience, that is the way you should do it. 
Sometimes when we do the retreat, we try to accumulate the mantras quickly. We don’t recite properly, we don’t meditate properly and so on. Of course, there is still the accumulation of merit. But what I’m trying to say is that if you really meditate properly, that’s the way you should do it. If you want to attain buddhahood quickly, then that’s the way you should meditate. 
THIRD LEVEL—SUBTLE GENERATION STAGE
During the third level, you want to achieve calm abiding. You will focus on meditating on the subtle drop/subtle implement the size of a mustard seed. You have already completed the deity yoga by the time you reach the third level. Therefore, on the third level, you are focussing on this meditation on the subtle drop. 
The range of the coarse and subtle generation stage
It is said that the coarse generation stage …
…
… the subtle drop at the upper opening. (p. 122)
Then you attain the peerless concentration …
…
…  both systems of Guhyasamāja. (p. 122)
“It is said that calm abiding is obtained when you attain stability on the subtle drop at the upper opening”—this means that you meditate on the tiny implement at the upper opening. When you are able to meditate on that in a very stable way, you do not come under the influence of laxity or excitation. Your mind does not become distracted. 
When you are able to attain stability on the subtle drop at the upper opening, is this an attainment of calm abiding? You should think about this.  This point is actually not clear in the commentaries. I read many commentaries and there is no explicit statement saying that if you are able to meditate on the subtle drop in this way for four or five hours, then you have attained calm abiding or you have attained special insight and so on. This is not clear in the texts. 
Emitting and reabsorbing the vajras
“Then you attain the peerless concentration uniting calm abiding and special insight through the wisdom of individual investigation repeatedly emitting and reabsorbing its object, …”: This means you emit a vajra to the front. After that, you reabsorb it to the root vajra at your heart. You do this again but this time, you emit two vajras to the front and then you reabsorb them to the root vajra. It is said that by doing such a practice of emitting and reabsorbing, you can attain special insight. 
From one vajra, you emit a second vajra. From the second vajra, you emit a third vajra and so on. You try to emit these vajras. In the beginning, these vajras are in front of your face. Later, they pervade the front of your body and so on until all of space is pervaded by these vajras. It is said that eventually you will attain special insight. 
The root vajra is located at your upper opening. Previously, by focussing on this vajra at the upper opening, you achieve calm abiding. Now through this practice of emitting and reabsorbing from the vajra at the upper opening, you want to achieve special insight. While you do this emitting and reabsorbing of the vajras, you have to focus on the vajra at your upper opening without becoming distracted. 
First, you emanate just one vajra and later, you reabsorb it. 
At the second level, from the root vajra, you emit one vajra. From the first vajra that has been emitted, you emit a second vajra.  
When you reabsorb, first, you reabsorb the second vajra into the first vajra and then you reabsorb the first vajra into the root vajra at your upper opening. 
At the third level, you are emanating three vajras, 
First, from the root vajra at the upper opening, you emanate one vajra. 
From the first vajra you have emanated, you emanate a second vajra. 
From the second vajra you have emanated, you emanate a third vajra. 
When you reabsorb, the third vajra absorbs into the second vajra.
The second vajra absorbs into the first vajra.
The first vajra absorbs into the root vajra at the upper opening. 
This is not easy because you need to have a very clear and stable mind that is free from distraction. Just imagine you have to do this emitting and reabsorbing that pervades the entire space. You have to keep track of all the vajras that you have emitted. You have to emit them in this order and when you reabsorb them, you have to do it in the correct sequence as well. Basically, there are just countless vajras. How are you going to do this? It is not easy.
Then you attain the peerless concentration … reabsorbing its object,… (p.122)
So, through this practice, you will attain special insight.
Calm abiding & special insight—simultaneous or sequential?
First, calm abiding is attained. Then special insight is attained. This is the explanation
according to Ngawang Palden. There is this way of explanation that says in tantra, calm abiding and special insight are attained sequentially. This explanation occurs in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Mantric Stages and also in Khedrup Je’s Ocean of Attainments. These texts explicitly said that calm abiding and special insight are attained sequentially.
But there are also other scholars who explained that calm abiding and special insight can be attained simultaneously in tantra. For example, Kundang Jampelyang and Kirti Losang Trinlé say that in tantra, one can attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously, unlike in sutra. In the sutra system, there is no possibility of attaining calm abiding and special insight simultaneously. They have to be attained sequentially. However, it is explained that in tantra, it is possible to attain them simultaneously. It is not definite that first, one attains calm abiding followed by special insight. 
The question comes up: How do you attain calm abiding and special insight simultaneously if that is a possibility in tantra? Perhaps, when you are cultivating calm abiding by focussing on this tiny implement at the upper opening, during the seventh and eighth stages, you train also in emitting and reabsorbing the vajras. Through the force of engaging in this practice on the seventh and eighth mental abidings, then when you complete the ninth mental abiding, you also complete the special insight. So, you attain calm abiding and special insight together. 
In the sutra system, when you train in calm abiding, you do only placement meditation. This is because if you try to engage in analytical meditation, then the mind will have difficulty staying on the object and the factor of stability will deteriorate.  So, you simply do placement meditation. Therefore, it is said that you begin to cultivate special insight only after you have attained calm abiding. 
It is different in the tantra system because of the unusual object and the unusual location where you meditate on the object:
The object is a subtle drop or a tiny implement the size of a mustard seed. This is unusual. 
On top of that, this object is meditated on at the upper opening. This place where you meditate on the object is also unusual. 
In tantra, this technique is unusual because it has unusual power in drawing your mind inwards. It is said that even though you do both placement meditation and analytical meditation, that analytical meditation does not serve as a hindrance to your meditation. Because you are able to alternate between placement meditation and analytical meditation without the analytical meditation becoming a hindrance, therefore, you can attain calm abiding and special insight together.  However, it is not clear in the text exactly when one attains calm abiding and exactly when one attains special insight. 
Therefore, regarding the attainment of calm abiding and special insight, there are two explanations:
According to the first way of explanation, first, you attain calm abiding by meditating on this subtle drop or tiny implement. After you have attained calm abiding, then you do this meditation of emitting and reabsorbing. Then you can attain special insight. 
According to the second explanation, it is possible for you to attain calm abiding and special insight together. Perhaps the way to do that is that when you are on the seventh and eighth mental abidings and before you attain calm abiding, you do this practice of emitting and reabsorbing. When you attain the ninth mental abiding, you attain both calm abiding and special insight. 
Father & mother deities
There is this presentation of meditating on this subtle substance drop with yourself visualized as the deity father and mother in union. 
You produce this drop, the substance of bodhicitta. This bodhicitta drop abides at the secret place. Within this drop, you meditate on the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
Since this is the complete supporting and supported mandala, within it, you have also the father and mother deities. Within the father and mother deities, you also have the drop. This drop descends to the secret place. Within that drop, there is again an entire supporting and supported mandala. So, you can see that the meditation gets more and more subtle. 
Similarly, at the third level of meditation, within this subtle drop, there is an entire supporting and supported mandala. This means that the father and mother deities are inside there. Again, you visualize they enter into union and then the drop descends to their secret place. At the secret place, there is this drop again containing the entire supporting and supported mandala. 
If you recall, we said that you complete the coarse generation stage when you are able to cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear instantly for a certain period of time.
If you are able to do this for four hours, you attain stability. 
If you are able to do this for an unlimited amount of time, then you complete the generation stage.
In Lama Tsongkhapa’s Medium Length Lam-rim, in the context of discussing special insight, it is mentioned that in Highest Yoga Tantra, there is the simultaneous attainment of calm abiding and special insight. 
In the Medium Length Lam-rim, there is also this statement saying that in the sutra system, first, you attain calm abiding, then you attain special insight. Then this question arises: Is this presentation of the sequential attainment of calm abiding and special insight—that is, first, calm abiding, then special insight—the same in the Hinayana, the Mahayana, in sutra and also in tantra? 
The answer is that it is similar in the following systems:
the vehicle of the hearers
the vehicle of solitary realizers
the vehicle of the bodhisattvas
the four tenets system 
the three tantra sets
From this answer, you can see that there is the omission of Highest Yoga Tantra. It talks about the Hinayana, the Mahayana in the Paramitayana and so on. It talks about the three lower classes of tantra. It does not mention Highest Yoga Tantra. Perhaps from this answer, we can infer that the attainment of the calm abiding and special insight in Highest Yoga Tantra does not have to be sequential. 
Even though there is no explicit statement saying that in Highest Yoga Tantra there is the simultaneous attainment of calm abiding and special insight, but when the answer states which systems have the serial presentation of calm abiding and special insight, Highest Yoga Tantra is not mentioned. Perhaps from there, we can say that there is simultaneous attainment in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
Why is Highest Yoga Tantra omitted from the answer? What is the reason? There should be a reason.
According to Yangchen Gawai Lodrö when you complete the subtle generation stage, you attain calm-abiding. This is what he said in his Principles of Grounds and Paths. 
Points of debate
When is calm abiding attained?
One scholar says: Calm abiding is attained…
…
… Yangchen Gawai Lodrö. (p.123)
Who is this “one scholar” mentioned here? It is actually the author Ngawang Palden’s own teacher, Yangchen Gawai Lodrö, who said that calm abiding is attained when you complete the subtle generation stage. Ngawang Palden himself is saying this statement does not teach the demarcation of the new attainment of calm abiding. It is simply saying that when you complete this subtle generation stage, you have attained calm abiding. It is not talking about “newly” attaining calm-abiding. 
According to Ngawang Palden, as we have seen from the previous explanation, one attains calm abiding before one completes the subtle generation stage. It is not the case that one attains calm abiding when one attains the subtle generation stage. 
When you attain the subtle generation stage, you are able to see instantly the entire supported and supporting mandala within the subtle drop in a very clear and stable way as though you are seeing the entire supported and supporting mandala in the subtle drop with your own eyes.  You see them with your eye consciousness, as though your eyes are opened and you are looking at the mandala. It is so clear it seems that if you were to stretch out your hands, you can actually touch them. 
When you have such a clear, stable meditative stabilization that is able to see this entire supporting and supported mandala in the subtle drop instantly and you can maintain this for four hours, then you have attained stability. 
If you can do this for an indefinite period of time, you have completed the subtle generation stage. 
This is the meditative stabilization of the union of calm abiding and special insight. It
has amazing clarity.
During this third level, you cultivate calm abiding and special insight and you are able to meditate on this entire supported and supporting mandala in the subtle drop very clearly and in a very stable way. This occurs through the power of meditative stabilization. You do not rely on the power of mantra and substance at this stage. 
It is said that on the first two levels, you rely on the power of mantra and substance. But during the third level, you rely on the power of meditative stabilization instead. It is a mistake to think, “I can just meditate through visualization. I don’t have to care about substance, mantra and so on.” Before you reach the third level, you do need to rely on substance and mantra. You shouldn’t think, “I can just visualize everything.” 
You need mantra and substance. 
You need to have clear appearance. 
You need to have divine pride. 
You need to have the awareness of emptiness that these phenomena are like illusions and so on. 
It is only when you reach the third level that you do not have this dependence on substance and mantra. So, it is incorrect for you to think that you do not need mantra, substance and so on before you have actually attained this level.
The power of the mind
During the third level, you will attain the union of calm abiding and special insight. It is said that after you have completed the subtle generation stage, when you go out to a field and meditate on the entire supported and supporting mandala, visualizing yourself in this celestial mansion, it is said that if it rains, you will not get wet! The rain will not come into the mandala.
Khen Rinpoche: This shows how powerful the mind is. It comes from the power of the mind.
This is an amazing achievement and it occurs through the power of meditative stabilization. Through meditative stabilization, you actually attain this ability. For example, it is said that when you use meditative stabilization to meditate on a bridge, you can actually walk on this bridge without falling into the river. Also, it is said that by using meditative stabilization to visualize a staircase going up into space, you can actually walk on this staircase and go upwards.
Khen Rinpoche: But don’t try this now. You may fall down!
Such powers can be attained on the generation stage through the power of your mind. Through the attainment of the union of calm abiding and special insight, you will be able to manifest these things as you think. So, such is the power of the mind.
However, those are not our goals. Our goal is not to be able to walk on water and so on. But it is said that the power of the generation stage is such that you will gain these abilities. As explained previously, you cultivate clear appearance and divine pride in order to overcome the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. You have to have very stable clear appearance and divine pride in order to overcome those hindrances. Therefore, you need to attain calm abiding. With calm abiding, you will have very stable clear appearance and divine pride and thus you are able to eliminate the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. 
MEDITATING ON THE SADHANA
Therefore, you meditate on bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the three buddha bodies. 
After that, you offer the inner offering. 
Then you offer the other offerings. 
Then you offer praises. 
At that point, you meditate on the coarse and subtle generation stages.
After that, you recollect the purities.
During the recollection of the purities, you try to generate enthusiasm. The translation (in the sadhana) is “minding the symbolism.” It says, “Your nine faces like this are for the nine scriptural categories. Your two horns are for the two levels of truth. Your thirty-four arms plus your body, speech and mind, these thirty-seven are for the thirty-seven limbs of enlightenment and your sixteen legs are for the sixteen types of emptiness.” (p. 32) So, by recollecting the symbolism or the purities of the deity’s body, you generate enthusiasm. 
After minding the symbolism, then you do the mantra recitation. Before you recite the mantra, you have to bless the mala (rosary). You generate yourself as the deity. Then you consecrate the rosary and bless the mala. After that, you recite the peaceful and wrathful mantras of Vajrabhairava. 
You do four sessions every day. You meditate according to the sadhana. When you become tired, you do the mantra recitation. After that, you make offerings and offer the tormas. Finally, you do the absorption and you end with the prayers and dedication.
The section on offering torma is important. You bless the torma in the same way that you bless the inner offering. After blessing it, you offer it. It is taught that there is a great purpose and reason for offering the torma. If you are able to do that, it will help to pacify obstacles. You will also be able to quickly achieve the various attainments or siddhis. You bless the torma and then you offer it to Vajrabhairava. You also offer it to Karmayama, the protector. 
When you want to make this offering, first, you have these substances in the vessels or bowls. You have to purify them into emptiness and then you bless them. Then you offer them to, for example, the deity or yidam. Then you have to visualize this Hum at the tongue of the deity becoming a one-spoked vajra through which the essence of the torma is drawn out. 
When you make this offering, you have to imagine that you emanate infinite goddesses from your heart and they make the offerings. Then Vajrabhairava’s tongue becomes this white single-spoked vajra, like a hollow tube and through that, the deity then draws out the essence of the torma through this straw of light. By partaking of the offerings, you have to imagine great bliss is generated in their continua and they become satiated by these offerings. This is on page 39 of your sadhana. 
You have many tormas to offer. There are different recipients of the tormas. After that, you have to perform the absorption. Before that, you have to request for forbearance or request for their patience. At this point, you should recite the 100 syllables mantra to purify mistakes, for example, reciting the mantras incorrectly, having unclear concentration, making additions and omissions and so on. 
After that, you have to do the dissolution or the absorption. This is at page 47 of the sadhana. You imagine that from your heart, light rays radiate and strike the charnel grounds and the protection wheel. They absorb into the celestial mansion. There are explanations of whether or not you should absorb this protection wheel. It is said that if you are facing great obstacles, then you should not absorb the protection wheel. So, you leave the protection wheel as it is. Then you absorb the charnel grounds. 
During the dissolution, you absorb the charnel grounds and so on. Eventually, you arrive at clear light emptiness. You have to place yourself in meditative equipoise in that clear light emptiness for a while. From the state of clear light emptiness, you arise as a deity. If you are able to arise as a complete form, i.e., the full Vajrabhairava, that is ideal. If that is not possible, then you arise as Vajrabhairava with one face and two arms. From that point onwards, you enter the session breaks or the period between sessions. 
You may wonder what the purpose of dissolving yourself into clear light emptiness and arising again as the deity is. Arising from clear light as the deity again corresponds to the intermediate state at the time of the basis. By doing this, you train in this meditation. This means that through such training, at the time of the path, you will be able to arise more quickly into the pure and impure illusory bodies. This also ripens the result so that you can arise quickly as the complete enjoyment body.
PRACTISING BETWEEN SESSIONS
When you enter the period between sessions, you should realize that this period is as important as the actual session from the point of view of your practice. Even though it is between sessions, you should not be parted from your divine pride. As you are going about your daily activities—whether you are sleeping, eating, waking up, washing yourself and so on—you should maintain the divine pride of being the deity.
Conduct to be practised
During the session breaks, you should practise this conduct:
whatever you see, you should think, “This is the actual mandala of the deity” and cultivate the divine pride of the actual supported and supporting mandala
whatever sounds you hear, you should think that these are the sounds of the yidam 
whatever comes to your mind, whatever thoughts you have, you should think that this is the actual mind of the deity. 
Eating and offering food
On top of that, we have to eat and drink. If you can, you should bless your food and drink in the same way as you bless your inner offering. Think that the five meats and the five nectars are blessed to become an ocean of nectar through the process of purification. Then you transform them into nectar and cause them to increase and multiply. The food and drink become the nature of great bliss but they have the aspect of being an ocean of nectar. Whenever you eat, you should try to spend one or two minutes to reflect on this. This is an important practice. 
Since you are generated as Vajrabhairava or Yamantaka, you are marked by the three syllables at your three places. This means that there is the syllable Hum at your heart. This syllable Hum should be regarded as encompassing all the buddhas. As you enjoy the food, think that you are offering this food to the letter Hum at your heart. Then you are making offerings to all the buddhas. You visualize the result of that offering being the generation of the special exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. 
Doing such a practice achieves many purposes. If you are able to eat your food or drink water in the manner described above, you will not accumulate any negativity during that process. Instead, you will accumulate infinite merit. By doing so, you will become free from sickness and will have a healthy body. So, you should try to do that to the best of your ability whenever you eat food and drink and so on. By spending a little bit of time to do that reflection, you will achieve great benefit. 
Practising sleep yoga
In terms of the conduct, you can also practise sleep yoga. To practise sleep yoga:
Imagine that from your heart, infinite light rays are emanated. 
These light rays strike the environment and the inhabitants within the environment. 
Then they are absorbed back into you. 
You absorb into emptiness in stages, i.e., everything absorbs into the Hum and the Hum in turn absorbs in stages.
Finally, you arrive at the state of clear light emptiness.  
You should fall asleep in that state of clear light emptiness. If you have difficulty falling asleep, this is one practice you can do. You visualize that light rays radiate out and then the environment and its inhabitants absorb into you. Then you absorb into the Hum. 
The Hum also dissolves progressively from the bottom upwards. The shabkyu absorbs into the Ha and the Ha absorbs into the crescent and so on. Then, the nada, the little squiggle, is absorbed and finally, it is the clear light emptiness. If you make effort in doing this, it will help you to fall asleep. By falling asleep in this clear light emptiness, you are practising sleep yoga. This is one of the yogas of conduct.
Yoga of waking up
You sleep but eventually you have to wake up. Then you practise the yoga of waking up. 
When you wake up, think the gods and goddesses are singing songs, urging you to arise and wake up from this clear light. At their urging, you wake up. 
When you wake up, you should think, “I am arising as the form body in order to enact the welfare of sentient beings.” 
With that intention, you should visualize that you arise in the form of one-face two-armed Vajrabhairava. 
Then you cultivate clear appearance and divine pride. 
Washing
After you have gotten out of bed, then you wash yourself. When you wash yourself, you can think that the washing water is actually the water of exalted wisdom. This water of exalted wisdom is obtained from the melting of Akshobhya father and mother. The visualization here is the same as that in the vase water initiation. You visualize that Akshobhya father and mother melt and become the nature of water.  That water is then used to wash yourself.  
When you are washing yourself, you can think that in the space before you are the buddhas of the five lineages or five families, the father and mother deities. From their hearts, infinite goddesses are emanated. These goddesses hold vases that are filled with nectar and they offer that to you. As you wash, think, “All my misdeeds and all my obscurations are washed away and become purified.” After this water flows away, think that there is one drop remaining on your crown. This drop of water transforms into Akshobhya and becomes your crown ornament. Then you think that the initiation deities absorb into you and bless your continuum.
There was a question previously regarding clear appearance and divine pride. It is important for you to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride both during the session as well as between the sessions. If you were to think, “I only need to cultivate them during the session,” and you are careless after the session, then this will make it difficult for you to generate clear appearance and divine pride when you return to the session. So, it is very important for you to make effort at clear appearance and divine pride also during the session breaks. If you are attentive during the session breaks, then that attentiveness will continue into the actual session. 
The essence of this discussion is that you should try your best to practise. If you cannot do everything, then do the essential ones. 
For example, every day you need to eat food. So, you try to bless the food in the same way you bless the inner offering. You spend a little bit of time doing that. 
Every day, you have to go to sleep. So, try your best to sleep within the state of clear light. 
Then when you wake up, try to generate a pure motivation and try to cultivate
divine pride. Generate this good heart thinking, “I will not harm anyone. I will only benefit them.” 
You should adjust your conduct in this way. It is difficult for us to practise every single thing but if we are a generation stage practitioner, then that is the way we should practise.
We are about to complete the generation stage. There is just one page left in the Tibetan text. I guess after that we will begin the completion stage.
Khen Rinpoche: So, you have all already completed the generation stage!
Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel 
Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 