Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L54 FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.865225
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on 13 March 2018[1]

Lesson 54


Shakyamuni  Buddha  meditation.  Importance  of   understanding   emptiness.
Commentary of the verse from the  Diamond  Cutter  Sutra.  (This  class  was
conducted in English by Khen Rinpoche himself).


SHAKYAMUNI BUDDHA MEDITATION

First, we do short breathing meditation for a few  minutes  to  settle  down
your mind. (You are) coming  from  busy  job,  busy  life.  So,  for  a  few
minutes, try to sit comfortably. Keep your back straight. To  avert  feeling
lazy.  A little bit of freshening up. So, that’s one point.

Idea is very simple meditation,  breathing  in  and  out.  Acknowledge  your
breathing in and out. Try to be aware and mindful  of  the  breath.  Breathe
gently. That’s very helpful. When you breathe gently, your mind  is  calmer.
Our mind and our breath are always related.  They  affect  each  other.  For
example, when you are not happy  or  you  are  angry,  you  tend  to  breath
faster. When you are too attached,  you  breathe  faster.  Also,  your  mind
moves with the winds. It’s good to have a  calm  mind  with  the  breathing.
Then your mind is quite peaceful.

So, that’s the idea. Breathe in and out. Maybe we do this for five  minutes,
OK? It’s very simple. Look at your breath. Be mindful of your  breath.  Only
that. As much as possible.

When your mind is peaceful, there’s no other  thought.  So,  now  with  this
peaceful mind, visualize Buddha Shakyamuni sitting in front of you, made  of
light. First, you visualize light in front. Then slowly, this rainbow  light
forms Buddha Shakyamuni. Try to see as clearly as possible.

Next, we recite Shakyamuni’s mantra seven  times.  So  when  we  recite  the
mantra, visualize light rays and nectar come from  Guru  Shakyamuni  Buddha,
entering your mind, your body and then purifying  all  the  physical  pains,
mental suffering, all the negative thoughts,  wrong  conceptions.  Visualize
like this. All totally purified. Then after that, your body becomes made  of
light. The suffering or pain no longer exist.  Feel  some  bliss  and  happy
feeling. Try to get that feeling in the mind. Then sit there as long as  you
can, for a few seconds.

(To umze) Chant the mantra with the tune.

I think most of you already know the mantra:  TADYATHA  OM  MUNE  MUNE  MAHA
MUNEYE SVAHA. We chant together. (Chanting of the mantra).

What we have done just now is a very simple practice that  everyone  can  do
easily.
Whenever we have a difficult time, especially when you are stressed with  so
many problems  in  your  life,  try  to  sit  down  and  do  some  breathing
meditation for a few minutes. Visualize the Buddha in front of you,  sending
light to your body and mind. Let go of whatever problems you have from  your
mind and body.  You can meditate like that for 10 minutes to bring peace  to
your mind. It’s extremely powerful. So try to do that. It’s very  effective.
This is something you have to try out and feel  for  yourself.  Let  go  the
mind-made problems to relax your body  and  mind.  That  will  bring  you  a
healthy body and healthy mind. Then you are able to  function  better.  Your
life can be better. Otherwise, there is no  quality  of  life  and  you  are
always miserable. So, it is good to do this short meditation.

Today, I am supposed to talk about the stars.  Do you know  how  many  stars
there are in space?  Does anybody know how many stars there are in the  sky?
 You don’t know?

IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING EMPTINESS

Before going to the topic, in the last two classes, I had talked  about  the
importance of emptiness. Why is it so important to study emptiness?  Why  is
it so important to understand emptiness? First, you  must  understand  that.
Otherwise, there is not much point.

Put very simply, we all  have  mental  and  physical  problems.  There’s  no
question about this. We all have those problems and we have all  experienced
them.  It is very clear. Because of having  this  physical  body,  the  five
aggregates, we create all the problems and pain. It would  be  different  if
we had this body but no mind. But with the body and  mind  coming  together,
all sorts of negative thoughts arise because of having  this  mind.  Due  to
having this body and mind,  we  experience  the  physical  pain  and  mental
suffering that we don’t like. We don’t want this type of  suffering  but  we
don’t have a choice.

How did this body happen?  How did this mind  come  about?   When  you  look
deeper, they came from the cause, karma and delusions.  Because  we  created
the karma, we got this physical body and mind.  So,  what  we  have  now  is
because of karma.

How did  this  action  of  karma  happen?   It  is  due  to  the  delusions,
attachment and anger. We create different negative karma. So  all  karma  is
created by attachment and anger, the deluded mind.

Again, when you look deeper on how this anger  and  attachment  arise,  they
are coming from ignorance, which is the root of the problem.   The  root  of
the delusion is ignorance.

So, we need to understand that ignorance is  not  understanding  reality  or
how things exist in reality. We can understand ignorance in  that  way.  Not
only do we not understand reality, but totally believe in the  existence  of
things in the wrong way.  We  totally  believe  in  something  that  doesn’t
exist.  Not only that, on top of that, believing in the wrong existence.

In the very beginning, it is all about ‘me’ and ‘I’.  When you  think  about
‘me’ and how
it appears to the mind, there is ‘me’  within  the  body.  It  exists  truly
somewhere there.  This appears to our mind and  we  truly  believe  in  this
appearance of the self or ‘I’ as something  that’s  solid  and  independent.
This is the very basis of all the problems. They start from there.

Because of that, when you see the other, the other is something that is  not
related to you, as something on the other side  and  independent  from  you.
When you say other than yourself, (this means  it)  exists  truly  from  the
(side of the) object. This appears to your mind and you believe in it.

So, the solid independent ‘I’ is at  one  side  and  the  solid  independent
other is at the  other  side.  These  two  are  different  and  are  totally
unrelated. The independent self and the  independent  other  appear  to  our
mind and we totally believe in that.  Because of  that,  if  something  good
happens to anything related to that independent ‘I’,  then  it’s  considered
good and attachment arises. When the independent other says nice  things  to
us, he becomes an independent friend, a real friend. He  will  always  be  a
friend and you believe in that.

When the independent other criticizes us, then we label him  as  the  enemy,
the truly existent independent enemy over there. This is how it  appears  to
us and we believe in that. On the basis of that, strong anger arises in  the
mind and strong attachment arises in the mind.

We believe in this way. We think we are right  and  we  believe  things  are
truly like that. This is the very root of the delusion that  gives  rise  to
all our negative emotions, such as attachment, anger,  jealousy  and  pride.
All the negative emotions are based on that.

Because of that, we create so much  negative  karma.  Due  to  the  negative
emotions, we harm ourselves and others and we create negative karma  in  the
process. Because of that, we take rebirth in samsara and experience all  the
different types of suffering, physical  and  mental.  All  this  happens  in
life.

So, this is something that’s  extremely  important  to  understand.  If  you
truly understand that, then when you hear  the  teaching  on  emptiness,  it
becomes very tasty—something you really want. So, you see why  emptiness  is
so important in our daily life.  You may get that kind  of  feeling  if  you
understand it correctly.

When you listen to the teaching, make sure you really  understand  that  the
teaching relates to your life. It is not a  teaching  that  is  beyond  your
life. That’s of no use at all.  It is a teaching that relates to your  life,
“I must have  this  practice  in  my  daily  life.”  So  this  is  extremely
important.

First, you have to understand that:
 • All the unwanted sufferings come from this physical body and the mind.
 • The physical body and the mind come from karma.
 • Karma comes from the delusions.
 • The root of the delusions is ignorance.

Simply believing  that  phenomena  exist  truly  from  their  own  side  and
believing in that
is called ignorance.  It’s a wrong way of believing how things  exist.   Not
only not knowing that, but on top of  it,  believing  in  that.  Because  of
that, all the negative emotions arise,  you  create  karma,  (resulting)  in
taking rebirth. Then there is no choice with regard to  avoiding  suffering,
be it physical or mental suffering. They are difficult to avoid.  You  don’t
have a choice.

If you don’t want all these  physical  and  mental  suffering,  then  it  is
better not to take rebirth in samsara. Once you  take  rebirth  in  samsara,
suffering comes along with it. When you  take  rebirth  in  samsara  due  to
karma and delusions, there is no choice but to  take  this  body  and  mind.
Once you have that, all the pain comes.   Therefore,  if  you  really  don’t
want suffering in your future lives and from  life  to  life,  there  is  no
other method more supreme than meditating on emptiness.  This  is  the  only
way to free oneself from the ocean of samsara  and  to  achieve  liberation,
nirvana.

Even if you were  to  meditate  on  great  compassion,  even  with  so  much
compassion, even if you have so  much  generosity  or  you  keep  such  pure
morality, even if you have deep concentration, by  themselves,  they  cannot
free you from the ocean of samsara.  Therefore, the  only  way  to  get  out
from samsara is to meditate on emptiness.

Again, you may ask the question: why can’t I be  freed  from  the  ocean  of
samsara without  (meditating  on)  emptiness?  Why  can’t  I  be  free  from
suffering? You must understand that. As I have mentioned before,  all  these
sufferings come from karma. Karma comes from the delusions,  attachment  and
anger, and these come from ignorance.

What is ignorance?  Ignorance is believing everything truly exists from  its
own side.   That’s the wrong belief  and  it’s  called  ignorance.   So,  in
order to remove ignorance, you must have  the  wisdom  realizing  emptiness.
When you realize emptiness, only then are you  able  to  remove  this  wrong
concept, this ignorance. We can remove ignorance when  we  have  the  wisdom
realizing emptiness.  Otherwise, there is no way.

Therefore, it is extremely important to understand  emptiness  if  we  don’t
want suffering.  We all  don’t  want  suffering.  We  only  want  happiness.
Without the meditation on emptiness, just  praying  alone  will  not  remove
your suffering. If we don’t want suffering from life to life, then  we  must
study and understand emptiness. We  must  meditate  on  what  emptiness  is.
Therefore, emptiness is important in our daily life.

COMMENTARY ON THE VERSE FROM THE DIAMOND CUTTER SUTRA

The Diamond Cutter Sutra says:

      A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,
      An illusion, a drop of dew, or a bubble,
      A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud—
      See conditioned thing as such!

A star
The first example is that of a star. This shows that any kind  of  phenomena
have two
realities—the  ultimate  truth  and  the  conventional  truth.   These   two
realities exist in all objects. For  example,  when  bodhisattvas  (or  arya
beings) who have realized emptiness directly meditates on the  nature  of  a
flower, they contemplate the flower—how does the flower exist? What  is  the
flower?—and they are able to see the ultimate nature of the flower in  their
meditation. At that moment, what they see is only  the  ultimate  nature  of
the flower. The conventional flower doesn’t appear in their mind.

When arya  bodhisattvas  who  have  realized  emptiness  are  in  meditative
equipoise, their mind and emptiness become one. They don’t  see  their  mind
and emptiness  as  being  two  separate  entities.  There  is  no  dualistic
appearance in their mind because their  mind  is  totally  absorbed  in  the
ultimate truth of the flower. There is no dualistic appearance as  they  see
only the ultimate nature of the flower.

As for the example of the star given here,  during  the  daytime,  when  you
look at the clear sky with no clouds, you are not able to see the star  even
though it exists in the sky. During daytime when it  is  bright,  you  don’t
see the stars. What you see is just empty space in the blue sky.  You  don’t
see the stars at all.

Likewise, when the arya bodhisattvas look at  the  ultimate  nature  of  the
flower, they don’t see the conventional flower. They only see the  emptiness
of the truly existent flower. They only see the  emptiness  of  the  flower.
This is one of the realities of the  flower.  Its  ultimate  nature  is  the
emptiness of the flower, the ultimate truth.

The conventional mind like our mind doesn’t see the ultimate reality of  the
flower. Instead, we see just the conventional flower.  So,  during  daytime,
we don’t see the star, only empty space.

When the sun sets, becoming dark and then totally  dark  in  the  nighttime,
when you look  at  the  sky,  then  you  see  all  the  different  types  of
stars—big,  small,  bright,  not  so  bright.  That’s   exactly   like   our
conventional mind. Our mind is obscured by  ignorance  and  the  imprint  of
ignorance. Our mind sees so many different types  of  conventional  objects.
Our mind sees so many different things when our mind is totally obscured  by
ignorance and the imprint of ignorance. Due to that, our mind sees  so  many
appearances. Some of them really exist. Others don’t exist at all. All  sort
of things appear in our mind.

When we see a flower, we know it’s a flower.  So,  conventionally  speaking,
we see the flower. Conventionally, the flower exists. It functions.  We  can
use it and we can enjoy it. We understand the conventional flower.

The problem is not only the conventional flower. Our mind is so obscured by
ignorance and also the imprint of ignorance that so many  things  appear  in
our mind. For example, the flower appears to our mind. But  not  only  that.
Even more than that—a real truly existent flower exists  from  the  side  of
the object. Nothing that is related to your mind exists from its  own  side.
This is something that’s not true.
That kind of thing doesn’t exist.

When we talk about the star, just  like  the  flower  in  your  conventional
mind, the flower appears and the flower exists.  Within  the  flower,  there
are two realities—the ultimate reality and the conventional reality. One  is
the real true nature of the flower seen by the  arya  bodhisattva  directly.
The conventional flower seen by  the  conventional  mind  exists.  The  star
shows that two realities exist in all objects. But our  mind  cannot  really
see the ultimate nature of the flower. We cannot see the
emptiness of the flower because our mind is totally obscured.

A visual aberration
The next example is a visual aberration.  I  don’t  know  what  the  English
words, “visual aberration” mean. In the text, it gives  an  example  of  how
people who have a problem  with  their  eyes  see  the  appearance  of  hair
falling down. In reality, there is no  hair  falling  down  but  their  eyes
really see that. In reality, there is no hair  falling  down  at  all.  That
doesn’t exist but in that person’s vision, he really sees hair  falling  and
he believes in that. But that doesn’t exist.

The flower truly exists from the side of the object. It has  nothing  to  do
with the subject,  our  mind.  The  flower  exists  independently  from  the
object’s side.  When  we  see  the  flower,  the  flower  appears  to  exist
independently in our mind and we believe that. When  we  see  (the  flower),
immediately, we believe that. But that’s  not  how  the  flower  exists.  We
believe that but that’s not true.  That  kind  of  (independently  existing)
flower doesn’t exist at all. It is exactly like  the  visual  aberration—the
person seeing hair falling down but that doesn’t exist at all.

Here, the truly existent  flower  exists  independently  from  the  object’s
side. The flower is empty of that appearance and your belief. The flower  is
empty of being a truly existent flower. When you say the  flower  is  empty,
it means the flower doesn’t exist the way we see it and the way  we  believe
it exists. The flower is empty of that.

The point is that what you believe and what you see are not true.  They  are
non-existent. The flower is empty of  that.  That  kind  of  flower  doesn’t
exist.  What  you  see  and  what  you   believe—the   inherently   existent
flower—don’t exist. It is like a visual aberration, the  person  seeing  the
hair falling. That doesn’t exist. So, this is  the  example  of  the  visual
aberration.

If the flower existing independently from its own side becomes the  ultimate
nature of the flower, then the arya bodhisattvas who see emptiness  directly
will be able to see that very clearly. But that’s not the case.

The arya bodhisattvas who see emptiness directly are not able  to  see  that
at all. What they see is empty of that. When  they  look  for  the  ultimate
nature of the flower, they see its emptiness of true  existence.  Similarly,
if the falling hair appearing  to  the  person’s  eyes  exists,  then  those
people who have good eyes will be able to see that  clearly  too.  But  they
don’t see that.

Similarly here, if the flower existing truly from its own side  becomes  the
ultimate nature of the flower, then the arya bodhisattvas who see  emptiness
directly should be able to see that clearly too. But they are  not  able  to
see that. This shows the flower is empty of true existence.  Therefore,  the
flower doesn’t exist truly.

A flame of a lamp
The next example is a flame of a lamp.

When we say the flower doesn’t exist truly, then the  flower  doesn’t  exist
from its own side. The meaning is the same. So if it  doesn’t  exist  truly,
it doesn’t exist from its  own  side,  (does  that  mean)  then  the  flower
doesn’t exist? When the flower is empty of existing from its  own  side,  we
may think the flower doesn’t exist. We may conclude that the flower  doesn’t
exist. That’s not the correct conclusion. Here, the example is  saying  that
the flower doesn’t exist from its own side.

The flame of the butter  lamp  arises  due  to  many  different  causes  and
conditions coming together. Due to that, then the flame of the lamp  exists.
Similarly,  the  flower  exists   due   to   many   different   causes   and
conditions—its parts and the thought and the name. The flower doesn’t  exist
independently. It exists  dependently,  not  independently.  Just  like  the
flame of a butter lamp, it exists due to dependence on different causes  and
conditions.

So, by understanding the examples like that, when you look at problems  like
samsara or unwanted suffering, their existence is exactly  like  that.  They
come together due to different causes and conditions. Due to  that,  rebirth
in  samsara,  the  samsaric  body,  the  samsaric  mind  exist.  Samsara  or
suffering does not exist independently.

When Buddha explained emptiness, he explained it in this way. In one of  the
sutras, the Buddha  said,  “Something  that  is  produced  by  condition  is
therefore not produced.” It sounds contradictory. What the Buddha is  saying
is that something that is produced by causes  and  conditions  is  something
that is not produced, which means it is not produced inherently. The  reason
is because it is produced by  causes  and  conditions.  Therefore,  inherent
production  doesn’t  exist.  This  is  the  very  easy  way  to   understand
emptiness.

An inherently existent  product  doesn’t  exist  because  any  product  that
exists is due to causes and conditions. Therefore,  an  independent  product
doesn’t exist. A product is empty of true existence.

Here, the example of a flame of  a  lamp  is  to  understand  that  samsaric
rebirth and all sufferings come from causes  and  conditions.  They  do  not
exist inherently. To illustrate that, the  Buddha  gave  the  example  of  a
flame of a lamp.

An illusion
First, these three  things—a  star,  a  visual  aberration,  a  flame  of  a
lamp—explain the
reality of how things exist. The Buddha explained this by using  a  star,  a
visual aberration and a flame of a  lamp.  The  Buddha  explained  that  the
reality of existence:
 • is empty of true existence
 • it exists due to causes and conditions
 • one object has two realities—the ultimate and conventional.

Next is an illusion. The magician makes something using some kind  of  trick
to show an illusion such as a beautiful  object,  an  unpleasant  object,  a
peaceful object or a scary object. The  magician  can  show  many  types  of
objects.

When the object appears to you, say, something scary like a tiger or  snake,
what you see is a real tiger, a real  snake.  You  believe  that.  When  the
tiger comes near to you, you are scared. Very deep down, you  believe  that.
But in reality, the tiger doesn’t exist at all. In the illusion,  the  tiger
doesn’t exist and  the  snake  doesn’t  exist.  Nevertheless,  due  to  that
appearance and we seeing that as real and believing it to be  real—something
doesn’t exist but we believe it exists—due  to  that,  fear  arises  in  our
mind. Similarly, all the samsaric suffering of  pain  that  appears  in  our
mind appears as true suffering, true body, the true ‘I’  existing  from  its
object.

The big problem is that what you see, you immediately believe 100%  in  what
you see—true ‘I’, true suffering, true body. But in reality, they are  empty
of that. True suffering, true  body,  true  ‘I’  don’t  exist.  When  I  say
‘true’, it means really true.  I  am  talking  about  the  independent  ‘I’,
independent suffering and independent body. They don’t  exist  at  all.  But
because we believe in them, then we suffer.

When you see true suffering, true body, true ‘I’  existing  from  their  own
side and believing in that,  based  on  that,  so  many  different  thoughts
arise. Then you  make  the  object,  ‘true’  body.   All  the  superstitious
thoughts make the object much more beautiful than it  is  in  reality.  “Oh,
this is beautiful!” You label so much  on  the  object,  making  the  object
extremely beautiful as if it exists from its own side. But in reality,  it’s
not like that.

Your mind labels so much  on  the  object  with  your  wrong  concepts.  You
believe it’s the right concept but it’s a totally wrong  concept.  You  just
make up so much on the object. Then this object, the body or the ‘I’  become
very beautiful. “I’m beautiful. My body is beautiful.”  We don’t  understand
that our mind makes up so much on that object.

It’s not a truly existent beautiful object. But after  that,  we  want  that
object so much. Without that object, you can’t live and you believe,  “If  I
get this object, I will be happy and satisfied.”  Then  you  run  after  the
object, look for the object, and get the  object.  You  try  with  all  your
effort all the time, believing that true happiness is over there: “If I  get
that, my life will be peaceful and happy.” You then put in all  the  effort,
truly believing that it’s so beautiful and that you will  be  happy  if  you
get it.

You never think that the object will  change  and  turn  to  suffering.  You
never think about that in the  beginning.  When  you  get  the  object,  you
believe it will satisfy your
life 100% and it will give you happiness. But sooner or  later,  after  days
or weeks or
months or years have passed by, slowly, you see it differently.

If the object truly exists from its own side, you will see  its  beauty  and
get satisfaction from the object all the time. The object  shouldn’t  change
at all. But from our daily experience, we know the  object  will  change.  A
month or a year later, the object will change.  You  experience  the  object
changing. That truly existent object that you used  to  believe  in  doesn’t
exist in that way. This is shown very clearly. If it truly exists  from  its
own side, then there is no change. Not only that, you will  see  the  beauty
and goodness of the object with 100% satisfaction.

If what you see is truly existent, the logic is that whoever  sees  it  will
have  to  see  it  in  exactly  the  same  way—truly  beautiful   and   100%
satisfactory—because it has nothing to do with your  mind.  It  exists  from
its own side. But that’s not the case. If it’s truly  existent,  the  object
will never change. It will always  give  happiness  and  full  satisfaction.
That’s what we believe but it’s not true. It will change after months or
years later.

Then we’ll see the  object  differently.  Slowly,  we  see  that  it’s  more
unsatisfactory, uglier and we label it, “This is bad.” You decorate so  much
on the object with your flawed mind. The object  becomes  totally  ugly  and
anger arises. Our lives are like that. Therefore, it clearly shows that  the
object doesn’t exist from its own side.  What  you  believe  in  is  totally
wrong. The object is empty of what you think. So emptiness  is  about  that.
So when you say emptiness, it is about being empty of what  you  see,  being
empty of what you believe. So, emptiness means that.

The truly existent beautiful and the truly existent unpleasant don’t  exist,
exactly like the illusion shown by the magician. The  illusory  elephant  or
the illusory tiger doesn’t exist. So the  truly  existent  body,  the  truly
existent suffering don’t  exist  at  all.  So  that’s  the  meaning  of  the
illusion.

A drop of dew
The next example is a drop of dew.  Here, it’s also showing  emptiness.  One
way we can understand it is that it shows impermanence. A drop of dew  means
that the drop of the dew on the leaf disappears due to  the  heat  when  the
sun rises.

All  compounded  phenomena  come  from  causes  and  conditions.  The   five
aggregates, suffering, are impermanent just like a drop of dew that  doesn’t
last long. It  will  disintegrate  moment  by  moment.  All  the  suffering,
samsara, including your body is impermanent. It is the product of karma  and
delusions.  It  depends  on  causes  and  conditions.  Therefore,  it’s  not
everlasting. Suffering is  not  everlasting.  It  will  change  because  the
causes and conditions can be changed. Therefore, suffering can  be  changed.
All the suffering in samsara exists because of causes  and  conditions.  One
way we can understand that is that it is empty of true existence. It  exists
dependent on  causes  and  conditions.  So,  it  doesn’t  exist  inherently.
Impermanence could be understood as emptiness.

A bubble
Next is the example of a bubble. Here, we can understand the three types of
suffering—the  suffering  of  suffering,  the  suffering   of   change   and
compounded pervasive suffering or the suffering of conditionality.  We  have
these three different types of sufferings in reality.

The suffering of suffering  is  easy  to  understand.  When  a  headache  or
stomachache arises as suffering, that’s the suffering of suffering.

Then the suffering of change is something like  samsaric  pleasure.  It’s  a
suffering of change but we don’t understand that.  We  truly  believed  that
it’s true happiness and we never understand that  it’s  suffering.  A  water
bubble is like that. The water bubble comes from water and is in the  nature
of water. The suffering of change is like  that.  At  a  glance,  the  water
bubble doesn’t look like water. But  in  reality  it  is  water.  The  water
bubble looks so beautiful and nice.  It  doesn’t  look  like  water  but  it
arises from water and its nature is water. It is the product of water so  it
is still in the  nature  of  water.  Similarly,  the  suffering  of  change,
samsaric pleasure that’s based on this body, which is  compounded  pervasive
suffering. The physical body is the conditionality.

The suffering of change in reality is suffering. It’s based  on  this  body.
It is a product of that. So in reality, it is suffering. To  understand  the
suffering of  change  and  compounded  pervasive  suffering,  which  is  the
physical aggregate, showing the true suffering. So, it is called  the  truth
of suffering in the four noble truths.

What does the truth of suffering mean? Here, the truth  of  suffering  means
that when the arya bodhisattvas look at it, it is  like  the  water  bubble.
Suffering of change, suffering of conditionality, they see  true  suffering.
They don’t see any pleasure there. That’s why it’s  called  true  suffering.
They see that but we don’t.

The water bubble is about everything being impermanent. It also  shows  that
everything is true suffering. So, when  you  say  true  suffering,  you  can
understand it comes from causes and conditions. Because of that, it  can  be
changed and we can understand that it is impermanent. Therefore,  it  exists
due  to  those  causes  and  conditions.  Therefore,  it  does   not   exist
independently.

A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud
Here, the dream shows the example of the past.  When  you  dream,  sometimes
you have nice dreams and sometimes you have bad dreams. When  you  wake  up,
you are still clinging on to the experience of the dream. You  remember  the
dream. If the dream is pleasant, then your mind has a  happy  feeling.  When
the dream is not good and when you wake up, you are  not  so  happy  because
you remember the past dream.

But in reality, it’s just a dream. Nothing  exists  there  at  all.  Whether
it’s good or bad, in reality, it doesn’t exist.  Similarly,  all  the  past,
the cause of samsara, exists but they do not exist inherently. Whatever  you
experience in the dream, whatever you see in the dream  doesn’t  exist.  All
the past, the cause of suffering, doesn’t exist inherently.

A flash of lightning shows the  present  moment.  That  also  doesn’t  exist
inherently. When you look at the present moment, you are not  able  to  find
it. Like lightning, where did it come from?  How did it  disappear?  If  you
look at it deeply, you are not able to find it. So, the  present  moment  is
also like that. When you look deeply, you are not able  to  find  the  truly
existent present moment.

The last one is a cloud. That represents the future. Sometimes in the  empty
space, the clouds slowly come together. Then rain  happens.  The  future  is
also like that. Within our clear mind, all the different  types  of  thought
gather like a cloud. Due to this,  all  the  different  types  of  suffering
exist in the future. Therefore, the future  sufferings  also  do  not  exist
inherently.

These three examples signify that the past, present and  future  also  don’t
exist inherently.

The whole point of the teaching here is to understand how we  suffer,  where
the suffering comes from, how we suffer in our daily life, how do we  create
karma in our daily life. It’s important to understand that.

Like a dream and an illusion that we used  to  believe  in,  these  are  not
true. Exactly like a dream, you just believe so much in it but  in  reality,
it’s not there. When you understand it’s like a dream, then your  attachment
or anger may be reduced or become less. When you dream, whatever you see  as
beautiful or unpleasant in the dream mind, you  really  experience  it.  You
believe 100% in the dream.  You  really  experience  it.   Even  if  you  go
through that in the dream, you can’t  differentiate  if  it’s  real  or  not
real. Your mind is (so engrossed in) only that.  You  don’t  see  any  other
option there.

If it’s pleasant, you wake up feeling happy. If you have  a  nightmare,  you
will experience such a difficult time in the dream. When you  wake  up,  you
can feel your  heart  beating  faster.  So,  that  is  how  the  dream  mind
experiences that moment, but that’s not reality. Something happened  in  the
dream but there is nothing there.

When you wake up and you understand it’s just a dream  and  it’s  not  real,
then it is less difficult for your mind and you can  relax.  In  the  dream,
you are totally scared by the nightmare.  But  when  you  wake  up  and  you
recognize it is just a dream, then you won’t feel that  kind  of  difficulty
in the mind. You can breathe easily.

All the suffering we experience  in  samsara  is  like  a  dream.  Pleasure,
pleasant, unpleasant, good, bad. Anything that happens in life looks like  a
dream. All these things don’t exist truly. The ignorant mind made  them  up.
In reality, they don’t exist truly, like a dream, like an illusion.

So, it’s extremely  important  for  you  to  meditate  like  that.  You  can
meditate on impermanence when you are in pain and  suffering.  Think  it  is
all  impermanent  and  not  everlasting.  When  you  have   this   kind   of
mindfulness, it’s really helpful.

Then meditate more deeply on emptiness. Think and  meditate  like  this—that
it’s like a dream, like an illusion. We will  be  able  to  relax  our  mind
whenever we have a difficult time.  Bad and good exist. Whatever happens  in
your life, your mind will not be so emotional, with ups and downs.  You  are
able to keep your mind balanced.
When the mind is very balanced, whatever happens in life, the  mind  doesn’t
go up and down. When you wake up and you understand it’s a  dream,  then  it
doesn’t move your mind up and  down.  Therefore,  this  is  really  helpful.
That’s why it is so important to meditate on emptiness. Think about  it  and
try. Learn, read, listen and meditate. Then in this way,  you  are  able  to
free yourself from the ocean of samsara.

Otherwise, it’s extremely difficult. We circle in samsara  numberless  times
in future. Compared to now, the  suffering  of  our  future  lives  is  much
greater. What we experience in this moment is nothing. The future  won’t  be
the same. So like that, think about them. Try to read,  think  and  meditate
on these verses as much as possible.

Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan,
Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Note: The teachings on March 6, 8 and 13 are general teachings by Khen
Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi that are open to all students and are NOT part of
Module 10 of the Second Basic Program.

