Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L42final.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:03.551751
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 42	 				                              19 September 2017
Review. The four empties.  Conceptual vs. non-conceptual minds. Why we are still in samsara. Basis of infusion of the imprints. 
REVIEW
In the last lesson, we looked at how the 25 coarse phenomena dissolve in stages during the time of death. At the time of death, eight signs will arise. These signs occur due to the power of karma. 
The death process begins with the dissolution of the earth element into the water element. When that happens:
The earth element loses its ability to act as a support for the consciousness. This ability shifts to the water element.  
Internally, the person experiences a mirage-like vision, i.e., seeing a body of water when in fact there is no body of water out there.   
Next, the water element dissolves into the fire element. When that happens:
The water element loses its ability to act as a support for the consciousness. 
Instead, the ability to support consciousness is manifested by the fire element.  
Internally, the person experiences a smoke-like vision, like a lot of smoke coming out of the chimney at the top of a house.
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t have (chimney) smoke here so you won’t know (what this is). 
When the fire element dissolves into the wind element: 
The fire element loses its ability to act as a support for the consciousness. 
There will come a time when the wind element acts as a support for the consciousness.  
When that happens, internally, it is said the person experiences a vision of fireflies, i.e., insects with glowing bodies that hover in the sky at night.
One’s body heat dissipates. The warmth in one’s limbs such as the hands, legs and the rest of the body disappear.
When the wind element dissolves into the consciousness:
normal inhalation and exhalation stop, i.e., the person stops breathing. 
Internally, the person experiences the vision of the flame of a butter-lamp. Sometimes, this is described as the vision of the glow of the butter-lamp, i.e., one doesn’t see the flame itself but the glow emitted by that flame.
During this phase of dissolution, the sense consciousnesses have already stopped. 
The mental consciousness such as the six root afflictions and the 20 secondary afflictions are not manifest. They have also stopped. From the tantric perspective, the 80 indicative conceptions also cease during this phase.
If we divide the consciousness into the coarse and subtle:
the coarse consciousnesses are all the sense consciousnesses, the mental consciousness, the six root afflictions, the 20 secondary afflictions and the 80 indicative conceptions. 
the subtle consciousnesses are the minds of appearance, increase, near-attainment and clear light.
One is considered dead by the world during this phase when the wind element dissolves into the consciousness when all breathing stops. During this phase, all the coarse consciousnesses would have ceased. During this phase, the 80 indicative conceptions also dissolve. This means that the ability to engage with objects disappear. The coarse mental consciousness dissolves into the mind of appearance. This mind of appearance is much subtler when compared to the 80 indicative conceptions and the coarse consciousnesses.
THE FOUR EMPTIES 
Mind of white appearance
When the consciousness dissolves into the mind of appearance, internally, the person will experience a whitish appearance, likened to the clear autumn night sky pervaded by a white light or moonlight. It is said that to this mind, called the mind of white appearance, only this vacuity filled with white light appears. Nothing else appears. It is also referred to as the mind of empty or the empty mind.
We have three main channels—the central channel, the left channel and the right channel. 
The winds from all the other channels in our body enter the left and right channels. 
The winds from the left and right channels then enter into the central channel, starting from the upper end of the (central) channel. 
As the winds enter the central channel from its upper end, the white bodhicitta we inherited from our father residing in our crown starts to descend in the central channel to the point just above the heart chakra where there’s a channel knot. 
Due to the flow of the white bodhicitta down the central channel, this is the condition for experiencing the whitish appearance internally. This whitish appearance does not exist outside. Rather, it is just an appearance to the mind.
At the time of death, this process happens due to karma. 
Mind of red increase
The mind of appearance then dissolves into the mind of increase. This is a more subtle mind compared to the mind of appearance. When this happens, internally, one experiences a red appearance. This is likened to a clear autumn sky pervaded by sunlight. It’s said that this experience is more intense than the earlier experience of the white appearance. There is a greater sense of this appearance of vacuity and more clarity with regard to the red appearance.
What is the condition for this reddish appearance?  
The winds below the heart chakra enter the central channel from the chakra at the secret place. 
As the winds enter, the channel knot at the secret place is untied and released. 
The winds flow up to the navel chakra and the channel knots there are untied.
Inside the navel chakra, there is the red bodhicitta we inherited from our mother. The navel chakra is the main place where this red bodhicitta is located. The red bodhicitta is said to be in the nature of fire. 
With the release of the channel knot at the navel chakra, this red bodhicitta moves up the central channel to the point just below the heart chakra. This is the condition for the internal sign of the red appearance to arise.  This appearance is likened to a clear autumn sky pervaded by red light. This conveys that experience via an example.  As before, this is just an internal appearance to the mind, not an external appearance. 
By now, all the coarse conventional appearances have dissolved.  To the mind of increase, nothing else appears except this vacuity that is pervaded by this reddish light. The mind of red increase is the mind of the very empty or the very empty mind.  
Mind of black near-attainment
Then the mind of increase dissolves into the mind of near-attainment that, in turn, is a much subtler mind. When that happens, internally, there is this appearance of darkness that is likened to a clear autumn night sky of pitch-black darkness.
Prior to this, the white bodhicitta and red bodhicitta have arrived above and below the heart chakra respectively inside the central channel. There are channel knots there. Due to the force of karma, when the channel knots are untied, the winds move inside the heart chakra. There is then the appearance of pitch-black darkness.
It is said that during the initial phase of the arising of this appearance of pitch-black darkness, there is still some awareness of that appearance.
There are the white and red bodhicittas just above and below the heart chakra. As the white and red bodhicittas touch and dissolve into the extremely subtle indestructible drop at the heart, I think that is when the phase of the mind of near- attainment starts. It is said to be like fainting, i.e., you are completely unconscious. This is when the red and white bodhicittas touch the indestructible drop. 
The mind of near-attainment is composed of two phases:
One is still aware or conscious in the earlier phase. 
The latter phase is when one is unconscious. It is unclear how long this phase lasts.  It is mentioned in some texts that the longer this phase of unconscious near-attainment, the more powerful and clearer is the clear light one experiences afterwards. 
Khen Rinpoche: Maybe it is like when you sleep very deeply for, say, ten hours. Then when you wake up, maybe your mind is fresher. Or is it still the same? Normally, when one sleeps well, the mind is fresher. 
The mind of near-attainment is also called the mind of great empty or the great empty mind.
The clear light of death
Within this unconscious state, the extremely subtle wind is stirred. As such, the extremely subtle mind manifests and functions, so to speak. This is the clear light of death. That is death. 
At the time of the basis, the clear light of death only happens at the end of the death dissolution process. This means that the only time when the mind of clear light manifests is during death. Otherwise, it doesn’t manifest and function. 
When this mind is manifest, what appears to it? It is a very clear vacuity that is likened to a very clear autumn sky that is not pervaded by moonlight, sunlight or darkness and is not covered by clouds. It is very clear. Prior to the clear light manifesting, the minds of appearance, increase and near-attainment have already dissolved. This means the appearances associated with those minds will not exist. So now, there is a very clear appearance of vacuity that is not polluted by those three earlier appearances. It is also likened to the experience of someone who is realizing emptiness directly.
The clear light of death manifests because the white bodhicitta that resided primarily at the crown and the red bodhicitta that primarily resided at the navel have already met at the heart and dissolved into the indestructible drop there. Together with that, all the winds in the body have already dissolved into the extremely subtle life- sustaining wind. As a result of that, the clear light of death manifests with its attendant experience or appearance. 
This clear light of death is the mind of death. It is also called the mind of all empty or the all empty mind. 
Meaning of ‘empty’
In this context, these expressions—empty, very empty, great empty and all empty—
do not refer to the emptiness of the object of negation, true existence. Rather, the word ‘empty’ refers to the absence of the coarse appearances that precede it. As one goes through these empties, each empty is subtler than the preceding one. It is the absence of the coarser appearances that come with those coarser levels of mind. So you have to understand ‘empty’ in this context to mean, ‘empty of those coarse appearances.’
When we talk about death, death refers to the mind of clear light or the clear light of death. This is what actual death is. This clear light of death is the basis dharmakaya. 
Then there is the appearance of vacuity to the clear light of death. This appearance of vacuity is given the name, the basis nature body.
The mind that takes this vacuity as an object is given the name, the basis wisdom truth body. 
You need to understand clearly: 
the stages of dissolution
the manner in which the winds are gathered 
the appearances that arise in the whole process
In particular, you have to memorize the eight internal signs. 
From the 25 coarse phenomena comes the five wisdoms of the basis.
In the first stage of dissolution, the mirror-like wisdom of the basis refers to the sense consciousnesses to which a variety of appearances appear.  
In the second stage of dissolution, the wisdom of equality of the basis refers to the mind that is mindful of pleasure, pain and unspecified feelings to be feelings. I have talked about this in the previous lesson. 
In the third stage of dissolution, the wisdom of individual investigation of the basis refers to the mind that remembers the names of one’s parents, the people one is close to, one’s relatives and loved ones. 
In the fourth stage of dissolution, the wisdom of accomplishment of the basis is the mind that is mindful of what needs to be done, “This has to be done. This shouldn’t be done.” 
At the time when the wind (element) dissolves into the consciousness, at the fourth stage of dissolution, the wisdoms of the basis—the mirror-like wisdom, the wisdom of equality, the wisdom of individual investigation, the wisdom of accomplishment or activity—have already ceased. Out of the five wisdoms, four have dissolved. 
In the fifth stage of dissolution, the wisdom of the sphere of reality or the wisdom of the dharmadhatu is the mind or the consciousness that is suitable to be transformed into the dharmakaya. 
CONCEPTUAL VS. NON-CONCEPTUAL MINDS
I think we could almost say with certainty that the minds of appearance, increase and near-attainment are conceptual minds. 
What about the mind of clear light? Do we have to classify it either as a conceptual or non-conceptual mind or could it be both? 
You could probably talk about the clear light mind in terms of some of them being conceptual minds and some being non-conceptual minds. The reason is this: At the end of the final mental isolation when the meditator achieves the example clear light, essentially, this is the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. But does he realize emptiness directly? No. So this means the example clear light is a conceptual mind.
The clear light of death that arises is the clear light of the basis and is called the mother clear light. There is some debate as to whether this is a fully qualified (or fully characterized) clear light or not? There are different positions. If you say it is not (a fully qualified clear light), then are you going to take the position that in order for a mind to be a fully qualified clear light, it has to be an extremely subtle mind of clear light realizing emptiness?
The clear light can be divided into:
the objective clear light, which refers to the object, emptiness and subtle emptiness
the subjective clear light (the extremely subtle mind of clear light) is the mind that takes subtle emptiness as its object
If that is the case, it follows that in order for it to be a fully qualified clear light, it has to be a clear light realizing emptiness. 
Ordinarily, a person is pronounced dead when the person stops breathing. But for us, actual death occurs when the clear light of death manifests. 
How long does the extremely subtle mind remain in the body? It depends. If you are talking about an ordinary person who dies normally, i.e., not in an accident or after some serious sickness but where the death process proceeds normally, it’s said that the consciousness may remain for up to three days.  
If death occurs suddenly due to an accident, dissolution happens very quickly. All the 
appearances arise quickly too. As such, the clear light will not remain for a long time in that body. 
As to the question posed in the last lesson with regard to people having near-death experiences and reviving after they have stopped breathing, it all depends on how far along the death process that person is. If we are talking about revival, i.e., coming back from death, where is the demarcation after which is the point of no return? Is it (at the point when the mind of) appearance arises? Can it even go up to the (arising of the mind of) near-attainment? That’s the question you have to think about.
I am not exactly sure but I doubt one can come back from the dead if the mind of clear light has manifested, i.e., one is already dead. I don’t think one can return from that. What if we were to say that one can still return from the dead, even when the minds of appearance, increase or near-attainment have set in? I’m not sure. How far can one go before the point of no return? It’s difficult to say. 
Khen Rinpoche: Does anybody have an idea as to when one can come back?
Ven. Gyurme: The brain dies two minutes after the blood flow (stops). If the brain is destroyed, I think one cannot come back.  
Khen Rinpoche: The brain may be dead but the heart is not dead.
WHY WE ARE STILL IN SAMSARA
The reason why we are circling in cyclic existence is because we’re not able to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. This means in order to be free from samsara, we have to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. 
It’s an extremely difficult feat to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind. It is extremely difficult to achieve because prior to that, many conditions have to fall into place, one of which is having the realization of the generation stage. So, before one can even do anything about this meditation (on the realization of emptiness),  one must understand first the generation stage and achieve it. This is why there is this presentation of the path of the generation stage. 
In the first place, one must have experienced those eight signs of dissolution, not intellectually or at the level of imagination but actually experience them. 
In order to be able to utilize the extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness, first, one must be able to engage in and be successful in the practice of sleep yoga. In the yoga of sleep, in reality, we will experience a similitude of those eight signs of dissolution at the time of sleep. But in the first place, we are not even able to recognize those eight signs that are similar to the death process though they actually occur at the time of sleep. In that case, there is no way you can achieve that with the actual clear light. 
Before one can do this practice in one’s sleep, one must be able to do it when one is awake! When one is awake, first, one must be able to do it at the level of imagination first. This is why there are the three mixings of the waking state and why in the generation stage practice, there are the practices of: 
taking death as the path of the dharmakaya
taking intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya
taking rebirth as the path of the nirmanakaya
After achieving thorough familiarity with those practices, then one progresses to the practice of the completion stage. At the lower level of the completion stage practice, through the power of meditation, the winds will actually enter the central channel. As the winds enter the central channel, they abide and dissolve there. With the dissolution of the winds in the central channel, the similitudes of those eight signs (of dissolution) actually occur. It is no longer happening at the level of imagination like in the practice of the generation stage. 
But we are talking still about the lower level of the completion stage. So there is still a long way to go before one can actually utilize the extremely subtle mind to realize clear light. It’s an extremely difficult feat. 
What we can do here is to gain an understanding of the technology of the essential points and the purpose of Highest Yoga Tantra. From the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra, because we are not able to stop ordinary death, that is why we have to enter the intermediate state. As long we are in the ordinary intermediate state, we have to take rebirth. That’s how we circle in cyclic existence.
So in order to stop rebirth, you have to stop the intermediate state.
In order to stop the intermediate state, you have to stop ordinary death. 
When ordinary death is overcome, instead of leaving the clear light in its ordinary state, you will be able to transform that extremely subtle mind of clear light into the entity of the path, i.e., realizing emptiness with that mind. Then there will be no more rebirth due to the power of karma and afflictions.
It is definite that the person who is able to realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind of clear light will achieve enlightenment in that lifetime.
But if that doesn’t happen, i.e., the extremely subtle mind cannot be transformed into the entity of the path, then one has to take rebirth through the intermediate state. If one is taking rebirth in the desire or form realms, definitely, one has to go through the intermediate state. If one enters the intermediate state, then the eight signs of the reverse order will occur. 
When one enters the intermediate state, one takes rebirth through the intermediate state. 
One arises from the clear light of death. 
Then one arises into the mind of near-attainment. 
Following the mind of near-attainment comes the mind of increase, i.e., the mind is becoming increasingly coarser. 
From the mind of increase comes the mind of appearance. 
Then the coarser consciousnesses come into being and the coarse bodies come into being. 
Maybe I will talk about this when we talk about rebirth.
BASIS OF INFUSION OF THE IMPRINTS
This leads us back to the question about the basis of infusion of the imprints. If you think about it, it seems you have no choice but to say that ultimately, it is the clear light, the extremely subtle mind, that acts as the repository of the imprints. 
If you look at the death process, at the fourth stage (of dissolution) when the wind dissolves into the consciousness, the ability of the wind element to act as the support for the consciousness has deteriorated. Because of that, those coarser levels of consciousness also cease. 
When the ability of the wind—that acts as the mount of those consciousnesses—to support the consciousnesses deteriorates, the consciousnesses they support also dissolve. So, the wind element dissolves into the consciousness. Having said that, would it be alright to say that together with the dissolution of these coarser levels of mind, the imprints are also transferred to the subtler levels of mind and so forth, all the way down to the clear light?
In the Pramanavarttika, there is a section discussing the proof of past and future lives where it talks about the breath, the sense powers and the consciousness moving from life to life. The energy is the wind. The sense powers and the consciousness go from life to life. The point is that it is not just the consciousness that goes from life to life. 
In the Pramanavarttika, it talks about the wind and the sense powers. Let’s talk about, for example, the eye sense power that is the uncommon empowering condition for the production of the eye consciousness. This uncommon empowering condition, the eye sense power, is not this physical eyeball. It’s said to be a very subtle form. What is this ‘very subtle form’? I think it’s very difficult to pinpoint what it is. Anyway, this is what is said in the teachings. So when we talk about the uncommon empowering condition, in this case, the eye sense power, there is this very subtle form that moves from life to life as well. When we say these sense powers move from life to life, they do so in the entity of predispositions or imprints. 
Q & A
Student 1: My question relates to actually trying to account for the aggregate of consciousness in the dissolution process. In the four stages, 
the first stage is form, 
the second stage is feelings, 
the third stage is discrimination, and  
the fourth stage is the compositional factor. 
It is not explicitly mentioned at which stage the fifth aggregate, consciousness, is. So I am trying to account for that. 
Khen Rinpoche: The aggregate of consciousness encompasses many things, not just the coarse but including the subtle. This means (it encompasses) the 80 indicative conceptions, the minds of appearance, increase, near-attainment and even the clear light itself.
Student 1: I would like to clarify the external signs for the fourth stage dissolution of the body and tongue sense power and the objects, taste and touch. 
Khen Rinpoche: When the tongue sense power dissolves, its ability to taste deteriorates. If that (sense power) dissolves, then taste, one of the five objects, will also dissolve. The external sign of the tongue sense power dissolving is that the tongue becomes shorter and thicker.
Student 1: When the white and red bodhicittas are travelling from the crown and the navel to the heart chakra, I understand the white bodhicitta is in the form of liquid. So, that’s actually a form.  From the fifth stage (of dissolution) onwards, there is no external sign yet we have the coarse movement of this physical entity downwards. Can that be considered as an external sign from the fifth to the seventh stage?
Khen Rinpoche:  Nothing can be observed externally. 
Student 1: For example, the ‘external’ sign of not being able to remember when the wisdom of activity dissolves and being unable to taste. All these are experienced by the dying person but somebody else would not be able to see these signs either.  
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau
Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
Handout