Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L31FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.920363
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 31	 				                                         1 August 2017
Action Tantra and the Nyung Na self-generation practice. Requests to the Lineage Gurus.  Instantaneous Generation. Blessing the Action Vase. Blessings the Offerings—dispelling, purifying, generating & blessing. Refuge & bodhicitta. Invocation of the Merit Field. Completion of the Seven-Limb Offering—rejoicing, urging, requesting, dedicating. The dharani of  immaculate morality. The four immeasurables. Departure of the merit field. The actual ceremony. How to meditate on the self-generation. 1. The ultimate deity. 2. The deity of sound. 3. The deity of syllables. 4. The deity of form. 5. The deity of mudra. 6. The deity of sign. 
We have finished with the three lower classes of tantra. Quite a few people have asked me to relate the material learnt in class to a specific self-generation practice. Since we do Nyung Na here, I thought maybe I can try to do that explanation in relation to the self-generation practice of Avalokiteshvara. In the process, we will see all the different sections of the practice. Unless you have memorized the Nyung Na sadhana, otherwise please look at the text at the same time as I explain. 
Khen Rinpoche: On Sunday, some of you said that we talk so much but we do not know how to practise. So if you want to practise, today is the practice. Make sure you understand everything in this sadhana. What we have talked about so far is all inside here. 
REQUESTS TO THE LINEAGE GURUS (pp. 39—43)
[The heavens of the dharmakaya are supreme yet, out of warmth, 
A hundred thousand moisture-bearing clouds of non-referential
compassion gather. 
I make requests to Padmapani, skilled in sending a rainfall
Of attainments of benefit and bliss to limitless migrators. 
Excellent Bhikshuni Lakshmi, gone to the stage of supreme liberation
Chandra Kumara who favoured the five sciences; 
Jnanabhadra, sublimely strong in patience, effort, and faith;
I make requests to you three friends of migrators. 
Penyawa of Nepal, best of scholars;
Excellent Dawa Gyaltsan, emanation of the Supreme Arya;
Nyiphug Chokyidrag, lord of practice;
I make requests to you three great beings. 
Trupa Dorje Gyal, descendent of the conquerors’ children; 
Excellent Zhangton Drajig, great in learning and morality; 
Thugje Jangchub Pal, endowed with morality’s fragrance; 
I make requests to you three who clarified the path to liberation. 
Dewa Chan, with control over countless concentrations; 
Jangchub Bar, with visions of hosts of meditational deities; 
Yeshe Bum, who possessed a treasury of precious qualities; 
I make requests to you three who fulfilled the hopes of migrators. 
Thogme Zangpo, who attained mastery over bodhichitta;
Sherab Pal, emanation of the invincible conqueror, Maitreya; 
Tsultrim Tsan, who constantly protected all migrators with compassion; 
I make requests to you three who spontaneously achieved the welfare of others.
Yontan Rinchen. holy guide of migrators, 
Sangya Gyatso, lord over an ocean of Buddha’s doctrine; 
Kyabchog Pal, who showed the path to infinite embodied beings; 
I make requests to you three who embodied scripture and realization. 
(Gyalwa) Ensapa, hero who accomplished righteous conduct; 
Sangya Yeshe, who fulfilled the hopes of the fortunate; 
Excellent (Panchen) Losang Chogyan, seeing all to be known; 
I make requests to you three holy guides. 
Damtsig Dorje (Konchog Gyaltsan), who acquired the supreme accomplishment; 
Excellent (Panchen) Losang Yeshe, lord of all the families; 
Venerable Donyo Khadrub, clarifier of the excellent path; 
I make requests to you three lamps of the doctrine. 
I make requests to Ngawang Chogdan, embodiment of the glorious, 
Who partook of the supreme wisdom of the five-knotted lord of speech,    Manjushri, 
And to Kalsang Gyatso, (the seventh Dalai Lama), 
Who clarified the doctrines of scripture and realization of the good eon’s fourth guide (Shakyamuni Buddha). 
I make requests to the ocean of varieties of emanations of the Supreme Arya, 
Universally appearing as environments and inhabitants, 
Apparitions of analytic wisdom and compassion
Unified with an all-pervading nature, pure from the very beginning.] 
If you look at the Requests to the Lineage Gurus (from Page 39 to) Page 41, up to the second last verse on that page, those are the actual requests to the individual lineage gurus. If possible, when reciting the Requests to the Lineage Gurus, visualize them in the space in front of you. As you recite the verses, first, you are making requests.  Then you do the visualizations of receiving the blessings and being purified by the descent of light and nectar. 
[Please bless me that I might be cared for closely like an only child 
By Padmapani who enjoys the Potala 
And by drinking the essence of the nectar of the Mahayana. 
Accomplish solely what is pleasing with my three doors.] (p.41)
You then focus on one’s direct guru to be practised inseparably from Avalokiteshvara and request that “one might be cared for closely like an only child” by Avalokiteshvara all the time and that one may always be able to enjoy drinking “the essence of the nectar of the Mahayana.” Also, whatever one does with one’s body, speech and mind, may it be only pleasing to Guru Avalokiteshvara. This is the first request. This is a very important point. I guess you can relate it to the practice of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. 
[Please bless me to renounce all the perfections of cyclic existence
To be unattached to the bliss of my own peace 
And to generate the supreme mind desiring to liberate mothers, 
Equal to space, from the ocean of suffering.] (p. 43)
“Please bless me to renounce all the perfections of cyclic existence.” It does not matter what kind of pleasant objects or enjoyments of the perfections of samsara there may be. Here, we request to be able to renounce them all. At the same time, we request not to be attracted to one’s own liberation only. Rather, one makes the request to be able to generate the mind of enlightenment with the desire to free all sentient beings from samsara.
[Please bless me to eliminate ordinary appearance and grasping 
With the clear appearance and (divine) pride of the six deities: 
The deity of thusness, the tone of the mantra’s empty resonance, the 
         seed syllable, 
The form complete with marks and exemplifications, the commitment
           mudra, and sign.] (p. 43)
We saw how the path of Action Tantra can be subsumed under the three mudras:
Meditating on the mind is suchness.
Meditating on speech is mantra. 
Meditating on the body is the Mahamudra. 
Through the practice of the six deities, we make request that we will be able to generate clear appearance and divine pride. Through that, may we be able to cut ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. 
On the basis of correctly devoting to the virtuous friend, one generates renunciation. With this renunciation as a condition, one generates the mind of enlightenment. With that, one enters the path of Action Tantra. After entering the path of Action Tantra, one engages in the yoga with signs to develop clear appearance and divine pride. Through that, one cuts the ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. 
Please bless me to accomplish each and every (common) attainment 
Through dependence on the concentration with four-branched 
          repetition 
And to complete perfect concentration 
With the yogas of absorption in fire and sound. (p.43)
“Please bless me to accomplish each and every (common) attainment/ Through dependence on the concentration with four-branched repetition.” Do you remember the four branches of recitation?
There is the absorption with recitation. From that, we go on to the absorption not reliant on recitation. Through dependence on those absorptions with the four branches of recitation, one completes the perfect absorption with the yogas of absorption on fire and the absorption on sound. 
On the basis of clear appearance and divine pride, one engages in the four branches of recitation. When one reaches the end of the absorption on sound, then one achieves uncommon calm abiding. From there, one goes on to the yoga without signs. 
The uncommon calm abiding is a perfect absorption. If we were to call it an uncommon calm abiding, is that OK or not? When one reaches the end of the absorption on sound, one achieves this perfect absorption. With that, one reaches the end of yoga with signs. 
Please bless me to uproot the two obscurations 
With the great space-like concentration (p.43)
“Please bless me to uproot the two obscurations/ With the great space-like concentration.” Depending on the yoga with signs alone, one will not be able to overcome the two obscurations. One must generate the yoga without signs. The “great space-like concentration” is essentially the absorption bestowing freedom at the limit of sound that:  
Bestowing immaculate liberation that destroys all trust in grasping at 
       signs, 
And by being endowed with a mass of merits of skill-in-means. (p. 43) 
“And by being endowed with a mass of merits of skill-in-means.” This is when we talk about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. Profundity refers to the meditation 
on the realization of emptiness and clarity refers to the clear appearance of the deity. I wonder if it is OK if we take “skill-in-means” to mean the practice of the clear appearance of the deity. 
Please bless me to attain soon the complete direct exalted wisdom 
      regarding all phenomena, 
The wish-fulfilling form bodies with their nets of light, 
And to spontaneously achieve the enlightened activities,
Ripening and liberating migrators included in the five families. (p.43)
“Ripening and liberating migrators included in the five families”: After achieving enlightenment, may one be able to place all sentient beings in full enlightenment 
This is essentially what making requests to the lineage gurus entails. Since this is the practice of Action Tantra, this request is connected to the path and the practice of Action Tantra. 
INSTANTANEOUS GENERATION (p. 53)
I instantaneously arise as the holy body of the Great Compassionate One. (p. 53) 
The reason one arises as the deity instantaneously is for the purpose of being able to consecrate or bless the offerings in the beginning. 
The actual body of the self-generation practice comes later on in the means of accomplishment. We call this the sadhana. 
BLESSING THE ACTION VASE (p. 53)
If the action vase is used, this is not blessing the action vase itself but blessing the water in the action vase. We say this is accomplishing the action vase. One uses the water that has been blessed and transformed to dispel interferers abiding in the offerings.  
BLESSING THE OFFERINGS (p. 55)
In the beginning, when we are blessing the offerings, we need to dispel any inter-
ferers that may be abiding within the offerings. 
For the purpose of dispelling the interferers, in this practice here, we recite the action mantra, Om Padmantakrit Hum Phat. 
Simultaneously, one sprinkles the dispelling water from the vase. 
At the same time, imagine emanating a host of wrathful beings from the heart of oneself as the deity. This forces the wrathful beings to dispel all the interferers that may be abiding in the offerings. 
One must think that they are all chased away. 
Whenever we are blessing offerings, usually, the practice is divided into four outlines:
dispelling
purification
generation
blessing
Dispelling (p.55)
The first outline of dispelling is to dispel interferers that may be abiding in the offerings. We do that with the recitation of the action mantra and the sprinkling of the vase water. At the same time, we do the visualization of emitting a host of wrathful beings to dispel the interferers. 
Khen Rinpoche: For those who have been to Nepal, when you go to the stupa to make light offerings, there is always a vase there. After you make your light offering, the vendor will ask you to sprinkle the water. This is not for blessing the light offerings. What do you think when you do that? The idea is to chase away interferers. 
Just my explaining and you listening to my explanation by itself is not going to be beneficial. It does not mean that you get it. You must get the idea and you must know the material well. You must read and familiarize yourself with the practice. You should get used to the sadhana and then do the visualizations. When you have some idea of the practice because you have thought about it, then the thought will arise, “Maybe there is really something there in this practice,” because you have done it. 
Khen Rinpoche: We have not started yet! There are many things to talk about. Sometimes, many people say, “You talk and talk but there is no action.” What you say is true. We learn so much, still there is so much there. 
Purification (p.55)
The second step is purification. This is extremely important and it goes with the mantra: 
Om savbhava shuddhah sarva dharmah svabhava shuddho ham
(The offering substances) become just empty. 
One brings to mind and meditates on the empty nature of the offering substances.  This is important because the offering substances themselves are contaminated phenomena and it is only by recalling the empty nature of those offerings that you can purify them. Once you have purified them, they are generated from within that understanding of emptiness. 
If the offerings we make are not generated from within emptiness and offered, setting aside the practice of reducing our attachment, there’s a real danger that it may lead to even more attachment. If they are not purified by bringing to mind the empty nature of the offerings, then whatever offerings made are just ordinary offerings because they remain as they are, i.e., ordinary. 
Therefore, the meditation on emptiness is extremely important. In the context here, bring to mind the empty nature of the offerings. If the offerings are generated from within their empty state and offered, then this practice will exhaust attachment.  This is because when the practice of making offerings is generated with an understanding of emptiness, it will be able to harm our grasping at true existence. This is what I think is the purpose of meditating on the emptiness of the offering substances before
generating them.
Generating (p.55)
From the state of emptiness, imagine from the syllable Bhrum arises offering vessels. The offering vessels themselves are vast and precious. Within each of those offering vessels is the syllable Om that melts into light and transforms into an offering. The first is a libation. It is not necessarily water. We should call it a libation or drink.  Then there is water for bathing the feet, flowers, incense, lamps, perfume, food, and music.
When we generate the offerings from within an understanding of emptiness, the offerings are often generated from syllables. Different practices have different syllables. The syllables themselves become the offering vessels, inside of which are other syllables that transform into the respective offerings. The point I think of visualizing the offerings arising from syllables after the meditation on emptiness is to bring to mind and signify how things exist only in mere name and are merely imputed by conceptuality.  
The offerings generated should be visualized to be of the best quality and the most pleasant:
If they are flowers, they should be the most beautiful flowers. 
If it is incense, it should be the sweetest smelling incense.
If it is light, it should be butter lamps that are extremely bright. 
If it is scent, it should be extremely pleasing scents.  
If it is food, it should be extremely delicious food. 
If it is music, it should be extremely soothing and pleasant music. 
What are the characteristics of the offerings generated? 
They are empty by nature and exist in mere name. They are imputed by thought. 
Their aspects are the individual offering substances.  
What about the function of the offerings? They bestow special uncontaminated bliss in the exalted minds of those who partake of the offerings. 
Up to this point, we have finished dispelling, purifying and generating the offerings. 
Khen Rinpoche:  When you read, do you understand the sadhana—which part is this, which part is that?  When you read the sadhana, you must understand it. It’s OK, yes? It’s not difficult.
Blessing (p. 55)
You recite Om argham Ah Hum till Om shapta Ah Hum to bless the offerings. The names of the individual offerings are mentioned and interspersed with the syllables Om, Ah and Hum for the purpose of blessing them. 
I want to reiterate the point that generating the offerings within the understanding and realization of emptiness is extremely important. Otherwise, we make offerings as they are—ordinary offerings. Then there is always opportunity for and the danger of 
miserliness to arise in relation to what we are offering. There is also the danger for 
miserliness to arise in relation to what we are offering. There is also the danger for attachment to arise. 
Without purifying the offerings by bringing to mind the meditation on emptiness, the offerings made will be ordinary offerings. How will it be possible to cause the guests who partake of the offerings to generate special uncontaminated bliss when only something ordinary is offered? 
The function of the offerings is that they’re supposed to bring about special uncontaminated bliss in the mind of the beings who partake of them. This bliss arises because the offering presented are pleasant and of the highest quality. As such, they are supposed to cause joy and bliss to arise in those who partake of them. 
This is something to think about. Just because bliss is experienced through partaking of the offerings does not necessarily lead to the arising of attachment. If that is the case, why? 
The idea is the offerings is supposed to generate special uncontaminated bliss in those who partake of the offerings. It does not mean those who experience this bliss through partaking of the offerings must necessarily have attachment. They can have bliss without attachment. 
Why am I saying this? This is because it is in relation to the discussion about the meaning of taking desire into the path. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you understand, my answer is there. 
So, this is the procedure for blessing the offerings—dispelling, purifying, generating and blessing. It does not matter whether you are blessing the offerings for the self-generation, the front generation or the merit field. The procedure of blessing the offerings is these four general steps. If you know these steps, you know how to bless the offerings. In this practice, it does not matter for whom the offerings are intended.  
REFUGE AND BODHICITTA (p.57)
There is no need to go into that here. 
The offerings for the merit field have already been blessed earlier. Now, before one offers them, one invites the merit field.
Invocation of the Merit Field (p. 57)
The manner of inviting or invoking the merit field is evident in the ritual. It is quite clear in all the rituals. 
In this case here, visualize at the heart of yourself as Avalokiteshvara, there is a moon disc on top of which is a white syllable Hrih. 
Rays of light emanate from the white (syllable) Hrih that rests on the moon disc at the heart of oneself visualized as the Great Compassionate One, invoking from the natural abode the Guru Arya Great compassionate One having the aspect of eleven faces, surrounded by the root and lineage gurus, the assembly of deities of the Great Compassionate One and an assembly of meditational deities, buddhas, bodhisattvas, dakas and dakinis, Dharma protectors, and guardians, 
all abiding in the space before me on a wide-stemmed thousand-petalled lotus. 
The merit field is invited from their natural abode. There are different ways of invocation with regard to what a natural abode here means. 
There is an invocation related to the complete enjoyment body. If you are doing an invocation in relation to that, then you imagine you are invoking Avalokiteshvara in the aspect of the complete enjoyment body from the pure land together with the host of gurus, buddhas, bodhisattvas, dakas, dakinis and Dharma protectors to the space in front of you. They abide there as objects of worship, sitting happily on a very big lotus with 1,000 petals. 
Another take on the natural abode is the dharmakaya from within the state of emptiness. This way of invocation does not involve inviting the merit field to come from another place. Rather, it appears instantaneously in the space in front of you, i.e., just by thinking of them, they are there! 
To those of you who say—“What is the relationship between the theory we have learnt to the actual practice?”—here, if we were to look at the actual practice itself, it is clearly evident.  Generally speaking, everything is in the text. All you have to do is read it, familiarize yourself with it, do the visualizations and think about them. It’s all there. It’s straightforward.
After inviting the merit field, one engages in the practice of the seven limbs. This is extremely important for accumulating merit and purifying negativities and obscurations. It’s said the experience of tasting the Dharma or generating the realizations depend on accumulating merit and purification. It is said that the highest field of merit is one’s root guru. 
Limb of Prostration (p. 59)
First, there is the limb of obeisance or homage. This continues (from Page 59) till Page 67. There is no need to talk about that. If this is done well, one can accumulate a great amount of merit. The way to pay homage, the way to think and so forth has already been explained in the lam-rim literature. There’s no need to go into that again.
Limb of Offering (p. 67)
You have already clarified yourself as the deity. From the syllable Hrih at the heart of
oneself as the deity, you emanate a host of offering goddesses who present the offerings to the merit field.
In the text, it says visualize offering goddesses who are “youthful in form.” Just as the offerings presented are pleasant and of the best quality, likewise, the goddesses who are presenting the offerings are also visualized to be beautiful, attractive and youthful.
The reason why we need to visualize the offering goddesses as beautiful and youthful and the offering substances as pleasant and good quality is because the level of bliss generated in the minds of those who partake of the offerings is commensurate with how pleasant and beautiful one visualizes the offerings to be. So, the better the quality and the more beautiful you visualize them to be,  that much more bliss is induced in those who partake of the offerings.
So, visualizing the offering goddesses and the offering substances as having those attributes is for the purpose of inducing joy or bliss in the minds of those who partake of the offerings. I would think that the bliss experienced has to be different from the kind of ordinary joy we experience. 
There must be a difference. The ordinary joy or bliss we like in our experiences is contaminated and tainted with attachment. Such joy and bliss are objects of abandonment and not something to be adopted, practised or generated. 
This practice is done by people who have renunciation and bodhicitta. If we are talking about renunciation, this means one is not interested in and has already given up that kind of joy or bliss one likes as they are tainted with desire and attachment. If they have been given up, how can it be that it is this kind of bliss that’s generated?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you confused or you are clear about this? This makes sense, no? 
You are so interested in taking the desire as the path, you all want to know what it is. 
Khen Rinpoche: That is all. What else?
We have to think about this. The real practitioner who does this kind of practice is someone who has already developed renunciation. This individual who has generated renunciation will not continue to manifest that which has already been renounced.
The practitioner is supposed to emanate offering goddesses holding the individual offering substances. He emanates goddesses equal in number to limitless space. For example, for the goddesses offering flowers, they are lovely and hold beautiful flowers that are then offered.
Whatever offerings are presented, you must think that as a result of partaking of the
offerings, the guests who are enjoying the offerings generate special uncontaminated great bliss. You must think that. This is an essential point. By thinking in this way, one accumulates the collection of merit.
Whether one accumulates a lot of merit or not depends on how and what you think and what you visualize. That’s important. Even if you have set out mountains of actual offering substances, if your way of thinking is very limited, the merit you accumulate will be just as limited. But even when the amount of offerings is not substantial, if you really know how to think, what to think and if you think expansively, you will be able to amass a great collection of merit easily. This is why it is said that everything comes down to how you think, what you think and how you visualize. 
COMPLETION OF THE SEVEN-LIMB OFFERING (p. 85)
Then the rest of the seven limbs continues with the limb of confession (p. 75), the limb of rejoicing (p. 85), the limb of urging the merit field to turn the Wheel of Dharma (p. 85), the limb of requesting them not to pass away into parinirvana (p. 85) and finally, the limb of dedicating the merit towards enlightenment (p. 85).
Then one recites the dharani of immaculate immorality (p. 87), finishing off with the prayer of pure morality (p. 87). This is then followed by the meditation on the four immeasurables (p. 87). I think that the meditation on the four immeasurables here constitutes an offering of practice.
The means of achievement or the sadhana can be divided into three sections:
the preparatory ceremony or the preliminaries (pp. 7—87)
the actual ceremony (pp. 89—139)
the concluding ceremony or conclusion (pp. 139—179)
After the meditation on the four immeasurables, then one imagines the merit field returning to their own abode. The section on the preliminaries of the practice is up to here. 
Khen Rinpoche: So, this is the appetizer to be followed by the main course. What comes last? Dessert! 
THE ACTUAL CEREMONY (pp. 89—139)
Next is the actual practice. We have talked about the four branches of recitation. We have talked about the self-basis, the other basis, the mind basis and the sound basis.
HOW TO MEDITATE ON THE SELF-GENERATION (THE SELF-BASIS) (p. 89)

Here, the self-basis is referred to as the practice of self-generation. The practice of   self-generation in Action Tantra is done by way of generating the six deities. The six deities are also referred to as the six enlightened ones as mentioned in the end note of this particular section (p. 99). 
1. The Ultimate Deity (p. 89)
Om svabhava shuddhah sarva dharmah, svabhava shuddho ham. 

The natures of myself, of the deity to be meditated upon and of all phenomena are in essence of one taste in emptiness. 
Here, it says, “The natures of myself, of the deity to be meditated upon …” The deity one is meditating on is Avalokiteshvara. 
“All phenomena are in essence of one taste in emptiness.”  This is the time we have to meditate on emptiness and to generate an ascertainment of emptiness. Ideally, we have to generate a valid cognition of emptiness. Such a reflection is called the ultimate or empty deity. 
2. The Deity of Sound (p. 89)
From the sphere of emptiness, the aspect of the tone of the mantra, Om mani padme Hum resounds, pervading the realm of space.  
Contemplating in this way is the deity of sound. Visualize that within this sphere of emptiness arises the tone of the mantra, Om mani padme Hum, resounding. It is in the aspect of sound but in reality, it is Avalokiteshvara appearing as sound.
The Deity of Syllables (p. 89)
My mind, in the aspect of the undifferentiable suchness of myself and the deity, becomes a moon mandala, upon which the very aspect of the tone of the mantra resounding in space is set down having the form of written syllables (the sounds and the written letters mixing), like very pure mercury adhering to grains of gold. 
Reflecting in this way is the deity of syllables. “My mind” is the mind that has ascertained emptiness. This mind ascertaining emptiness appears in the aspect of the moon mandala. It is on this very moon mandala (or moon disc) upon which the sound of the mantra, Om mani padme Hum, resounding in space descends and settles in the form of the syllables of the mantra.
The Deity of Form (pp. 91—93)
[The (syllables) transform into a thousand-petalled lotus, as brilliant as
refined gold, marked at the center by the mantra, Om mani padme Hum. From the tips of multicolored light rays emitted from the moon, lotus, and mantra, innumerable holy bodies of the Arya (Avalokiteshvara) spread out, pervading all the realms of space. Great clouds of miraculously emanated offerings are beautifully offered to the buddhas and their children. From yet another great emanated cloud, a continuous rain of nectar descends, extinguishing the fires of suffering of all migrators of the hells and other (realms). They are satisfied with bliss (and become Avalokiteshvara). Then, the light rays, along with the bodies of the deity, return and enter into one’s own mind (in the aspect of) the moon mandala, lotus and mantra garland.  
These transform into a multicolored lotus and moon seat, upon which oneself arises as Arya Avalokiteshvara with a white-colored body in the prime of youth and radiating rays of light. Of the eleven faces, the root face is white; the right, green; and the left, red. Above that, the central face is green; the right, red; and the left, white. Above that, the central face is red; the right, white; and the left, green. They also have long narrow eyes and smiling expressions. Above these is a wrathful black face with bared fangs and wrathful wrinkles, a third eye, and orange hair standing upright. On the crown is a peaceful red face with a crown protrusion, having a chaste aspect, devoid of ornaments, and with 
(its own) neck. 
The first two hands are folded at the heart (and hold a jewel). The second right hand holds a rosary; the third eliminates the hunger and thirst of the hungry ghosts by sending down a stream of nectar from (the mudra of) granting sublime (realizations); and the fourth holds a wheel. The second left hand holds a golden lotus with a stem, the third holds a water vessel, and the fourth holds a bow and arrow. 
The remaining nine hundred ninety-two hands, as soft as lotus petals, are (in the mudra of) granting sublime realizations. In the palm of every hand is an eye. The hands do not extend above the crown protrusion nor below the knees. 
An antelope skin covers the left breast, and there is a lower garment of fine cloth. (The waist is) endowed with a golden belt adorned with jewels; (the head of the wrathful face) is beautified with a garland of orange hair. He has a jeweled crown, earrings, necklace. armlets, bracelets, and anklets, wears garments of various (-colored) silks, and radiates rays of white light.]
There is no need to read everything for the deity of form. In Tibetan, we always use de la, which means “this” or “that.” We always have to figure out what “this” or “that” refers to. 
What has been generated prior to this section? It is the moon disc and the syllables of
the mantra, Om mani padme Hum, settling on the moon disc. In Tibetan, when we say “that” completely “transform into a thousand-petalled lotus, as brilliant as refined gold …” I think “that” refers to both the moon disc and the syllables.
Through that complete transformation, we have a thousand-petalled lotus that is marked by the mantra, Om mani padme Hum. We have the lotus and the mantra. Now you look at the next line. Do  you see any seeming contradiction?
Khen Rinpoche: I am just reading from the sadhana.
Here, the “(syllables)” in brackets are sometimes put in by the translator to clarify things. However, sometimes, this does not clarify but only confuses. In Tibetan, De yongsu gyurpa lë  means “they” or “that” is completely transformed. 
The first thing is, what is “that” referring to and whatever “that” is referring to, what does it transform into? It transforms “into a thousand-petalled lotus, as brilliant as refined gold, marked at the center by the mantra, Om mani padme Hum.” 
In the next sentence, it says, “From the tips of the multicolored light rays emitted from the moon, lotus and mantra …,” where does the moon come from? 
Whatever it is, earlier on, we had generated the moon disc with the mantra. That completely transforms into the lotus. Then we put the moon and the mantra, om mani padme Hum on it.
From the lotus, moon and mantra, light emanates and goes out to fulfil the two purposes. The manner of fulfilling the two purposes is quite standard. It always involves making offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. Then most of the light rays go out to all the six types of sentient beings, purifying their individual sufferings and placing them in the state of enlightenment. At the end of performing the two purposes, the light rays are gathered back.
The lights are gathered back and “that” completely transforms into …? Again, what is “that” referring to? Just the moon or just the mantra or is it the moon disc and the mantra? Anyway, whatever “that” is, one transforms into the eleven-faced thousand- armed Avalokiteshvara, standing on the lotus and the moon.
It makes some sense to think that the moon and the mantra are transformed into Avalokiteshvara because the moon essentially is one’s own mind, the mind realizing emptiness. Earlier on, you had imagined the sound of the mantra that is the actual deity appearing in the aspect of sound. That settled on the moon disc and transformed into the letters of the mantra. So, it makes sense to think of oneself arising as Avalokiteshvara from the moon and the letters of the mantra. They are completely transformed in the deity of form and you arise as the eleven-faced thousand-armed Avalokiteshvara. There is a detailed description of the visualization. The description is there so that as one reads, one is supposed to meditate and do the visualization.
5. The Deity of Mudra (p. 93)
Visualize the three letters Om Ah Hum respectively at your crown, throat and heart. On the moon disc at the heart, there is a white Hrih with a long vowel and subsequent aspiration. By reciting the mantra of the lotus lineage and performing the hand gesture of the lotus lineage, touch your heart, mid-brow, throat and the top of the right and left shoulders. This is the deity of mudra. Up to this point, the deity of mudra, one has generated the commitment being (or samayasattva).
The Deity of Sign (p. 95)
Invocation and Absorption of the Wisdom Beings
The light rays radiate from the Hrih at the heart and invite from their natural abode Arya Avalokiteshvara together with all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. They absorb and dissolve into yourself as the commitment being. Through that, they become non-dual meaning the wisdom being become non-dual with yourself, the commitment being.
While most rituals have this invocation of wisdom beings and dissolution into the commitment being, there are some rituals that do not contain it. It is not absolutely necessary. Nevertheless, when it’s done, it’s helpful later on for the practitioner in developing divine pride and clear appearance. For this purpose, the invitation and absorption of wisdom beings are done. You will see in some texts, it is mentioned that even if the wisdom beings are not invited and absorbed, that’s not a fault of omission.
I guess the point is that when we invite the wisdom beings and absorbed them into oneself generated as the commitment being, this gives a sense of a divine identity, “Now, I am the actual deity. I am Avalokiteshvara.” It helps in the development of divine pride.
After the absorption of the wisdom beings, there is the practice of conferring initiation and the practice of the seal impression. First, one invites the empowering deities and then one makes offering to them.
Empowerment
There are always these terminologies that you have to put up with. You just have to know that they exist. When you hear terms like commitment being, wisdom being and concentration being, you have to know that they exist.
After inviting the initiating deities, one makes offerings and request them to confer the empowerment. Here, it is not just the “Goddess Dressed in White.” It is supposed to be a translation of the name of a goddess, Gosdkarmo. She and other initiating goddesses are emitted from the heart of the buddhas and confer the initiation with the nectar from the vases in their hands. 
One’s entire body is filled and all stains are purified. From the transformation of the excess water remaining on the crown, then one is adorned with Amitabha on the crown, Akshobhya on the forehead, Ratnasambhava behind the right ear, Vairochana at the back and Amoghasiddhi behind the left ear.
After doing the initiation and they seal the impression, then you visualize at your heart a moon disc upon which stands the wisdom being, Avalokiteshvara, who is white and has one face and two hands. His right hand is in the mudra of bestowing realizations and the left holds a lotus at the heart. In his heart, there is a moon disc on top of which is the white syllable, Hrih. This is the visualization of the three-tiered being.
Focussing on this visualization of the three-tiered being and so forth without being distracted, one meditates in order to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. Meditating like this undistractedly to develop divine pride and clear appearance is called the deity of sign. 
Generating yourself as the deity through these six deities is the self-basis.
Khen Rinpoche: I thought I could finish today but I don’t think I can finish. 
We will continue in the next lesson with the rest of the four branches. We will also see how the meditation on the aspects that are concordant with the four complete purities at the time of the result is done in the sadhana.
You will need to read the ritual and try to figure out where the boundaries are. Where is the self-basis? Where is the other basis? When is the recitation done? Also where are the mind basis and the sound basis? 
After reading the whole sadhana, try to figure out which part of the sadhana accords with the aspects of the complete purities at the time of the result.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.