Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L07FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.522785
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 7	 				                                          11 April 2017
Revisiting generating the path and the basis of support. Mahayana path of seeing (cont’d). Mahayana path of meditation. Mahayana path of no more learning. Three countless great eons. Ordinary beings and superiors. Importance of wisdom & method. Afflictive obscurations & knowledge obscurations. 
REVISITING GENERATING THE PATH AND THE BASIS OF SUPPORT
There may be some confusion regarding what I brought up before. As illustrated in the Lam-rim Chenmo, an inopportune state is to be born in one of the lands in the form realm that is called the Place of Non-Discrimination. Another illustration of an inopportune state is to be born as an ordinary being in the formless realm. 
The Lamrim Chenmo seems to be saying that as long as we are an ordinary being who is born in the formless realm, it is necessarily an inopportune state. As such, what I mentioned in one of the earlier classes may have to be corrected. I think I did say that one can enter the path on any basis of the three realms. 
If you think about what is mentioned in the Lamrim Chenmo—being an ordinary being in the formless realm is necessarily an inopportune state—then it is better to say that besides not being able to generate the path of seeing in the formless realm, it is not possible to generate a path with a formless realm basis. However, it is possible to newly generate a path with a desire realm basis or a form realm basis. 
Who are the people who can generate the mind of enlightenment? The sutras said all the six types of migratory beings can do so. Therefore, we can say that a person with a form realm basis can generate the mind of enlightenment. 
Khen Rinpoche: When I say something that you are not clear about, ask immediately.  
Student 1: Does it mean that it is necessarily the case that there are no bodhisattvas abiding in the formless realm? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 1: What about the arhat who newly generates the mind of enlightenment due to his past habit of abiding in the absorptions? Even if he has generated the mind of enlightenment, he may go back to abiding in the formless realm absorption without losing his bodhicitta. Is that possible?  
Khen Rinpoche:  No. I don’t think so. 
It is clear in the Lamrim Chenmo that all ordinary beings in the formless realm are considered to be in an inopportune state.
It is clearly stated in many sutras that bodhisattva superiors do not take rebirth in the formless realm, i.e., they do not seek an existence in that realm. 
It is stated that the six types of migratory beings can generate the mind of enlightenment. 
Can beings in the form realm generate the mind of enlightenment? I think it may be better to say that they can. If we say yes, what are the reasons that we can posit for stating beings in the form realm can newly generate a path?
Student 2: (Inaudible). 
Khen Rinpoche: Your reason can apply to the formless realm too. I am saying that your logic fits the formless realm.  
Student 2: In the form realm, due to strong imprints of accumulating merit in past lives, the person who takes rebirth there can newly generate the mind of enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, beings in the formless realm can also generate the mind of enlightenment because of strong imprints from the past. 
Student 2: A person who has strong imprints of bodhicitta can take rebirth in the formless realm. However, he cannot generate the mind of enlightenment due to the conditions in the formless realm.
Khen Rinpoche: Then it doesn’t have so much to do with the imprints, doesn’t it? 
Student 2: The imprints need external conditions to ripen. In the formless realm, the external conditions are such that it is not a suitable place for the imprints of the mind of enlightenment to ripen. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why are the conditions not there? 
Student 2: One no longer has physical aggregates in the formless realm. But in the form realm, there is the form aggregate that may induce some level of renunciation that will enable the person to carry on to accumulate merit.
Khen Rinpoche: Ok.
Student 3: I think that the formless realm beings sort of deactivate their mental factor of discrimination as compared to the form realm beings. Although the formless realm beings are also in meditative absorption, they do not reject happy feelings. The form realm beings reject whatever feelings that arise from single-pointedness while abiding in a state of equanimity. These feelings of equanimity do not have the wisdom realizing emptiness. As such, I think it is difficult for the formless realm beings to newly generate the mind of enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t get what you are saying. What is your reason? Just give me one sentence.
Student 3: I think formless realm beings deactivate their mental factor of discrimination.
Ven. Gyurme: Can you deactivate something that is omnipresent? Maybe you should say that they have very subtle discrimination.
Student 3: Yes. It is very subtle. They do not engage in analysis. They only abide in meditative absorption so there is no analytical meditation in the formless realm.
Student 4: We said earlier that ordinary beings in the formless realm lack the freedom to practise Dharma. This means there are still beings there who are not ordinary beings who can generate the path. Since those who are not ordinary beings can still generate the path, who are they? 
Khen Rinpoche: I remember very clearly that the answer was given a long time ago. Please go back and read the transcripts. 
In Gyaltsab Je’s Essential Ornament, he very clearly states that one can generate the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation with the form realm basis. If that is possible, we can say that one can also generate the path of accumulation with the form realm basis. If we say one can generate the path of accumulation with a form realm basis, then we can say that one can newly attain a path with a form realm basis. This is the reason.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you following what I am saying? 
Student 5: You mentioned that ordinary beings of the formless realm are in an inopportune state and therefore cannot generate a path. Beings of the hell realm and hungry ghost realm are also in inopportune states. What is the reason then for their ability to generate a path? If their ability to generate bodhicitta is the only reason given, it should work the other way for hell beings and hungry ghosts. 
Khen Rinpoche: Do the rest of you understand what she is asking? 
Student 1: I remembered in the Lamrim Chenmo that Lama Tsongkhapa elaborated that the reason for these being inopportune states is because the beings there lack discrimination.
Khen Rinpoche: Does discrimination apply to the hell beings?
Student 1: No. Lama Tsongkhapa elaborated on the reason why the fourth level form realm gods and all the formless realm gods are in inopportune states. It is because these beings lack discrimination whereas for the other beings that are in an inopportune state, they manifest suffering but they don’t lack discrimination.
Khen Rinpoche: The lack of discrimination characterizes one particular kind of god in the form realm. Did it say it is the reason that characterizes the ordinary beings in the formless realm?
Student 1: I remembered it also applies to the formless realm.
Khen Rinpoche: Go back and read the text.
Student 1: I also have another question. In the case of the formless realm—let’s say they do lack discrimination—how then do they progress from the first to the second to the third levels and then to the peak? 
Khen Rinpoche: No more tantra! We are still at sutra! 
We have to think about this. The hell beings are in an inopportune state, but you have to say that as a hell being, it is possible to generate the mind of enlightenment.
The Lamrim Chenmo states that all ordinary beings in the formless realm are said to be in an inopportune state. That statement is made by Lama Tsongkhapa in the Lamrim Chenmo. He is saying implicitly that there are superiors in the formless realm and it also implies that superiors in the formless realm are not posited to be in an inopportune state. 
But this is not to say that it is possible to newly generate a superior path with a formless realm basis. While there are superiors in the formless realm, this is not the same as saying that one can newly generate a superior path in the formless realm. These are two different things. It is clear that the basis for newly generating the superior path is the desire realm basis. One cannot newly generate a superior path with a form realm or a formless realm basis. Not only is one unable to newly generate the path of seeing with a form realm or formless realm basis, one also cannot attain the path of meditation with those bases. Based on the philosophical treatises, we have to say that one cannot newly generate the path of meditation with a form realm or formless realm basis.
How then do we account for the existence of superior beings with a form realm or formless realm basis? Where do they come from?
A superior is either a Hinayana superior or a Mahayana superior. It is clear that there are no Mahayana superiors there. So what are left are the Hinayana superiors. There are Hinayana superiors with a form realm basis or a formless realm basis. 
There is a presentation of how one moves on a Hinayana path after actualizing the path of seeing and then newly attaining the path of meditation. On that basis, there is an explanation of number of rebirths they have to go through and in those rebirths, how they take on the bases of the form realm and the formless realm. It is said that one can achieve the state of an arhat on the Hinayana path of no more learning on the basis of a desire realm being or a form realm being.
With regard to the Hinayana superiors, after attaining the path of meditation, it is not as if they have overcome their karma and afflictions. Although they don’t accumulate fresh projecting karma, they still have to take rebirth in cyclic existence due to their karma and afflictions. 
There is a clear presentation of how there are Hinayana superiors who, after achieving the path of meditation, take rebirth in the form realm. With that form realm basis, they manifest arhatship and achieve liberation. 
There are others who after newly achieving the path of meditation take rebirth in the formless realm and in dependence on that basis, they become arhats.
This is something we can think about: 
Is it possible to newly generate a path with a formless realm basis? 
Is it possible to generate the mind of enlightenment with a formless realm basis?
So far, I haven’t seen the treatises indicating the possibility of one newly generating the path or newly generating the mind of enlightenment with a formless realm basis. 
Hell beings, pretas (hungry ghosts) and animals are considered to be in inopportune states. Yet it is stated clearly that the six types of migrators can generate bodhicitta. This means all hell beings, hungry ghosts, animals, humans, demi-gods and gods can newly generate bodhicitta.
In the section on mind generation, the commentaries cited many sutras, i.e., the words of the Buddha himself, that it is possible to generate bodhicitta as a hell being and so forth.
This is a point for further discussion and analysis. It is insufficient to say, “You cannot newly generate the path with a formless realm support.” The more important issue is why this is so. What is the reason?  If we say that as long as you are a being in the form realm and formless realm, you do not have much discrimination, then are we going to say that the superiors in the form realm and formless realm also lack discrimination? 
MAHAYANA PATH OF SEEING (CONT’D)
Back to newly generating the path of seeing. It is said that the basis for doing this is the desire realm basis. A desire realm basis is the one for newly generating the path of seeing. 
Based on this assertion, there is a school of thought that says that it is not possible to achieve enlightenment in Amitabha Buddha’s pure land because one cannot newly generate the path of seeing there. However, there is another school of thought that says that one can achieve enlightenment in Amitabha Buddha’s pure land.
These are important points. You must pay attention when these points are brought up. You have to try to understand what is being said. If you sit there, not really paying attention and spacing out, then you are not going to get anything!
Uninterrupted path
Back to the Mahayana grounds and paths. The uninterrupted path of the path of seeing is the mind directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise and is the very first direct antidote to the acquired afflictive obscurations. 
At the very least, you should be able to say that the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana path of seeing is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness that is the direct antidote to the acquired afflictive obscuration. 
The uninterrupted path of the Mahayana path of seeing is a wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise that is directly observing emptiness. This is in the continuum of the person who possesses this wisdom. No other mind manifests at that time. Only this wisdom directly realizing emptiness is manifesting. As such, only emptiness appears. Nothing else appears to this wisdom. 
Path of release
The uninterrupted path in the Mahayana path of seeing acts as the direct antidote to the acquired afflictive obscurations. The path of release (also translated as the liberated path) is that same wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise. The path of release is the name given to that phase whereby that mind has abandoned or is free of the acquired afflictive obscurations, such as the artificial conception of true existence. 
When the path of release of the Mahayana path of seeing is attained, all the acquired afflictive obscurations together with their seeds are removed by the force of the antidote.
Subsequent attainment (post-meditative equipoise)/focussing on the practice of the perfection of generosity
When that bodhisattva arises from that meditative equipoise, he enters the post-meditative state of subsequent attainment. 
What does he do during this period of subsequent attainment? He focusses on accumulating the collection of merit. Here, he focusses primarily on the practice of the perfection of generosity.
Why does the bodhisattva accumulate the collection of merit during this post-meditative equipoise? This is because, although he has abandoned the acquired afflictive obscurations, he has yet to abandon the innate afflictive obscurations and the knowledge obscurations. He is accumulating merit in order to be able to abandon these obscurations, starting with abandoning the innate afflictive obscurations followed by abandoning the knowledge obscurations. 
Abandoning the innate afflictive obscurations themselves is not easy. The innate afflictive obscurations cannot be abandoned through the force of a single antidote. Why? Because the innate afflictive obscurations are multi-layered. 
We have talked about the nine layers of the innate afflictive obscurations—the three big, the three middling and the three small. 
If we were to follow the assertions of the Sera Je College, i.e., if we follow the textbook of Sera Je Monastery, the big of the big innate afflictive obscurations are divided into coarse and subtle. As such, we end up with ten layers of innate afflictive obscurations that have to be abandoned. But it is easier if we follow the chart so we will stick to nine layers of innate afflictive obscuration. 
MAHAYANA PATH OF MEDITATION 
First ground: Abandoning the big of the big innate afflictive obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of generosity
In post-meditative equipoise, the bodhisattva accumulates the collection of merit so that his wisdom directly realizing emptiness will be powerful enough to act as an antidote to the next level of obscuration that is to be abandoned. Comes the time when his wisdom directly realizing emptiness becomes powerful enough to act as such an antidote, this is when the uninterrupted path at the end of the first ground is attained. 
When the uninterrupted path at the end of the first ground of the path of meditation is attained, this wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise acts as the direct antidote to the big of the big innate afflictive obscurations. 
Second ground: Abandoning the middling of the big innate afflictive obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of ethical discipline
When the bodhisattva achieves the abandonment of the big of the big innate afflictive obscurations, he achieves the path of release. 
Simultaneously, he enters the second ground, i.e., he moves from the first ground to the second ground. When is this movement posited? When the path of release that is the abandonment of the big of the big innate afflictive obscurations is attained.  
As before, that bodhisattva will arise from meditative equipoise and enter the post-meditative equipoise state of subsequent attainment. During post-meditative equipoise, he focusses again on the accumulation of collection of merit. Here, he focusses primarily on the practice of the perfection of ethical discipline. 
When the accumulation of merit is sufficient, there comes a time when he is able to generate the wisdom directly realizing emptiness that acts as the antidote to the middling of the big innate obscurations. 
He attains the uninterrupted path that is generated at the end of the second ground that acts as the direct antidote to the middling of the big innate obscurations.
Third ground: Abandoning the small of the big innate afflictive obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of patience
When that wisdom in meditative equipoise abandons the middling of the big innate obscurations, he achieves the path of release and simultaneously moves from the second to the third ground.
The manner of progress is similar. He arises from meditative equipoise and accumulates merit. In this case, he focusses primarily on the practice of the perfection of patience. 
When sufficient merit is accumulated, there comes the time when his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise can act as the direct antidote to the small of the big innate afflictive obscurations. This is when he achieves the uninterrupted path at the end of the third ground. 
Fourth ground: Abandoning of the big of the middling innate afflictive obscurations/ focussing on the practice of the perfection of joyous effort
In that same meditative equipoise, his mind is freed of the small of the big innate obscurations. Simultaneously, he achieves the path of release of the fourth ground. This path of release is an abandonment of the three levels of the big innate obscurations—big of the big, middling of the big and small of the big. 
Again, he arises from meditative equipoise into subsequent attainment and focusses on the accumulation of merit. 
Here, he focusses primarily on the practice of the perfection of joyous effort. He has to start abandoning the three levels of the middling innate afflictive obscurations. 
When he has accumulated sufficient merit that empowers his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise to act as the direct antidote to the big of the middling innate afflictive obscurations, this is when he achieves the uninterrupted path at the end of the fourth ground. 
Fifth ground: Abandoning the middling of the middling innate afflictive obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of concentration (meditative stabilization)
When the bodhisattva in meditative equipoise abandons the big of the middling innate afflictive obscurations, he achieves the path of release of the fifth ground. Simultaneous with the abandonment of the big of the middling innate afflictive obscurations, he moves from the fourth to the fifth ground.
He arises from post-meditative equipoise into subsequent attainment and focusses on the accumulation of merit. 
Here, he focusses primarily on the practice of the perfection of concentration (or meditative stabilization). 
When the accumulation of merit is sufficient, his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise becomes powerful enough to act as the direct antidote to the middling of the middling innate afflictive obscurations. He achieves the uninterrupted path at the end of the fifth ground. 
Sixth ground: Abandoning the small of the middling innate afflictive obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of wisdom
In that same meditative equipoise, the bodhisattva abandons the middling of the middling innate afflictive obscurations. He achieves the path of release of the sixth ground, moving from the fifth to the sixth ground.
If you understand the manner of progression from the beginning, you should be able to get the manner of progression through the rest of the grounds up to the end of the seventh ground. They are similar. Perhaps, there are people who may not understand. As I go through this step by step, you will have to focus on what is being said.
Again the bodhisattva arises from post-meditative equipoise into subsequent attainment, focussing on the accumulation of merit and the practice of the perfection of wisdom. 
When sufficient merit has been accumulated, his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise can act as the direct antidote to the small of the middling innate afflictive obscurations. 
This mind is the uninterrupted path at the end the sixth ground. 
Seventh ground:Abandoning the big, middling and small of the small innate afflictive obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of method
In the same meditative equipoise when the bodhisattva abandons the small of the middling innate afflictive obscurations, he moves from the sixth to the seventh ground. When the path of release of the seventh ground is attained, the bodhisattva has abandoned the three big and the three middling innate afflictive obscurations. 
He arises from meditative equipoise into subsequent attainment, focussing on the accumulation of merit. When the perfection of wisdom itself is divided, the last four are:
the perfection of method 
the perfection of prayer 
the perfection of power 
the perfection of exalted wisdom
The main practice here is the perfection of method. 
When sufficient merit is accumulated and his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise is powerful enough to act as an antidote to the next level of obscurations, that uninterrupted path at the end of the seventh ground acts as the direct antidote to all three levels of the small innate afflictive obscurations. These three small innate afflictive obscurations are not abandoned serially but are abandoned by one antidote, i.e., the uninterrupted path at the end of the seventh ground.
Eight ground: Abandoning the big knowledge obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of prayer
In that same meditative equipoise when he achieves the path of release on the eighth ground, he becomes a destroyer of the foe, the afflictions that are both the acquired and innate afflictive obscurations.  As such, he becomes the foe destroyer.  
~ Impure and pure grounds
The first to the seventh grounds are called impure grounds because those grounds have yet to be purified of the afflictive obscurations. The eighth, ninth and tenth bodhisattva grounds are called the pure grounds because these grounds are purified of afflictive obscurations.  
Having achieved the path of release of the eighth ground, what remains to be abandoned? Although at this stage all afflictive obscurations are abandoned, the knowledge obscurations are still there. 
Again, that bodhisattva arises from meditative equipoise. In post-meditative equipoise, he focusses on the accumulation of merit and the practice of the perfection of prayer. 
When he accumulates sufficient merit, his wisdom directly realizing emptiness in meditative equipoise acts as the direct antidote to the knowledge obscurations and this mind acquires the name, uninterrupted path at the end of the eight ground. The knowledge obscurations are divided into three—big, middling and small. Of the three, the uninterrupted path at the end of the eight ground acts the direct antidote to the big knowledge obscurations. 
Ninth ground: Abandoning the middling knowledge obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of power
When the big knowledge obscurations are abandoned, he attains the path of release on the ninth ground. 
He arises from meditative equipoise. In post-meditative equipoise, he accumulates merit through the practice of perfection of power.
When this bodhisattva’s wisdom directly realizing emptiness is powerful enough to act as the antidote to the middling knowledge obscurations, that mind is the uninterrupted path at the end of the ninth ground. 
Tenth ground: Abandoning the small knowledge obscurations/focussing on the practice of the perfection of exalted wisdom
When this bodhisattva abandons the middling knowledge obscurations, simultaneously, he moves to the tenth ground. 
He enters into post meditative equipoise and accumulates merit primarily through the practice of the perfection of exalted wisdom. 
When this bodhisattva’s wisdom directly realizing emptiness is powerful enough to act as the antidote to the small knowledge obscurations, this mind is the last uninterrupted path at the end of the tenth ground. This last uninterrupted path is also called the vajra-like concentration (or meditative stabilization) of the path of meditation. 
MAHAYANA PATH OF NO MORE LEARNING
The small knowledge obscurations are the subtlest obscurations that have to be abandoned. The uninterrupted path at the end of the tenth ground acts as an antidote to the small knowledge obscurations. When these are abandoned, he achieves the path of no more learning that is simultaneous with achieving full enlightenment. 
It is important that you grasp the sutric Mahayana grounds and paths. You have to be familiar with them and be able to say this is this, that is that and this is what happens. 
Three countless great eons
One needs to accumulate the collection over the three countless great eons:
The first countless great eon is spent on the first two paths—the Mahayana path of accumulation and the Mahayana path of preparation. 
The second countless great eon is spent on the seven impure grounds—the first to the seventh grounds. 
The third countless great eon is spent on the three pure grounds—the eighth to the tenth grounds.
Ordinary beings and superiors 
There are the Mahayana paths of the ordinary beings and the Mahayana paths of the superiors. 
The Mahayana paths of the ordinary beings are the Mahayana path of accumulation and the Mahayana path of preparation.
The Mahayana paths of the Mahayana superiors are the Mahayana path of seeing, the Mahayana path of meditation and the Mahayana path of no more learning. 
If you understand what we have discussed over these lessons, you can see that achieving enlightenment does not happen so easily. It requires great effort and a lot of hard work, alternating between familiarizing the mind through meditation and accumulating the collections over a long period of time.
From this, we can see that there is no such thing as achieving enlightenment quickly. Within the very long period of time required, hard work is necessary from beginning to end. We can see the amount of effort we now need to make, knowing all this relative to where we are now. We know what we need to do.
IMPORTANCE OF WISDOM & METHOD
Even from this short exercise, we can see how extremely important the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is. Whatever obscurations we are talking about, whether it is the afflictive obscurations or the knowledge obscurations, we need the wisdom directly realizing emptiness to abandon them. 
In fact, it is only from the path of preparation onwards that the bodhisattva gains an ability to suppress manifest ignorance, the apprehension of true existence. Even then, he is only able to suppress it and is not yet able to destroy it. This ability only starts on the path of preparation. Although he has realized emptiness, it is not the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. Nevertheless, his realization of emptiness enables him to start suppressing the apprehension of true existence. 
But in order to be able to start damaging the afflictive obscurations, we need the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. Otherwise, we cannot even cause a dent in our obscurations. When the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is attained for the first time, we are only able to counteract the acquired afflictive obscurations. After that, we have to work on the innate obscurations. After abandoning all the innate obscurations, there are still the knowledge obscurations to be worked on. What acts as the antidote to all these obscurations? It is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. From this, we can see that there is no possibility of abandoning all these obscurations at all without the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
But the wisdom directly realizing emptiness alone is not enough. This is why the mind of enlightenment—the method—is extremely important. If the wisdom directly realizing emptiness is not conjoined with the special method of mind generation (bodhicitta), there is no way to overcome the knowledge obscurations. This is why bodhicitta is so important. Without bodhicitta, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness cannot act as the antidote to the knowledge obscurations. 
Afflictive obscurations and knowledge obscurations
Having said this, before we can abandon them, we need to know exactly what the afflictive obscurations and the knowledge obscurations are. 
The afflictive obscurations consist of:
the grasping at or the apprehension of true existence 
the seeds that are deposited on the mental continuum by the grasping at true existence 
the afflictions that are induced by this grasping such as anger and attachment. The anger and attachment that are induced by the grasping at true existence are also posited as afflictive obscurations. 
Likewise, the seeds that are deposited by the afflictions such as attachment are also considered afflictive obscurations. 
As an example, let’s take the seeds of attachment. The seeds of attachment are deposited by attachment. What do these seeds of attachments do? What is their function?  The seeds refer to the cause that will give rise to a future manifestation of attachment. It is the potential that makes it possible for attachment to manifest again.
What about the imprints (or predispositions and proclivities) that are deposited by the grasping at true existence? These imprints are the knowledge obscurations. There are also imprints deposited by attachment and so forth and these are also classified under knowledge obscurations. 
What do these imprints of the apprehension of true existence or attachment do? While they are not capable of producing the apprehension of true existence or manifest attachment in the future, they produce mistaken dualistic appearances. So there are two parts to the knowledge obscurations:
the imprints of the grasping at true existence 
the mistaken dualistic appearances that are produced by those imprints 
There was a debate amongst scholars of the past as to whether there are knowledge obscurations that are consciousnesses. There are two schools of thought. Our school of thought is that there are no knowledge obscurations that are consciousnesses.
Khen Rinpoche: We have completed grounds and paths. We will start on tantra in the next lesson. No more sutra!
Student 6: It is said Shakyamuni Buddha accumulated merit over three countless great eons. In terms of this presentation of grounds and paths, can a bodhisattva accomplish all this in a single lifetime or is it a simplified model that is to be achieved over many lifetimes with the bodhisattva taking different rebirths? Is it a single rebirth or many?
Khen Rinpoche: I think many rebirths. I don’t think it is possible in a single rebirth. 
Student 6: In the next lifetime, the bodhisattva will have a perfect recollection that he was on the previous paths?
Khen Rinpoche: Of course. This has to be the case. He has to recall. Otherwise, there is no point.
Student 1: Is the wisdom of subsequent attainment on the path of seeing according to the Consequence Middle Way School long enough for the bodhisattva to take several rebirths?
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 1: So it is as short as that asserted by the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS)? 
Khen Rinpoche: I think it is all the same.
Student 1: In that case, there are also teachings of the bodhisattvas manifesting hundreds of bodies to benefit sentient beings in order to accumulate merit. They do it within that short period? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. 
Student 5: This was mentioned in the last module. In the path of seeing, there are the eight forbearances that are the antidotes to the path of seeing abandonments that are included in the three realms. Actually, I am not sure what “included in the three realms” means. This is only talking about the mind. When we talk about the basis, we are referring to the body. The body can be the desire realm basis but the mind can be of a different realm. Is that correct?
Khen Rinpoche: To newly attain the path of seeing, one needs the desire realm basis, for example, to be a human being. By the time the bodhisattva has achieved all the different actual concentrations, his body can be a desire realm basis but his mind is that of a higher realm. Probably, we will have to say that the bodhisattva may have a desire realm basis but his mind, including the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, is the mind of a higher realm.  Probably, of the four levels of the form realm, we have to say that the mind is the actual concentration of the fourth level.  
Student 7: With regard to the knowledge obscurations, are the terms—imprints, latencies and predispositions—referring to the same thing?
Ven. Gyurme: Yes.  
Student 8: You mentioned that Gyaltsab Je said that the form realm support can newly attain the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation. What reasons did he posit for that to be the case?
Khen Rinpoche: He didn’t give the reasons but this is the statement he made. If he gave the reasons, I would have told you. 
In the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge, Vasubandhu said that you cannot newly attain the path of seeing in the higher realms because the level of disenchantment is small. He only said that. So you have to take what he said, think about it and discuss it. 
I have said this before. All of you shouldn’t be looking for answers right away and be satisfied with the answers. This is not the way. You have to think about it. Why? What? How? You have to think about it, search for the answers and come to a position of your own. 
Having said that, I am not saying that you can think about it and come out with your own philosophy! The position that you take has to be supported by scriptural authority and reasoning. 
Student 9: If we work hard enough and generate uncontrived renunciation and uncontrived bodhicitta in this lifetime and enter the path, is that entry into the path irreversible? This means that from life to life, I just pick up from where I’ve left off. I am thinking if I were to enter the path today and I die tomorrow, does that mean in my next life, I have to start generating uncontrived renunciation and bodhicitta all over again? 
Khen Rinpoche: It is clear that once the path is generated, with regard to renunciation, it will never degenerate. But if you talk about the mind generation, then that is a different question. It is said that once a path is generated, it never degenerates but bodhicitta can degenerate. It is possible for the mind generation on the path of accumulation to degenerate. But once you reach the middling path of accumulation, one’s mind generation will never degenerate. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.