Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L51final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.037908
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson 51
 19 October 2017


Homework. How to do the Tara Puja. (This class was conducted in English by
Khen Rinpoche himself).


Homework

I want to give you the homework. The group  leaders  will  send  it  to  you
later. I just want to tell you now.  This  is  part  of  the  Basic  Program
requirement. Those who really want to take  the  final  exam  must  do  this
(homework).

I want you to do lam-rim  meditation  in  November,  December  and  January,
i.e., for three months. In one month, normally we have eight classes,  i.e.,
every Tuesday and Thursday. So  every  Tuesday  and  Thursday  in  November,
December and January, I want  you  to  do  lam-rim  meditation.  Instead  of
coming class, you discipline yourself by sitting down  on  your  cushion  at
7.30 pm and then start your meditation.

Option I
I want you to do 15 minutes of guru yoga  practice,  using  either  the  Six
Session Guru Yoga or Lama Tsongkhapa Guru Yoga. It is up to  you.  Then  you
meditate on the lam-rim for 45 minutes. So you have one hour of  meditation.


If you do the meditation on Tuesday and Thursday  every  week,  after  three
months, you will have done 24 hours of meditation. Each month,  you  do  the
meditation for 8 hours. In November, you do the meditation for 8  hours.  In
December, you do the meditation for eight hours and in January, you  do  the
meditation  for  eight  hours.  So  in  total,  you  will  do  24  hours  of
meditation.

If you do the meditation every Tuesday and Thursday for  three  months,  you
get 100 marks. This mark, you give to yourself. Nobody else is  giving  (the
marks). You have to
be honest with yourself.
If you miss one session, i.e., you do only 23 hours  instead  of  24  hours,
then you deduct 5 marks. If you miss two sessions, you deduct 10  marks  and
so forth.

Option 2
I want you to do the same thing but for 45 minutes, a shorter time. This  is
your choice.
For 15 minutes, you do the guru yoga practice and you do 30 minutes of  lam-
rim meditation.

This is the second choice. If you want 100 marks, do the meditation for  one
hour. Here, you do 45 minutes of meditation. You get 75 marks.  Same  thing.
If you miss one session of your 45 minutes meditation, deduct 5 marks.

Option 3
Another choice is to do the meditation for 30 minutes—15 minutes, guru  yoga
practice and 15 minutes, lam-rim meditation. For this  option,  you  get  50
marks. So if you do that, this means you just pass.

Option 4
You just do 15 minutes of lam-rim meditation.  If  you  do  that  for  three
months, on every Tuesday and Thursday, you will get 25 marks.

You have to choose to do  the  meditation  for  one  hour,  45  minutes,  30
minutes or 15 minutes. You have to  be  honest.  When  we  start  our  class
again, you give me your mark. Whether it is 100 marks or 75 marks,  it’s  up
to you. Write down the mark and pass it back to me.  Write  down  your  name
and state, “I have 100 marks” or “I have 75 marks.”

This is the homework. Try it for three months. (This is for) those  who  are
really serious about wanting to take the final exam and also those  who  are
really serious about wanting to get enlightened!

You can choose any day to do the meditation. It  is  up  to  you.  I’m  just
giving the example of Tuesday and Thursday because of the  class  days.  You
can do it on Wednesdays too. It is up to you.

You have to do the meditation in one  sitting.  I’m  not  expecting  a  good
meditation. I want you to try your best. Put in some effort  and  try.  That
is the point.
Just concentrate on the small and middle scope of the lam-rim.

Put the great scope aside for the time being. (With regard  to  the  lam-rim
retreat) we are supposed to do this for two weeks. I will think  about  this
because I didn’t have the time. I also couldn’t get  the  place.  The  other
option is what I am giving you now. I will see whether that can  be  covered
in two weeks of meditation. I have to think about that.

When I say, guru yoga, for example the Lama  Tsongkhapa  Guru  Yoga,  first,
visualise and then  establish  the  seven-limb  practice  according  to  the
sequence. As for the Six Session Guru Yoga, I  have  explained  it  (in  the
last class). Visualise extensive offerings and do the seven limbs prayer.
Be honest with yourself and give your own mark. This makes it very  easy  so
nobody needs to mark. You mark yourself.  You  want  to  give  yourself  100
marks or 50 marks—it is up to you. Nobody can judge. Only you can  do  that.
At least try. I have given you different choices.

TARA PUJA

Today is the last day of class. I thought to do Tara puja today.  Sometimes,
we talk so much, we listen to so much but nothing  changes,  nothing  moves.
Sometimes, we need to sit down and do some prayers and pujas. In  the  first
Basic Program, we used to do the Hayagriva puja.  We  collected  some  money
and sponsored the Hayagriva puja in Sera. Somehow, we didn’t  do  that  this
time round. So we do Tara puja today to clear all the  obstacles  and  (pray
for) success in our studies and practice, success for the  centre  and  also
on an individual basis.

We pray together  to  Mother  Tara.  Tara  is  extremely  powerful  as  Tara
promised Lama Atisha that she would constantly  guide  and  protect  whoever
follow Lama Atisha’s teachings.

We start from DANG DANG DRO WA. Read this in English. As  I  have  mentioned
before, visualise the merit field, take refuge and generate  the  bodhicitta
mind.


Taking Refuge (p. 141)[1]

Taking REFUGE AND GENERATING BODHICITTA (p. 141)

You see two refuge prayers here. At the beginning, you can meditate  on  the
refuge of the small scope and the middle scope. When  you  recite  SANG  GYÄ
CHHÖ DANG, then you meditate on the refuge of  great  scope.  Sometimes,  we
may question why there are two refuge prayers. They can be meditated  on  in
this way.

Read the next prayer in English. Set a strong motivation as you read it.
After reading it, keep silent for a while (and meditate). Set up your
motivation as you read it.

Special Bodhicitta (p. 142)

Do the same thing for the next prayer, which  are  The  Four  Immeasurables.
After reading, keep silent for a little while. As we have already read  (the
prayer), try to meditate on these four immeasurable thoughts.

The Four Immeasurables (p. 142)

Next I think is the Tara practice according to Highest Yoga  Tantra.  First,
generate yourself as Tara. As we have learnt  before,  try  to  meditate  on
emptiness to get some understanding of emptiness.

Start from your aggregates, (investigating) how the aggregates exist.  Then,
also how
the ‘I’ exists. You try to look for it. The conclusion  you  must  get  when
you look for the ‘I’ is that you are not able to find  it  inside  the  five
aggregates or outside of them. You are not able to  find  it.  But  the  ‘I’
exists by labelling on the basis of the five aggregates. You arrive at  that
conclusion—the merely labelled ‘I’. Try to get that idea.  It  is  the  same
thing with the aggregates. They do not exist from their own  side.  So,  try
to get that understanding of emptiness. That mind slowly  becomes  Tara.  So
meditate like that for a few minutes.

Self-Generation (p. 143)

BLESSING THE INNER OFFERING (p. 143)

What I am doing today is this: I want you to learn how to do the  Tara  puja
at the same time. Some of you have been here for 20 years. Do you  know  how
to do the Tara puja? I don’t think so. That is not correct.

During the last class, I had  asked  the  (group)  leaders  to  set  up  the
offerings. Just look at how it is set up. It is very simple. One  look,  you
know how it’s done.  You  can  learn  that  easily  with  a  little  bit  of
mindfulness. Then you can do it in your own home and do Tara puja  when  you
have time. That will be very good.

The amount of offerings you want to make may  be  different.  Actually,  the
four sets of offerings are compulsory. On top that, you don’t need  so  many
offerings. It’s up to your pocket and how much you want to offer.  What  I’m
trying to do here is I want you to learn how to do Tara  puja  at  the  same
time. Somebody may ask you, “You have been in ABC for 20 years. Do you  know
how to do Tara puja?” If you say, “I don’t know,” then that is not  correct.
You have studied Highest Yoga Tantra. If you were to say,  “I  don’t  know,”
to such a simple thing, then that’s not correct. (Apply)  a  little  bit  of
mindfulness. It’s not so difficult. It’s very simple.

Next is the inner offering. This is Highest Yoga Tantra  so  you  must  have
your inner offering. This is the blessing of the inner offering.  For  those
who have some idea, within emptiness, you  visualise  this  huge  container.
You visualise the five meats and five nectars melting and becoming an  ocean
of nectar. So you taste that. For those  who  have  a  better  idea,  it  is
exactly the same as in the Yamantaka sadhana. This one is very short.

BLESSING THE OUTER OFFERINGS (p. 144)

Only after the next verse, OM VAJRA AMRITA KUNDALI HANA HANA  HUM  PHAT  are
the offerings blessed. At that time, you put  your  ring  finger  here  like
that. (Khen Rinpoche  demonstrates).   This  is  how  the  blessing  of  the
offerings is done.

Before OM VAJRA AMRITA KUNDALI HANA HANA HUM PHAT, you don’t do that  (i.e.,
flick the inner offering at the offerings) because you haven’t  blessed  the
inner offering yet. Only after that do you do this.

As I explained before,  try  to  meditate  on  emptiness.  Within  emptiness
appears the syllable letter KAM. This KAM transforms  into  big  containers.
Inside the containers, you visualise the syllable HUM. From this  HUM  arise
different types of beautiful offerings. In reality, they are in  the  nature
of emptiness but with the aspect of the different types of  offerings.  Then
generate great bliss in the different senses.

Next is the visualisation of the merit field. After you read, then you
meditate. Keep silent for a few minutes. Read slowly.

VISUALISATION OF THE FIELD OF MERIT (p. 145)

Now I think is the prostration. Here, maybe (you do not) need (to  use  the)
bell.  Traditionally, you need (to do so) but today, I’m doing it  a  little
differently.

Put your palms together. You  visualise  the  merit  field.  Then  visualise
numberless bodies  (of  yourself  filling)  the  entire  universe.  You  can
visualise numberless (replicas of yourself). Then think of the merit  field.
Then  make  prostrations.  In  reality,  you  should   stand   up   and   do
prostrations. Since there is not much time, just put  your  palms  together.
We recite the four verses three times. The idea is to make  prostrations  to
the merit field. Visualise that and  read  slowly.  At  the  same  time,  if
possible, think of the meaning (of what you are reciting).

HOMAGE (p. 145)

The next limb from the seven limbs practice is the  practice  of  offerings.
After making prostrations, visualise numberless offerings and bless them.

As we have learnt  before,  from  your  heart  emanates  beautiful  offering
goddesses holding different types of beautiful objects to offer to the  guru
merit field. ARGHAM—once you make this offering, these  particular  offering
goddesses dissolve back  into  your  heart.  The  same  thing  with  PADYAM.
Emanate offering goddesses and once you  make  the  offering,  the  offering
goddesses dissolve back into  your  heart.  We  will  read  slowly.  ARGHAM,
PADYAM … so that this will give you some time to meditate. The  idea  is  to
visualise extensive offerings to the root guru merit field.

(The relevant offering verse was chanted for each type of  offering,  making
a total of seven repetitions.).

OFFERING TO THE MERIT FIELD (p. 146)

After that is the seven-limb practice.  Normally,  we  read  the  seven-limb
practice very quickly and at the same time, ring the bell  so  there  is  no
time for meditation.  Here, we read it in  English.  We  read  each  of  the
seven-limb practice and after that, there will be a little bit of silence.

THE SEVEN LIMBS (p. 147)

Normally for the mandala, we do the long version. Today, I am breaking  some
rules so we will just do the short one. We just do the  two  (short)  verses
with the tune. We do SA ZHI PÖ KYI. When you have  time,  you  must  do  the
long mandala as traditionally, one must do the long mandala.
Today, because I am talking  and  that  takes  time.  (If  we  do  the  long
mandala), we cannot finish.  Because of my talk, I am breaking some  of  the
rules. The idea of SA ZHI PÖ KYI is  to  offer  beautiful  objects  and  the
whole universe to the guru merit field.

LONG MANDALA OFFERING IN TWENTY-THREE HEAPS (p. 148)

Next is making single-pointed request. I don’t know what comes here.  Again,
visualise the merit field. Then make  this  request,  “May  we  be  able  to
devote to the holy master from the heart and with  our  actions,  always  be
able to devote to and please the guru by subduing our mind and then  quickly
becoming enlightened.” Like that, you make  the  heartfelt  request  to  the
guru merit field. You can do this in Tibetan with the tune.

HEARTFELT REQUEST (Optional) (p. 149)

Taking Refuge and Generating Bodhicitta (p. 150)

Prayer for the Desired Goal (p. 151)

Next are prostrations (or homage) to Mother Tara.  We  do  this  in  English
seven times. Put your palms together and visualise  making  prostrations  to
Mother Tara.

FIRST ROUND—HOMAGE (p. 152)

Next is the same thing. Again, visualise numberless  offerings.  Then  offer
them to Mother Tara.  Emanate  offering  goddesses  who  make  offerings  to
Mother Tara. Then they go back into your heart.

OFFERING TO TARA (p. 152)

Next is the same thing,  the  seven  limbs  practice.  As  before,  read  it
slowly.

THE SEVEN LIMBS (p. 153)

SHORT MANDALA OFFERING (p. 155)

There is the next meditation. Read the refuge  and  the  bodhicitta  prayer.
After that, there is Mother Tara  with  her  right  hand  in  the  mudra  of
granting sublime realizations and the left hand in the protection mudra.  We
can read that prayer in Tibetan once.

TAKING REFUGE AND GENERATING BODHICITTA & PRAYER (p. 156)

After that are the 21 Tara Praises.  When  we  read  the  21  Tara  Praises,
visualise Mother  Tara  in  front.  Mother  Tara  protects  each  and  every
sentient being especially those who have  different  fears,  especially  the
fear of the lower realms. Mother Tara protects from  every  fear.  These  21
Tara Praises are an extremely powerful prayer to read.  They  were  composed
by the Buddha himself. Many other buddhas also say the  same  thing.  It  is
extremely powerful so we should recite it with single-pointed devotion.

THE PRAISES (p. 157)

Again, make single-pointed request to Mother Tara to clear all obstacles  to
achieving ever-lasting happiness and having all the  perfect  conditions  to
be able to do so. Let us make single-pointed  request  to  Mother  Tara.  We
read this in Tibetan.

REQUEST (p. 162)

Next again, prostrations. Traditionally, we need  to  (recite  this  prayer)
seven times.  Now, we do three times.

SECOND ROUND—HOMAGE (p. 164)

Next is the same thing. Again,  we  visualise  making  offerings  to  Mother
Tara.

OFFERING TO TARA (p. 164)

The Seven Limbs (p. 165)

Short Mandala Offering (p. 167)

Taking Refuge and Generating Bodhicitta & prayer (p. 168)

Normally, in the Tara puja, (at this point), you have  to  do  the  21  Tara
Praises three times. Because of time and because  I  have  talked  too  much
today, I’m breaking the rule. We do the short one, the  Five  Lines  Prayer.
This is also very powerful. Mother Tara told  Lama  Atisha  the  Five  Lines
Prayer herself. We do this three times. The  idea  is  the  same.  Visualise
Mother Tara and think that all  sentient  beings  are  protected  by  Mother
Tara. Those who cannot breathe are able to breathe and  so  forth.  Do  this
prayer three times.

THE FIVE LINES PRAYER (p. 179)


      OM CHOM DÄN DÄ MA LHA MO DRÖL MA LA CHHAG TSHÄL LO
          OM I prostrate to the goddess foe destroyer, liberating lady Tara,


      CHHAG TSHÄL DRÖL MA TARE PÄL MO
          Homage to TARE, savioress, heroine,
      TUTTARA YI JIG KÜN SEL MA
           With TUTTARE dispelling all fears,
      TURE DÖN NAM THAM CHÄ TER MA
            Granting all beneﬁts with TURE,
      SVAHA YI GER CHÄ LA RAB DÜ
             To her with sound SVAHA, I bow.


We do the request in  Tibetan.  Here,  we  make  single-pointed  request  to
Mother Tara to clear all the obstacles to us achieving enlightenment.
REQUEST (p. 174)

One more time. Again, we make prostrations to  Mother  Tara.  We  read  this
three times.

THIRD ROUND—HOMAGE (p. 175)

What comes next is offerings again. We just do the last verse—“OM ARYA  TARE
… HUM SVAHA.” Same thing again. Visualise making offerings to  Mother  Tara.
Traditionally, in the last round and the round at the  beginning,  you  will
read these (offering) verses in a more extensive way. Today, it’s already  a
little late so we will do the short one.

OFFERING TO TARA (p. 175)

The Seven Limbs (p. 176)

Long Mandala Offering in Twenty-Three Heaps (p. 177)

Short Mandala Offering (p. 178)

Heartfelt Request (Optional) (p. 178)

Take refuge then generate bodhicitta.  After  that,  do  the  visualisation.
When you recite the 21 Tara Praises, you visualise that  from  Mother  Tara,
nectar comes out, entering yourself and all sentient beings. Then your  body
and the entire bodies of  all  sentient  beings  fill  up  with  nectar  and
receive all the blessings. We do the short one six times and the  last  one,
the long version. We recite in Tibetan.

Taking Refuge and Generating Bodhicitta (p. 179)

VISUALISATION (p. 179)

THE PRAISES (p. 180)

We skip the benefits (i.e., the Prayer of the Benefits, p. 185).   Next,  we
recite the blessing of the torma. We make torma offering to Mother  Tara  so
proceed with blessing the torma.  After  that,  we  make  offering  (of  the
torma) to Mother Tara.

Offering the Torma (p. 187)

Offerings (p. 188)

PRAISE (p. 188)

PRAYERS (p. 189)

Confession of Faults in the Recitation (p. 190)

REQUESTING THE DEITY TO REMAIN OR DEPART (p. 191)

There is a long tune to the GE WA DI YI.  It is like the DAG  SOG  NAM  KYI/
DENG NÄ JANG CHHUB BAR verse in the Lama Chopa  (LC  122).  It  is  same  as
that.

Dedication Prayer (p. 192)

Khen Rinpoche: You can do in Tibetan.

Verse of Auspiciousness (p. 192)

So we finish just in time. Don’t follow the many things  that  were  skipped
today because I talked. Normally, you must read the long  21  Tara  Praises.
The short one is illegal!

OK. Thank you. You do the Tara puja at home exactly  like  that.  Then  that
will clear away all the obstacles and everything will be successful. If  you
learn it, then you can do at home.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.











-----------------------
[1] The Abbreviated Four-Mandala Ritual to Chittamani Tara, Essential
Buddhist Prayers: An FPMT Prayer Book. Volume 2: Common Center Practices. ©
2002, 2004, 2006, 2009 FPMT Inc.

