Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L21FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.237653
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 21	 				                                            15 June 2017
Importance of studying and reflection. Why not just meditate? Calm abiding in tantra. Root text, p. 39—42.  Establishing the siddhis. Group leaders. 
IMPORTANCE OF STUDYING AND REFLECTION
Is there a difference between having heard and reflected on the teachings, especially the treatises, and not having done that? Many people say there’s no difference, questioning the purpose behind studying the great treatises. 
Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa said very clearly the Dharma one studies and thinks about is the Dharma to be practised. There’s no Dharma to be practised that’s separated from the Dharma one learns and reflects upon.
If you look at Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lamrim Chenmo, at the beginning, he said very clearly that the whole purpose of studying is to put into practice what one learns. We’ve to remember this in the deepest recesses of our heart—the whole point of learning and reflecting on the Dharma is to put it into practice for the purpose of subduing and disciplining the mind. You’ve to keep this in mind all the time. Otherwise, you’ll not achieve much benefit from just learning and thinking about the Dharma. The quality of any Dharma practice must be based on having studied and thought about it. Then it’ll be good and it’ll hit its mark, i.e., it’s able to bring forth its intended result. 
As an example, let’s take the prayer of going for refuge and generating bodhicitta we recite so often. For someone who has a very good grasp of the entire Buddhadharma, who knows the stages of the path to enlightenment well, just by reciting that prayer, that individual’s able to think about the entire path. It’s possible for that individual’s heart to be touched and moved from reflecting on just one verse of the prayer. 
But for somebody who hasn’t done much studying or understood well the Buddhadharma, there’s no way for this to happen. At the very most, perhaps this person has the idea the prayer is talking about refuge but other than that, I don’t think that individual will feel anything. It’s just a verbal recitation. 
Let’s look at the first two lines of the prayer:
I go for refuge until I am enlightened 
To the Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha. 
These lines point to refuge but refuge’s a mind. One has to feel something. If an individual has studied the lam-rim and knows the structure of the path well, he’ll know in the first two lines, he has to think about what’s covered in the path shared with the person of small capacity and the path shared with the person of medium capacity. This is the barest minimum. 
In order for the mind of refuge to arise, there must be a real fear of the suffering of the lower realms. On top of that, there has to be the fear of the suffering of samsara. For a person who hasn’t studied or who’s unable to think about what he’s studied, he can recite these two lines but there’s no real refuge at all.
For real refuge to arise, there must be real fear in the heart—the fear of having to go to the lower realms and the sufferings there. On top of that, there’s the fear of the suffering of samsara. Only when there’re these real fears and from your heart, you entrust yourself totally to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, convinced they can protect you. That’s refuge. This is the minimum you have to do. 
But in order to feel this deeply, first you must’ve studied and thought about the teachings that’ll help you to produce that fear and conviction. Even to produce this mind of refuge, if we don’t study and don’t think about what we’ve studied, what other method is there to produce the mind of refuge?
The remaining two lines of the prayer pertain to generating bodhicitta. It contains the entire Mahayana path. Simply speaking, this thought—“I must achieve enlightenment. I will achieve enlightenment”—will not arise without having trained the mind in the techniques for generating bodhicitta, such as the sevenfold cause and effect method or the practice of exchanging self and others. Without training the mind in that way, there’s no way to produce a mind generation that’s induced by some feeling in the heart. Mind generation isn’t going to arise if we sit there, thinking over and over again, “I will achieve enlightenment!” The heart’s not moved at all. 
How could this bodhicitta arise one day? By training the mind gradually in those techniques that lead to the generation of bodhicitta. Without thinking about them and studying them, how is it possible to develop bodhicitta?
The word, ‘I’, appears in the prayer as in, “I go for refuge until I am enlightened …” What’s the nature of this ‘I’ seeking to achieve enlightenment through practising the perfections? For somebody who’s studied and reflected on the view of the Middle Way School, when the word, ‘I’, comes up, it’s possible for this person to have the understanding and feeling that the ‘I’ who goes for refuge and so forth exists but does not exist from its own side, i.e., it’s empty of existing from its own side. This understanding of the ‘I’ with this nature of emptiness going for refuge, practising the perfections and so forth, is only possible for those who’ve studied and are familiar with the view of the Middle Way School. 
WHY NOT JUST MEDITATE?
It’s common to hear people ask questions like this: “You know we’re very busy people. Our lives are already so complicated. Instead of studying, studying, studying and thinking, thinking, thinking, isn’t it better to just meditate?” 
But this gives rise to another question: What kind of meditation is that person doing? Even to meditate, first you must learn how to meditate. Especially these days, everybody is talking about meditation. Advertisements are put up everywhere, encouraging people to meditate. 
However, you’ve to understand there’re different kinds of meditation. In the Buddhist context, we don’t meditate for the purpose of only achieving mental peace in this life alone. That has never been the main point of meditation. Of course, mental peace is important. Without mental peace, you wouldn’t even want to practise the Dharma but that’s never been the main goal of practising meditation.
There’re many different kinds of meditations. There’re different topics we’re supposed to meditate on starting with the four close placements of mindfulness. If you’re meditate on just the four seals—all composite phenomena are impermanent, all contaminated phenomena are suffering, all phenomena are empty and selfless—the mind will change for the better. That’s not just some temporary peace as it’ll lead to a reduction in the afflictions like ignorance, anger and attachment. Then we can say that life becomes better and better from life to life. It’s a real change and there’s real benefit from life to life. 
When we talk about meditation in the Buddhist context, at the very minimum, that meditation must benefit you in your next life. This means your meditation at the end of the day must stop you from going to the lower realms. 
In Buddhist practice, we also emphasize the achievement of a concentrated mind. We have the teachings on calm abiding. It’s important to develop calm abiding. But calm abiding’s not exclusive to Buddhism. Calm abiding’s a realization and attainment that’s also common among non-Buddhists. Anybody can achieve it, not only Buddhists. 
There may be teachings for developing calm abiding and people do develop a concentrated mind. This meditator may attain calm abiding but if he overlooked training in the path shared with the person of medium capacity, he’ll hold on to the bliss and the pleasurable feeling he gets from calm abiding. With his realization of calm abiding, he develops the concentration and creates the karma to be born in the form and formless realms. He can even create the cause to be born in the highest possible state of existence in samsara called the peak of samsara, the fourth level of the formless realm. It’s a state where one doesn’t have any manifest afflictions. One feels as if one is enlightened. But as one still has to die, on the day of death, one has to go back somewhere in samsara again.
Meditation’s important but it depends on what kind of meditation you’re doing and what’s the purpose of your meditation. If you don’t know the correct and proper meditation to do, if you think meditation’s just to have some peace of mind, then in the end, you’ll not achieve anything purposeful.
Therefore, you must never ever think that study and reflection are pointless. They’re extremely important. At the same time, you mustn’t forget the purpose of studying and reflection—to practise and to change the mind. If you only hold on to the idea that studying and reflection are very important but you forget the purpose of studying and reflection, then you’re not going to achieve the real purpose behind holding on to that position.
~~~~~~~~~~~

CALM ABIDING IN TANTRA
There are three divisions to the absorption not reliant on recitation:  
absorption on fire
absorption on sound
absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound 
The root text mentioned calm abiding is achieved during the absorption on sound. Can we say the calm abiding attained when you practise the absorption on sound is not the general calm abiding. Rather, it’s the calm abiding focussing on emptiness as its object of observation? 
In one of the writings of Longdol Lama Rinpoche on his summary verse on tantra, he did say when you achieve the calm abiding focussing on emptiness, that’s when the absorption on sound is culminated. It’s not stated like this in other texts on the tantric grounds and paths, but in this summary by Longdol Lama Rinpoche, the words, “calm abiding observing emptiness,” are used. I’ll use this as the support for my position I shared with you in the last lesson. 
In the writings by Kachen Yeshe Gyaltsen, he makes this statement, “Prior to meditating on the absorption on sound, I think it’s possible to achieve calm abiding focussing on the deity’s body.” Do you see the implication of this statement? 
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t forget what I said in the last lesson!
There’re also learned scholars who hold the position that calm abiding is newly attained during the absorption on sound. 
In another text on the tantric grounds and paths, it’s stated calm abiding is achieved together with the pliancy associated with it during the absorption on fire. 
You have to think about these positions and decide which one is better.  
Back to what I’ve mentioned earlier on. If we were to take the position similar to the mode of progress in sutra, we’ll say:
during the absorption on sound, you achieve the calm abiding observing emptiness. That’s the great path of accumulation. 
When you achieve the yoga without signs, that’s when you achieve the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound. That’s when you enter the path of preparation.
Q & A
Student 1: If we take the position of calm abiding focussing on the deity’s body before the absorption on sound, during the time of the six deities, when we generate the empty deity, is that the calm abiding focussing on emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 1: The empty deity is all about focussing on emptiness. How is it then one does not realize emptiness? Let’s say somebody has already realized emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Just because somebody has realized emptiness, it doesn’t necessarily mean he has attained the calm abiding observing emptiness. 
For example, if you follow the sutric mode of progress, calm abiding observing emptiness is only achieved on the great path of accumulation. Of course, we’re talking about those of definite Mahayana lineage. If we’re talking about those with sharp faculties, they would have realized emptiness prior to entering the path. When they enter the path, they have calm abiding but they don’t have the calm abiding observing emptiness. 
Student 1: How does one differentiate them? You have the realization of emptiness.  You’ve attained calm abiding before you achieve the great path of accumulation. Yet that calm abiding and realization of emptiness don’t come together. His calm abiding can’t focus on emptiness. That’s the implication.
In the first place, what sort of mind does he use to realize emptiness if he’s not using calm abiding to realize emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: Definitely he’s using calm abiding to realize emptiness. Not any other mind. 
Student 1: That’s before the stage of calm abiding focussing on emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say prior to realizing calm abiding focussing on emptiness, he has realized emptiness. He’s definitely meditating, but the question’s why he doesn’t have the calm abiding focussing on emptiness? Probably, you would have to say he’s not able to meditate on it. 
When we say the calm abiding observing emptiness, we are talking about the calm abiding induced while taking emptiness as its object of observation. By taking emptiness as its object of observation, then one develops calm abiding with respect (to that). But prior to achieving this, he cannot. 
Why doesn’t he achieve this prior to the great path of accumulation? Prior to that, he’s not able to take emptiness as the object of observation to produce the calm abiding observing emptiness. 
Student 1: How does the person realize emptiness when he’s attained calm abiding but he’s not using calm abiding to realize emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: Aren’t there also individuals who achieve calm abiding prior to entering the path? It’s highly possible for people to achieve calm abiding prior to entering the path. 
Then after having realized emptiness, immediately, he should have the calm abiding focussing on emptiness from the beginning. (But that’s not the case. Your qualm is)  why he doesn’t have this?
Student 1: Yes, this’ll be an absurd consequence because you have to say calm abiding focussing on emptiness is achieved on the great path of accumulation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s hold on to what’s said in the text
On the great path of accumulation, you achieve the calm abiding observing emptiness. 
When you achieve the special insight observing emptiness, you achieve the path of preparation. 
Prior to that, you don’t achieve those two realizations. 
Is it possible to realize emptiness prior to entering the path? Yes. 
So you’ve these three things.
During the small path of accumulation, does the bodhisattva have the calm abiding observing emptiness? No, because it’s not achieved prior to the great path of accumulation. 
The question is: Why don’t they have the calm abiding observing emptiness? They have the realization of emptiness and they have calm abiding. What is the reason they don’t have the calm-abiding observing emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: That’s your question, isn’t it?  
Student 1: Yes. What if I take the position that he achieves calm-abiding focussing on emptiness upon reaching the middling (path of accumulation) rather than the great 
(path of accumulation)? So far, no text says that. 
Khen Rinpoche: You can say that but what’s the problem (with that position)? If you say there’s no problem, then why (can’t the bodhisattva achieve the calm abiding focussing on emptiness) before that (i.e., before the middling path of accumulation)?
Student 1: That’s my point. Not all bodhisattvas realize emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: We’re talking about the sharp-facultied ones of definite (Mahayana) lineage. 
According to you, once you’ve realized emptiness, the next thing is once you achieve calm abiding, you necessarily have the calm abiding observing emptiness. That’s the position you’re taking.  
Student 1: Let’s say (that’s my position) for the purpose of clarifying all this. What will be the fallacy of saying that? 
Khen Rinpoche: We’re not able to say that. 
Scriptural authority states on the great path of accumulation, you’ve the calm abiding observing emptiness. Only on that basis can you have the special insight focussing on emptiness. (Based on your position), you may as well say on the small path of accumulation, there’s also the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness. Isn’t that possible? Because if you’re to say you have calm abiding observing emptiness on the small path of accumulation, definitely, you can also say there’s special insight. Why not? Then (this can also be the case) prior to entering the path. 
There’s another problem. Are calm abiding observing emptiness and special insight observing emptiness generated serially or simultaneously (on the sutra path)? 
Student 1: On the sutra path, they are generated serially.
Khen Rinpoche: For a person of definite Mahayana lineage, simultaneous with entering the Mahayana path, can that individual have calm abiding observing emptiness and the special insight observing emptiness? Is that possible? 
Student 1: No. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why? What’s missing? We have three things—generating bodhicitta, calm abiding observing emptiness and special insight observing emptiness. Which one’s missing? 
Student 1: The special insight focussing on emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: For this person of definite Mahayana lineage, at the time of entering the Mahayana path, does he have the special insight observing emptiness? 
Student 1: It cannot be said he has (the special insight observing emptiness). 
Khen Rinpoche: It follows you have to say he has special insight observing emptiness because he has special insight and he has the realization of emptiness. You asserted that. If you have special insight and the realization of emptiness, it follows that these two must be combined. What are you going to say to that? 
Student 1: I say yes, but I qualify (my answer) by differentiating (that special insight observing emptiness) with the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness. They are separate trainings. Is that possible?
Khen Rinpoche: The union of calm abiding and special insight means the individual has both calm abiding and special insight. If the individual has calm abiding and also realizes emptiness, why is it necessarily so that he has the calm abiding observing emptiness? Why? 
Student 1: Because it’s a union. My thinking is his realization of emptiness is within the state of calm abiding. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why? 
Student 1: Because he has calm abiding, he uses calm abiding to meditate on …
Khen Rinpoche: How do you know that? The mind realizing emptiness need not necessarily be (one that’s attained) calm abiding. Do you need calm abiding to realize emptiness? 
Student 1: You don’t need calm abiding to realize emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why don’t you need (calm abiding to realize emptiness)? 
Student 1: If you’ve calm abiding when you’re meditating and trying to realize emptiness, is calm abiding utilized at all? Not necessarily at all? 
Khen Rinpoche:  What did I say? He has realized emptiness already. He realized emptiness before achieving calm abiding. 
~~~~~~~~~~~
ESTABLISHING THE SIDDHIS
Union of calm abiding and insight
You must first …
…
… establish many of the minor siddhis. (p. 39) 
The “three absorptions” are:
the absorption on fire
the absorption on sound
the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound
In order to achieve the special siddhis in Action Tantra and Performance Tantra, first, one must have done a proper approximation of the deity in dependence upon the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation. Then on that basis, one achieves the special siddhis. It is the achievement of the special siddhis that makes the path of Action Tantra and Performance Tantra quicker than the Perfection Vehicle.
Performing a valid approximation of the deity in dependence on the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation is highly emphasized in Action Tantra and Performance Tantra. This is because only then will you be able to achieve the special siddhis or attainments. With the attainment of these special siddhis, they make your path to enlightenment much quicker. It’s said with these siddhis you can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime.
How to establish the siddhis having achieved approximation
The fourth … categorizing them in three. (p. 39)
We categorize the siddhis in various ways.
(1) By means of nature 
By means of nature, … knowing all the treatises. (p. 40)
Among the different levels of siddhis, the supreme siddhis are:
The siddhi of the knowledge bearer (vidyadhara): The vidyadhara refers not just to being a knowledge bearer but being the life knowledge bearer meaning one achieves the realization of immortality. Based on that, one is able to achieve enlightenment in one lifetime. Therefore, it’s called a supreme siddhi. 
The siddhi of higher perception: Sometimes this siddhi’s translated as clairvoyance but it’s more than that.  
The siddhi of knowing all the treatises: It’s said whatever text one picks up, without difficulty, one understands all their words and meanings.
The intermediate siddhis …  and so on. (p. 40) 
“Invisibility” is being able to move around without people seeing you. 
“Extracting the essence” is the practice of chulen where one’s able to sustain one’s body without having to rely on coarse food. Rather one can, for example, survive on the practice of extracting the essence from chulen pills. 
“Speed walking” is the ability to walk very fast.
Khen Rinpoche: Chulen is good if one wants to be slim. People who do the chulen practice becomes very thin and skinny like a stalk of bamboo. I heard their mind is very, very clear when they do chulen. The mind’s extremely clear. I heard that someone did this practice in Dharamsala during Lama Yeshe’s time. This person became very skinny. Everyday, he ate this small pill for one month and became very skinny. So, I recommend this practice for those who want to slim down. It really works! Other slimming pills don’t work but this one really works! 
The lesser siddhis … and so forth. (p. 40)
(2) By means of signs
By means of signs, there are three: igniting substances, making them emit smoke, and heating them. (p. 41)
There’s the practice of accomplishing (or blessing) the pills. There’re different kinds of pills one can make. Somebody who has performed the prior approximation of the deity well, they’ll receive signs during the accomplishment of the pills. For example, the pills may catch fire, ignite smoke or at the very least, they heat up and become warm. 
For example, in Highest Yoga Tantra, when the inner offering pills are being prepared, these signs are mentioned. For somebody who has the realizations and the power, it’s said such signs appear when they bless the inner offering pills. 
Khen Rinpoche: So go and check your inner offering. See whether there’s fire, smoke or heat. 
(3) By means of basis
By means of basis … and resources. (p. 41)
(4) By means of the bestower
By means of the bestower, … earth deities. (p. 42)
There’re mantras spoken by aryas, the superiors. “Deities” I guess refers to the desire realm gods. The “earth deities” refer to beings who’re abiding on earth. They could include yaksas or non-human entities. You do hear of accounts of mantras taught by nagas, yaksas, spirits and so forth. They live on earth. People practise their mantras and they seem to achieve the ability to pacify sicknesses, obstacles and so forth by reciting those mantras. 
(5) By means of lineage
By means of lineage, … 
…
… lesser siddhis are attained. (p. 42) 
The action of pacification is achieved primarily by depending on the tathagata lineage,
The action of increase is achieved primarily by depending on the lotus lineage. 
The action of wrath is achieved primarily by depending on the vajra lineage. 
As I mentioned before, when we think of these three lineages, we have to think of them as deities, the personification of the appearance of the factors of purity of the body, speech and mind. 
The factor of purity of the body appearing as the deity is the tathagata lineage. 
The factor of purity of speech appearing as the deity is the lotus lineage. 
The factor of purity of mind appearing as the deity is the vajra lineage.
By looking at the rituals of the deity, you can tell which lineage it belongs to by looking at the deity they are crowned with. 
How do we know a particular deity belongs to the tathagata lineage? If you look at the rituals of a deity of the tathagata lineage, you’ll see statements like, “This deity is crowned by Vairochana.” This is an indication the deity belongs to the tathagata lineage.
If the deity is crowned by Amitabha, it belongs to the lotus lineage. If you look at the Action Tantra ritual of Avalokiteshvara or Chenrezig, you’ll see the deity is crowned by Amitabha. You know then the Action Tantra practice of Chenrezig is a practice of the lotus lineage. Likewise, Tara is also crowned by Amitabha so the Action Tantra practice of Tara also belongs to the lotus lineage. 
If the deity is crowned by Akshobhya, it belongs to the vajra lineage. 
GROUP LEADERS 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m going to divide the class into five groups. I will pass out the numbers. Everyone who’s a BP student, pick a number. 
In the very beginning, we had eight group leaders. We changed the group leaders and the groups for each module. Then people said they wanted to stick to one group all the time. 
Recently, I had a meeting with the group leaders. Some suggested it’s better to rotate. There are many different views. This is not only for the purpose of the group discussions. If you want to receive emails and so forth, you must join a group. In our recent discussion, some group leaders want to step down. Some groups had become very small. Some group leaders wanted to rest.
In the very beginning, the idea was for the groups to rotate so that everyone can know each other. If you’re in your own group all the time, you’ll not know anyone. This is not so healthy. It’s important to know each other. 
Whichever group you are part of, please make sure you’re involved in the group and 
communicate well with one another. This is also part of the practice. “I don’t like this. I don’t like that.” Don’t become like that. That’s not good. So, see this as a part of your practice. I want you to do that. Make sure you do well in your group. Talk well. Discuss well. Know each other well. Care for each other well. 
After the next module, we will change again. Then at the end of the day, you’ll know everybody. Everybody becomes friends. That’s my hope. That’s my point. Whether this happens or not, I’m not sure. I thought it was good to rotate from the very beginning. It’s important not to stick to one group forever. It’s better to know everyone. 
Therefore, we’ve five groups. I’ve given them the names of the five dhyani buddhas. 
Not everybody’s here tonight. Those who didn’t come tonight, if you’re part of the BP class, then you should be in a group. Maybe you can tell the centre manager you want to join a group. She will put you in one of the five groups. 
My purpose in making the new groups is that I want the group leaders to be active and I also want the students to be active. Any questions related to BP you don’t understand, you can ask your group leader directly. He may be able to answer your question. If he’s not able to give you an answer, then bring it up in class. 
SUNDAY DISCUSSION
I request you to come to the discussion session on Sunday. In this way, you can learn more. You can ask any questions but we already have some questions prepared. Before that, on Friday and Saturday, read a little bit about the questions. Think about the questions a little bit and get some idea in the mind. 
Then on Sunday when you come here, you’re able to say something. So, first, you think then later you present your view. It could be right or it could be wrong. That doesn’t matter.
If you’re wrong, somebody’ll say you’re wrong. Then you’ve to prove why you’re right, “Because I have this … this … this …” This is the way in which you’ll learn better. I want you to work together as a group and discuss the questions and their answers. 
Sometimes of course, during debate and questions and answers, you’re not mindful and you talk in a very strong, aggressive and sharp way. Then you really hurt the feelings of others. So you always have to be mindful of this. Sometimes, this happens so you must be mindful. Try to recognize this immediately and don’t do it. This can happen for everyone. You have to be mindful not to hurt anybody. This is the mindfulness you need. Otherwise, sometimes we’re not mindful and we just say something really strong. Of course, you’re discussing the Dharma. But sometimes this happens, even to me. I don’t mean it but sometimes, during debate, strong words just come out.
Especially during discussion, something like that can happen. One party gets hurt.  Then you don’t like each other and become unhappy with one another. After that, you don’t want to join the group any more.
This is what happened in the past. So group leaders also have this responsibility. If that happens, the group leader should make sure and say, “This is going too far.” The group leader’s job is to do that. The group leader is not just a title. You also have responsibilities. That’s why you are given the names of the five buddhas. Remember that. I mean we’re all like that, so make sure. I’m not sure what to do if the group leader himself becomes like that. Then it’s the assistant’s job, “Group leader, you are getting a little bit strong. Cool down.” Remind your group leader. I think this is important. 
This Sunday, I don’t have Chinese lam-rim class. I will come. So, please everybody come to discuss. Some people I know they don’t want to discuss at all.  One thing of course is that you come (to class) from work. You come here, finish class, then you run back. There’s no communication with each other, spending time with each other or talking to each other. I don’t see that. Just come, then run off. Come and run off. It’s like a work place. 9:30pm. You cannot stay. 
That’s why Sunday’s good. You all get together. The whole point is to know each other then you discuss. It’s not easy but we try our best to improve. 
My talk alone cannot contribute much. From your side, you also need the discussion group. I hope so. 
After this module, I thought to change the group again. 
Last time, I noticed that some people said, “I don’t like this group leader. I don’t want to go there.” Problems are everywhere. Wherever you go, the problem’s there. So, you must learn how to make fewer problems within the group. I want to tell you to respect the group leaders. This is important. I’ve given them the name of buddhas. I hope you will respect that. You can ask them any questions. Ask your group leader for any notes, summaries and so forth that you may need. Whatever way can help you to learn better, you can ask your group leader. 
So those who didn’t come today, please tell them, “You must sign up and join a group.” Because if you don’t sign up, then you won’t receive any emails relating to the Basic Program. Make sure you are part of the Basic Program. Make sure you register there. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.