Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L48final.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.819417
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 48 				                                                10 October 2017
Q & A. Taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya. 
Q & A
Student 1: I would like to ask what is the path liberating empowerment? It was mentioned in class but the meaning wasn’t really elaborated upon. 
Khen Rinpoche: Next time.  I don't know what that is.
About apportioning the 80 indicative conceptions:
33 belong to the mind of appearance. 
40 belong to the mind of increase.
Seven belongs to the mind of near-attainment.  
Khen Rinpoche: What I mentioned in the last class is not correct.
Student 2: Regarding the five omnipresent mental factors ... (This student had posed this question in the last lesson: Does the extremely subtle mind still have the five omnipresent mental factors?)
Khen Rinpoche: If you were to say, yes, it shouldn’t be a problem.  Although it is not clearly mentioned in tantra but in sutra, it is stated very clearly that all principal minds are necessarily accompanied by the five omnipresent mental factors.  Although it is not clearly mentioned in tantra, it seems there isn’t any reason to say why they cannot be there. So, there shouldn’t be any problem with saying that they are there—the clear light mind and the five omnipresent mental factors are in the retinue of the clear light mind.  
Student 2: When a person uses the clear light of death to directly realize emptiness,
that clear light of death is actually the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. That is a main mind, right?
Khen Rinpoche: You can say that.
Student 2: So, when we talk about the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, it is not necessarily the mental factor of wisdom. Or is it because of the mental factor of wisdom that the main mind is also known as the wisdom directly realizing emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: In general, wisdom is a mental factor.  Whether it is the main mind or the mental factor, if one realizes emptiness, the other necessarily realizes it too.   
Student 2: So, you call the main mind the wisdom directly realizing emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche:  In lorig, the study of mind, sem and yi gi shepa,  is translated as mind and mental consciousness.  In the context of when mental consciousness is used, it usually refers to the main mind or the principal mind. But when we talk about the clear light, it is always referring to the main mind. This is something that you have to think about.
Student 2: In the last discussion, we talked about the clear light of death. Is this clear light of death naturally blissful?
Khen Rinpoche: It is naturally peaceful?  I could say that.
Student 2: So everyone will have a blissful death. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is naturally peaceful but I don’t know if it is blissful. I’m not sure. 
Student 2: We are trying to meditate in order to utilize the extremely subtle mind to realize emptiness. So, we are using the blissful mind to realize emptiness. Wouldn’t we have to say that the extremely subtle mind is naturally blissful?  I don’t know whether I am making myself clear. 
Khen Rinpoche: I wonder if the basis clear light is naturally blissful. I don’t really think so.  But with regard to the clear light that is generated on the path of the completion stage, techniques are taught to transform the extremely subtle mind into the entity of great bliss. This happens through meditation on the path, especially on the completion stage where there are techniques to transform the mind into the nature of bliss and using that blissful state to ascertain emptiness. But to say that the clear light of the basis is by nature blissful, I don’t think so.
Student 2: The bodhisattva has done his completion stage practice and is in his last moment as a sentient being. He is in meditative equipoise accessing the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness.  Once the person abandons all the obscurations, that person’s gross mind does not manifest anymore when he becomes a buddha. So, the mind remains extremely subtle from then on. 
The form body that arises, the nirmanakaya or sambhogakaya, will also be extremely
subtle.  The nirmanakaya is something we can see. So, when we talk about the form being, be it gross or subtle, how do we measure this? Is a buddha’s form body considered to be extremely subtle?  As the coarse mind is no longer manifest, is the form body, the nirmanakaya, such as Buddha Shakyamuni, considered extremely subtle?  
Khen Rinpoche: Tantra explains the way to actualize the truth body and form body.  With regard to the actualization of the truth body, the thing that acts as the substantial cause for that has to be an extremely subtle mind. A coarse mind cannot act as a substantial cause for the dharmakaya.  
In order to abandon the knowledge obscurations, the extremely subtle mind has to transform into the entity of the direct perception of emptiness without which the knowledge obscurations cannot be abandoned. 
In Highest Yoga Tantra, the mind is divided into the coarse and subtle. The subtle minds consist of the mind of appearance, increase and near-attainment, culminating in the clear light.  The minds of appearance, increase and near-attainment are accompanied by the appearance of true existence.  This appearance of true existence is posited as a knowledge obscuration.  So, without stopping this mind, you cannot achieve enlightenment because you cannot overcome the knowledge obscurations.
The afflictive obscurations are mainly the two kinds of grasping:
Grasping at the self of persons
Grasping at the self of phenomena
The afflictive obscurations are coarser compared to the knowledge obscurations. This is why in the Paramitayana they talk about the wisdom directly realizing emptiness overcoming the afflictive obscurations.  Based on that, you can achieve liberation from samsara. Relative to the knowledge obscurations, the afflictive obscurations are coarser. This means the mind that overcomes the afflictive obscurations can also be a coarser mind. In order to abandon the afflictive obscurations, you don’t need the extremely subtle mind that is directly realizing emptiness to act as their antidote.  
So now, is there a grasping at true existence that is a mind of appearance, a mind of increase or a mind of near-attainment? This is a qualm. Can there be the apprehension of true existence or grasping at true existence? Can there be a mind of appearance that is ignorance? Can there be a mind of increase that is ignorance? Can there be a mind of near-attainment that is ignorance?
We cannot just say an outright, no. Another way of looking at this is this. If you were to say, yes, is there any fallacy?
Khen Rinpoche: If you were to say, “Yes,” what is the problem or there is no problem?  How comfortable are you with saying “No”? 
Student 3: I want to clarify what exactly is a coarse mind, a subtle mind and an extremely subtle mind.  I recall in Lesson 39: 
The sense consciousnesses were coarse consciousnesses.  
The subtle mind was divide into two groups. One group is the 80 indicative conceptions, the six root afflictions and the 20 secondary afflictions. The other group is called the extremely subtle mind, the four empties. 
Just now, we talked of the subtle mind being referred to as the four empties and the extremely subtle mind being the clear light mind. Should I use the term, subtle mind, for the 80 indicative conceptions, the 6 root afflictions and the 20 secondary afflictions?
Khen Rinpoche: It is just two different ways of saying the same thing. There is one way of classifying the mind into the coarse, subtle and extremely subtle. Another way of classifying the mind is just looking at it as coarse and subtle. You can follow whatever suits you as it is getting at the same thing and is not contradictory. 
Student 3: If you specify it, that’s fine. But in class, when you say the subtle mind and the extremely subtle mind, I don’t know what you are referring to.  
Khen Rinpoche: There are two ways of looking at it. Whichever one you are comfortable with, that’s it. It’s not so difficult.
The minds explained in sutra, such as all the sense and mental consciousnesses, from the perspective of tantra, they are coarse. At the time of dying when one stops breathing, those consciousnesses cease. Then the subtle minds—the mind of appearance, increase and near-attainment—manifest. At the end, the extremely subtle mind of clear light manifests. If you think about it like this, then it’s clear. 
Student 3: So the 80 indicative conceptions would be classified as coarse minds? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, the 80 indicative conceptions are coarse minds. Even the six root afflictions and 22 secondary afflictions are all coarse minds. 
Student 4: The arhats and the superior bodhisattvas undergo the inconceivable transference of death. In tantra, that would involve the reverse process of the minds of black near-attainment, red increase and white appearance. For these two groups (i.e., the arhats and superior bodhisattvas), since these are not taught and practised in sutra, how do they get the minds of the four empties to realize emptiness? Am I right to say that even the 80 indicative conceptions are not taught in sutra?  I am just trying to understand how those who did not practise Highest Yoga Tantra are able to achieve liberation and abide on the bodhisattva superiors’ path in sutra and still undergo this cycle of dissolution. After that, where do they abide? 
Since Khen Rinpoche asked is there ignorance in these minds, and since they are not taught in sutra, is it comfortable to say there is ignorance at that level in the minds of these persons? 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that there can be a mind of near-attainment that is in the entity of ignorance?
Student 4: I’m trying to discuss. I’m not sure.
Khen Rinpoche: They are already arhats! 
Student 4: After the reverse process—the minds of near-attainment, increase and appearance—they rise from there and then they abide ...
Khen Rinpoche: You mean immediately after they achieve arhatship?
Student 4: They arise from there and subsequently, they abide in meditative equipoise. 
I’m saying that there could still be ignorance but that does not in any way cause them to not achieve nirvana. I was asking about how they go through the inconceivable transference of death. Precisely because these are not taught in sutra, yet in sutra, they definitely achieve liberation. Yet they still have to go through this process although they were not taught and they did not practise using these four types of minds to cause them to realize emptiness. Therefore, they do not have these four types of minds to realize emptiness because they have not practised them. Is it comfortable to say they still have ignorance in these four types of mind?
How do we account for them achieving liberation? Is it that during the reverse process, these minds manifest, yet …
Khen Rinpoche: From where? From the clear light in sutra when they are arhats?
Student 4: Precisely. So, that is why they still have this clear light that did not realize emptiness. So, you can say that for them, there is a clear light with ignorance. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why? Ignorance is a gross mind. Ignorance has to be a gross mind. That’s it. Isn’t that the conclusion?  That’s why my qualm is whether the subtle mind has ignorance or not. That’s my question. If you say yes, it’s difficult, except arhats. Therefore, ignorance must be a gross mind. There is no subtle mind that is ignorance. 
Student 4: Looking at this the other way round, this means for all sentient beings who go through these four types of mind, there is no ignorance there because ignorance is a coarse mind.  So when these four minds manifest, there is no ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche:  Even though these minds are not in the entity of ignorance, they are accompanied by the seeds of ignorance.
We can say it in that way. 
Student 4:  I am trying to figure out where they abide when they are abiding in meditative equipoise in nirvana. When the arhats arise into the reverse process, these minds manifest. Yet these minds do not realize emptiness even directly for them. So, the only time the mind directly realizing emptiness manifests would be after the mind of white appearance of the reverse process or after the 80 indicative 
conceptions of the reverse process. Then there is the mind directly realizing empti-
ness and the arhat abides in equipoise with that mind. 
Is it possible to say that because we have to account for where they abide? What sort of mind is manifesting for them to abide in nirvana? 
During the fourth stage of the dissolution process of the forward order, the winds dissolve into the consciousnesses. These are coarse consciousnesses—the 6 root afflictions, 22 secondary afflictions and the 80 indicative conceptions. During the reverse process for the arhats, for sure the six root afflictions and the 22 secondary afflictions will not be there. But I’m not sure about the 80 indicative conceptions because these are not taught in sutra.
Khen Rinpoche: Not all the 80 indicative conceptions are objects of abandonment because many of them are virtuous. They are conceptual and many are virtuous. 
Student 4: If these minds are accompanied by the mind that does not realize emptiness, are they still an object of abandonment? Among the 80 indicative conceptions, those minds that are virtuous but accompanied by ignorance need to be abandoned. For example, the virtuous mind grasping at true existence.
Khen Rinpoche: The arhats don’t have that.
Student 4: They will have abandoned all that at the coarse level for sure.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. All coarse grasping are abandoned. 
Student 4: For the superior bodhisattvas, from the time they achieve the path of seeing onwards, they undergo the inconceivable transference of death. When they arise from the reverse process, the same case will apply. They will manifest grosser levels of mind and from there work for sentient beings?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. 
Student 4: OK. Thank you. 
Student 5: In the last lesson, you mentioned that when the consciousness come out from the mouth, (the person) will be born a ghost. In many teachings, the lamas said if the consciousness comes out from the upper part of the body, it will be a good rebirth.
If you refer to the FPMT website, in the death process, the teachers advised sitting near the upper part of the body of the dying person so that the consciousness is attracted to come out from the upper part of the body.  The qualm is that if it is coming out from the upper part of the body, it is necessarily a good rebirth. The body from above the navel is considered the upper part of the body. 
Khen Rinpoche: I seem to remember it was said that depending on where the heat gathers in the body during the death process, that could be an indication of whether
the person is going to the lower realms or going to get a good rebirth. 
If the person is going to get a good rebirth, there’s still heat in the upper part of the body. This means the upper part of the body is warm and the lower part of the body is cold. If it is the reverse, then it’s a sign perhaps that the person is going to the lower realms, i.e., the heat is very much in the lower part of the body and the upper part of the body is still cold.
Maybe your question relates to that? What you are referring to could be the part of the body from where heat starts to dissipate. For somebody who is going to get a good rebirth, the cessation of bodily heat starts from the lower part of the body, whereas for someone who is going to get a bad rebirth, the body heat starts to dissipate from the upper part of the body. 
That is different from the place of exit of the consciousness. For someone who is going to be born:
in the hells, the consciousness leaves through the lower orifices.
as a hungry ghost, the consciousness leaves through the mouth. 
as an animal, the consciousness leaves from the genitals, the secret place.
as a human, the consciousness leaves through the eyes.
as a desire realm god, the consciousness leaves from the navel.
as a form realm god, the consciousness leaves from the mid-brow
in the formless realms, the consciousness leaves from the crown.
The text clearly states the various exits of the consciousness. This is different from what you are referring to, i.e., where the body heat gathers in the body at the time of death. These are two different things. 
~~~~~~~~~~~
We have talked about the death process and connected that to the practice of taking death as the path of dharmakaya. In relation to the self-generation rite:
There is the invitation of the merit field (p.15).  
After that, one performs the seven-branch worship in relation to the merit field (p.15).
The merit field then dissolves into the practitioner.
The practitioner experiences happiness and joy.
That practitioner, the ‘I’, who experiences happiness and joy, becomes the subject of enquiry. In this case, one investigates what is the nature of this person who is experiencing bliss by using the reasoning of the four extremes in the self-generation rite of Vajrabhairava. Basically, you come to ascertain emptiness or selflessness, the emptiness of the ‘I’ and even the bliss that one is experiencing. One investigates and also sees the emptiness of that. 
Then one realizes emptiness. One does not regard this as an ordinary mind. Rather this is the wisdom of great bliss directly realizing emptiness.  One identifies with that and thinks, “This is my actual resultant dharmakaya.” One then places divine pride on and identifies with that. 
We can use this same way of thinking and apply it to our negative emotions like jealousy or anger. When you are very upset with or jealous of someone, there is a very strong sense of the ‘I’. Then you ask yourself the same question. Instead of applying it to the great bliss, you apply it to this unhappy feeling, “Who is this me that is upset? Where is this anger? What is this anger? Who is this me that is feeling jealous? Where is this jealousy?” When you look for it, you can’t find it.
When we are angry or upset, obviously, there is this person who is upset. We feel it. Then we should look for it. If it really exists the way it appears, it should be findable.  Where are we going to find it? It should be within the confines of this physical space that we call the body. So where is it? Is it the head? The heart? Which body part is it? The thing is when you look for it, you can’t find it.
When we are upset, obviously, we can feel it. We never ever think that it is outside this body. We always feel it is somewhere inside. If that is the case, then this is where we should look for it. If it is really inside because we believe it is inside these physical confines, then it should be findable. But when we look for it, there is nothing we can really point to—it is this ‘I’ who is upset.
Khen Rinpoche: This is very helpful. Sit down and really look when you are feeling so much unhappiness. 
Try it out and think about it. We cannot really find the ‘I’ who is so upset. Yet we feel it but it cannot be found. Then maybe it is possible to get a glimpse of how this is just completely made up by our mind. Whether we are upset or not, at the end of the day, we are our own creator because we create that experience. Having a glimpse of that will make us want to continue to work to change our mind because we see that it is in our own hands. We make that experience. 
If we don’t have that glimpse of how experiences, good or bad, are made up by ourselves, what alternative is there? We then believe that it is made up by something outside, by somebody or some situation. If we believe that, then we will always look outside for a solution. We will never ever want to do anything with our own mind to change it. 
There is this unhappy person. But when we look for it, it’s kind of strange that we cannot point to anything that’s the person.  When we look for the mind where this anger is, at the end of the day, we also cannot really pinpoint what it is and where it is. This becomes more powerful. 
We are often beset by some unhappy experiences. We are always unhappy about something. In those situations, try to look for the ‘I’ who is unhappy or look for the unhappy mind. When you look for it, it becomes elusive. When you cannot find it, definitely, the unhappy mind and feeling will subside or at least become weaker. 
The only thing to do is to try this out for yourself whenever you feel unhappy for whatever reason. This is the time to experiment and look for the ‘I’ or look for the unhappy mind. Without trying, we cannot really say it works or it doesn’t work. However, if you try and it works, that is good and you have a glimpse. If you try and nothing works, then nothing can be done.
Khen Rinpoche: You try. It will work. 
~~~~~~~~~~~
TAKING THE INTERMEDIATE STATE AS THE PATH OF SAMBHOGAKAYA
We have talked about how the intermediate state is established. Now, let’s see how we can connect that with taking the intermediate state as the enjoyment body. We will talk about this in relation to the Vajrabhairava practice. 
After meditating on taking death as the path of the dharmakaya, there is the generation of the four elemental mandalas upon which you generate the common protection wheel (p. 17) followed by the uncommon protection wheel (p. 18). Inside that, one generates the entire inestimable mansion (p. 21). 
In order to be born from the womb possessing the six constituents in the Southern Continent, the Southern Continent must come into being first before you can be born from the womb there. In terms of the formation of the world system, first, there is the eon of empty and then the eon of formation.
What happens during taking death as the path of the dharmakaya? Part of that is concordant with the empty eon. There is nothing! Then during the eon of formation, the gross elements start to come into being, starting with the wind element followed by the fire element, water element and then earth element. What is concordant with that is found in the sadhana when you generate the four elemental mandalas (p. 17) after the meditation of the clear light. This ends with the celestial mansion inside the protection wheel. So, the generation of the celestial mansion is concordant with the formation of the Southern Continent. 
In the long sadhana, up to the point when it says “surrounded by the charnel grounds” (p. 22) is the section generating the celestial mansion in the charnel grounds.
Inside the celestial mansion surrounded by these charnel grounds, from a Yam comes a black wind mandala with a slight shade of red, … (p. 22)
This is taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya. It will be good to project the protection wheels just before one starts the practice of taking the intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya.  
Before you meditate on that, you project the (protection) wheel thinking, “I am going to purify my intermediate state. I am going to actualize the path time illusory body so that I will achieve the resultant enjoyment body in the future.”
Inside the celestial mansion surrounded by these charnel grounds, from a Yam comes a black wind mandala with a slight shade of red, on top of which from the first letter (of the Sanskrit alphabet) A, comes a moon mandala. (p. 22)
Earlier on, the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya has already
been done, culminating in placing divine pride as the resultant dharmakaya. That mind that one has identified to be the resultant dharmakaya now takes on the form of the short A on top of the wind mandala. The short A then melts into light and transforms into a moon disc radiating with light. Essentially, this is one’s mind. Imagine that it is the dharmakaya that’s taking the form of the short A that transforms into moon disc. 
In the center of it, like a bubble out of water, comes a yellow Dhih which transforms into a sword marked in the center (of its hub) with a Dhih. (p. 22—23)
Arising “like a bubble out of water,” on top of the moon disc, is the syllable Dhih.  
You imagine that your mind and Manjushri’s perfect enlightened wisdom as being inseparable but in the aspect of the syllable Dhih. This Dhih is essentially one’s mind that is inseparable in entity from Manjushri’s omniscient wisdom, now appearing in the form of Dhih. It is Dhih that is resonating. 
The Dhih on top of the moon disc transforms into a blue double-edged sword standing upright. You visualize the syllable Dhih either in the handle or in the middle of the sword. 
Light rays radiate from this sword marked with the Dhih, going out and inviting all the Manjushris either in the form of Manjushri of the five lineages or in the form of the Causal Vajra-holder, Manjugosha. 
They absorb into the sword, which is completely transformed. One becomes the Causal Vajra-holder Manjugosha, yellow in colour with one face and two arms. The right hand is holding a sword and the left a text. This yellow Manjushri is slightly wrathful.
This enjoyment body is very subtle, is established from the extremely subtle wind-mind and radiates five-coloured light rays. It can only be seen by bodhisattva superiors. One meditates on its clear appearance and generates the divine pride of being the resultant sambhogakaya. 
One arising as the Causal Vajra-holder, Manjugosha, is where most masters stop for the section on taking the intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya. 
The next section, taking rebirth as the path of the nirmanakaya, starts with:
At my heart, from an Ah comes a sun-disc mandala …(p. 23)
Most masters place this visualization under taking rebirth as the path of the nirmanakaya. But there are some who place this meditation of the sun disc in the session of taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya.
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t have the text? If you don’t bring the text, then you don’t know what I’m talking about. At least, if you know (the text) by heart, then that’s different. If you bring the sadhana, then we can pinpoint (where we are), otherwise …
Concordance with the basis, the path and the result
This visualization starting from:
… A, comes a moon mandala. In the center of it, like a bubble out of waters, comes a yellow Dhih which transforms into a sword marked in the center (of its hub) with a Dhih. (p. 22—23)
comes with an explanation of the concordance with the basis, the path and the result. 
Let’s look at the concordance with the basis first. “… A, comes a moon mandala”: The Ah here symbolizes the extremely subtle wind-mind of the basis. The extremely subtle wind-mind is the basis of accomplishment of the intermediate state.
If you were to explain the concordance with the path, then that Ah represents the example clear light and the meaning clear light of the path from which the illusory bodies of the path arise.
If you apply that to the concordance with the result, it is the final moment of mind just before enlightenment, the path clear light. The extremely subtle wind-mind at the end of the continuum represents that and it is from there that enlightenment comes.
The moon represents the extremely subtle wind-mind of the basis, the example clear light and the meaning clear light of the path and the final moment of the learner’s union. 
On top of that is the resonating syllable Dhih. 
If you look at it in terms of the basis, it represents the speech of the intermediate state being. 
When applied to the path, it is the speech of the path illusory bodies.
When applied to the result, it is the speech of the enjoyment body.
Then the syllable Dhih transforms into the sword marked with the Dhih. 
If applied to the basis, this represents the mind of the intermediate state being. 
If applied to the path, it is the mind in the continuum of the path illusory bodies. 
If applied to the result, it is the exalted mind of the enjoyment body.
From the sword marked with Dhih, light rays go out and all the different Manjushris are absorbed into the sword.
If you talk about the concordance with the basis, then this is what the intermediate state beings do. Due to many hallucinations, they run around doing things. This is what applying to the basis means.
When it is applied to the path, this symbolizes the activities undertaken by the path illusory bodies who engage in various activities for sentient beings.
After the Manjushris has absorbed into the sword, one transforms into yellow Manjugosha, the Causal Vajraholder.  
When you apply that to the concordance with the basis, this is like the establishment of the intermediate state being. The intermediate state being comes into being complete with its body, speech and mind.
When applied to the path, it means the arising into the illusory bodies of the path from the example clear light and the meaning clear light. 
When applied to the result, it means the arising into the enjoyment body from the final meaning clear light of the learner’s union.
If you look at the self-generation rite of Vajrabhairava, in the section on taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya, it is all there. 
If you follow the long self-generation rite, after taking death as the path of the dharmakaya, this is followed by the meditations on the common and uncommon protection wheels, generating the entire celestial mansion and so on.  
If not, it is just from the state of emptiness. 
From the dharmakaya, the celestial mansion comes into being. 
In the middle of the celestial mansion, from Ah comes a moon-disc mandala. 
On top of that, the syllable Dhih transforms into a sword marked with Dhih.  
Then this sword radiates light rays. 
All the Manjushris come (and are absorbed into the sword). 
Then the sword is completely transformed.
Then you think, “Now I am the Causal Vajraholder, Manjugosha.”
Do the meditation without distraction. Just follow that sequence laid out in the self- generation rite. At the end, this culminates in the arising of oneself as the Causal Vajraholder, Manjugosha. Then one cultivates clear appearance and establishes divine pride of oneself as the resultant sambhogakaya.
This generation stage is just done at the level of imagination. What are the purpose and the benefits of doing this? What do we stand to gain? 
This is the practice of taking the intermediate state as the path of sambhogakaya. It is a meditation that is concordant with the aspect of the intermediate state. By doing this practice here—the generation stage at the level of imagination—it purifies the ordinary intermediate state. This meditation is a cause for ripening the mind and a cause to actualize the path illusory bodies, i.e., both the pure and impure illusory bodies in the future. It also places a potential to actualize the resultant sambhogakaya in the future.
Try to understand these essential points and the process. Once you know that, then the general theory of Highest Yoga Tantra practices is pretty much the same. Once you get the point, you can apply them in many places. The practice can be applied not only in the context of the self-generation rites but also arising as the deity, in the Guru Puja practice or in the Six-Session Guru Yoga. It is equally applicable. If you know the essential points and then you try to practise and visualize accordingly, at least you can say you are doing something that looks like a tantric practice.
We will talk about taking rebirth as the path of the nirmanakaya in the next session. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau
Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.