Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L59FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.025296
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson 59
      14 April 2018


Root text, p. 117—122. The importance of calm abiding and insight. The yoga
of the subtle drop. A unique method for developing concentration. The range
of the coarse and subtle generation stage: What is ordinary appearance?
What is adherence to ordinariness? “The apprehended aspect” —as applied to
the mind and the object. Vast and profound ways of meditation. Yoga of non-
dual clarity and profundity. Three qualities have to be complete. Clarity,
stability and mode of apprehension. How to meditate in stages: alternating
between analytical and placement meditation. Conjoined with indivisible
bliss and emptiness.


The importance of calm abiding and insight (P. 117)

      Also it is said that clear appearance …
      …
      … familiar with the meaning of reality. (p. 117)

This passage is saying that at the first level, the level of the  beginners,
you focus on the mandala and deities  and  cultivate  clear  appearance  and
divine pride. This is saying that when you are able to do that,  it  is  not
necessarily the case that you have achieved calm abiding.  In  other  words,
in order for you to achieve clear appearance and divine pride  with  respect
to the deities, you do not have to have attained calm abiding previously.

Since I am providing commentary on the text,  you  need  to  have  read  the
text.

Khen Rinpoche: Have you read the text? In your dreams?

Literally, the second phrase in the Tibetan text says, “It is  not  that  it
will not be produced if you meditate on the deities one by one  in  stages.”
In the English translation, it says not so literally, “It is generated  even
if you do not become familiar with each deity in stages.”  This  means  that
even if you do  not  become  familiar  with  each  deity  in  stages,  clear
appearance can be generated.

The last part  says,  “It  is  generated  without  your  needing  to  become
familiar with the meaning of reality.” This means that in order for  you  to
give rise to  clear  appearance,  it  is  not  necessary  for  you  to  have
meditated on emptiness previously and become familiar with  the  meaning  of
reality.

Essentially, what this means is that on the first level, the  level  of  the
beginner, and on the second level, the level  of  those  who  have  attained
some pristine wisdom, you cultivate this clear appearance and divine  pride.


The main objects of abandonment of the generation stage are  the  appearance
of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. At this stage,  you  will
try to cultivate the antidotes, i.e., divine  pride  and  clear  appearance.
You will  be  able  to  attain  divine  pride  and  clear  appearance.  That
attainment does not depend on you meditating on emptiness previously and  it
does not depend on you having attained calm abiding previously.

      Indeed the mere frequent cultivation …
      …
      …  stop ordinary appearance and conception. (p. 117)

The yoga of the subtle drop (p. 118)

      Calm abiding is definitely established … the yoga of the subtle  drop.
      (p. 118)

By focussing on the deities and  so  forth,  repeatedly  using  your  mental
consciousness, eventually those objects of observation will  appear  clearly
to your mental consciousness. When you have  attained  clear  appearance  in
this way, it is not necessary that you have  achieved  stability  so  it  is
necessary for you to also attain the stability factor. If you  do  not  have
the stability factor, even though you have clear appearance,  you  will  not
be able to overcome the appearance of  ordinariness  and  the  adherence  to
ordinariness or the conceptions of ordinariness. Therefore, you have to  try
to achieve a stable clear appearance. In order to do that, you must  achieve
calm abiding.

How do you actually achieve this calm abiding if calm abiding  is  necessary
on the generation stage? You have to achieve it  through  the  yoga  of  the
subtle drop. This explains that the object of observation  has  to  be  this
subtle or minute drop. You will be able to achieve calm abiding  during  the
third level, the  level  of  those  who  have  attained  some  control  over
pristine wisdom.

      Meditations involving the subtle drop and their purpose


      Beginners and those attaining some pristine wisdom …
      …
      … a hand symbol or subtle drop. (p. 119)


      Further, those on the first two levels … excitation in realization
      meditation. (p. 119)

Sze Gee: It should say when meditating on the sadhana.

The  yoga  of  the  subtle  drop  involves  the  meditation  of  the  entire
supporting and supported mandala within the  minute  drop.  Therefore,  this
subtle yoga is performed on  the  third  level  and  not  before  that.  The
ability to meditate on the supporting and supported mandala within a  subtle
drop occurs on the third level. On the first two levels, there  is  no  such
ability.

What happens then on the first two levels? “Beginners  and  those  attaining
some pristine wisdom hold the mind on a subtle hand symbol or  drop  at  the
upper and lower  opening.”  “The  upper  opening”  refers  to  the  midpoint
between your eyebrows and “the lower opening” refers to your  secret  place.
In other words, those at the level of  the  beginners  or  first  level  and
those attaining some pristine wisdom or the second level  will  focus  their
minds on this minute drop either at the centre between the  eyebrows  or  at
the secret place.

      It is said that establishing … from the third level. (p. 120)


      Calm abiding is not established …
      …
      … sustained meditation on the focal basis. (p. 120)

A unique method for developing concentration (p. 120)

      Though the focal objects …
      …
      … progressively taming the winds. (p. 120—121)


      Though you attain …
      …
      … integrates numerous objects. (p. 122)


The range of the coarse and subtle generation stage (p. 122)


      It is said that the coarse generation stage …
      …
      … at the upper opening. (p. 122)

In order for you to be able to understand this material, you  must  be  able
to retain in your mind the meaning of the four levels of  practitioners.  We
have already gone through these.

We have these four levels of  practitioners  on  the  generation  stage  and
completion
stage. What do these practitioners achieve? You must have  some  rough  idea
in your mind in order to understand the later material. Please  retain  that
information in your mind. I will give some brief explanations.

The coarse generation  stage  corresponds  to  the  first  two  levels.  The
purpose of cultivation on these two levels is to  achieve  clear  appearance
and divine pride. In observing the mandala, one has to  meditate  again  and
again.

The subtle generation stage is cultivated during the third  level.  At  that
time, you want to meditate on the deity  within  a  very  minute  or  subtle
drop. This drop can be placed either at  the  upper  opening  or  the  lower
opening. The upper opening is the point between  your  eyebrows.  You  place
this drop there with the deity inside and you try to hold your mind on  this
very minute drop. The purpose of such cultivation is to attain stability.

We meditate on the coarse and subtle generation stages.  What  is  the  main
purpose you want to achieve by meditating on  the  coarse  generation  stage
and the subtle generation stage? The main purpose is to purify the bases  of
purification. One wants to purify ordinary  death,  intermediate  state  and
rebirth. Not only that. You meditate so that you will be  able  to  actually
purify ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth. You have to  do  that
by cultivating the paths that bring death, intermediate  state  and  rebirth
as the three bodies. To do that, you have to generate  the  clear  light—the
example and actual clear light, the  illusory  bodies—the  impure  and  pure
illusory bodies—and also the learner’s union.

If you were to ask, “Is that all? Is  that  the  purpose  of  meditating  on
those stages?” The answer is, “No, because  you  also  want  to  attain  the
three buddha bodies of the resultant time.” You want to be able to attain:
 • the resultant dharmakaya (the dharma body)
 • the resultant sambhogakaya (complete enjoyment body)
 • the resultant nirmanakaya (emanation body)

This means there are actually many goals that you want  to  achieve  through
these meditations. There are many purposes to you doing these meditations.

Suppose you just cultivate the coarse and subtle generation stages  and  you
do not meditate on the completion stage. By doing  that,  you  will  not  be
able to attain the three buddha bodies and you will not be  able  to  attain
the results of purification of the three buddha bodies.

To summarize:
 • The purpose of meditating on the coarse generation  stages  is  that  you
   will be able to create the conditions for giving rise to the three buddha
   bodies at the time of the path.
 • Through such meditation, you will be able to ripen the  three  bodies  of
   the  resultant  time.  This  means  that  by  meditating  on  the  coarse
   generation stage, you will be able to meditate on  the  completion  stage
   later on.
 • By meditating on the three bodies at the time of the path, then you  will
   be able to achieve the three bodies of the resultant time.

The purpose of cultivating the generation stage can be described in so  many
ways but the main purpose is to overcome the appearance of ordinariness  and
the adherence
to ordinariness.
 • How do you overcome the appearance of  ordinariness?  You  cultivate  the
   clear appearance of being the deity.
 • How do you overcome the adherence to ordinariness or  the  conception  of
   ordinariness? You cultivate divine pride.
Therefore, during the first two levels, you cultivate the coarse  generation
stage. You want to overcome ordinary appearance  and  ordinary  conceptions.
What do you do? You cultivate clear appearance and  divine  pride  on  these
two levels.

One  then  goes  on  to  try  to  cultivate  the  subtle  generation  stage.
Previously, one had focussed on a very tiny hand symbol or  hand  implement.
One meditates on this tiny  symbol  or  implement  at  the  upper  or  lower
openings. One focusses one’s mind on that. On the  first  two  levels,  this
meditation on the subtle drop is performed for  the  purpose  of  countering
mental laxity and excitation or excitement.

What is ordinary appearance?
We  need  to  ask,  “What  is  ordinary  appearance  or  the  appearance  of
ordinariness?” This is something we need to think about.

We appear in an ordinary way to ourselves due to karma and afflictions.  Due
to our karma, we appear to  our  own  mind  in  an  ordinary  way.  This  is
ordinary appearance  and  it  has  to  be  overcome  by  meditating  on  the
generation stage. Your form appears  to  your  mental  consciousness  in  an
ordinary way. This ordinary appearance or  the  appearance  of  ordinariness
has to be stopped. In its place, you have to generate a divine appearance.

Let’s say you are practising Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava.  In  the  place  of
that ordinary appearance, you want to generate the  form  or  appearance  of
Yamantaka.  You  want  to  familiarize  yourself  with  that  appearance  of
Yamantaka.

What is adherence to ordinariness?
What is ordinary conception or  the  adherence  to  ordinariness?  When  you
appear in an ordinary way in your own mind, you appear to be bound  by  your
karma and  afflictions.  You  assent  to  these  appearances  and  you  hold
yourself to be ordinary in the way you appear. In  order  to  overcome  this
adherence to ordinariness, you have to cultivate divine pride. But in  order
to cultivate divine pride, first,  you  have  to  stop  this  appearance  of
ordinariness. Stopping that appearance of ordinariness,  then  you  generate
this appearance of Vajrabhairava. You generate the appearance of this  deity
who has  extinguished  all  faults  and  who  has  perfected  all  excellent
qualities.

Having generated that appearance, you cultivate divine  pride  by  thinking,
“I am the actual Vajrabhairava!” You have  to  sustain  this  thought  in  a
strong manner. This is not something that’s easy to  achieve.  In  order  to
achieve that, first, you have to stop ordinary appearance. How can you  stop
that?

In the beginning of the sadhana, you have the  purification  into  emptiness
where you recite the  mantra  Om  svabhava  shuddha  sarva  dharma  svabhava
shuddho  ham.  This  is  for  the  purpose  of  purifying  everything   into
emptiness. Having purified everything into emptiness, you bring to mind  the
view of emptiness. This is why in the beginning, you  have  this  meditation
where you meditate on how everything becomes clear light emptiness.

Having purified everything into emptiness, you must  remember  the  view  of
emptiness. This emptiness refers to the fact that  when  you  look  for  the
imputed object, you are not able to find it. There is  no  findable  imputed
object. In this way, you meditate on emptiness properly.

After that, the sadhana says, “Everything becomes empty,”  and  so  on.  So,
you  cause  the  appearance  of  Vajrabhairava  or  Yamantaka   to   appear,
remembering that while it appears, it does not exist  inherently.  From  the
state of emptiness, the appearance of  the  body  of  Vajrabhairava  arises.
Based on this appearance, you have to try to elicit clear  appearance.  This
means  that,  with  your  mental  consciousness,  you  have  to  familiarize
yourself with this appearance again and again. This is the way to  train  in
clear appearance.

Having produced this clear appearance, then you  have  to  cultivate  divine
pride, thinking this is the actual Vajrabhairava of the resultant  time,  “I
am the actual resultant Vajrabhairava.”  This is the way  to  give  rise  to
divine pride.

“The apprehended aspect”—as applied to the mind and the object
In the text  you  see  this  expression,  “the  apprehended  aspect  of  the
realization of emptiness appears as the deity.”  What  is  this  apprehended
aspect of the realization of emptiness? It is the mind realizing  emptiness.
That mind appears in the form of the deity.

Alternatively, this expression, “apprehended aspect,” can be applied to  the
object. Instead of pointing to  the  consciousness,  you  apply  it  to  the
object, emptiness. Emptiness here  refers  to  the  emptiness  of  the  five
aggregates. The five aggregates are purified into emptiness. They are  empty
of inherent existence.  This  is  the  object,  the  emptiness  of  inherent
existence. Some scholars explained that from this  object,  emptiness,  then
the appearance of the deity arises.

The basis of imputation of the person  is  the  five  aggregates.  The  five
aggregates  that  are  the  bases  of  imputation  are  empty  of   inherent
existence. So, when you say, “From the  state  of  emptiness,  Vajrabhairava
arises,” that emptiness can be taken to be the object.  Some  scholars  also
say that you can take it to mean the consciousness realizing emptiness.  So,
from the state of emptiness, the deity appears.

So, there are two ways to understand  this  arising—from  the  side  of  the
consciousness or from the side of the object.
Between these two ways, the first way—taking this apprehended aspect  to  be
the consciousness—means that from the mind  realizing  emptiness,  then  the
deity appears. This seems to be  the  better  option  between  the  two  but
different scholars have different explanations for  this.  They  have  their
own reasons.

Vast and profound ways of meditation
There are two ways of meditation:
1. The vast way of meditation
2. The profound way of meditation
 • The meditation in which you cultivate clear appearance and  divine  pride
   is the vast way of meditation.
 • If you meditate thinking, “I am like an illusion,” then that would be the
   profound way of meditation.

Yoga of non-dual clarity and profundity
There is this expression we see a lot of in  Highest  Yoga  Tantra  that  is
translated as “the yoga of non-dual clarity  and  profundity.”  The  English
translation in the (root) text  (on  page  125)  is  “the  clear,  profound,
nondual yoga.” Rinpoche has just explained what this means.

 • Profundity refers to the profound way of meditation where you meditate on
   emptiness.
 • Clarity refers to the clear appearance, the vast way of meditation.
 • These two are non-dual in the sense that they are inseparable. Therefore,
   this yoga is called the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. Non-dual
   refers to the  fact  that  profundity  and  clarity  are  inseparable  or
   indivisible.

So, first, you meditate on emptiness. Then  this  mind  realizing  emptiness
arises in the form of the deity. Then you  cultivate  clear  appearance  and
divine pride. On top of that, you also  meditate  on  emptiness.  Therefore,
you have the combination of profundity and clarity  within  a  single  mind.
So, you have within a single mind both method and  wisdom.  This  is  called
the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.

However, this expression, “the yoga of non-dual profundity and  clarity”  is
not unique to Highest Yoga Tantra. Such an expression also  appears  in  the
three lower tantras. What is special in Highest  Yoga  Tantra  is  that  you
have the exalted wisdom  or  pristine  wisdom  of  non-dual  profundity  and
clarity.

Three qualities have to be complete
On the occasion of the generation stage, it is very  important  for  you  to
train in clear appearance and divine pride. Not only  is  it  important  for
you to have this clear appearance of the deity, you must also cultivate  the
divine pride of being the deity. Not only that, you also need  to  have  the
awareness of emptiness. That refers to selflessness. You need  to  have  all
these three qualities complete.  By  practising  in  this  way,  using  your
mental consciousness, then you would be  able  to  stop  the  appearance  of
ordinariness in the perspective of your mind.

To cause clear appearance to arise using  your  mind,  you  have  to  become
familiar
with the object. With this repeated acquaintance with the object  acting  as
a condition, then you would be able to see this object clearly.

To give an example of how you could actually achieve this  clear  appearance
of the deity, think of how you are familiar with what is in your  room.  For
example, in your room, you can recall  the  window  is  here.  The  door  is
there. There is a TV here and so on. The fact that you are  able  to  recall
these appearances is because  of  previous  familiarization  with  your  eye
consciousness seeing the window, the door, the  TV  and  so  on.  Similarly,
with your mental consciousness, you can become familiar with the  appearance
of the deity. It is through a similar process of habituation that with  your
mental consciousness, you are able to have a clear appearance of the  deity.
Using this example based on our  own  experience,  we  can  understand  that
clear appearance arises from habituation or familiarization.  Therefore,  if
we become familiar with an object, then we will have a clear  appearance  of
it. With such clear appearance, then  we  would  be  able  to  overcome  the
appearance of ordinariness.

But it is still not enough only  to  have  clear  appearance.  You  need  to
cultivate divine  pride.  You  should  generate  this  thought,  “I  am  the
Vajrabhairava or Yamantaka of the resultant time.”  You have  to  give  rise
to this thought strongly and for a prolonged period  of  time.  Just  having
this thought in a flash is not sufficient. You have  to  have  this  thought
for a prolonged period of time. Therefore, it is necessary for  us  to  make
the effort to develop divine pride.

On top of clear appearance and divine pride, you also need to remember  that
the object is empty of inherent existence. What this means is  that  if  you
were to look for the imputed object, you will not be  able  to  find  it  at
all. There is nothing at all  that  can  be  found.  In  this  way,  single-
pointedly, you should meditate on the meaning of the emptiness  of  inherent
existence.

Clarity, stability and mode of apprehension
On top of clear appearance and divine pride, it is necessary for  your  mind
to be stable. This means that you have to ensure that  your  mind  does  not
become distracted. You need clear appearance,  divine  pride  and  a  stable
mind. How do you achieve this  stability?  How  do  you  achieve  this  non-
distraction?

As said in the sutra system, when we were explaining calm abiding, you  need
to practise mindfulness and introspection. First, you  have  to  place  your
mind on the object of observation. When the mind gets distracted,  you  have
to bring it back and so on. You have to follow these steps as  explained  in
the context of developing calm abiding in the sutra system.

If you are meditating on Vajrabhairava and you find that your mind has  gone
to another object because of distraction, then you  have  to  try  to  bring
your mind back to the object and try not to be distracted.

But even after you manage to keep your mind on the object,  it  can  be  the
case that the object is not clear. For example, the  body  of  Vajrabhairava
is dark blue in colour. It can be the case that your mind is not  distracted
and is holding on to this dark  blue  body.  However,  it  does  not  appear
clearly to you. This means that while you have the stability factor, you  do
not have the clarity  factor.  This  means  you  have  to  put  effort  into
developing the clarity factor.

Your mind can hold on to the object in a clear and stable  manner.  However,
it can be
the case that your mode of apprehension of the object is weak. As  explained
in the sutra text, this is a case of subtle laxity having arisen.  You  have
to do something to counteract this subtle laxity. How do you  overcome  this
subtle laxity? You have to uplift your mind.

So, when you meditate on the deity’s form, the deity’s  body,  you  need  to
have three attributes:
1. Clarity
2. Stability
3. Mode of apprehension—this means that your  mode  of  holding  on  to  the
   object should not be too tight or too loose.  You  must  have  the  right
   amount of tension— not too strong but not too weak either.
So, these three attributes are necessary.

When you meditate on the deity, you have to put in the effort  to  make  the
deity’s form clearer and clearer. At the same time, you want  to  make  your
mind more and more stable. Therefore, you have to practice this  combination
of stability and clarity.

At the time of the coarse generation stage,  during  the  first  level,  the
level of the beginners, you have to meditate through the  preparations  that
I have described. You read the sadhana slowly, from the very beginning.  You
do the visualizations and then you try to  cultivate  clear  appearance  and
divine pride. In this way, you try to generate clarity and stability.

How to meditate in stages

This is hard to do because the sadhana is long. It is hard for you  to  have
clarity and stability immediately, right from the beginning.  What  you  can
do is divide the sadhana into sections. You choose  the  first  section  and
then you train in clarity and stability. After you have trained  well,  then
you can move on to the next section and then  again  train  in  clarity  and
stability.

A good meditator on the generation stage will practise in  the  way  I  have
just described. The first section is meditated well. Then  the  practitioner
moves on to the second section and trains in  stability  and  clarity  while
not forgetting the first section.
The practitioner should practise the sadhana in this way.

You have to meditate progressively without forgetting the previous  sections
because at the stage of the beginner, you are training in  your  ability  to
have the mandala appear clearly and so on. If  you  meditate  on  the  later
stages while you forget the previous ones, then it would  be  difficult  for
you to cause the whole mandala to appear clearly in the end.

As mentioned in the previous lessons, in order to become  a  person  of  the
generation stage, you need to be  able  to  give  rise  to  the  uncontrived
experience. This means that you meditate on the sadhana and  you  cause  the
various deities and mandala to appear clearly in a  gradual  way,  stage  by
stage, without any additions or omissions. Eventually, you would be able  to
give rise to the clear appearance without much effort. You achieve  what  is
called an uncontrived experience. At that time, you become a person  of  the
generation stage or you have entered the tantric  path.  You  have  attained
initially the generation stage realization.

In order to practise the generation stage and then to be able to move on  to
practise the completion stage, in  the  beginning,  you  have  to  train  in
reading the sadhana. Then you have to generate  clarity,  stability,  divine
pride as well as the awareness of emptiness.

While reading the sadhana slowly, you have to cause all these  qualities  to
arise. Moreover, you train in this way in stages,  meaning  that  after  you
have obtained clarity for the first section, only then do  you  move  on  to
the next section. You add a new section while not  forgetting  the  previous
section. In this way, progressively, you add more and  more  sections  while
not forgetting the previous  sections.  Eventually,  you  will  be  able  to
obtain clear appearance of the entire visualization  of  the  supported  and
supporting mandala. This occurs during the level of the beginners.  You  can
see  that  you  have  to  train  in  stable  memory  as  well.  So   without
forgetfulness, you have to train in these visualizations.

If you find that you are not able to remember the previous section, this  is
the  sign  that  your  memory  has   degenerated.   Your   mindfulness   has
degenerated. Therefore, you have to train in such a  way  that  your  memory
becomes more and more powerful. In other words, if you train in  the  latest
stage, you have to ensure that you have not forgotten the  previous  stages.
If you forget, then this is because the power of your memory or  mindfulness
has weakened. Therefore, you have to train your memory in such  a  way  that
you do not forget the previous stages.

We have been discussing this in the  context  of  tantra.  In  general,  for
example, if you study something, you have to make sure  that  you  study  in
such a way that you do not forget the previous  parts  when  you  study  the
later parts. It is on the basis of remembering the earlier  parts  that  you
add on the later parts. If you are able to do that, your study  will  be  of
good quality.

Khen Rinpoche: I mentioned before that in order not to have dementia in  the
future, this is the best method! Improve your memory and don’t  forget  what
you learnt last Saturday. Remember today what I teach on Saturday,  remember
today. You continue like that, then there  is  no  chance  for  dementia  to
arise. What I taught last Saturday, you forgot today. What  I  teach  today,
you forget tomorrow. Then dementia is already there! There  is  no  need  to
wait.

After you get older and older, it comes closer  and  closer.  What  you  eat
just now, you don’t remember. Gradually, it goes like  that.  If  you  worry
about dementia, then don’t forget what I teach on Saturday.
If you don’t guard your memory, then what  will  happen  is  that  you  will
become more and more forgetful and more and more  absent-minded.  Therefore,
during the level of the beginners, you read the sadhana slowly  and  perform
all the visualizations until  eventually  you  are  able  to  visualize  the
entire supported  and  supporting  mandala.   At  that  point,  you  have  a
considerable amount of stability, you have a considerable amount of  clarity
and with that, you will be able to cultivate divine pride also.

You need to have a lot of familiarization in order for such  an  achievement
to arise. You have to practise  during  four  sessions  daily.  Through  the
force of habituation, then eventually you will be able to cause  the  entire
supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly in a  very  short  period
of time, in the duration of a finger snap. Without much effort  as  was  the
case in the past, instantly, in a very short instant of time, you  are  able
to cause everything to appear clearly. Once you have that  kind  of  ability
to sustain that visualization, you are transferred to the second level,  the
level of someone who has attained some pristine wisdom.

When first, you visualize the deity, you have to visualize the shape of  the
deity, the colour of the deity and so on. As has been explained in the  lam-
rim, in the beginning, it will not be clear. Right at the  beginning,  maybe
you have a rough shape only. You have to make an effort to cause this  rough
shape to appear. It is not the case that it will be  clear  right  from  the
beginning.

Once you have the shape of the deity, then you  should  focus  on  that  and
train in stability, the ability to abide on that. Within the state of  being
able to stay on this rough shape, then slowly you have  to  improve  on  the
clarity of that image.

The same instructions from the lam-rim  apply  here.  You  have  this  rough
image. Then you try to make your mind stay on this image.  After  that,  you
work on its clarity.  After  a  considerable  amount  of  clarity  has  been
achieved, then you try to achieve clear appearance and divine pride.

In case you find your mind becoming distracted, then you have to bring  your
mind back to the object of observation. Similarly, if you  detect  signs  of
laxity, then you have to try to counteract them as well. In  this  way,  you
try to focus your mind on  the  object  of  observation.  The  procedure  of
meditation is the same.

Therefore, the essence of the meditation is  to  cause  this  stability  and
clarity to arise. Based on that,  you  have  to  think,  “I  am  the  actual
Vajrabhairava,” and in this way cultivate divine pride.

Alternating between analytical and placement meditation
When you meditate, you need to alternate between analytical  meditation  and
placement meditation. After analytical meditation, you have to do  placement
meditation. After that, you do analytical meditation and so on.  It  is  not
the case that you simply meditate analytically all the time  without  moving
on  to  placement  meditation.  You  have  to  practice  a  combination   of
analytical meditation and placement meditation.

If you do simply  analytical  meditation  without  moving  on  to  placement
meditation, it will be difficult for your mind to remain on the  object.  On
the  other  hand,  if  you  practice  placement  meditation  alone   without
practising analytical meditation, it will be  difficult  for  the  deity  to
appear clearly. So, if you meditate on the circle of deities  in  this  way,
then it is a matter of time that the entire circle of  deities  will  appear
clearly. Eventually in a very short instant of time, you are  able  to  give
rise to the clear appearance of the deity,  the  colours,  the  shapes,  the
hand implements and so on.

Your meditation should be sustained in such a way  that  you  don’t  try  to
change the size of the deity or the colour of the deity and so on.  You  are
trying to meditate on the deity clearly. You should keep it  the  same  size
as the size you meditated on in the previous session. It is  the  same  with
its colour. You  shouldn’t  meditate  on  one  colour  previously  and  then
another colour now and so on. Keeping those factors constant,  you  have  to
meditate until you see the entire supported and supporting mandala  clearly.
Then you cause  your  mind  to  stay  in  this  manner,  training  on  clear
appearance and divine pride.  Then  when  you  are  able  to  visualize  the
celestial mansion of  the  deity,  you  must  think,  “This  is  the  actual
celestial mansion, the celestial palace of the  deity.  This  is  the  self-
appearance of the exalted wisdom”.  Similarly,  when  you  meditate  on  the
deity, you have to think, “This is the actual deity of  the  resultant  time
with all its perfect excellent qualities”. It  is  crucial  that  you  think
decisively in this way.

This divine pride should be cultivated with respect to all  aspects  of  the
body, speech and mind:
 • With respect to your body, think, “This is the actual body of the deity.”


 • With respect to your speech, think, “This is the  actual  speech  of  the
   deity.”
 • With respect to your mind, think, “This is the actual mind of the deity.”


You have to generate these thoughts in a very strong,  forceful  manner  and
in a decisive way. With such a practice, you will arrive at the point  where
the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness  no  longer
arise to the perspective of your mind. Simply by thinking, you are  able  to
cause the deity to appear clearly.  You are also able to cause divine  pride
to arise. Once you have reached this attainment, you are said to attain  the
uncontrived experience.

However, there is still more training for you to  do  even  after  you  have
attained this uncontrived experience. This is  because  you  need  to  train
also in being able to visualize the  subtle  deities,  the  deities  at  the
sense sources or the sense bases. Similarly, you have to  work  on  clarity,
stability and divine pride through slowly meditating in stages.

Through such gradual meditation, eventually, you arrive at this point  where
you are able to see all the deities—the coarse  deities  as  well  as  these
subtle deities of the sense sources—clearly in a very short period of  time.
In the short period of a finger snap, you are able to cause all of  them  to
appear clearly. You also cultivate divine pride with  respect  to  them.  In
this way, your ability increases more and more.

When you are able to meditate clearly on all the deities and also  cultivate
the divine pride in this short space of time, then  you  are  said  to  have
attained the third level, the
level of those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom.

During the coarse generation stage, you  practise  a  combination  of  clear
appearance, divine pride and your awareness  of  emptiness  to  be  like  an
illusion.  These  are  all  empty  of  inherent  existence.  They  are  like
illusions. With this combination of the three qualities, you  stop  the  two
objects of abandonment, the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence  to
ordinariness.

Why is it important for you to have  these  three  qualities  when  you  are
meditating on the generation  stage?  If  you  have  these  three  qualities
complete, then it will make a big difference in the way you  counteract  the
different kinds of objects of abandonment.
 • When you have clear appearance,  this  will  greatly  contribute  to  you
   overcoming the appearance of ordinariness.
 • When you have divine pride, this will contribute to  you  overcoming  the
   adherence to ordinariness or ordinary conception.
 • When you have this awareness that all is  empty  of  inherent  existence,
   like illusions, then you are  able  to  counteract  the  root  of  cyclic
   existence. This will be very powerful in  overcoming  the  conception  of
   self.

In the Paramitayana, the Perfection Vehicle, you do not have  this  practice
of generating yourself as a deity and meditating on  the  emptiness  of  the
deity. This is because in the Perfection Vehicle, you  don’t  even  generate
yourself as a deity. If you don’t do that, then you  will  not  move  on  to
meditate on yourself as a deity that is empty of inherent existence.

Conjoined with indivisible bliss and emptiness
In the three  lower  tantras,  you  do  have  this  practice  of  generating
yourself as a deity  and  then  meditating  on  the  emptiness  of  inherent
existence. For this reason, it is said that the yoga of non-dual  profundity
and clarity exists in the three lower classes of tantra.

However, in the three lower classes of tantra, you do not have the  yoga  of
non-dual profundity and clarity that is  conjoined  with  indivisible  bliss
and emptiness. Therefore, such a yoga of  non-dual  profundity  and  clarity
that is conjoined with indivisible bliss and emptiness can only be found  in
Highest Yoga Tantra. The generation stage is a  big  part  of  Highest  Yoga
Tantra.  You will not find such terminology—generation  stage—in  the  lower
tantras.

In the generation stage, your meditation has to be conjoined with bliss  and
emptiness.  However, if this innate bliss does not exist in your  continuum,
how are you supposed to meditate on it? Your meditation is  supposed  to  be
conjoined with bliss and emptiness. The emptiness that is required  in  this
context can be the emptiness explained in the Consequence Middle Way  School
(CMWS).  But it does not have  to  be  that  because  it  can  also  be  the
emptiness explained in the Autonomy Middle Way School  (AMWS)  or  even  the
Mind Only School (MOS).  Scholars have explained that there  are  meditators
who have this view of emptiness according to the AMWS or MOS.
In Highest Yoga Tantra, you find many instances  of  the  deity  taking  the
form of male and female deities in embrace.  From the  state  of  emptiness,
you generate the deities.
If you have stable clear appearance and divine pride, then you will be  able
to  stop  the  arising  of  the  manifest  appearance  of  ordinariness  and
adherence to ordinariness. In a short time, you will be able to  give  arise
to this visualization.

At that time, you should  meditate,  “My  mind  has  become  the  nature  of
bliss.” On the basis of you being this deity entering into  union  with  the
consort, then you have to imagine this  bliss.   On  the  generation  stage,
there is no actual bliss as you are simply imagining this  bliss.  You  have
to think, “My mind has become the nature of bliss”  or  “My  mind  has  been
transformed into the nature of bliss.”  When you think  also  that  all  the
supporting and supported mandalas are empty of inherent existence, you  have
to give rise to this thought in a decisive way.  Then  this  mind  that  has
become the nature of bliss apprehends emptiness.

Your mind is  not  really  in  the  nature  of  bliss  but  you  think,  you
visualize, you imagine, “My mind is  in  the  nature  of  bliss.”  Then  you
meditate  on  emptiness  with  that  mind.   So,  this  is  the  meaning  of
conjoining with bliss and emptiness during  the  generation  stage.  At  the
very least, you have to use such  imagination,  thinking,  “I  am  conjoined
with bliss and emptiness in this way.”
 • If you are able to meditate like that, it is said you  will  be  able  to
   purify an enormous amount of misdeeds and obscurations.
 • Also, you will accumulate extensive merit.
 • If you are able to do at least such a meditation, then there  will  be  a
   big difference  in  the  effectiveness  of  stopping  the  appearance  of
   ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness.
 • Such a meditation also has the ability to  increase  the  power  of  your
   understanding  of  emptiness.   In  other  words,  your  realization   of
   emptiness, your ascertaining of emptiness, will become more stable.
 • Because your ascertainment of emptiness has become more stable, then this
   means that you are able to have greater and quicker power to overcome the
   conception of true existence. Through the force of  such  an  attainment,
   you will gain  extraordinary  speed  and  power  in  attaining  a  direct
   realization of emptiness.
Therefore, to meditate  by  conjoining  with  bliss  and  emptiness  on  the
generation stage has great purpose.  Even though you  may  not  have  actual
bliss and emptiness, you  imagine  that  you  have  it.  You  visualize  it.
Through the force of such visualization, you will be able  to  more  quickly
overcome the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence  to  ordinariness.
Also, you will be able to attain the realization of emptiness more  quickly.
You will be able to have greater power in abandoning the conception of  true
existence.  In this way, you will be able to attain buddhahood quickly.

In the next session, we will discuss  when  calm  abiding  is  attained  and
also, in the context of tantra, whether calm  abiding  and  special  insight
are attained at the same time.  I hope that in the next class,  we  will  be
able to complete the generation stage.

Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok
Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel
Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
