Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L05FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.961453
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 5	 				                                             4 April 2017
The Three Principles of the Path. Renunciation & the realization of emptiness. Basis of support for entering the path. Are renunciation & bodhicitta generated serially or simultaneously?
THE THREE PRINCIPLES OF THE PATH 
In The Three Principles of the Path, it refers to “Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara].” One interpretation of this line is that it is talking about those who do not have the slightest interest in anything that has to do with samsara. They do not have the slightest attachment or clinging to samsaric perfections. 
All of us work so hard day and night to achieve something. At end of the day, what are we striving for is samsaric happiness because of our attachment to it. As we are driven by our craving for samsaric pleasure, we will do whatever it takes to get it. We crave to meet with desirable objects and we crave to be separated from unpleasant objects. 
From our own experience, it is evident that prior to getting an object or achieving a particular desired outcome, there is this very strong craving to obtain that object, meet with that person or encounter that desirable situation. After we have acquired the object, met the person or achieved that desirable outcome, then there is another kind of craving that arises, further enhancing the initial craving—the hope we will never lose the object, person or experience. Even at those times when we may not be actually experiencing the pleasant situation and so on, we recall our pleasurable experiences in the past. When the memories of those pleasures arise, we cling on to those memories. This is another kind of craving.
When we meet with problems and difficulties, we are unhappy and suffer. There is a strong craving or desire to be free of these problems and difficulties. But even when we are free from problems, yet another kind of craving arises, “May those problems never happen to me again!” This very strong desire arises. This is our life story. Whether we meet with pleasure or suffering, those experiences are always intertwined with craving.
From craving comes grasping. Then we accumulate karma. This is how we perpetuate our existence in cyclic existence. Therefore, renunciation is very important. This is why Lama Tsongkhapa refers to it in his Three Principles of the Path—“Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara].” Someone who has such heartfelt renunciation and disinterest in samsara is the person of medium capacity. 
Who strive to make freedom and endowments meaningful
This second line refers to bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment. It is said that the best way of making our life meaningful is to cultivate and actualize great compassion and, in particular, bodhicitta. This is what makes the human life of freedom and endowments truly meaningful.
Who entrust themselves to the path pleasing the Victorious Ones –
This refers to the view of dependent origination. It shows that we have to engage in hearing teachings, reflecting and meditating on dependent origination. Somebody who does that is engaging in activities that truly pleases the buddhas. This line shows the need to cultivate the correct view.
Je Rinpoche concludes this paragraph by saying, 
You fortunate ones: listen with a calm mind.
This is what I have been trying to emphasize recently. Whenever we listen to the teachings or study the Buddhadharma, it is very important to make sure that our motivation is pure and correct.
RENUNCIATION & THE REALIZATION OF EMPTINESS
Student 1: If, in the first place, renunciation is not needed to realize emptiness, why do we need renunciation to directly realize emptiness in order to enter the path of seeing? 
Khen Rinpoche: Is this related to why it is not possible to achieve the path of seeing newly in the form realm? The reason given then was that there is no strong renunciation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody come up to answer this question. 
If one doesn’t necessarily need to realize emptiness prior to generating renunciation, why does one need strong renunciation to newly generate the path of seeing? 
The reason given was that you cannot achieve the path of seeing newly in the form realm because you don’t have strong renunciation. 
Student 1: In the last lesson, we were told that before one enters the path, one can realize emptiness inferentially first. Upon seeing that it is possible to achieve liberation, then one generates renunciation. This means that one can realize emptiness and then generate renunciation after that. So renunciation is not needed to realize emptiness inferentially.
Student 2: Without renunciation, one will have strong attachment to the happiness of this life. Without renunciation to the pleasures of samsara, such as all the pleasurable experiences in the higher realms, there is no way that one can develop calm abiding. Without calm abiding, it is difficult to achieve special insight and subsequently, the inferential realization of emptiness followed by the direct realization of emptiness. In that sense, renunciation is an important component in the gradual progression towards the direct realization of emptiness.
Student 3: Could it be that to see emptiness directly, you need a truly pacified calm mind to penetrate into that wisdom. Therefore, without renunciation, you won’t get to that level of calmness of mind. 
I actually have a question related to the Mahayana and Hinayana paths. As said in the previous lessons, for the individual who enters the Mahayana path right from the onset, there is a systematic way of doing so. 
First, he renounces the happiness of this life and overcomes his attachment to this life, thus becoming a person of small capacity. 
This is followed by developing aversion towards every single samsaric perfection, seeing that it is in the nature of suffering. 
He also sees that everybody else in samsara is in the same boat. This individual empathizes with them and develops the same level of aversion for the suffering of others. He undergoes training in bodhicitta, either with the method of exchanging self for others or the sevenfold cause and effect method. He develops great compassion, the wholehearted resolve and so forth and becomes a person of great capacity. At that time, he has developed contrived bodhicitta. 
This person of great capacity, before entering the Mahayana path, would have contrived renunciation for himself mixed with contrived bodhicitta in equal measure. At the point when his contrived renunciation becomes uncontrived renunciation, simultaneously his contrived bodhicitta becomes uncontrived bodhicitta as well. 
Then he enters the Mahayana path.
It strikes me that the difference between someone who is following the Hinayana path and someone who is following the Mahayana path is that after becoming a person of small capacity, the Hinayana practitioner will develop renunciation for himself and go on to the Hinayana path. 
On the other hand, an individual after becoming a person of small capacity can develop renunciation for himself, empathy for others and the same level of aversion for other people’s suffering. At that point, the training for developing bodhicitta should be available. If such training is not available, not being taught or not being emphasized at this point, this individual is likely to go into the Hinayana path? Can I say that? 
Khen Rinpoche: If you don’t train, you will go to the Hinayana path.
At the very beginning of his journey, generally an individual will have some idea of what he is looking for. There are people who from the outset aim for their own liberation. Then there are others who are not seeking that but are looking for the Mahayana path. 
Only when one has the thought of wanting to achieve a particular goal—be it personal liberation or full enlightenment—will one train in the path that will help one to achieve that goal. When one engages in the training, there is the training of the person of small capacity, the training of the person of medium capacity and the training for the person of great capacity.
Student 4: Is contrived renunciation a valid cognition? 
Khen Rinpoche: If you are talking about a contrived experience—an experience that arises through effort—it need not be a valid cognition because it is possible to have a contrived experience that is a correctly assuming consciousness.
I guess you can even include the doubt tending towards the factual that sides with reality. This is a mind that is better than the correctly assuming consciousness. Of course, the best is to have a valid cognizer.
Student 4: Related to the question about the inferential realization of emptiness arising before the generation of an uncontrived renunciation, I am wondering whether the inferential realization of emptiness can be based on an inferential realization of renunciation as both can be done before the path. They are still sequential in the sense that you would have the inferential realization of renunciation first before you generate the inferential realization of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to remember what we discussed earlier in the previous lesson. What is the meaning of “to enter a path”? When does one enter a path? When does a path arise in one’s continuum? Having an aversion towards or disinterest in samsaric perfections alone is not enough though it is important and must come first. 
The practitioner becomes a person of medium capacity when by reflecting on the disadvantages or faults of true suffering, she develops an aversion towards anything to do with samsara.  But a person of medium capacity is not necessarily a person who has entered a path though she has the attitude to renounce samsaric pleasure. 
In order for a path to arise, something else must be present. This additional element can only come about through the reflection on true origins. By seeing that true origins need to be abandoned and, on a personal level, recognizing that indeed they can be abandoned, only then does the desire arise, “I must achieve liberation from samsara.” 
When this thought seeking liberation arises day and night, a path has arisen in the mind. This is when the person enters a path. There must be a thought seeking liberation. 
As Lama Tsongkhapa said, 
And all day and night the intention seeking liberation arises—
Then the thought of renunciation has been generated.
So this is the measure of having generated renunciation. “Day and night” literally means day and night, just as at our level, desire arises day and night! We have stress and worries arising day and night. It doesn’t matter whether we are eating, walking or sleeping. There are always worries. They are there all the time. In the case of entering a path, the intention that seeks liberation day and night is based on first having renounced samsaric perfections. If that thought of seeking liberation arises day and night, the path has arisen in the mind. Then the person has entered the path.
This is something you must keep in mind. You must remember this. On the basis of this, then the question arises: In order for this renunciation to arise, i.e., in order to enter the path, do you need to realize emptiness first? Do you need to realize emptiness first to enter the path, i.e., before this strong desire for liberation can arise, do you need to realize emptiness first? 
This is why you have the question: Do you need to realize emptiness prior to entering the path?
We have looked at the answer briefly. There is a difference in terms of the individual. This is why we talked about the sharp facultied trainees and the dull facultied trainees. 
For the sharp facultied trainees, probably we can say that they would have realized emptiness before they entered the path. 
For the dull facultied trainees, they would have entered the path without realizing emptiness. 
What is the criterion for entering a path? It is when the uncontrived wish for liberation is produced. When you have this uncontrived renunciation, then you enter the path. As such, it is not necessary to realize emptiness first. 
When you enter the path, be it the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path, you are on the path of accumulation. As the path already exists, there is no need to talk about generating a path. There is no question as to whether that individual has renunciation on the path of accumulation or on the path of preparation. Likewise, there is no need to question whether you need renunciation to realize emptiness directly or not because you necessarily have renunciation. 
BASIS OF SUPPORT FOR ENTERING THE PATH
When we talk about cyclic existence in terms of the three realms—the desire realm, the form realm and the formless realm—in the Abhidharmakosa (Treasury of Manifest Knowledge), it is said that in order to newly attain the path of seeing for the very first time, one must possess the basis of the desire realm.
Having said that, then the question is: In order to enter a path, what kind of basis do you need? Can one enter a path on the basis of having a desire realm basis, a form realm basis or a formless realm basis? Or is it the case that you can only newly develop a path in a certain realm but not in other realms. What do you think? 
Is it possible to newly attain a path with a form realm basis? Is it possible to newly attain a path on a formless realm basis? 
Khen Rinpoche: Sometimes, I am talking but you cannot catch up. So it is better for you to ask questions and I answer them. To me, this method works better. If I just continue talking, then nothing goes inside. You must think and question and someone must answer. 
You must think carefully about your question before you talk so that a single answer can clear your doubts. You can learn better that way. This is why I am asking questions. If you think you may have an answer, say so immediately. If there is something wrong with your answer, I will tell you, “That’s wrong.” 
But many people are shy to answer my questions. No one wants to come up here and say, “What you said must be wrong” or “Maybe, that is not right.” Nobody wants to come up and say that. It doesn’t matter whether your answer is right or wrong. Just come up and say whatever you think. Of course, before you do that, you must think. Otherwise, you cannot say, “I think it is like this.” What you think may be right or it may be wrong. That doesn’t matter. If there is something wrong with your answer, I will ask another question. Then your brain is working. 
Any new student wants to come up? Come, come. Next time I will buy masks for everyone so people won’t recognize who you are!
Student 5: Those with a form realm support and a formless realm support cannot enter a path. Only those who have a desire realm support can do so.
Khen Rinpoche: Someone with a formless realm support cannot newly enter a path?
Student 5: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 5: Because they are enjoying their life.
Khen Rinpoche: Very good reason. If you are enjoying your life, then there is no renunciation. 
This is not about right and wrong all the time. What is your stand? You must have your own stand and view about things. You can only have certain opinions if you have thought about the topic. This is the idea. If you have thought about it, then you can come up with an opinion. 
It is true that if there is no suffering, there is no renunciation. Having said that, are you saying that the form and formless realms are free of suffering? The answer is “No,” because they are both included in samsara. Therefore, there is suffering there only their suffering is much subtler. They have pervasive compounded suffering or the suffering of conditionality. 
As said in the lam-rim, some of the gods have unbelievable mental stress and suffering prior to their death. While they may have very long lifespans and incredible enjoyments, it is said that the week prior to their death, they experience the signs of death that drive them crazy. It makes them unbelievably sad, fearful and full of worries. This is their kind of mental stress and suffering. 
Is it possible for them to generate renunciation during that time? What you think? During that week, can they achieve renunciation keeping in mind we are talking about a week in the timezone of the god realm, not a week in the human realm? The measurement of time varies depending on the type of god realm we are referring to. 
Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Manifest Knowledge said that it is possible to newly generate the first three levels of the path of preparation with a form realm basis, i.e., one can newly attain the heat, peak and forbearance levels of the path of preparation. If it is possible to newly attain the path of preparation with a form realm basis, then it will be difficult to establish that it is not possible to newly attain the path of accumulation with that same basis. 
It is also clearly stated in the great treatises, citing many sutras, that one can generate the uncontrived mind of enlightenment on the bases of the six types of migrators of the three realms. 
If that is the case, what is the implication? Therefore, you cannot say it is not possible to newly attain a path with any of the bases in samsara. 
If it is possible to newly attain uncontrived bodhicitta in any bases of the three realms, then you can’t say that you cannot newly attain a path on the bases of any of the three realms.
So going back to the question: Is it possible to newly attain a path on any of the bases of the three realms, probably, it is better to say, “Yes.” There are two reasons for this:
Many sutras have stated that it is possible to newly achieve the mind of enlightenment—here we are talking about the Mahayana path—on any of the bases of the three realms.
It is clearly stated in Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Manifest Knowledge that one can newly attain the path of preparation with the form realm basis. If that is the case, then it is difficult to establish why you cannot newly attain the path of accumulation with a form realm basis. 
While Vasubandhu clearly said one can newly achieve the first three levels of the path of preparation with the form realm basis, he also said clearly that it is not possible to newly achieve the supreme mundane qualities level of the path of preparation with a form or formless realm basis. 
What is Vasubandhu’s reason for saying that one cannot newly attain the supreme mundane qualities level of the path of preparation on the form realm basis? 
The reason is that the person with the form realm basis cannot newly attain the path of seeing. If he cannot newly attain the path of seeing with a form realm basis, he cannot newly attain the supreme mundane qualities level of the path of preparation on the form realm basis. Why? Because one proceeds from the supreme mundane qualities level of the path of preparation to achieve the path of seeing in one meditative equipoise.  
Why can’t individuals with form realm and formless realm bases newly attain the path of seeing? The reason is that their disenchantment with samsara is weak.  
Therefore, in order to newly achieve the path of seeing, just having renunciation alone is not enough. In order to newly attain the path of seeing, one must have the very strong renunciation, i.e., great disenchantment with cyclic existence, that can only be generated with the desire realm basis. 
We can expand on and further analyse all this information. Does that mean that the renunciation of the individual on the path of accumulation and on the path of preparation are different? Does that renunciation somehow change in quality? 
What is the measure of having generated renunciation? You already have the desire for liberation that arises day and night. If you were to posit that there is a difference, what higher level of renunciation can there be than that?
Khen Rinpoche:  If day and night, it is no more there then what is there beyond that? 
Khen Rinpoche: How does renunciation become stronger after achieving the realization of emptiness? 
Student 6: You were asking whether there is any difference in the level of renunciation generated. There is the bodhicitta that is earth-like and the one that is like gold depending on whether you have the realization of emptiness. Similarly, on the path of accumulation and the path of preparation, there is a difference in the understanding of emptiness. This in turn generates a difference in the level of faith. I think that could further enhance your renunciation. 
Khen Rinpoche: If we were to take the position that the strength of renunciation grows, this means that on the path of accumulation, the person has a certain level of renunciation. When he achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness, he enters the path of preparation. Because of that, his renunciation should be even stronger. 
If you were to attribute the growth of his renunciation to the growth of his wisdom realizing emptiness, since what is changing at each level is the wisdom realizing emptiness, then it won’t matter which realm he is in. Why is it then that one can only realize emptiness directly for the first time on the desire realm basis? 
When he is on the path of accumulation in the form and formless realms, you say that his renunciation has definitely grown over time because of the wisdom realizing emptiness. What is there to stop this individual from realizing emptiness directly for the first time? If you were to use that as a reason, then a desire realm basis won’t matter anymore.
Student 7: In the last module, you mentioned that it is not certain whether one can newly generate the forbearance level of the path of preparation. In our exam assignment (for Module 9), I think most of us wrote that this is not clear. Now, it seems that according to the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge, one can newly achieve the forbearance level of the path of preparation. My exam answer and marks will be affected! 
Khen Rinpoche: What is said is that you can newly attain the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation but you cannot newly attain the supreme mundane qualities level of the path of preparation.
A qualm was raised. You were asked to think whether it is possible to newly attain the forbearance level of the path of preparation or not. The answer is either “Yes” or “No.” If you were to say, “Yes,” what reason can you give for your answer? You have to justify your answer. This is how you do it. 
The forbearance level of the path of preparation is also divided into three: small, middling and great. We can say that the small and middling levels of the forbearance level of the path of preparation can be newly attained. But for the great level of the forbearance level of the path of preparation, you would have to say “No, that is not the case.” This is because moving from the great level of the forbearance level of the path of preparation into the supreme mundane qualities level of the path of preparation occurs in one meditative equipoise. Since this occurs in one meditative equipoise, you can say that one cannot newly attain the great level of the forbearance level of the path of preparation. 
Khen Rinpoche: I thought I have mentioned this before.
It is not mentioned clearly in the text that the forbearance level of the path of preparation can be newly attained with the form realm basis. The text did not say “Yes” or “No.” But if you think about it, my personal view is that of the three levels of the forbearance level of the path of preparation, we can say that we can newly attain the small and middling levels of the forbearance level of the path of preparation. I think you would have to say that one cannot newly attain the great level of the forbearance level of the path of preparation with a form realm basis. 
The reason given in the treatises to explain why it is not possible to newly attain the path of seeing on the form realm basis is due to weak disenchantment, i.e., one’s renunciation is not sufficiently strong. You have to link that to the statement that one can only newly attain the path of seeing with a desire realm basis. Basically, they are saying that you can have strong renunciation in the desire realm. Why?
Student 8: If I were to enter the path as a form realm god, I wonder how I am going to practise the six perfections. Who am I going to practise patience with? Who am I going to practise giving with?
Khen Rinpoche: Which place are you talking about?
Student 8: The form realm. 
Khen Rinpoche: There is not only you in the form realm. There are many others around also.
Student 8: I think there will be a difference in the intensity of, say, the practice of giving, compared to the desire realm. For example, in the formless realm, we won’t experience the kind of suffering that is found in the desire realm. If I am a formless realm god, the sufferings of the desire realm is like a movie to me. I cannot feel the intensity of that suffering compared with someone who is practising in the desire realm. Therefore, my disenchantment will be weaker.
Khen Rinpoche: Why is the renunciation not strong enough to generate the path of seeing newly?
Student 9: I think the desire realm basis is a more suitable basis because the desire realm basis will have both the mental and physical aggregates. In the formless realm, they don’t have physical aggregates. As for the form realm, they have already renounced sensual pleasure. For them, their suffering is quite subtle so it is very difficult for them to feel very strong disenchantment. 
I want to ask a question. Is there such a thing as contrived renunciation? In the second lesson, I understand that the Mahayanist enters a path by generating renunciation and bodhicitta together. Is it possible for them to do so sequentially in that first, they generate a contrived renunciation and then go on to generate bodhicitta? As they progress on the path, they will still need to make their renunciation stronger. 
Khen Rinpoche: In The Three Principles of the Path, Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa posited the criteria of having generated renunciation very clearly. The measure of someone who has entered the path is the thought desiring liberation day and night. That thought is spontaneous, effortless and uncontrived. This is the measure of renunciation. When one has this renunciation, he becomes somebody who has entered the path as he has the path in his mind. 
If we were to elaborate further, when a person enters the path, there are only two possibilities. There is nothing in between the two. The path one has entered is either the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path. With uncontrived renunciation, one is either entering the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path. 
Student 9: If one enters the Hinayana Path, the definition is uncontrived renunciation, whereas if one enters the Mahayana path, it is uncontrived bodhicitta. Uncontrived renunciation means thinking about liberation day and night. I understand that. 
However, the Mahayanists possess a mind to gain great enlightenment for sentient beings. Their own self liberation is not their first priority. I can also generate uncontrived bodhicitta with contrived renunciation. If it becomes contrived renunciation, I will be thinking day and night of my own liberation. This is what I think.
Khen Rinpoche:  I think I have explained this in the last lesson. I think I have answered this question. If you get that, the answer is there. 
ARE RENUNCIATION & BODHICITTA GENERATED SERIALLY OR SIMULTANEOUSLY?
The measure of renunciation is that the person has no interest in samsaric perfections. It then comes to the point when day and night he has the thought desiring liberation. That is when he enters the path. What path does he enter? There are only two possibilities: either the Hinayana path or the Mahayana path. 
In the case of an individual who doesn’t have bodhicitta, what option does he have? It is the Hinayana path.  When does he enter the Hinayana path? On the basis of renouncing samsaric perfections and having the uncontrived thought day and night seeking liberation for himself alone. 
He enters the Hinayana path from the Hinayana path of accumulation. After entering the Hinayana path of accumulation, is it possible for him to enter the Mahayana path of accumulation from there?
In the first place, what drove him to enter a path? Day and night, he is thinking of liberation for himself. On that basis, he starts his journey towards that goal. But then almost immediately, the thought arises, “I’m going to achieve liberation for all sentient beings”? This is very unlikely.  
The question that was raised two lessons ago was this: For someone who is entering the Mahayana from the onset, is his generation of renunciation and bodhicitta serial or simultaneous? 
If you were to say it is serial—renunciation is generated first then the generation of bodhicitta follows—it will be very difficult to defend this position. The only choice is to say that renunciation and bodhicitta are generated simultaneously. This is why this qualm arises. 
For someone who is entering the Mahayana path from the onset, is bodhicitta generated after renunciation or are bodhicitta and renunciation generated simultaneously?
How is it possible for these two to arise together? If you don’t even realize and renounce your own suffering, how can you empathize with others and want to free them from suffering? How are you going to explain this? This doesn’t mean that you are wrong. 
If we don’t contemplate our own suffering, seeing how terrible our own samsara is, there is no way we can think of other people’s suffering and then develop the wish to free them from their suffering. No way. So they are not simultaneous. 
Student 10: I still think you need to generate renunciation before we can have bodhicitta. As much as I would love to work for sentient beings, I will probably have to start from the Hinayana path first. 
I do not understand that point as to why they must arise simultaneously. I can’t explain it in my own words. 
I do not think I can enter the Mahayana path because I do not have renunciation yet. We are just concerned with our exam marks, our enjoyments and mundane stuff. Clearly, whatever I am doing is not Dharmic. I am not even a real Buddhist despite coming for classes and so forth. 
My question is what is the basic thing we must all do? To me, I stick to having a good heart and not harming others. Is that even enough? 
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, this is class for learning. You can discuss anything. Don’t believe everything I say. For the sake of discussion, I will say many different ways. I said they arise simultaneously but just now I said they cannot arise together. You need to think. 
Khen Rinpoche: The answer as to whether they are generated simultaneously or serially have been given by me many times. The answer is clear. As for the levels of practice, it is also clear. 
All of us are heavily influenced by and are under the control of our ignorance, anger and attachment, day and night, every single day of our lives. They only bring us problems. The two obvious ones are our anger and attachment. Of the two, the more troublesome one is our attachment, which causes all our difficulties and problems. 
Since it is our attachment that is causing us difficulties, obviously, in order to have less difficulties, unhappiness and suffering, we have to moderate our attachment.  We need to at least weaken it. 
The first kind of attachment that we should work at is our attachment to this life. At the beginning of lam-rim, it talks about reversing the attachment to this life’s happiness. This is the main troublemaker for us. This is what we have to work at. If you think about it, there is no better solution than to think about our own death and impermanence all the time. 
This is not going to happen right away but reducing our attachment to this life is not going to happen at all if we don’t apply the antidote, the meditation on death and impermanence. We have to think about and understand death and impermanence all the time. Fundamentally, this is how we should enter into the practice. Practice means starting from here. 
Let’s take a simple example. When you are staying in a hotel, you don’t worry about what is going to happen to the sofa or bed because they are not your sofa or bed. But if we were to talk about our own sofa and bed, then it is a completely different thing. Why is that so—that we have no concern at all for the sofa and bed in the hotel but we care so much about our own possessions? It is because there is a mind clinging to them. 
Why do we not cling to the sofa and bed in the hotel room? Because we know we are there for only a short time, perhaps, only one day. That is why those things do not bother us. 
Why are we so concerned about the sofa and bed in our house? Because we have this idea, “These things have to be with me for a long time.” 
When we say practise, what is the first practice for everybody to do? The first thing to do is to weaken our attachment to this life. The best method is to think about death and impermanence all the time. Commensurate with the strength of our reflection on and recollection of death and impermanence in our daily life, we will see a decline in our afflictions such as our anger and attachment to this life. Commensurate with the decline in our anger and attachment, obviously, we become a happier person, with more peace and happiness in our daily life. This is the process by which we begin to move towards acquiring the status of a Dharma practitioner.  
The great Kadampa geshes said that with every single happiness and pleasure we experience in samsara, suffering is packaged together with them. There isn’t a single samsaric pleasure and experience that is separated from suffering. At least one suffering always comes along with it. We ought to know this. But we don’t believe this. We don’t realize it. We don’t see it. 
It doesn’t matter whether you are Buddhist or not, the point is for this understanding to happen in your mind.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.