Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L53 FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.648802
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on 8 March 2018[1]

Lesson 53


Talking about emptiness. (This  class  was  conducted  in  English  by  Khen
Rinpoche himself).


Before we begin the teachings,  we  always  do  the  prayer  of  refuge  and
generating bodhicitta. That is to set  our  motivation.  It’s  important  to
know how strong your motivation is when you listen to the Dharma as it  does
make a huge difference. It will (determine whether the  teachings  will)  go
deep into your mind and really touch the  heart.  Depending  on  how  strong
your motivation is, that will determine how effective the teachings will  be
for your mind.

Why do we need to practise the Dharma? We have to question  ourselves,  “Why
do I need to practise the Dharma?”

TALKING ABOUT EMPTINESS

Here, I  am  talking  about  emptiness.  “Why  do  I  need  to  learn  about
emptiness?” You must have a clear answer (to  this  question)  in  your  own
heart. Most of the time (our answer) is from the  mouth  and  not  from  the
heart. What I’m trying to do here tonight is about that. Not just to  listen
but to think from the heart. I think this is something useful for  everyone,
especially (when it is) about emptiness.

The Buddha said this in one of his sutras.  I  can’t  translate  everything.
Maybe for those who can understand  Tibetan,  then  it’s  very  good.  (Khen
Rinpoche recited in Tibetan).

The Buddha said, “Because of  not  knowing  emptiness  (or  the  reality  of
existence), sentient beings khyam pa.” I don’t know  what  khyam  pa  is  in
English but in Chinese, it means to go kai kai (i.e., go gallivanting).

Because of not knowing emptiness and the reality of  how  things  exist,  we
circle in samsara without any choice. There is no happiness as we circle  in
samsara with pain and suffering.

The compassionate Buddha showed many different methods and  used  logic  and
many different reasonings on emptiness to (help) sentient beings.

The other day, I spoke about the quotation from Nagarjuna in Chapter 18  (of
the Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way). I explained its  meaning.  It  is
good to read. You can read it in English. It is good to know  the  quotation
also.

(Khen Rinpoche recited in Tibetan).
      Release occurs when action and defilements cease.
             Actions and defilements are derived from thoughts.
             And these come from the mind’s constructions.
             Emptiness is what arrest or stops them.

Nagarjuna wrote this quotation in his root text on  the  Madhyamika.  It  is
good to write down this quotation. Meditating on this  verse  will  be  very
useful. Here, it  is  saying  that  not  knowing  emptiness,  we  circle  in
samsara.

The Buddha teaches many different methods to us to  show  (the  meaning  of)
emptiness. That means Buddha is showing us we have to  learn  from  all  the
four  different  tenets  as  the  different  levels  of  tenets  talk  about
different (levels of) emptiness.

Sit down and think about the physical pain and mental suffering we  are  all
experiencing. When you talk about suffering, why does the suffering of  pain
happen? Why is this suffering of pain  happening  to  me?   It  is  good  to
meditate on that.

Sometimes, when I’m talking, don’t just listen but  think  about  (what  I’m
saying).

We all have some kind of pain and some kind of suffering in our  life.  This
is something we don’t like and we don’t want. When you ask why and you  look
deeply, the answer is because we have this body and mind. Not just any  kind
of body. Not just any kind of mind.  We  have  this  contaminated  body  and
contaminated mind. That is the reason we have suffering and pain.

We have  different  kinds  of  suffering—the  suffering  of  suffering,  the
suffering  of  change  and  compounded  pervasive  suffering.  Suffering  of
suffering  and  suffering  of  change  happen  because  of  this  compounded
pervasive suffering. This refers to our physical aggregates.

The question is: By having this body and mind, why do I  suffer?  Why  do  I
get pain? The answer is: This  aggregate  possesses  the  mind.  It  is  the
product of contaminated karma.

Again, go deeper and question: Why did this karma  happen  to  me?  How  did
this karma happen to me?

Due to negative emotions such as strong desire and anger, we  create  karma.
Whether physically or verbally, all these are based on the mind.  All  these
physical and verbal actions are created by  your  thought.  When  you  think
about it, your  body,  speech,  action  is  coming  out.  So,  you  have  to
understand that physical and verbal actions are based on thought.

Thought is based on the mind.  If  you  don’t  have  a  mind,  then  thought
doesn’t arise. When the thought arises, you follow the  thought.  Then  your
negative emotion becomes stronger.  Because  of  your  mind,  all  sorts  of
actions from your speech and body create  karma.  Again,  all  these  active
thoughts and negative emotion thoughts such as attachment and  anger  become
strong.
Why do they become stronger and stronger?

When you look deeper, all this is because of your  mental  projection.  Your
mind made all this up. The mental emotion is  made  up  by  your  own  mind.
Since beginningless rebirths and even in this life, from birth  up  to  now,
you are habituated with this kind of negative emotion. Because of  that,  as
mentioned in the lam-rim, you are controlled by your mind and your  mind  is
controlled by the delusions.

Again, look deeper at that negative emotion. Where  do  all  these  negative
emotions really come from? What is their root?

Then the answer is: (They come  from  you)  not  knowing  emptiness  or  not
knowing the reality of existence, such as how the  ‘I’  exists  or  how  the
object exists? We really don’t understand that. What  we  see  and  what  we
believe is beyond reality.

Again, you look at how attachment arises, how anger arises. Look  deeply  at
something that’s related to the ‘I’ or  ‘me’.  For  example,  when  somebody
says nice pleasant words to you, then this person becomes a friend  to  you.
You label (this person) as a friend. Dependent on those pleasant words,  you
label “my friend” because this person said nice words to you. So,  the  ‘me’
is important and because of ‘me’, you regard him as a friend.

Similarly, if somebody were to say unpleasant words,  then  you  label  that
person as an  enemy.  Again,  you  have  to  understand  that  due  to  that
condition, i.e., just depending on those words,  you  label  the  person  as
enemy.

Dependent on those words  that  relate  to  the  ‘I’,  yourself—saying  nice
things to ‘me’ or saying  unpleasant  things  to  ‘me’—then  you  label  the
person as a friend or enemy. The friend or enemy exists as a mere label.  It
doesn’t exist inherently from (the side of) the object. This is the  reality
of friend and enemy. All friends exist and all enemies exist  in  mere  name
but we don’t understand how the friend and the enemy exist.

We see the friend existing from the (side of the) object itself. It  appears
like that in the mind. The friend exists out there from its own side,  as  a
very solid friend. We believe in that. This  is  the  very  basis.  Once  it
appears as an enemy or friend from its own side and we believe it exists  in
the way we see  it,  i.e.,  it  exists  from  its  own  side,  that  is  the
ignorance, which is the root of the problem. It starts from there.

So, understand that all problems come from ignorance, the mistaken mind.  As
mentioned today, based on that, all kinds of thoughts arise. Based on  that,
your thoughts become very active.  Your  mistaken  mind  makes  up  so  many
things about the object. This object becomes  beautiful,  100%  pleasant  or
100% unpleasant. It all depends on how much your mind decorates  and  (puts)
labels on the object. Then the  object  becomes  very  solidly  pleasant  or
solidly unpleasant, the solid friend, the very stable  friend  or  the  very
unpleasant enemy. Due to that, strong attachment or anger arises. Then  your
mind is very disturbed by  it  and  when  it  is  very  strong,  verbal  and
physical actions happen. So, this is how karma is created.  Harming  oneself
and harming others. Harm not only in this life but from life to life.

So, it’s extremely important to understand how we suffer  in  samsara.  This
is all about
the four noble truths—the truth of suffering and the truth  of  origination,
which is talking about karma and delusions. Because of that comes the  truth
of suffering.  This  is  one  of  the  very  important  topics  we  need  to
understand. If we don’t want suffering again, what can be done?  Whether  we
have choice or not is another question here. Whether there is any choice  or
you want this continually? So, this is the very big question for us  to  ask
day and night. This question is very serious. How serious it is  depends  on
how you ask the question. Does our practice work  or  not?  How  serious  is
this question for oneself?

Also, I mentioned in the last class you need to look deeply as  really  it’s
not only about this life. You have to think about life to  life—almost  eons
of countless rebirths that we have to take in the  future.  What  we  suffer
now and the pain we have now is  nothing  compared  to  the  hungry  ghosts,
compared to animals, compared to hell beings. It is nothing. So,  it’s  good
to think like that.

If you take rebirth in the future as hell beings,  hungry  ghosts,  animals,
are you able to accept that kind of suffering? When you meditate like  that,
you know very clearly the root of the problem.

Therefore, if we don’t want suffering, we don’t want to suffer for eons  and
eons, what can we do? In order not to suffer in this life and from  life  to
life,  the  only  way  is  to  cut  the  root  of  the  problem,  which   is
ignorance—believing  everything  is  truly  existent.  Therefore,   studying
emptiness or meditating on emptiness and believing  in  emptiness,  you  can
understand how important it is to meditate on emptiness. When  you  meditate
on  emptiness,  then  you  really  see,  “I  really  need  to  meditate   on
emptiness.” When you meditate well  on  emptiness,  the  conclusion  is:  “I
really have to meditate on emptiness!” It has to  come  from  deep  down  in
your heart.

When you read the Heart Sutra  at  the  beginning  of  the  class,  you  can
meditate like that for 15 to 20 minutes. First, meditate and then  read  the
Heart Sutra. “I am able to be freed from the ocean of  samsara  and  to  cut
the root of samsara. Therefore, I’m going to read the Heart Sutra.”

This is why I mentioned that the motivation is  very  important.  With  this
deep heartfelt motivation, then  read  the  sutra  with  concentration,  for
example, the Heart Sutra. Even if you don’t understand  every  single  word,
but due to your  motivation,  it  becomes  a  very  effective  and  powerful
prayer. When you do your commitments or even when you listen to  the  Dharma
with a motivation like that, it is extremely powerful.

Here,  you  have  to  understand  why  it  is  so  important  to  understand
emptiness. When you look at this,  then  you  really  need  to  meditate  on
emptiness. Otherwise, there is no other way. With that kind  of  conclusion,
then you see how important it is. Then you put in the effort on that.

If you understand emptiness, what is the benefit? What do  you  get  out  of
it? What do you get for  your  life  if  you  understand  emptiness  or  you
meditate on emptiness? What change does it make in your life? If  you  don’t
meditate, what do you lose? What
benefit do I get? It’s like doing business—what I get or what  I  lose?  So,
the same thing
here: when I meditate on emptiness, what is the benefit I get?  If  I  don’t
meditate, what do I lose?

Buddha mentioned in one of the sutras the many benefits:  “If  you  meditate
on emptiness, then you gather  all  the  collection  of  virtue.  Until  you
achieve enlightenment, whether you are an ordinary being or an  arya  being,
all the time, your wishes will be fulfilled.”

Also, Buddha said to Manjushri, “Just meditating on the six perfections  for
eons and eons, you have so much merit. But even more, if you have some  kind
of doubt—when you say doubt, there  are  three  different  types  of  doubt.
There is the doubt tending towards the factual—Your doubt is  close  to  the
reality. If you have just this little doubt close to reality, on  emptiness,
the merit is much greater than meditating on the six  perfections  for  eons
and eons.”

If you make offerings of jewels and diamonds in numbers equal  to  the  sand
grains in the Ganges River—it can also be the number of sand grains  in  the
Pacific Ocean— you collect that much merit  from  offering  that  amount  of
precious jewels to the numberless buddhas for eons.

However, if you explain four verses on  the  meaning  of  emptiness  or  you
think about or meditate on just four verses of the teachings  on  emptiness,
that merit is much greater than that. So, the Buddha explained this  is  how
much benefit one would get.

If you don’t meditate on emptiness, you think you don’t lose  anything.  You
may think, “If I meditate, I benefit. But if I don’t do  it,  I  don’t  lose
anything.” As I mentioned before, when you look deeply,  there  is  a  great
loss if you don’t meditate on emptiness. You should understand  this.  As  I
mentioned earlier, circling in samsara endlessly is the  kind  of  loss  you
get.

We have also taken the highest yoga tantra initiation. One of  the  precepts
is “Not recollecting the view (of voidness).”  This  means  not  remembering
emptiness. That is one of the downfalls in the tantric vows. That is why  it
is extremely important to meditate on emptiness.

So, it is important to see the reasons:
 • Why do I need to learn about emptiness?
 • What benefit do I get if I meditate on emptiness?
 • What will be the loss if I don’t meditate on emptiness?

You really need to sit down  and  meditate  on  that.  You  really  have  to
understand this from the depths of your  heart,  seeing  the  importance  of
learning about emptiness and then meditating on emptiness so  that  you  can
understand what emptiness means.

What does emptiness mean? You say that I have to meditate on  emptiness.  Is
it really
necessary?

Again, the question arises: What is emptiness?
Sometimes, there is some misunderstanding when  you  say,  emptiness.   Many
people may think  it  means  nothingness  but  that’s  not  the  meaning  of
emptiness. When you say emptiness, it means being empty  of  something.  You
have to understand it means being empty of something.

Therefore, you have to recognize the object of negation. What is the  object
of negation to be refuted? First, you have to understand  that.  Here,  when
all the phenomena, including the ‘I’ and the object  that  appears  to  your
mind, they appear from their own side, over  there  from  the  side  of  the
object. They don’t depend on others.  They exist from their  own  side.  So,
that’s the object of negation. Emptiness means  being  empty  of  that.  So,
this is something you have to understand.

When you say empty of  true  existence,  nothing  exists  truly.  Everything
exists depending on others. So, the meaning of emptiness is being  empty  of
true existence. As mentioned before, in relation to the ‘I’, my  friend,  my
enemy, (someone who is) pleasant to me, unpleasant to me, because  of  ‘me’,
the true self, somewhere in there exists my own self,  somewhere  within  my
body.

We believe it is somewhere there. It is truly there.  Then  based  on  that,
whatever happens related to that ‘I’, good or bad, our emotions  go  up  and
down because of believing in  the  truly  existent  ‘I’.  The  stronger  the
belief you have in that truly existent ‘I’, the stronger will your  emotions
go up and down.

From the different views of the lower tenets, the Buddha  teaches  that  the
self is not permanent, unitary and independent. It is impermanent and  empty
of all that. In the very beginning, the  Buddha  teaches  that  the  ‘I’  is
empty of being permanent, unitary and independent.

Then when you look at the ‘I’,  the  ‘I’  seems  to  be  something  that  is
outside of the body.  When you look, where is the ‘I’?  Is  it  within  your
body or is it something different from the body? Not the  body,  not  within
body, but something different from the body.  Something  separate  from  the
body and the mind.

That  was  the  non-Buddhist  belief—the  existence  of  the  self  that  is
permanent, unitary  and  independent,  separate  from  the  body.  The  non-
Buddhist philosophers thought and meditated about what the  self  is.  Since
there is no other way because of their strong  belief  that  the  self  must
exist, then they have to come out with some kind  of  reason  or  belief  to
accept that kind of self.  The ‘I’ or self cannot be one with  the  body  or
same as the body, not within the body and is not the body. If  the  ‘I’  and
the body is the same, it would be difficult as they  cannot  really  explain
the existence of past and future lives. They are not able to explain that.

Non-Buddhists also think about that.  There are also many non-Buddhists  who
believe in past and future lives and what really goes  from  life  to  life.
They have to think about and say something. That is why  they  believe  this
kind  of  permanent,  unitary  and  independent  self  exists  as  something
separate from the body. When you die,  the  body  is  left  behind  but  the
self—that is referred to as the soul or atman—goes on to the next life.  But
the self doesn’t change. That is their belief.

According to Buddhists, this is not correct. An  unchangeable  self  is  not
possible. An independent self is  not  possible.  An  unitary  self  is  not
possible. Therefore, being empty of that self is being empty of these  three
things. Buddhists believe that kind of self doesn’t exist.

Then there is the self-sufficient substantially existent self that is  empty
or selfless as explained by the Autonomy Middle  Way  School.  They  believe
that is empty of the self. That kind of self doesn’t exist.  So,  what  does
that mean? That means when you think about the self, the ‘I’ or ‘me’, it  is
not something outside of the body or something different from the body.

Then you have another view. The self, the ‘I’, or ‘me’ is somewhere  in  the
collection  of  the  body  and  mind,  somewhere  within  the  substantially
existent ‘I’.  Buddhists also don’t believe there is this kind of  ‘I’  that
is existing from its own side somewhere inside the body and mind. This  kind
of self doesn’t exist. The self is empty of that. So that is the meaning  of
the self-sufficient substantially existent self.

Then you look at the Cittamatra view (the view of the Mind  Only  School  or
MOS) and the Autonomy Middle Way School. When  they  look  for  the  ‘I’  or
self, it is not within body. Then it must be inside the mind.  If  the  body
cannot be the ‘I’ or self, then it must be the mind because  the  self  must
exist. They believe the self  must  exist  inherently  from  its  own  side.
Therefore, when you look for it, you must find it. That is  the  fundamental
belief of this tenet.

When this tenet looks for the self and they find it, then they have  to  say
something. That is why the mind is the self, not the body. Again, they  look
deeply. There are so many different minds—the sense consciousnesses and  the
mental consciousness. There are five types  of  sense  consciousnesses.  All
these cannot be the self. Then they have to dig deeper.  Then they find  the
mental consciousness. But again, there are so many  different  minds  within
the  mental  consciousness.   Then   the   MOS   says   there   is   another
consciousness—the mind-basis-of-all is the self,  the  ‘I’  or  person.  The
Autonomy  Middle  Way  School  (AMWS)  says  that   one   type   of   mental
consciousness is the self. That is what they believe.

In the final view, the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS)  says  that  all
these  assertions  are  not  correct.  Nothing  exists  from  its  own  side
including the ‘I’, the self. The logic is that if it really exists from  the
side of the object, then when you search for that ‘I’, you are able to  find
it. But you are not able to find any kind of object when you  look  for  it.
It is impossible to pinpoint and it  is  impossible  to  find  any  kind  of
object. Therefore, everything is empty from its own side. This is  what  you
have to understand. When you look deeply at the ‘I’ or self,  it  cannot  be
found within the body or within the mind either. You  look  everywhere.  You
meditate. The emotional ‘I’.
When you are so emotional—“I am miserable and I  am  suffering”—we  see  the
independent self right there as  truly  existent.  The  emotional  ‘I’  that
experiences the suffering is somewhere in the body.  But in  reality,  there
is no such emotional ‘I’ existing from its own side.  It  doesn’t  exist  at
all. When you look deeply, there is no such ‘I’. You are not  able  to  find
it at all. When you see that,  the  view  of  the  ignorance/the  object  of
ignorance is not there. There is no ignorance. The object  of  ignorance  is
no longer there.
If that happens, then your attachment or anger will  be  subdued,  pacified,
lessened, reduced or weakened. So meditate like that when  you  are  feeling
emotional. Look at the ‘I’. When you see that there is no  such  ‘I’  there,
it does make a huge difference when you  have  so  much  emotions  during  a
difficult time. If you really meditate like that, immediately, you  will  be
at peace.

So, meditating on emptiness is  extremely  powerful.  It  not  only  reduces
attachment but it is able to cut the root of the problem. We don’t  need  to
suffer again and again in samsara if we are able to meditate  on  emptiness.
Whatever kind of big problem happens in our life,  we  can  live  in  peace.
Really nothing much can disturb us and there will be no ups and  downs.  So,
this is something we have to understand.

If you really understand the point, then you will put effort into trying  to
meditate. When you look at the ‘I’ that is so  emotional  and  suffering  so
much, yet when we look at that ‘I’, it cannot be found within  the  body  or
within the mind. It is not the mind and it is not the body.

The ‘I’ who is experiencing the suffering is also  not  different  from  the
body and mind. It is not inside or outside. It is not the body or the  mind.
When you look at the ‘I’ and you cannot find it, it doesn’t  mean  that  the
‘I’ who is experiencing the suffering doesn’t exist. When you  look  for  it
and you are not able to find it, the point is as mentioned  in  the  sutras,
“Not finding is the best finding.” When you look for  it,  you  cannot  find
it. What you find is the emptiness of the truly existent ‘I’. So, you  found
something there. It doesn’t mean that you don’t find  anything  at  all.  It
doesn’t mean that.

When you look at that, you don’t find the truly existent ‘I’. Instead,  what
you find is the emptiness of that ‘I’. So, you do found something.  You  are
looking at the reality of the ‘I’. The nature of the ‘I’ is empty  of  that.
The conclusion is that this ‘I’ who is experiencing the suffering  is  there
but it cannot be found within the body and mind.  But  it  is  there.  Then,
again, the conclusion is that this ‘I’ exists in just mere  name.  Then  you
understand the merely labelled ‘I’ who experiences the suffering.   When  we
look at the ‘I’ who is suffering, the ‘I’ cannot be found.

Then the ‘I’ who is experiencing the suffering looks at the  suffering.  The
suffering itself cannot be found. It is also empty of  true  existence.  So,
this  includes  the  ‘I’  who  is  suffering.  The   object,   subject   and
action—everything is empty. This is the same meaning as “Form is  empty”  in
the Heart Sutra. That is related to the ‘I’ or self that is empty. Read  the
verses and meditate—the ‘I’ that is empty  means  the  inherently  existent,
independent ‘I’ doesn’t exist. The ‘I’ exists in mere name.

When you have this kind of deep understanding, then  by  just  understanding
the emotion, the negative emotion  becomes  weaker.  Then  you  create  less
negative karma if you have a deeper understanding of emptiness and have  the
realization of emptiness. It would be much better if  you  have  the  direct
realization of emptiness. Then there is  no  way  you  can  create  negative
karma to take rebirth in samsara. When you realize emptiness  directly,  the
mind becomes extremely powerful. You won’t  create  any  throwing  karma  in
samsara. Then it is confirmed you will achieve liberation or  enlightenment.
You are on the track to enlightenment and liberation.
With others, there is no guarantee.

Did you meditate or not? I just talked?

There was one student of Milarepa who  did  some  meditation  on  emptiness.
After that he went to see Milarepa and reported on  his  meditation  to  the
master. He reported on  how  he  meditated  and  what  happened  during  the
meditation. It can be related to the nature of the clear light of  the  mind
or the meditation on emptiness. Meditate on emptiness or meditating  on  the
clear light.

This student told Milarepa that when he meditated on  space  alone,  it  was
quite comfortable. But when clouds appear in  the  space,  then  he  felt  a
little uncomfortable. Then he asked Milarepa, “How do I  meditate  on  space
with the clouds?”

Milarepa replied, “When you are meditating on space, if  you  are  (feeling)
comfortable, then the cloud is just the manifestation of that space, a  play
of that space. Place your mind back on  the  space.”  That  was  the  answer
given by Milarepa to the student.

I also roughly mentioned this in the last class. The meaning is there.  When
you meditate on the clear light or meditate with the  mind  as  the  object,
when your mind is very quiet, you are able to see the clarity of  the  mind.
It is like seeing space. When you meditate quietly with concentration,  look
at the mind. You are able to see the clarity of the mind. Your mind  is  not
disturbed. It’s quite stable and comfortable.

When we meditate, sometimes some kind of emotional thoughts or some kind  of
thoughts just arise from nowhere. They  just  pop  up.  So,  those  are  the
clouds. Then it becomes a problem. When you are at peace and suddenly,  some
thoughts come in, you are not so comfortable with that.  Then  what  do  you
do?

You need to look at the thoughts. When you look at them,  “This  is  just  a
thought that arises from the mind.” It’s just like that. Just notice it  and
don’t be bothered by it. Just go back to the clarity of  your  mind.  Notice
but don’t follow it as it is just a thought. Don’t follow  the  thought  and
just go back to your meditation. Recognize that the thought has  arisen  and
then go back to the meditation on the clarity of the mind. So, that  is  one
way to meditate.

When thoughts arise, how can we deal  with  them?   One  method  is  not  to
follow the thoughts but just notice them. Then go back  to  your  meditation
on the clear light. The thought arise from the  mind.  It  is  part  of  the
mind. Nothing surprising about that. When you recognize that, then  go  back
to meditating on the clear light. That is the advice given by  Milarepa.  It
is the same thing when you meditate on emptiness.
There is another method from the Eight Verses of Mind  Training.  “Vigilant,
the moment a delusion appears in my mind, endangering myself and  others,  I
shall confront and avert it without delay.” This  is  a  slightly  different
method. You have to understand (what I described earlier) is one way  to  do
the meditation. Here, it is slightly different. Always be  mindful  whenever
the negative emotions arise during the meditation. Always  be  vigilant  and
recognize them as they endanger yourself and others, so they are  very  bad.
Try to kick them  out.  That  is  one  of  the  methods,  i.e.,  immediately
applying the antidote upon recognizing (the negative emotion), getting
it out and then going back to the meditation.

Question: Let’s say a thought arises when you are trying to meditate.  Shall
we cut our reaction to this thought?

Answer: Cut? I have already told you.

There are two ways to meditate. You got the first  one?  Anyway,  first  you
meditate.  Then you can ask later. Don’t ask before your meditation! You  go
back and meditate. Then  after  you  have  the  experience  like  Milerepa’s
student, then come. After you meditate, then you come back,  “Clouds  appear
and disturb my mind. What shall I  do,  master?  How  do  I  chase  out  the
clouds?”

What I have been talking about is nothing new but my point is, I  just  want
you to think more  deeply.  Sometimes,  we  talk  about  the  importance  of
emptiness but if we don’t think really deeply—why  it  is  so  important  to
meditate on emptiness—then we just say, “OK. OK.”  It  is  left  like  that.
Then time just passes. We don’t see the importance and the need to  meditate
on emptiness. We just take it for granted. We just take it  easy.  When  the
time comes, then we just regret. This is our life.  So, try to  put  in  the
best effort as much as possible. I think that is all for today.

I thought to talk about the stars but it didn’t happen. The verse  from  the
Diamond Cutter Sutra is another extremely important topic  to  meditate  on.
When you see a star, a visual aberration, a drop of dew and  a  flame  of  a
lamp, they all have some kind of meaning there. For the star,  what  you  do
have in your mind? Is it just a star? That’s all? That is something we  need
to meditate on. I’m not sure whether we need one more class  on  Tuesday  to
talk about this. If you really want, then I will talk on Tuesday.

I hear there will be translation through Skype for the time  being.  I  hope
to finish the tantric salam module within three to  four  months.  If  Skype
does happen, then maybe we need to change the time  because  the  translator
is overseas with a different time zone. I think the SPC Committee will  send
you an email. I think we can finish Highest Yoga  Tantra  in  two  to  three
months. Then the Basic Program will end this year. Then you  will  have  the
final exam, maybe in December or January or  whenever  you  want.  Then  you
will graduate.

On Tuesday, I will talk about the star. I will tell the story of  the  star.
How the star happens in the sky. You all know this thing. My  point  is  for
you to sit down and try to have a deeper understanding of why  you  have  to
meditate on emptiness. If you don’t
meditate, what you will stand to lose. The idea is to encourage  you  to  go
deep down
from the heart.


Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan,
Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Note: The teachings on March 6, 8 and 13 are general teachings by Khen
Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi that are open to all students and are NOT part of
Module 10 of the Second Basic Program.

