Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L11final.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.853655
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 11	 				                                               4 May 2017
The four possibilities. Conduct without attachment. The vast conduct—utilizing attachment as an aid. Conduct with attachment. Other terms for the tantric path. The four classes of tantra.
THE FOUR POSSIBILITIES
In the last lesson, we looked at the difference between a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana tenets. To see that difference more clearly, it will be helpful if we look at the number of possibilities that exist between the two. Are there three or four possibilities?
There could be a person who is a proponent of Hinayana tenets but is not a Hinayanist. An illustration will be a bodhisattva who is a proponent of the Great Exposition school (GES) or Sutra school (SS). 
There could be someone who is a Hinayanist but is not a proponent of Hinayana tenets. An illustration will be a person on the Hinayana path of seeing who is a proponent of the Middle Way school (MWS).
There could be someone who is both a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana tenets. These two are not necessarily mutually exclusive. An illustration will be a proponent of Hinayana tenets who is on the Hinayana path of accumulation.  
There could be someone who is neither a Hinayanist nor a proponent of Hinayana tenets. One can posit many illustrations of this.
Likewise, there are four permutations between someone who is a Mahayanist and a proponent of Mahayana tenets. You should think about them based on what I have just said about the permutations between a Hinayanist and a proponent of Hinayana tenets. If you understand that, then based on that, you can find the answer for the permutations between a Mahayanist and a proponent of Mahayana tenets.
The Buddha turned the Wheel of Dharma but there were many levels to the turning of the Wheel of Dharma. 
The Buddha turned the Wheel of Dharma that became the material for the tenets of the GES and the SS. 
There was the turning of the Wheel of Dharma followed by proponents of the Mind Only school (MOS). 
There was also the turning of the Wheel of Dharma that presented the tenets of the MWS. 
So with regard to the presentation of the view, the Buddha gave many versions as to what the view is. Although these views are different, all these were taught by the Buddha.
The Buddha taught the Hinayana. The Buddha also taught the Mahayana. As seen in the last lesson, the Mahayana is divided into the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajra Vehicle.
CONDUCT WITHOUT ATTACHMENT 
The Buddha gave teachings in accordance with the dispositions, interests and capacities of the disciples. As such, the Hinayana teachings are called conduct without attachment where attachment is considered to be an object of abandonment. No exception is made for attachment whatsoever. For disciples whose dispositions and capacities are only suited for such conduct and path, the Buddha taught them the Hinayana.
As long as the person is still motivated by self-interest and self-cherishing, the only conduct for that person is one that has to do with abandoning attachment. Through such conduct, the person works for enlightenment. For such a person, attachment can only be a fault and mistake. It can never become the supporting condition for virtue. As such, the Buddha did not permit these individuals to utilize attachment on the path. Attachment is solely an object of abandonment. 
THE VAST CONDUCT—UTILIZING ATTACHMENT AS AN AID 
For those whose aspirations are more extensive with more expansive minds, the Buddha taught the practice of the perfections. Such individuals enter the Mahayana path and train in the paramitas to achieve enlightenment. Such conduct and practice are superior to the conduct that is devoid of attachment. 
In the Mahayana Paramitayana—the Causal Perfection Vehicle—permission is granted to engage in the three bodily non-virtues and four verbal non-virtues. It is not taught in the Mahayana Paramitayana that you have to focus all your energies on overcoming attachment. It is not taught like that. Yes, the bodhisattva has to give up attachment, but it is not taught with the emphasis that only attachment is to be abandoned. 
These bodhisattvas don’t have self-cherishing and are only interested in working for the welfare of others. As such, attachment is not necessarily a problem for these individuals. Instead, there are instructions on how they could utilize attachment to help others. Poisons may be poisonous on their own, but when mixed with other medicinal substances, some poisons can become helpful medicinal compounds. The attachment in the continua of bodhisattvas is similar to such poisons. 
The bodhisattvas have bodhicitta and the thought of cherishing others. They don’t have self-cherishing. Therefore, they are able to utilize their attachment for good to benefit others. 
Now you can see that in the Hinayana, no permission was given for utilizing attachment whatsoever. Attachment is treated like any other afflictions and is to be abandoned as nothing good can come out of it. Yet the same Buddha also taught the Causal Perfection Vehicle where attachment can be utilized to benefit others. These are two vastly different methods:
One is the conduct that is devoid of attachment. 
The other is the vast conduct where attachment can be utilized in certain situations. 
You have to understand why the Buddha taught these two different methods.
Permission is not given to the Hinayana practitioner to engage in any of the ten non-virtues. They are only to be abandoned. 
However, in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, among the ten non-virtues, there are exceptions with regard to the three bodily non-virtues and the four verbal non-virtues. There could be situations where the bodhisattva may engage in these non-virtues. For example, the bodhisattvas are allowed to kill when certain conditions are met. Nevertheless, even in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, permission is not given to engage in the three mental non-virtues. 
In the Causal Perfection Vehicle, attachment can be used as an aid to benefit other sentient beings. Techniques are taught for doing this but the Causal Perfection Vehicle does not teach that attachment can be taken as a path. It is only taught that attachment can be used as an aid or means to benefit others. Taking attachment as the path is not taught in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. What is an example of using attachment as an aid to benefit others? It is said that bodhisattvas take rebirths as wheel-turning kings whereby they produce many sons to work for sentient beings. 
If you were to analyze why it is that in the Hinayana, no exceptions are made while exceptions are allowed in the Causal Perfection Vehicle, the conclusion will be that it depends on whether the individual has self-interest or is only interested in working for the benefit of others. If the individual has no self-interest and self-cherishing, thinking only of benefiting others, then what are generally considered to be non-virtues can become supporting conditions to accomplish something that is of great benefit to others.
CONDUCT WITH ATTACHMENT
The Mahayana consists of the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant (or Profound) Vajra Vehicle. Since the Resultant Vajra Vehicle is also Mahayana, the very basis for the Vajrayana path is still bodhicitta. 
In addition to that, the Resultant Vajra Vehicle teaches the utilizing of attachment on the path, i.e., attachment is used as a method for achieving enlightenment. It is conduct that is accompanied by attachment. This technique is found in the Resultant Vajra Vehicle. Since the Resultant Vajra Vehicle is Mahayana, the most basic criterion is that the individual has to overcome self-cherishing with no self-interest whatsoever. On the basis of this, conduct with attachment is taught in the Resultant Vajrayana.
Attachment is purposely made to manifest. 
When attachment is manifest, bliss is induced. 
The bliss induced by the manifesting of attachment is then used to ascertain emptiness. 
With that special consciousness, one progresses towards enlightenment. This is the unique feature of the Secret Mantra Vehicle. 
You have to know these essential points as to why and how attachment is taken into the path in the Secret Mantra Vehicle. 
OTHER TERMS FOR THE TANTRIC PATH
It is good to know the meaning of some of these terms. You will see terms like the Vajra Vehicle, the Resultant Vehicle, the Method Vehicle and the Secret Mantra Vehicle. 
Vajrayana or Vajra Vehicle
‘Vajra’ means inseparable but what is this referring to? Inseparability here refers to the yoga of inseparable method and wisdom. There is great debate among scholars over this inseparability of method and wisdom. The conclusion arrived at by many great masters is that this inseparability refers to the practice whereby both the factors of method and wisdom are fused together in one entity and in one consciousness. In the context of deity yoga, this means that while one is observing the body of the deity, at the same time, one’s mind is cognizant of the emptiness of true existence of the deity’s body. So these two—the appearance of the deity and the ascertainment of the emptiness of the  deity’s body—are fused together and are present in one consciousness.
In the context of the yoga of inseparable method and wisdom:
method refers to the appearance of the deity’s body 
wisdom refers to the mind that ascertains emptiness, in particular, the emptiness of the deity’s body 
Method and wisdom are the two aspects in that one consciousness.
Phrased another way, these are the two factors that are fused in one consciousness:  
the appearance factor—the appearance of the deity’s body to the mind
the ascertainment factor—at the same time, the mind ascertains the emptiness of the deity’s body
Furthermore:
in dependence upon method, one achieves the form body
in dependence upon wisdom, one achieves the truth body 
The Causal Perfection Vehicle also talks about the union of method and wisdom but the meaning of the union of method and wisdom in the Causal Perfection Vehicle only means that the practice of method is complemented by wisdom and the practice of wisdom is complemented by method. These two are not fused into one entity in one consciousness. 
It is only in the Vajrayana that the real meaning of the union of method and wisdom is found whereby both method and wisdom are fused together in one entity in one consciousness. This is like the etymology of the Vajrayana. 
Resultant Vehicle
It is called the Resultant Vehicle because during the causal stage, there is the meditation on the four complete purities of the resultant stage. The four complete purities of the resultant stage are:
the complete pure body 
the complete pure environment 
the complete pure enjoyments
the complete pure activity 
In the practice of tantra, the meditation on these four complete purities of the resultant stage is done during the causal phase. 
The meditation on the aspects that are concordant with the complete pure body is done during the causal phase. Essentially, this refers to the practice of self-generation when we generate ourselves as the deity. On the basis of generating ourselves as the deity, we then meditate on clear appearance and divine pride. 
There must be a result that arises from such meditation. Otherwise, it will be pointless and a waste of time. In the beginning, such self-generation practice is just at the level of imagination and make-belief but eventually, it will lead to the actual attainment of the body of a buddha. In the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra, it eventually culminates in the attainment of the illusory body that is an actual wisdom body. These details will be covered in the future.
In short, through these many stages of progress, eventually, it leads to the attainment of the impure illusory body followed by the pure illusory body. When the pure illusory body is achieved, we can say that this is the substantial cause of the rupakaya or the form body.
~ Why practicing tantra is essential for achieving enlightenment
This is one of the essential points as to why the practice of tantra is absolutely necessary for achieving full enlightenment. One cannot achieve enlightenment by depending on the Causal Perfection Vehicle alone. This lies in the inadequate explanation offered by the Causal Perfection Vehicle of achieving the form body of a buddha. The real techniques of achieving the form body of a buddha are only found in tantra where there are the complete and perfect explanations for achieving the illusory bodies. 
Another reason why one has to practice tantra, especially Highest Yoga Tantra, is the quality of the mind that takes emptiness as its object. In sutra, there is a presentation of the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. But when we look at this mind from the tantric perspective, the mind that directly realizes emptiness in sutra is considered to be a coarse mind. 
With a coarse mind realizing emptiness, one cannot eradicate the subtle knowledge obscurations, i.e., the subtle dualistic appearances. The Causal Perfection Vehicle also mentions dualistic appearances, but these dualistic appearances referred to in sutra are considered to be coarse.
When we look at them from the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra, there are the extremely subtle dualistic appearances of the white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment. Without overcoming these three subtle minds, there is no way to eliminate the extremely subtle knowledge obscurations. In order to eliminate them, we have to generate the extremely subtle mind and realize emptiness with that mind. The perfect and complete explanations of the wisdom realizing emptiness can only be found in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
You have to understand the reasons why it is not possible to achieve enlightenment just by depending on the Causal Perfection Vehicle. You need to understand why there is a need to depend on tantra. 
~ The view in sutra and tantra 
Sometimes, you will see statements such as, “There is no difference in the view between sutra and tantra.” At other times, you will see statements such as, “There is a difference in the view between sutra and tantra.” You must know what these statements actually mean. 
“There is no difference in the view between sutra and tantra”: This is referring to the objective view i.e., the object, emptiness, itself. With regard to the object, emptiness, there is no difference in sutra and tantra. You will not find an explanation that is more superior to the one that has already been settled and clarified by Nargajuna and his spiritual sons.
“There is a difference in the view between sutra and tantra”: You have to understand this statement to mean that there is a difference in the subject, i.e., the mind, that takes emptiness as its object. 
In sutra, the mind that takes emptiness as its object is a coarse mind. 
In tantra, especially in Highest Yoga Tantra, the mind that takes emptiness as its object is the extremely subtle mind—the mind of clear light. 
In that sense then there is a difference in the view, which refers here to the subjective not the objective view. 
~ The four complete purities: 
The complete purity of body refers to the meditation on the body of the deity. Such a practice has to be done during the causal phase while you are on the path. 
The complete purity of the environment refers to the meditation on the supporting and supported mandalas, in particular, meditating on the inestimable mansion.
The complete purity of enjoyments refers to the practice of making offerings to the self-generation. 
The complete purity of activities refers to the practice in tantra whereby on the basis of deity yoga, you visualize the seed syllabus and mantra garlands at your heart emitting light rays through which you accomplish the purposes of yourself and others. 
The vehicle that has the meditation on the path that is concordant with the aspects of the four complete purities of the result is called the Resultant Yana (Resultant Vehicle). 
Methodyana or Method Vehicle
Methodyana (Method Vehicle) is so named because it is a yana that teaches the method of achieving the form body that is superior to the method that is taught in the Causal Perfection Vehicle. 
Secret Mantrayana or Secret Mantra Vehicle
Sometimes, the Vajrayana is also referred to as the Secret Mantrayana or Secret Mantra Vehicle. It is called Secret Mantra because it is a practice that has to be done privately and kept secret from unsuitable receptacles. In that sense, it is secret. 
Generally speaking, mantra means mind protection, i.e., protecting the mind. There are many levels of protection. First, we need to protect ourselves from the lower realms and samsara. What protects us from the lower realms is moving the mind away from the ten non-virtues. So when we protect our mind by moving the mind away from the ten non-virtues, we are protecting ourselves from the lower realms.
How do we protect ourselves from samsara? We protect our mind from the afflictions. This is how we move away from samsara. For example, the Abhidharma literature explains how the afflictions arise. First, there must be an object and a sense power. These two must come together before the afflictions can arise. But does it mean that afflictions will necessarily arise just because the object and the sense power meet? The answer is no. In addition to these two conditions, there must be the potential in the mind for the afflictions to arise. We talk then about the predispositions and seeds of afflictions. The potential for afflictions to arise already exists in the mind. When the sense power comes into contact with the object, then attachment arises. 
In the context of Secret Mantra, mind protection means protecting the mind from ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness. How do we do that? Through the meditations on the body of the deity and the inestimable mansion, i.e., by seeing everything that appears to be pure. 
It is called Secret Mantrayana in that all the four classes of Buddhist tantra are the same in that they are paths that utilize attachment. 
THE FOUR CLASSES OF TANTRA
All the four classes of Buddhist tantra are the same in that they are paths that utilize attachment, but there is a difference in the manner in which attachment is utilized or taken as the path. Because there is a difference, we have four classes of tantra:
Action Tantra
Performance Tantra
Yoga Tantra
Highest Yoga Tantra 
How attachment is utilized
Action Tantra is for trainees who are able to utilize the bliss that arises from looking at the visualized wisdom mudra (or wisdom goddess) but is not able to utilize the bliss that arises from smiling at the visualized wisdom mudra. When one gazes at the visualized wisdom mudra, one experiences bliss. One then uses that bliss to ascertain emptiness. Such a path is called Action Tantra. 
Performance Tantra is for trainees who are able to utilize the attachment that arises from smiling at the visualized wisdom mudra but is not able to utilize the attachment that arises from holding hands with the visualized wisdom mudra. Such a path is called Performance Tantra. 
Yoga Tantra is for trainees who are able to utilize the attachment arising from holding hands with the visualized wisdom mudra but is not able to utilize the attachment from sexual union. Such a path is called Yoga Tantra.
Highest Yoga Tantra is for trainees who are not only able to utilize the attachment arising from sexual union with a visualized wisdom mudra, but is also able to utilize the attachment arising from union with an actual wisdom mudra or actual consort. Such a path is called Highest Yoga Tantra. 
External vs internal activities
For trainees who need to rely heavily on external activities in order to engage in the practice of deity yoga and the meditation on emptiness, the tantric path for such trainees is called Action Tantra. 
For example, in the practice of Thousand-Armed Avalokiteshvara or Chenrezig, the Nyung Nay, great emphasis is placed on the cleanliness of the abode, the practice of personal hygiene such as bathing and wearing clean cloths, eating white foods, and abandoning eating meat, eggs, onions, garlic and so forth. During the practice, the performance of the hand gestures (or hand mudras) are considered essential. There is no option to not do them. If the hand mudras are not performed, it is considered a fault of omission.  This is another example of the emphasis on external activities. You need to rely on a lot of such external activities. 
The tantric path where there is an equal emphasis on external activities and the internal practice of yoga is called Performance Tantra.
Yoga Tantra is the path that engages in the practice of deity yoga and the meditation on emptiness. Between external activities and the internal meditation, the emphasis is on the internal meditation. There is no emphasis on external activities. The principal practice is the inner practice of yoga.
Highest Yoga Tantra is the similar in that it completely emphasizes the inner meditation and not outer activities. The inner practice is the principal and is even more superior to that practiced in Yoga Tantra. As such it is called Highest (or Unsurpassed) Yoga Tantra.
Student 1: With respect to the Vajrayana, whereby the mind is one inseparable entity, when one is in meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness, how does one maintain the visualization of the self-generation without losing that meditation? Similarly, during post meditative-equipoise, how do we maintain our visualization of the self-generation without losing the meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: With regard to post-meditative equipoise, it is simple because everything that appears appears to be illusory-like. While it appears to be truly existent, the meditator is cognizant of their emptiness—that they do not exist in the way they appear. As such, it is illusory-like. 
As for during meditative equipoise, this is something that we need to think about. This comes back to the meaning of method and wisdom being present in one consciousness. 
According to this view, we say that even in meditative equipoise, both method and wisdom must be present in the one mind. The body of the deity does appear during the meditative equipoise ascertaining emptiness. There is this difference in tantra. This is not possible in sutra where in meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness, nothing else appears except emptiness. But here in tantra, since the method and wisdom must be present in one mind, the deity’s body does appear in meditative equipoise even as the ascertainment factor of the mind is focussing on the emptiness of that body. If you assert that method and wisdom are inseparable, then there is no choice but to say that in meditative equipoise, the deity’s body does appear. This is the appearance factor. 
Student 2: Question 1: When the bodhisattva practises attachment with bliss, is sexual union the only attachment with bliss? No? What are the other examples?
Question 2: The Hinayanist who propounds Hinayana tenets will be on the Hinayana path of accumulation and the Hinayana path of preparation. But from the path of seeing onwards, won’t he become a Hinayanist who propounds Mahayana tenets? 
Khen Rinpoche: The person who enters the Hinayana path can exist from the Hinayana path of accumulation all the way up to the Hinayana path of no more learning.
How many types of Hinayanists are there? There are two. Definitely a Hinayanist is enumerated to be either a hearer or solitary realizer. 
What about the proponents of Hinayana tenets? There are also only two possibilities.  One is either a proponent of the GES or a proponent of the SS. If you are sure about these two, then you can posit illustrations to clarify your position. 
A Mahayanist is someone who enters the Mahayana path. As for the proponents of the Mahayana tenets, there are two—proponents of the MOS or the MWS. You have to think about how the pervasion works.
Student 2: May I generalize and say that a Mahayanist who is a proponent of Hinayana tenets can only exist on the Mahayana path of accumulation and not thereafter?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. You can say that for the small path of accumulation but whether this still applies from that time onwards, this is something for you to think about. Is it possible for there to be a proponent of the SS on the middling Mahayana path of accumulation? 
Student 2: It is not possible.
Khen Rinpoche: Why? Is there a bodhisattva on the middling path of accumulation who is a proponent of the MOS? This is a question for everybody, not just her.
Student 2: I think it may be possible because the bodhicitta of the bodhisattvas is like gold (at this level).  They don’t fall back to the Hinayana path anymore. But it could be unlikely as well. If you have to realize emptiness at that stage, that realization of emptiness must accord with the position of the CMWS. Whoever gets into the path of seeing, whether it is the Hinayana or the Mahayana, their view must accord with the CMWS’ way of thinking with regard to wisdom.
Student 3: It was mentioned that one uses the bliss that arises from attachment to ascertain emptiness. My qualm is this—how can a mind that is clear light arise from something that is adventitious, such as attachment? It sounds contradictory to me. 
Khen Rinpoche: With attachment as the condition, bliss will definitely arise. Can that bliss be increased or not?  The question now is whether that bliss is attachment or not? This is what we need to think about. 
Attachment is the condition for bliss to arise. It is a technique that uses bliss to make the coarser level of consciousness cease. When the coarser level of consciousness ceases, then the extremely subtle mind can manifest. Then it is about transforming this extremely subtle mind to the path, causing it to ascertain emptiness. Highest Yoga Tantra is the technique that talks about the path that transforms this extremely subtle mind into a consciousness that realizes emptiness.
Student 4:  Tantra basically hinges on bliss being generated. What if bliss cannot be generated by looking at, smiling and holding hands with the visualized wisdom goddess or god? It is not necessarily the case that one will generate bliss. You can be extremely attached or totally indifferent.
Khen Rinpoche: For the time being, don’t forget about bodhicitta. Let’s think about those things first.
Student 5: What are the differences in these phrases: 
utilizing attachment as the path 
utilizing desire as the path 
utilizing pleasure as the path  
utilizing bliss as the path? 
Are there any differences in terms of subtlety and so forth?
Khen Rinpoche: As long as you get the fundamental point, how you say it doesn’t really matter. The point is we are talking about the same thing. What is their meaning? The point is that attachment acts as the condition for the blissful consciousness to arise. Bliss is a consciousness. Bliss arises and that bliss ascertains emptiness. With that blissful consciousness ascertaining emptiness, attachment is exhausted. This is the meaning of taking attachment as the path. This is what is meant. It doesn’t matter how you say it.
Student 6: Once someone enters the Mahayana path through the Causal Perfection Vehicle, does he have to go through the countless great eons before he becomes enlightened? Can’t he enter the tantra path somewhere in between to shorten that time period?
Khen Rinpoche: I wonder if there is an absolute need to go all the way up to the end of tenth ground before one can enter the tantric path. I don’t think so. I think it is possible to enter the tantric path while one is on the path of accumulation or the path of preparation of the Causal Perfection Vehicle. I am not sure but what I think is this—once you have entered the path of seeing of the Causal Perfection Vehicle, then you have to traverse to the end of the tenth ground. 
It is stated in the Perfection literature that once you attain the superior path, it is certain that you will achieve the enlightenment of that path. It implies that it is certain that you will travel that path. Here we are talking about the path of the Causal Perfection Vehicle. 
I am not sure. Perhaps it has to do with the fact that once you achieve the respective superior path of the yana you have chosen, you gain the certainty that you will definitely achieve the enlightenment of that path you are on. For this reason, you have to go all the way to the tenth ground.
Student 7: In the Mahayana sutric path, desire is used as an aid whereas in the tantric path, desire can be transformed into the path. This statement seems to be very vague. Isn’t bodhicitta also a desire to gain enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. What is the meaning of desire here?
Khen Rinpoche: Desire means attachment.
Student 4: It was mentioned in a previous class that Shakyamuni Buddha took three countless eons to reach the tenth ground. Only then was he was asked by other buddhas to enter the tantric path. What happened in between? Does it mean that Shakyamuni Buddha never met tantra all this while?
Tantra is the quicker path. When he is on the supreme mundane quality level (of the path of preparation) he should have remembered what he was taught since time without beginning.  So all this while we don’t know what happened to the dharmakaya pervades all!
Khen Rinpoche: You have to ask Buddha Shakyamuni himself that question.  I have no idea why it went that way for him. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.