Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L03FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.427329
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshab Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 3	 				                                        28 March 2017
Review. The first turning of the Wheel of Dharma. The second turning of the Wheel of Dharma. The third turning of the Wheel of Dharma. The sutric grounds and paths. 
REVIEW
Over the last two lessons, I talked about how we can persuade our mind to practise the Dharma and to take the Dharma seriously. This is important. You can find the methods for this in the lam-rim. 
In the beginning, we have to reflect on the human life of freedom and endowments. In Lama Tsongkhapa’s The Three Principles of the Path, he said, 
Freedom and endowments are difficult to find
And life has no time to spare.
First, we have to realize how precious this human life of freedom and endowments is and how after attaining a life such as this, there are so many wonderful things that we can accomplish with it. 
We are not talking merely about knowing the words but rather on the basis of those words—“Freedom and endowment are difficult to find/And life has no time to spare”—reciting them slowly and mindfully, all the while reflecting on them to see whether we agree with them or not. If we generate conviction after having thought about this statement and we agree, “Yes, this is really the case,” that ascertainment is what will persuade us to practise the Dharma. 
On the other hand, if we are not convinced of what is stated in these two lines, then it is extremely difficult for us to take a genuine interest in the Dharma. There must be something that will ignite and sustain our interest in the Dharma and the desire to practise it. What can that be? When we see the purpose of Dharma practice, we will gladly pursue and practise it. Here, just thinking about the human life of freedom and endowments and death and impermanence seem to be the only ways to ignite such enthusiasm and to sustain it. I don’t think there is anything else that can really persuade us to take the Dharma to heart.
We have to continually think about the precious human rebirth and death and impermanence all the time. The more we recollect these points, the more we can persuade ourselves to practise the Dharma. As much as possible, we need to persuade ourselves to take the Dharma to heart all the time. If we don’t think about how “life has no time to spare,” i.e., our impending death and impermanence, I don’t think there is anything else that can move the mind. 
If we are able to see that there is something beyond this life—here we are talking about many future lives as our future existences will last far longer compared to our present life—it would be easier to take the Dharma to heart. It is also much easier to see that there is nothing except the Dharma that really matters. 
Meditating on the human life of freedom and endowments—its meaningfulness, the difficulty of acquiring it, the fact that it will not last forever and how death will definitely happen—is not only important in the beginning of our practice. If we reflect on these points well, we will begin to take the Dharma to heart. 
But taking the Dharma to heart is one thing and being able to continue to practise is another. Often what happens is that we may think about these points for a short time. We begin to feel, “Yes, yes, yes! This is all true.” We start to take some interest in Dharma practice but we are unable to sustain that interest as it doesn’t last. This is why thinking about the human life of freedom and endowments and its impermanence cannot be done only in the beginning or sporadically here and there. It has to be done continually all the time. If we don’t remember and recall these two topics all the time, we may generate some interest and start our practice but we may not be able to sustain it. Then, during the middle, when our enthusiasm and interest in the Dharma flag, our Dharma practice will start to degenerate. This problem comes about because of our failure to continually meditate on the human life of freedom and endowments and death and impermanence.
We have to integrate the teachings into our life. Practising in itself is not enough. Our practice has to culminate in its full completion. What will enable us to bring our practice to a successful culmination? It is the continual reflection of the human life of freedom and endowments and death and impermanence. So starting, sustaining and bringing our Dharma practice to completion is contingent on persuading our mind to always engage in such reflection. There is no other way. 
By recollecting and meditating on the verse from The Three Principles of the Path— “Freedom and endowments are difficult to find/ And life has no time to spare”—we are able to abandon whatever attachment we have for the happiness of this life. 
Then, “By gaining familiarity with this,/ Attraction to the appearances of this life is reversed.” When we are able to reverse our attraction to the happiness of this life, this is when our Dharma practice starts and when we are able to persuade ourselves to take the Dharma seriously.
This is an extremely important point that we must understand, reflect well on and then implement. It is only when we are able to loosen our grip on our attachment to the happiness of this life, turning away from whatever interest we may have in this life and focussing on our future lives instead that we will engage in Dharma practice. If we don’t do that, there is no Dharma practice to speak of. 
When we say that we want to engage in Dharma practice, what is the first practice? The first practice is turning away from and giving up the attachment to this life. If that doesn’t happen, we may say we are practising the Dharma, we may think we are practising the Dharma, but it doesn’t necessarily mean that we are practising the Dharma. It becomes questionable whether our practice becomes Dharma or not. 
As I mentioned before, what is the demarcation between what is Dharma and what is not Dharma? It comes down to whether we have given up the attachment to this life. If we had done nothing about that attachment, then nothing we do becomes Dharma.  
When we hear the phrase, “Give up this life,” we shouldn’t take it literally. It doesn’t mean not wanting anything to do with this life. It means to give up our attachment to this life. This is what it means. Giving up attachment to this life can manifest in the form of the lifestyle adopted by Jetsun Milarepa. He completely gave up wealth, power, his loved ones and entourage, his possessions and so forth.  He led a life of solitude and isolation. What did he achieve in the end? He achieved enlightenment in that very lifetime. This is the real meaning of giving up this life. It is the best lifestyle. 
The essence is giving up attachment to this life’s happiness, possessions, wealth, property and relationships.   Even if one cannot give up these up completely, first, one has to reduce one’s attachment to them. Otherwise, there is really no mental space for meaningful Dharma practice to come about if we still have very strong grasping to our family and friends, relationships, power, possessions, wealth and so forth. It is impossible to desire these things and, at the same time, expect to practise the Dharma.
If you examine the teachings of the great Kadampa masters, their teachings are short and direct. People may not find them particularly poetic or pleasing to the ears. They are hard truths that are really ‘in your face.’ The Kadampa masters summarized it very succinctly—if you cannot give up attachment to this life, nothing you do will become Dharma. It sounds so unpleasant. We don’t like it. But it is the truth.
Thinking about our own impending death and impermanence is so important. It is only when we can take the teachings on death and impermanence to heart, remembering them all the time that our mind can be persuaded to practise the Dharma. So that is the first step in practising the Dharma. These are the practices of a person of small capacity. We should start from there. 
When we do not take the teachings on death and impermanence to heart, reflecting on them deeply all the time, we will continue to live our life in the way we are doing now. We will cruise along. Everything seems to run very smoothly. But comes the day when we have to die, we will end up with very strong regret at the time of our death.
So the very first Dharma practice is practising to completely give up our attachment to this life. We have to see for ourselves how our attachment to this life is the source of all our problems. This is not difficult if we are honest with ourselves. Whatever problems and difficulties we meet in our daily life, they all boil down to our grasping at the happiness of this life. If we analyse this properly, we will be able to see that our attachment to this life is the root of all our problems and difficulties.
We have to see for ourselves whether this is true. We have to think whether all our problems and difficulties are due to our attachment to this life. We have to see for ourselves whether we agree with this or not. If it is true—that our attachment to the happiness of this life is the source of all our problems—then in order to solve our problems, we have to get rid of our attachment to this life. When we are able to reduce and finally eliminate our attachment to this life, the problems will go away. At the very least, mentally, we will feel relieved. Just by subduing our attachment, suddenly, our problems are gone. This is the Dharma that takes away our unhappiness!
I think all of you know this already. You have heard these teachings many times. It is clear from this that just knowing the teachings may not benefit us. We have to use this knowledge and think about it until we have tasted the Dharma for ourselves. Seeing the validity of those teachings, through that experience, our mind will feel relieved. The benefit comes when we see our mind being transformed. So just knowing the Dharma alone doesn’t benefit.
As I mentioned before, there is a way to think when we receive teachings.  When we receive teachings, we should regard the teachings as instructions that are specially tailored for us. We should not look at them as just general teachings. Rather, we should regard whatever teachings we hear in this way, “These are personal instructions tailored just for me, no one else.” From our own side, we should have some devotion towards and trust in the person from whom we receive the teachings. This will make a big difference and impact to our mind. 
~~~~~~~~~~~
In the last lesson, we looked at the views of the different tenets as to who Guru Shakyamuni Buddha was and how he achieved enlightenment. 
According to the Great Exposition School (GES), a Hinayana tenet, while the person who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha was on the path, he accumulated the collections for a very long period of time. Finally at the end, in his last life, he was born as Prince Siddhartha. In that life, he newly achieved the state of enlightenment. This is the summary of what we covered in the last lesson.
The Mahayana has different views on this. According to the Mahayana, before the Buddha became Shakyamuni Buddha, he also accumulate the collections for a very long period of time. The person who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment in Akanishta pure land. He achieved enlightenment in the form of the complete enjoyment body. With that complete enjoyment body as the basis of emanation, the supreme emanation body descended into our world, the southern continent, and engaged in the twelve deeds, starting from conception all the way to the passing of parinirvana.
So according to the Mahayana, the being who performed the twelve deeds was not an ordinary sentient being but a buddha. These deeds were not performed by an ordinary sentient being but were performed by the supreme emanation body of the Buddha. 
THE FIRST TURNING OF THE WHEEL OF DHARMA
In essence, the assertion as to how Guru Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment is the same in the Paramitayana, Causal Perfection Vehicle, and the Mantra Vehicle. After achieving full enlightenment, the Buddha did not teach for forty-nine days. It was only on the forty-ninth day that the Buddha met the first five fortunate disciples in Sarnath, near Varanasi, and turned the Wheel of Dharma for the first time.
When the Buddha first approached his five former companions to give the first teachings, they were initially quite apprehensive. Why was that so? Before the Buddha achieved enlightenment, they had been companions practising the austerities together but after a few years, Prince Siddhartha discontinued that practice as he decided that was not the way to practise. As such, these five individuals felt that Prince Siddhartha was weak as he had given up his practice. 
When Shakyamuni Buddha approached them, they had a discussion and decided that they will simply prepare a seat for him but there was no need to rise and pay respect to the Buddha. But as the Buddha come closer and closer, due to the power of the Buddha’s magnificence, they stood up, paid respect and invited the Buddha to take his seat. They were awestruck by the power of the Buddha’s magnificence. 
They were very curious and said to the Buddha, “You really look different now. You are so magnificent.” Then they asked the Buddha, “What happened? Are you enlightened?”
The Buddha replied, “Yes, I have become a buddha. I am fully omniscient.”
It is said that when the Buddha made this declaration, spontaneously, these five former companions were ordained.
There is also a historical account of how the gods, Indra and Brahma, requested the Buddha to turn the Wheel of Dharma. When they made this request, they gave a thousand-spoked golden dharmachakra as an offering. 
The Buddha examined, “Where should this Dharma teaching be given? Where did the buddhas of the past turn the Wheel of Dharma?” The Buddha then had a vision of a thousand jewelled thrones set up in Sarnath. He saw that he was sitting on the fourth throne. He circumambulated the first three thrones three times. Then he took his place on the fourth throne. On the fourth throne, he taught the Dharma for the first time to the five fortunate disciples.
In that first sermon, the Buddha talked about the four noble truths. First, he made a statement about what the truths were. 
True sufferings are to be known.  
True origins are to be abandoned. 
True cessations are to be actualized. 
True paths are to be cultivated. 
It is said that as a result of hearing this first teaching from the Buddha, the five fortunate disciples achieved the path of seeing. 
During the first turning of the Wheel of Dharma, besides the teaching on the four noble truths, Buddha also explained the workings of karma, the four close placements of mindfulness and so forth.
THE SECOND TURNING OF THE WHEEL OF DHARMA
The second turning of the Wheel of Dharma took place at Vulture’s Peak at Rajagriha. Historically, it was said that the first five fortunate disciples accompanied the Buddha to Vulture’s Peak. The Buddha primarily taught the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras there. The intended disciples of this second turning of the Wheel of Dharma was mainly the bodhisattvas. It was said that there were numberless bodhisattvas present at this turning of the Wheel of Dharma.
THE THIRD TURNING OF THE WHEEL OF DHARMA
The third turning of the Wheel of Dharma was performed at Vaishali and was for both the Hinayana and Mahayana disciples. In that turning of the Wheel of Dharma,   one major sutra that was taught was The Sutra Unravelling the Intended Meaning (also known as The Sutra Unravelling the Thought). Sutras such as the Tathagata-garbha or The Tathagata Essence were included in the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma. The subject matter of this third turning of the Wheel of Dharma was directed at disciples who were predisposed to the view of the Mind Only School (MOS).
In terms of the yanas or vehicles, the first turning of the Wheel of Dharma at Sarnath was intended primarily for the followers of the Hinayana. 
In terms of tenets, the view of reality presented was that asserted by the Great Exposition School and the Sutra School.
The second and the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma were intended for the followers of the Mahayana. 
In the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the view that was taught was mainly meant for those who were inclined towards the Middle Way School (MWS).
In the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the view that was taught was adhered to by the followers of the Mind Only School (MOS). 
It is also said that the Buddha established the presentation of the basis (what constitutes reality), the path and the result (of cultivating the path)—the foundation for the entire Buddhadharma—during the first turning of the Wheel of Dharma. 
Having laid the foundation during the first turning of the Wheel of Dharma for the entire Buddhadharma, at the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the Buddha elaborated in greater depth and with greater clarity the basis, i.e., the two truths. Based on the presentation of the basis, the Buddha proceeded to give an extensive explanation as what constitutes the path, method and wisdom. Then the Buddha explained the results of the path to be the two kayas or the two bodies. 
In the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma, as elaborated in the sutra, The Tathagata Essence, the Buddha explains that all sentient beings possess in them the potential that is suitable to be transformed into the two bodies of a buddha, the truth body and the form body. The Buddha said that if one works hard to develop the mind that directly perceives the suchness of its factor of luminosity and awareness, i.e., the emptiness of the mind, and develops that realisation to culmination, the potential that already exists within one will be transformed into the truth body and the form body, and all obscurations can be removed. 
In the Sublime Continuum or the Uttaratantra, Maitreya explained how the mind is clear light, our defilements are adventitious by employing nine analogies and then using them to explain the nine meanings. 
On the basis of these three turnings of the Wheel of Dharma culminating with the explanations of the Tathagata Essence, the secret mantra (or Vajrayana) teachings were added. These teachings could be seen as an extension of the teachings that the mind is clear light given during the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma. Here, the Buddha had already established the path, i.e., method and wisdom, resulting in the two bodies. 
In the Vajrayana, there are more detailed, profound and clearer explanations as to what constitutes the method and what constitutes wisdom. There are more detailed, profound and clearer explanations of what constitutes the factor of method in tantra. 
With regard to the factor of wisdom, especially in highest yoga tantra, there are more profound explanations of the mind that understands and realizes emptiness. 
In a way the Vajrayana teachings are built upon what the Buddha has established earlier. Especially in highest yoga tantra, there is an explanation of the path and the result in relation to what all sentient beings already possess—the extremely subtle wind-mind that all sentient beings possess that in nature has always been an inseparable entity. Based on that, there is a profound explanation of how method and wisdom are an inseparable entity on the path thus culminating in the result that is also an inseparable union of both the form and truth bodies. 
THE SUTRIC GROUNDS AND PATHS
With reference to the chart above, it is clear that we are talking about the Mahayana sutric grounds and paths. In order to achieve enlightenment, one has to accumulate the collections over three countless great eons and actualize the five paths: 
the Mahayana path of accumulation 
the Mahayana path of preparation 
the Mahayana path of seeing 
the Mahayana path of meditation 
the Mahayana path of no more learning 
When does a path arise in the mind?
A path arises in the mind when renunciation is generated. In order to have this renunciation, first, we must completely give up attachment to this life. On that basis, we renounce samsara in its entirety. Effortlessly, day and night, there is the heartfelt wish, “I must achieve liberation. I have to free myself from cyclic existence.” When there is such heartfelt renunciation day and night, that is when the path arises. 
The first path that arises is called the path of accumulation because day and night, one is thinking only of how to achieve liberation. So, on this path, one is working hard to accumulate the causes for liberation. 
The path of accumulation is divided into: 
small 	
medium	
great 
In the last module with regard to the 37 aspects of the path to enlightenment, we related them to the path of accumulation in the following way: 
On the small path of accumulation, the main practice is the four close placements of mindfulness. 
On the medium path of accumulation, the main practice is the four correct abandonments 
On the great path of accumulation, the main practice is the four legs of magical emanations. 
The four close placements of mindfulness is correlated to the small path of accumulation. We should practise them as they are very useful. This is just to remind you what was covered in the previous module. The meditation on the four close placements of mindfulness is to counteract the four erroneous conceptions: 
conceiving the impure to be pure 
conceiving that which is impermanent to be permanent 
conceiving that which is in the nature of suffering to be happiness
conceiving that which is selfless to have a self 
We are talking about the Mahayana path here. When renunciation is generated, a path arises in the mind with the thought seeking liberation. When we talk about liberation, it does not necessarily mean lower nirvana. Here we are referring to the non-abiding nirvana. In the context of the Mahayana path of accumulation, the bodhisattva has great courage and determination in accumulating the collections.
You will recall from the last module that there is a practice called achieving through armour that refers to the great determination and resolve to practise the six perfections—not just the six perfections individually, but rather, within the practice of each perfection, to include the practice of all the other perfections. For example, when the bodhisattva is practising the perfection of generosity, he is resolved to integrate the practices of the other perfections into that practice. 
Since we are talking about the Mahayana path, one doesn’t enter the Mahayana path based on renunciation alone. If one has not generated bodhicitta, then there is no way to start on the Mahayana path. So, on the basis of renunciation, bodhicitta has to be generated. So the arising of uncontrived bodhicitta marks the beginning of the Mahayana path. 
Here is a question for the older students. When one enters the Mahayana path, are renunciation and bodhicitta generated together at the same time or are they generated serially?
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand the question? I better ask questions. When I talk too much I am not sure whether you are sleeping or not! This is not such a difficult question. 
Student 1:  They do not happen together. Renunciation means you are willing to give up the things you are attached to. But once I have done that, it doesn’t mean that I will automatically have the wish wanting to work for all sentient beings. I think it goes step by step. I need to be able to renounce first. Then I generate bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: So she is saying renunciation comes first followed by bodhicitta. Is that correct? 
Another question: If renunciation comes first, in order to generate bodhicitta, you need to go through the seven steps such as recognizing all sentient beings to be our mothers and so forth. At which step do you have renunciation?
This is our last topic in the Basic Program. You should know all these things by now. This is nothing new. You are already doing the module on tantra. Nobody wants to say anything? How are you going to graduate? 
Hup Cheng (Student 2) has a lot of good answers. He doesn’t come to class but he can follow what is going on!.
Student 2: My take is that the cultivation of renunciation comes first before the cultivation of bodhicitta. Lama Tsongkhapa’s The Three Principles of the Path talks about the cultivation of renunciation first and after that, he goes on to talk about the cultivation of bodhicitta. They are achieved through different causes and mind trainings such as the four close placements of mindfulness. 
If you have the unmistaken realization of renunciation, then your Dharma practice becomes pure Dharma practice. Otherwise, even your bodhicitta can become corrupted and not pure bodhicitta. So, my understanding is that it should be renunciation first followed serially by bodhicitta. 
Khen Rinpoche: So that is the order Lama Tsongkhapa gave in The Three Principles of the Path? That means understanding emptiness comes after the generation of bodhicitta? That means it is not possible to realise emptiness before generating bodhicitta? 
Student 2: Emptiness is supposed to be presented last in The Three Principles of the Path. There are separate causes for bodhicitta and emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Is it possible to realise emptiness before generating bodhicitta? 
Student 2: Logically speaking, you can realize emptiness before you realize bodhicitta. They come about from two separate causes
Khen Rinpoche: But Lama Tsongkhapa said renunciation, bodhicitta and emptiness. How can it come before? 
Your reason is because Lama Tsongkhapa said so. You said that renunciation comes first. In order to generate bodhicitta, there are seven steps. During which step does renunciation happen? After or before the seven steps? 
Student 2:  I would say it comes before the seven steps. It should be cultivated separately. 
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it the case that when renunciation occurs, the path arises simultaneously? Isn’t it the case that anybody who develops renunciation has entered the path?
Student 2: Yes, you defined that just now. With the generation of renunciation, then you enter the path. Without renunciation, it doesn’t become the path. 
If you extend this to the Mahayana path, then you conjoin renunciation with the altruistic motivation to achieve enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings to enter the Mahayana path. 
Khen Rinpoche: So when one generates uncontrived renunciation, does one enter the path?
Student 2: Yes, you enter the path.
Khen Rinpoche: Among the five paths, which path do you enter?
Student 2: The path of accumulation.  
Khen Rinpoche:  The five paths is either the five Mahayana Paths or the five Hinayana paths. If you say it is not the Mahayana path, then you are left only with the Hinayana path. 
Student 3: Yes, you enter the Hinayana path first. 
Khen Rinpoche: So in order to enter the Mahayana path, isn’t it the case that you have to enter the Hinayana path? There is no choice. 
Student 2: Yes. If that is your argument, then logically, you have to enter the Hinayana path first. 
Khen Rinpoche:  So you enter the Hinayana path of accumulation and you reach the Hinayana path of no more learning. Only after that is when you start meditating on how others are your mothers is it? 
Student 2: Good question. I am not very sure. You said you need renunciation to enter the path. Otherwise, it doesn’t qualify as a path. 
Khen Rinpoche: We will stop here. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.