Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L37FINAL_.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.699662
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 37	 				                                       31 August 2017
Q&A. Root text: Pages 98—. How to keep the vows and commitments purely. How to practice the path. How to meditate on the two stages. How to meditate on the generation stage—debating the definition of the generation stage. 
Q & A 
Khen Rinpoche: If you have questions from your Sunday discussion that you need clarification on, maybe you can ask just one or two questions.
Student 1:  In deity yoga, the nature of the appearance of the deity is a phenomena source form. With reference to the Lorig we learnt in an earlier module, the conceptual mind has no observed object condition. Therefore, before the path of seeing, how can the mind perceive the appearance of the deity?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you asking about the appearance of the deity, which is a phenomena form source and how it can be the observed object condition?
Student 1: How can it appear to a conceptual mind? 
Ven. Gyurme: Are you saying the appearing object has to be meaning generality, a permanent phenomenon?
Khen Rinpoche: As an example, to the thought apprehending a vase, a vase appears. To the thought apprehending form, form appears. We are not saying anything that appears to a thought is always a permanent phenomenon. As for the appearance of the deity’s body to our thought, there is a part of it that is a composed phenomenon. This means it’s not necessarily a permanent phenomenon.
Student 2: We learnt that through familiarity, the object of meditation can become a
reality. The difficulty for me is this. Something is dependently designated. E.g., a god, human or hungry ghost posits the same base to be nectar, water and pus respectively.
If that being posits something else other than what they are positing, eventually it will become that object. A human positing the base of water to be nectar, eventually it will become nectar. Other than saying it is due to the ripening of virtuous imprints, how should I understand if you posit something long enough, that becomes an object in reality? For example, if you were to posit the appearance of a deity’s body long enough, you will become the deity’s body. 
Khen Rinpoche: For example, if we visualize a flower, that visualized flower has an imputed form. It is said that through repeated familiarity of the imputed flower over time, there are people to whom that imputed flower will actually become a flower one can touch like a real flower.
In the generation stage of Highest Yoga Tantra, when the meditator achieves calm abiding, the appearance of the deity’s body is so real that that experience is no different from actually seeing a deity’s body. This clear appearance of the deity’s body achieved by the meditator on the generation stage, while it appears so real and so clearly, is not an actual deity’s body. The actual deity’s body is only achieved on higher levels of the completion stage. 
During the completion stage, when the meditator achieves the final mental isolation, the extremely subtle mind realizes emptiness. That mind is called the example clear light. It acts as the cooperative condition while the extremely subtle wind that is one entity with this mind acts as the substantial cause. 
With the extremely subtle mind and wind coming in as the cooperative condition and substantial cause respectively, the meditator arises as the illusory body. This illusory body is an actual deity’s body. This is how it is explained in Highest Yoga Tantra. This illusory body that is an actual deity’s body is not like a coarse body. Rather, it’s a subtle body that is established from the mere subtle wind-mind. 
~~~~~~~~~~~~
How to keep the vows and commitments purely
Second, if while meditating …
…
…  even at the cost of your life. (p. 98) 
When one obtains an empowerment (or wang) in Highest Yoga Tantra, one takes the bodhisattva vows and the tantric vows. After taking these vows, one must strive to guard them against any downfalls. In order to do that, one must know what the vows and commitments (or samayas) are. So guarding the vows and commitments purely is extremely important, without which no siddhis (or attainments) will be achieved. 
In particular, strive intently … according to the rite. (p. 98)
With regard to the tantric vows, you must know what the downfalls are. There are 14 root downfalls, eight heavy transgressions and many other branch commitments. There are also the 19 commitments of the five buddha lineages that have to be observed also. 
There are people who believe it is not a must to avoid alcohol or intoxicants after taking the tantric vows. They say since it’s not mentioned among the root downfalls, therefore it’s not a root downfall. It is only a branch commitment. 
It is mentioned in the Six-Session Guru Yoga that one should “abandon the four basic non-virtues, as well as liquor.” It’s clear it’s a branch commitment to avoid alcohol. There are also other branch commitments such as abandoning the ten non-virtues, cultivating the ten virtues and so forth. In particular, it’s usually emphasized how important it is to avoid being stained by a root downfall. If one is stained by a root downfall, there’s no way to achieve the siddhis, including the supreme siddhi in this life. However, if one is stained by a root downfall, one should restore the tantric vows through the proper rites. If one has engaged in and completed an approximation of the deity, one can purify and restore the tantric vows through self-initiation. If not, one has to obtain the empowerment again.
For it is said …
…
…  no matter how hard you strive. (p. 98)
These may be understood … in the Cluster of Siddhis. (p. 99)
Having obtained the empowerment and properly guarded the vows and commitments, how is the path of Highest Yoga Tantra practised? 
How to practice the path
This third section … enhancing these two stages (p. 99)
How to meditate on the two stages
This has two sections: … the completion stage (p. 99)
How to meditate on the generation stage
Debating the definition of the generation stage 
Paṇchen Losang Chökyi Gyaltsen …
…
… birth, death, and the intermediate state.” (p. 100)
Reply: I think he means …
…
… related to birth, death, or the intermediate state. (p. 100)
In order to understand the definition, there are a few things to sort out.
What is the difference between the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel and not entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel? 
What is this meditation on aspects that are concordant with death, the intermediate state and rebirth?
But before one can sort out these points, I think we must have some understanding at least of the practice of taking the three bodies as the path. If you have some idea of this, then this definition of the generation stage will be easier to understand. 
THE PRACTICE OF TAKING THE THREE BODIES AS THE PATH
Let’s look at this practice of taking the three bodies as the path. 
First, you need to have some idea of the presentation of the three bodies:
the three bodies that are the basis of purification 
the three bodies that are the paths that purify 
the three bodies that are the result of purification
The three bodies that are the basis of purification
The truth body (or the dharmakaya) of the basis is ordinary death, i.e., the mind at the time of death. The mind at the time of death is given the name the truth body of the basis. 
After death, one takes rebirth. Before one takes rebirth, one enters the intermediate state. The intermediate state is the enjoyment body of the basis. 
From the intermediate state, one takes rebirth. This is given the name, the emanation body of the basis. 
These are the three bodies of the basis – death, intermediate state and birth. 
The three bodies that are the paths that purify
Highest Yoga Tantra is the method for purifying these three bodies so as to achieve the three bodies that are the result of purification, i.e., the three resultant bodies. 
The method to purify the three bodies of the basis is the generation stage and the completion stage of Highest Yoga Tantra.  
There are the three bodies that are the purifiers in relation to the generation stage
There are the three bodies that are the purifiers in the completion stage 
~ Generation stage
There are the three bodies during the generation stage practice. If you look at any self-generation rite of Highest Yoga Tantra, at the time of generating as a deity, it starts with, Om Svabhava Shuddha Sarva Dharma Svabhava Shuddho Ham. Then the practice starts. The generation stage is performed at the level of visualization. It is 
make-believe only. 
Here using Vajrabhairava as an example. 
One meditates on emptiness.
Then one imagines that the mind has ascertained the meaning of emptiness and this mind is the resultant dharmakaya. (This is the practice of taking death as the path of the truth body). 
Then one arises from that into the sambhogakaya in the form of youthful Manjughosha. This is the practice of taking the intermediate state as the path of the enjoyment body. 
From that one arises into Vajrabhairava with nine faces, 34 arms and 16 legs.  One thinks this is the resultant emanation body. This is the practice of taking rebirth as the path of the emanation body. 
In the context of Vajrabhairava, these are the three bodies of the generation stage. 
These meditations that are done in the generation stage are just make-believe at the level of visualization. It is not the case one has achieved the actual body of the deity.  One imagines, “I have achieved this … I have achieved that.” This is where part of the definition comes into play. 
The purpose of the generation stage is that it acts as a ripener. It is a yoga (or practice) that ripens the mental continuum of the individual for its completion stage that is the result. Although it is at the level of visualization, nevertheless, this practice matures (or ripens) the mind to be able to actualize the three bodies of the completion stage. This is why in the definition it says that it is a yoga that, “newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death and the intermediate state.” “Newly investigates” means it is just an imputation at the level of make-believe. 
We talk about the three bodies of the basis of purification. Other than being just a terminology, what do the three bodies of the basis of purification refer to? It refers to three things—ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth—that are to be eliminated. How do we do that? We meditate on the generation stage and the completion stage. 
Essentially, here in Highest Yoga Tantra, we are talking about a path that meditates on aspects that are concordant with ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth for the purpose of overcoming ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth. 
~~Meditating on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death
Let’s look at the first one—meditating on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death during the generation stage. How does one meditate on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death in the generation stage? 
Essentially, it’s the meditation on emptiness. If one has realized emptiness, that is the real meditation. But even if this is not the case, at least at the level of correct belief, one thinks that although one has not realized emptiness yet, one imagines that one has realized emptiness and so forth. Such a meditation is the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death. 
~~Meditating on the aspect that is concordant with the ordinary intermediate state
From within that meditation on emptiness, from the visualized dharmakaya, one arises as the enjoyment body. Depending on the Highest Yoga Tantra that we are talking about:
In Vajrabhairava, one arises as youthful Manjughosha. 
In Vajrayogini, one arises as the syllable Bam.
In Heruka Chakrasamvara, one arises as the nada. 
This is the practice of taking the intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya. At this point, one is meditating on the aspect that is concordant with the intermediate state. 
~~Meditating on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary rebirth
In the practice of Vajrabhairava, from Manjughosha, one arises as Vajrabhairava with nine faces, 34 arms and 16 legs. This is the practice of taking ordinary rebirth as the path of the emanation body. 
In the generation stage, taking Vajrabhairava as an example, at the time of the meditation on emptiness, one imagines that the mind realizing emptiness is the actual dharmakaya. 
After one has arisen as the youthful Manjughosha, one imagines that this is the actual enjoyment body. 
Then when one arises into the full form of Vajrabhairava, one imagines, “This is
the actual emanation body.” Based on that, one must elicit clear appearance and divine pride. 
Since these are generation stage practices, the so-called three bodies are not the actual bodies. They only arise at the level of imagination. As such, it’s called a yoga that “newly investigates” or newly imputes.
The purpose of the generation stage is to stop ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth. But it is not the actual stopping as this is not done at the generation stage. 
~Completion stage 
In the completion stage, there are the three bodies of the completion stage. 
When one achieves the example clear light of the final mental isolation, after that,
there is the meaning clear light. These two, the example clear light and the mean-
ing clear light, are the truth body (dharmakaya) of the completion stage. 
The example clear light of the final mental isolation acts as the cooperative condition for achieving the impure illusory body and the meaning clear light acts as the cooperative condition for achieving the pure illusory body. These two illusory bodies—the impure illusory body and the pure illusory body—are the complete enjoyment body of the completion stage.
The impure illusory body has not severed the relationship with the physical body that is its support. So the impure illusory body has to enter the physical body that is its support. From there, the individual can work for others. This is the emanation body of the completion stage. 
What about the pure illusory body? The pure illusory body has severed its connection with the physical body that is its support. It does not need to depend on the physical body that is its support. But in order to work for others, the meditator can re-enter the physical body, thereby assuming a coarse body through which he can work for sentient beings. But even without doing that, the pure illusory body can also work for others.  This is also the emanation body of the completion stage. 
The actual stopping of ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth is only achieved at a certain level of the completion stage. 
In the completion stage when one achieves the example clear light of the final mental isolation, one realizes emptiness. The example clear light is the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness and it is that mind that actually purifies ordinary death. 
As such, for that individual, there is no more ordinary intermediate state. Instead of arising into the ordinary intermediate state, in its place, when the meditator arises from his meditative equipoise, he achieves the impure illusory body that is the substitute for the ordinary intermediate state. It is said that the person who has achieved this impure illusory body will achieve enlightenment with that basis. 
Since there is no more intermediate state for this individual, there is also no more rebirth. 
This example clear light is an extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness but it is not a direct realization of emptiness. The realization of emptiness is still via a meaning generality. As such, it possesses dual appearances. There is debate about whether this is a conceptual mind or not. I would think it is a conceptual mind.
When the extremely subtle mind realizes emptiness directly, it becomes the meaning clear light that by nature is direct perception. When this meaning clear light is achieved, this meaning clear light of the fourth stage is the direct antidote to all the afflictive obscurations. When the meditator arises from that, he achieves the pure illusory body. 
You have to keep this in mind. 
There are the three bodies of the path. When you look at them in greater detail, there are the three bodies at the time of the generation stage and the three bodies at the time of the completion stage.
When the completion stage is culminated, i.e., when one reaches the end of the completion stage, one achieves the three resultant bodies, the results of the purification—the wisdom truth body, the enjoyment body and the emanation body.
In the definition of the generation stage, it is the meditation on the aspect that is concordant with birth, death and the intermediate state. Here, birth, death and the intermediate state are the three bases of purification—the three bodies of the basis. 
Perhaps we can use this analogy to describe the process. When we mine for gold, we dig for it. What we get is just the deposit. The gold is there but it is embedded among all kinds of different things such as the soil, different minerals and so forth, depending on where we dig. So the gold is there but it is not visible yet. We have to wash and extract it using all kinds of chemicals and processes. Only after that can you get the actual gold.  This process is similar to what is being done in the completion stage. With the gold, you can fashion it into jewellery, ear-rings or ornaments. Those are the end products. That is like the three bodies of the result, the results of purification.
The purpose here is to overcome ordinary death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth.
When ordinary death is overcome, there is no more intermediate state. 
When there is no more intermediate state, then there is no more rebirth. 
With regard to emptiness as the object, in sutra and tantra, the emptiness is the same. The difference between sutra and tantra lies in the mind that realizes emptiness. You can see the huge difference between tantra and sutra because in Highest Yoga Tantra, the mind that realizes emptiness is the extremely subtle mind.
With regard to the objects of abandonment, what are described in sutra is basically the same as what are asserted here in Highest Yoga Tantra. There are the afflictive obscurations and there are also the knowledge obscurations.
The knowledge obscurations consist of two things—the predispositions of ignorance together with the factor of the mistaken dualistic appearance that arises due to that. Here, in Highest Yoga Tantra, the knowledge obscurations primarily refer to the appearance of true existence. Although the object of abandonment is similar, the mind that acts as the antidote to these obscurations is different.
In Highest Yoga Tantra, the description of what is posited as the knowledge obscurations is much subtler than that posited in sutra. Yes, we talk about the predispositions of ignorance and the mistaken dualistic appearances that arise due to that. But in Highest Yoga Tantra, they talk about the three minds: 
the mind of appearance
the mind of increase 
the mind of near attainment
These three minds are very subtle minds but they are posited to be conceptual minds. As such, they possess dualistic appearance. These three are posited as the knowledge obscurations in Highest Yoga Tantra. Such a presentation is not found in sutra. Because these three minds are so subtle, one must generate a very special mind that takes emptiness as its object that can act as the antidote to these three minds. As such, this is one special feature of Highest Yoga Tantra, the generation of the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness, a special mind that can act as the antidote to these very subtle knowledge obscurations.
From this, you can see why one needs to depend on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra to achieve enlightenment. In order to achieve enlightenment, you need to abandon the very subtle knowledge obscurations. In order to abandon these extremely subtle obscurations, you need to generate a mind that is powerful enough to overcome them. Such a method is found only in Highest Yoga Tantra. From this, you can see how without entering into Highest Yoga Tantra, there is no way to achieve enlightenment.
If somebody were to ask you why you must enter Highest Yoga Tantra to achieve enlightenment, you must be able to answer him.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the answer? I have already told you the answer. You have already forgotten! OK. We talk more the next time.
Student 3: After one has taken the Highest Yoga Tantra initiation with the said downfalls and secondary branches, it is said you should restore them by confessing according to the rite—the self-initiation rite or taking the initiation again. I am just wondering whether the 100-syllable Vajrasattva purification or confession and prostrations to the 35 buddhas will purify those mistakes of the ten non-virtues and downfalls. Speaking for myself, honestly, the probability is very high (that I have committed those downfalls).
Khen Rinpoche: I will answer in the next class. We do tsog now.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 