Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L64FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.513223
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 64 				                                                        19 May 2018
Object clear light & subject clear light. Root text, p. 131—138. Wrap-up of the generation stage. The completion stage. Classifying the stages in the completion stage. 
OBJECT CLEAR LIGHT & SUBJECT CLEAR LIGHT
In the sutra system, there is a presentation of the basis, path and result according to the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.  
We have settled upon the basis, the two truths.  
Based on that, there is a presentation of the path, the method and wisdom. 
By practising the path, one will attain the results, the two buddha bodies.
When we talk about clear light, there are actually two types of clear light:
the object clear light
In the sutra system, in the context of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the object clear light, which is emptiness, is emphasized.  In the middle Wheel of Dharma or the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the object clear light, emptiness, is presented extensively. 
the subject clear light
The subject clear light is referring to the clear light that is the object processor.  In the last Wheel of Dharma or the third turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the main presentation is the subject clear light or the clear light that is the object processor. 
In order to settle upon the subject clear light, there is the presentation of Highest Yoga Tantra. In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a very detailed presentation of the very subtle mind. Together with this very subtle mind is the very subtle wind.  
This very subtle mind is imputed the name, ultimate truth.  
The very subtle wind is imputed the name, conventional truth.
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, we say that coarse minds, such as the sense consciousnesses, are adventitious. For example, the minds such as white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment are said to be adventitious.  That means they arise adventitiously and cease adventitiously.  They are not stable and they do not dwell in the nature of the mind.  
What is the mind that goes on to buddhahood? It is difficult to posit our adventitious mind as a continuity of a similar type that goes on to the buddha ground. What goes to the buddha ground is this very subtle mind dwelling in the nature of our mind that remains in an unchanged manner.  Such a mind that is able to go on to buddhahood has this nature of clear and knowing.
We have a very subtle mind that is mounted on the very subtle wind.  These two dwell within us as one entity. Even though one is a form and the other a consciousness, they are able to stay together. The form—this wind that we are talking about here—is not referring to coarse form.  
If you are able to understand this point, then you will be able to derive a profound understanding of the statement, “All sentient beings are pervaded by the buddha lineage.” All sentient beings have this buddha nature or buddha lineage that is suitable to be transformed into a buddha’s body.  With this understanding, you understand that this very powerful potential exists in all living beings. As soon as sentient beings come into existence, they have such a nature.
But simply having the very subtle mind and the very subtle wind are not sufficient because we need to cause them to manifest. The very subtle mind is used to ascertain the object clear light, emptiness. Such a mind has the ability to dispel obscurations that are more subtle than the obscurations presented in the sutra system.  Such a mind will be able to abandon the subtle afflictive obscurations and subtle knowledge obscurations.
By cultivating this meaning clear light or actual clear light, you will be able to eliminate the two obscurations.  It is said that the continuity of a similar type of this meaning clear light or actual clear light becomes the dharmakaya or dharma body of a buddha.
Now the mount of this meaning clear light is the very subtle wind. Through meditating on the illusory body, this very subtle wind will actually arise as the fully- fledged deity, i.e., it becomes the actual deity. This illusory body that is a continuity of a similar type will become the actual form body of a buddha or the rupakaya. 
In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra:
the conventional truth is said to be the illusory body
the ultimate truth is the clear light
Therefore, in Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a presentation of meditating on the two truths to attain the buddha body:
meditating on the conventional illusory body 
meditating on the ultimate clear light
Now, we have already finished explaining the generation stage.  On the generation stage, one uses one’s imagination to meditate on the supported and supporting mandala. Similarly, the processes of death, the intermediate stage and rebirth are meditated upon using imagination.  
On the generation stage, you are not able to actually produce a fully-fledged body of the deity. However, on the completion stage, you can produce such a fully-fledged body, i.e., an actual body of a deity.
If you want to attain the state of the union of non-learner—that is basically the union of a buddha’s body and a buddha’s mind—then there is no choice. You have to enter tantra. You have to study tantra and develop an understanding of the method to do that. So, it is crucial that you deposit the imprint or latency of how to do this.
We may do this explanation here but the actual attainment is difficult. Nevertheless, here, we try to understand what is necessary in order to attain such a state of the union of no-more-learning, what are the procedures and so on.  In doing so, we will be able to deposit latencies and leave imprints in our mind. This is important.  
All of you should focus your attention and listen to the explanation of the path of tantra. Please do so earnestly because if you are able to develop an understanding of how to practise the tantric path, you will leave imprints on your mind and these imprints will go along with you, life after life, so that you can continue to practise tantra. So, this is important.
We have completed the first of the two main sections, the section on the generation stage. Now we are going to look into the second section, the completion stage. We start with some outlines on how to meditate on the completion stage.
THE COMPLETION STAGE
How to meditate on the completion stage
This has two parts: …
…
… highest yoga tantras (p. 131)
“1. Explaining some classifications of the completion stage of the Ārya system”: what is being explained in this section is the practice of the stages of Guhyasamāja. This is because there are various explanations on how to practise the Guhyasamāja system.  The “Ārya system” refers to the system of Ārya Nāgārjuna. So, here we will find a brief explanation of the Guhyasamāja completion stage according to Nāgārjuna’s system.  
“2. Teaching in brief is the completion stage of the other highest yoga tantras”: tantras such as Vajrabhairava or Yamantaka, Heruka or Chakrasamvara are called different names but basically, these systems have the same procedure in terms of the practice.  However, the Kalachakra tantra has a different way of practice. In the second section, the Kalachakra tantra will be explained briefly.
Explaining some classifications of the completion stage of the Ārya system
The first has two sections: … each classification (p. 131)
The first of these has two sections and the first of the two subsections is, “Analyzing the definition.” 
Analyzing the definition
Paṇchen Chögyen states …
… 
… highest yoga tantra. (p. 134)  
It is not logically necessary …
…
… entering the central channel. (p. 134)
Let us look at this definition. 
It is stated that the completion stage is “derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.” So, this is the requirement of the completion stage. 
The definition also states that this is “the yoga in the mental continuum of a learner.” 
Now, there is a debate as to whether the completion stage has to belong to the mental continuum of a learner.  In any case, it is stated as such here. So, from this statement here, we would say that there is no completion state on the buddha ground.
In this definition, it is stated that the completion stage has to be “derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.”  
The point here is that it is not necessary that the completion stage yoga is derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. The example is given of the individual withdrawal and absorption in the Kalachakra system.  This take place before the winds enter the central channel, which means that it is not necessary that the completion stage yoga is derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel.  
This is why right after the definition, we see the statement, “But I think this definition refers to the general completion state of highest yoga tantra.” In general, we are referring to Guhyasamāja tantra, Yamantaka tantra and Heruka tantra because they have the same procedure. This means that the Kalachakra tantra is excluded. So if you want to posit this as a definition that applies to all types of Highest Yoga Tantra, then the definition actually contains a flaw.  But if you say that this definition is just for the general completion stage of Highest Yoga Tantra, meaning you exclude the Kalachakra tantra, then it is acceptable.  
I have already said many times before, in order to study well, you have to read this text many times before you come to class. You have to think about the meaning and then you come to class. Then you hear the explanation. You read it. You think about it. If you do that, you will develop a very good understanding.  However, if this is the first time ever that you are seeing this definition, then it is difficult for you to immediately form an understanding.  
Khen Rinpoche: You understand?  You must be seeing it for the first time or have you seen it many times already? Some say, “Many times.” Some say, “First time.”  I don’t know.  
I saw on the news that the British prince is going to get married today. The BBC news shows all these things. People have been waiting there from last night, sleeping on the road! I think hundreds of people were sleeping on the road with their sleeping bags, with the temperature going down to 10 or 7 degrees. They slept there the whole night.    
Then the news reporter came and asked questions, “How did you feel last night? Was it cold or not?”  Then the people replied, “Very cold!” “What are you waiting for, sleeping here the whole night?” The people answered, “We want to see what the prince’s wife, Megan’s dress will look like.” Many people answered like that. “If I get a chance, I will take a selfie with her. That is our goal for spending the whole night in the cold weather.” 
You see that when people have the interest, spending the whole night in the cold is not a problem.  They (Prince Harry and Megan) will walk by so fast. Even if it takes only one or two seconds, you will not have time for (taking a selfie). You will just have a glimpse of the dress but these people are willing to wait the whole night. 
I think you get what I am trying to say.  If you get my point, then OK.  It is very interesting how much hardship they are willing to put up with for less than two seconds. They just want to see what she will wear.  I saw that some people came from France, Spain and so on. They came from far away, spending so much money just to see The Dress!   
What I am trying to say is that you need to have focus when you are studying.  If you have mental determination, then studying will not be hard. But if you lack that, then studying will be a hardship for you.
Khen Rinpoche: You must have that kind of interest (just like these people who are going to see The Dress).  You must have the alertness, “Today, (Khen Rinpoche) is going to talk about something new!” Otherwise, (without that interest), nothing goes inside. But if you have that alertness, then when you hear some of the words, it’s like “Wow!” Otherwise, you are just (spacing out) … 
To study well, you need to have interest. That means you have to read beforehand.  Then you come to class. You read it again. You listen to the explanation. Then you will be able to leave good imprints. The material will stay in your mind.  That way, you will be able to study properly.  
Some debate on the definition of the completion stage
One says: It follows that …
…
… constitutes completion stage practice. (p. 135)
This is because …
…
… not logically necessary. (p. 135—136)
This person is saying that the definition is not logically necessary in the sense that according to the definition, “the yoga in the mental continuum of a learner derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation constitutes completion-stage practice.” 
He gives the reason, “This is because a generation-stage practice with such qualities exists.” So, even though it satisfies the definition, it is not a completion stage practice.
If you look at the bottom of page 135, it says that in the generation stage there is this causing of the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.  What reason does this person give for claiming that?  The reason is “because the four joys derived from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel exist in their mental continua,” referring to the mental continua of people on the generation stage.  
Our own system’s reply is on page 136, “That is not logically necessary” What this means is that there is no pervasion in the reason that the opponent had given.  
The opponent then explains why the reason is established.
The reason is established …
…
… in the completion stage. (p. 136)
What is this text, Illuminating Lamp by Lama Tsongkhapa, saying? He is talking about this point that we have discussed previously. 
A person practises the coarse generation stage. 
After that, he practises the subtle generation stage. 
Then he completes the subtle generation stage. 
It is possible for him to have the winds enter the central channel. 
Illuminating Lamp also says that some sharp-facultied generation stage practitioners are able to use the technique of converting union with an external consort into vitality exertion. By practising this vitality exertion, he can cause the winds to dissolve into the central channel and, as a result of that, he generates the four joys. 
But this text, Illuminating Lamp, continues to say, “However, if these two do occur during the generation stage, they must nonetheless be posited as paths of the completion stage.”
“These two” refer to the two we have seen earlier on: 
the first being that someone has completed the subtle generation stage and,  possibly, the winds can enter the central channel. 
the second refers to using the technique of entering into union with an external consort and so on. 
So, he is saying that if these two occur on the generation stage, they must be posited as the path of the completion stage. 
The text, Oral Transmission, by Jnānapāda says that “such innate states that arise during the empowerment before meditating on the path are included in the completion stage.” This means that before you meditate on the generation stage and completion stage, you have to receive an empowerment or initiation. The empowerments are of various types:
The first is the vase empowerment.
The second is the secret empowerment. 
The third is the knowledge wisdom empowerment.
The fourth is the word empowerment.
During the third empowerment, the knowledge wisdom empowerment, it is possible that the person receiving the initiation generates innate bliss, i.e., the “innate states.”  
This person has not meditated on the paths of the generation stage or the completion stage. If this person generates innate bliss, could this be said to be included in the completion stage? This is something we need to think about. This occurs before meditating on the path. This means this person has not even entered the generation stage. 
Our system’s reply: 
Your assertion is unacceptable …
…
… penetrating vital points in the body. (p. 137)
I have actually explained this point previously. Here, we are saying it is possible for the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel by completing the generation stage or by practicing vitality exertion using an external consort. However, this process of the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel does not occur through the power of meditation. Therefore, it is not considered a completion stage path. 
One says: Take such a path … it is a completion-stage path. (p. 137)
“The previously quoted text” here refers to Lama Tsongkhapa’s Illuminating Lamp where it is clearly stated that such a path belongs to the completion stage. This person is saying that. 
Reply: Though it is a realization …
…
…  This should be analyzed. (p. 137—138)
The person is saying that someone on the generation stage can generate the four joys by causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. But the question is: is this a completion stage? This person is saying, “Well, it is (a completion stage) because Lama Tsongkhapa said so.” 
But the reply to that is that what Lama Tsongkhapa said here is that this path “is a realization typical of the completion stage.” 
To summarize, if you were to ask whether someone on the generation stage can generate the four joys by causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel, the answer is yes. The question now is whether this is a completion stage path or not? 
When you look at Lama Tsongkhapa’s text, Illuminating Lamp, Lama Tsongkhapa says, “Yes, it is a completion stage path.”
But you must think about the fact that it is not reasonable to posit the existence of a completion stage path in the continuum of someone who is on the generation stage. That being the case, we then have to say, “It is not a completion stage path but it is a realization typical of the completion stage.” More literally, we should say, “It belongs to the class of the completion stage.” Many scholars give such an answer.  
The text on page 137 says that this path of the four joys derived from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel “belongs to neither the generation nor the completion stage.” Is this acceptable? This doubt arises due to the fact that in the continuum of someone on the generation stage, it is possible to have the four joys by causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. Would you posit this as a generation stage or a completion stage? This is something you have to think about.
Question: In the middle of page 136, there is the expression, “paths of the completion stage.” Then later on, on page 138, there is another expression, “completion-stage path.” Are both these expressions the same thing? 
Sze Gee: Is there any difference between “paths of the completion stage” and “completion-stage path”? In Tibetan, they are exactly the same. I think the translator just rendered them slightly differently. 
Question: It says here that the practice of the subtle generation stage and the union with consort are not completion stage practices “since this path does not arise due to meditating on the special method of penetrating vital points in the body.” Isn’t the subtle generation stage the meditation on the drops in the mandala, especially when they are positioned on certain parts of the chakras?
Answer: Previously, we have said that on the first two of the four levels—i.e., on the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom—there is no attainment of calm abiding. If you have laxity or excitation, then you meditate on the subtle drops. Once you have pacified laxity or excitation, you should return to the meditation on deity yoga. The purpose of meditating on the subtle drops on the first two levels is to pacify laxity and excitation. 
However, when you reach the third level—the level of those who have attained some control over exalted wisdom—you meditate on the subtle drops for the purpose of making the mind single-pointed. You don’t meditate on deity yoga but you focus on the subtle drops so that you can attain calm abiding or samatha. After that, for the sake of attaining special insight or vipassana, you do the meditation of emitting and reabsorbing. This explanation is given in the context of meditating on the generation stage to explain how you can attain calm abiding and special insight. 
When you are on the generation stage, you do not meditate on the subtle drops for the purpose of causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. This is something that you do on the completion stage. When you complete the subtle generation stage, it is possible for the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. However, you did not meditate on the subtle drop the size of a mustard seed in order to achieve that. On the generation stage, you meditate on the subtle drop, for example, to pacify laxity and excitation and to cultivate calm abiding and so on. This means that even though the winds enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel, the meditation was not done specifically to achieve that. 
So, you can see that Lama Tsongkhapa’s explanation comes in two sections. 
First, you have to practise the generation stage. 
You complete the coarse generation stage. 
You complete the subtle generation stage.
Then you practise the completion stage. 
In a text by Langdon Lama Rinpoche and the textbook used by Gyurme Tantric College, it is said, “You just have to complete the coarse generation stage. Without going on to the subtle generation stage, you can practise the completion stage.” Langdon Lama Rinpoche said in his text, Enumerations of the Grounds and Paths of Tantra, humans of this degenerate age have such short lives and there is no time. So, after completing the coarse generation stage, you can go on to practise the completion stage. 
However, Lama Tsongkhapa in his texts, such as the Clear Lamp on the Five Stages, states very clearly the stages or sequence of embarking on the path:
First, you complete the coarse generation stage.
Then you complete the subtle generation stage.
Then you go on to the completion stage.
He describes these stages as steps as if you are ascending a staircase. 
Khen Rinpoche: Before I read further, we better go through the chart on the five stages. Otherwise, you won’t know what I am talking about. This gives you some idea. After I read, it makes sense. Does everybody have the chart? 
The two stages of Highest Yoga Tantra are the generation stage and the completion stage. 
CLASSIFYING THE STAGES IN THE COMPLETION STAGE
Under the completion stage, we have the five completion stages of Guhyasamāja, according to Nagarjuna. 
In terms of these five stages, according to Arya Nagarjuna:  
The first stage is verbal isolation or isolation of speech. The first stage is also called vajra recitation (or vajra repetition). 
The second stage is mental isolation or isolation of the mind.
The third stage is the illusory body.
The fourth stage is the meaning clear light or the actual clear light.
The fifth stage is union. 
These are the five profound paths, according to Arya Nagarjuna. They are called the first stage, second stage, third stage, fourth stage and the fifth stage. You should remember them.  
When Nagarjuna listed verbal isolation as the first stage, he actually included physical isolation within it. He says the first stage vajra recitation is a case of the physical isolation or isolation of the body being included in the isolation of speech. 
If you enumerate these stages in terms of six stages, then you have:
The first stage is physical isolation (isolation of the body). 
The second stage is verbal isolation (isolation of speech).
The third stage is mental isolation (isolation of the mind). 
The fourth stage is the illusory body. 
The fifth stage is the meaning clear light or the actual clear light.
The sixth stage is union. 
There is also the enumeration of the stages as four stages:
The first stage is mental isolation. 
The second stage is the illusory body. 
The third stage is the meaning clear light or the actual clear light.  
The fourth stage is union.  
This would be a case of including physical isolation and verbal isolation within mental isolation.
There are various ways to classify the stages of the completion stage. You can have a four-fold classification. You can have a five-fold classification or a six-fold classification but they are not contradictory. 
Correlation with the grounds & paths—according to sutra system
The generation stage would occur on the path of accumulation. So, you would correlate the generation stage with the path of accumulation. 
The completion stage will correlate with the other paths. 
If we try to correlate the five stages with the paths that are described in the Perfection Vehicle or the Sutra Vehicle:
Physical isolation or the isolation of body will correspond to the heat level of the path of preparation.
Verbal isolation or isolation of speech will correspond to the peak level of the path of preparation.
Mental isolation or isolation of the mind corresponds to the forbearance level of the path of preparation. Mental isolation is divided into two levels: (1) mere mental isolation and (2) final mental isolation. 
The third stage called the illusory body corresponds to the supreme mundane level of the path of preparation.
The fourth stage of meaning or actual clear light corresponds to the uninterrupted path of the first ground of the path of seeing. With this fourth stage clear light, one is able to generate the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations that are to be abandoned by the path of seeing. But on this stage, of course, one is not able to abandon the innate afflictions.
In the sutra system, when you generate the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing, that serves as a direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations that are to be abandoned by the path of seeing. So, when you attain the liberated path, after that, you have abandoned the afflictive obscurations to be abandoned by the path of seeing. 
After that, you will go on to abandon the afflictions that are to be abandoned by the path of meditation. As soon as you attain the eighth ground, you have abandoned the innate afflictive obscurations.
But, in tantra, with a single uninterrupted path, you can abandon both the acquired and innate afflictive obscurations. This one uninterrupted path acts as the direct antidote to both the acquired and innate obscurations. When you hear this expression, “the fourth stage clear light,” you have to know that this is the uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations.
In general, the fifth stage union can be divided into two types:
the learner’s union 
the non-learner’s union.
Within learner’s union itself, there are also two types:
the learner’s union of abandonment 
the learner’s union of realization
Between these two types of learner’s unions, first, you attain the learner’s union of abandonment. Then you attain the learner’s union of realization.
With regard to the third stage illusory body, you can see that this is actually the impure illusory body. In general terms, there are two types of illusory body:
the impure illusory body 
the pure illusory body
However, when we say, “the third stage illusory body,” you must understand that this refers to the impure illusory body. In the context of enumerating the first stage vajra repetition, second stage mental isolation, third stage illusory body, fourth stage clear light and fifth stage union, the third stage illusory body can only refer to the impure illusory body.
In terms of this learner’s union of realization and abandonment, we are talking about that.
In terms of the illusory body, there are two types—one pure and one impure. 
When you generate the fourth stage clear light, you have the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. As soon as you have abandoned all the afflictive obscurations, you achieve the pure illusory body. That pure illusory body together with the mind of clear light is the union. So, these two—the pure illusory body and the meaning clear light—are combined into a single entity.
Khen Rinpoche: I made a mistake here.
On the fourth stage clear light, you have the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. As soon as the afflictive obscurations have been abandoned, you have the pure illusory body. So union refers to the union of abandonment and the pure illusory body. Instead of saying union is the union of clear light and the pure illusory body, we should say it is the union of the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations and the pure illusory body. The union of abandonment refers to this union of the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations and the pure illusory body.
Why do we say that this illusory body is pure? Such a person has already abandoned the afflictive obscurations. So, “pure” in that expression, “pure illusory body,” refers to being free from the afflictive obscurations. The illusory body is pure or impure based on whether or not the afflictive obscurations have been abandoned. 
In the case of an impure illusory body, that person has not yet abandoned the afflictive obscurations. 
In the case of the pure illusory body, that person has abandoned the afflictive obscurations.
One has already abandoned the afflictive obscurations but it is still necessary to meditate on the meaning clear light. One needs to manifest the meaning clear light. This is for the purpose of abandoning the knowledge obscurations. As soon as one manifests this meaning clear light, then one attains the learner’s union of realization. This learner’s union of realization, i.e., the final meaning clear light of the learner, corresponds to the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum in the sutra system. 
When you attain this learner’s union—the learner’s final meaning clear light—then you attain the union of the meaning clear light and the pure illusory body. When you attain such a union, you attain the learner’s union of realization. The realization that we talk about in the learner’s union of realization refers to this final meaning clear light of a learner. One attains this union that is the union of this clear light and the pure illusory body. This clear light and the illusory body are of one entity. Immediately after having actualized this final meaning clear light, then one has abandoned all the knowledge obscurations. This is the union in which the body and mind are of a single entity.
So, in order to attain the union of no-more-learning in which the body and mind have become an indivisible entity, you need to first attain the learner’s union of realization. 
And prior to that, you have to attain the learner’s union of abandonment.
This learner’s union of abandonment has to be preceded by the fourth stage meaning clear light. 
In terms of someone who enters the tantric path, before one can attain the fourth stage meaning clear light, you have to attain the impure illusory body. 
In order to attain such an illusory body, you need to first attain what is called the final mental isolation or final isolation of mind, i.e., the metaphoric or example clear light. There is no way to attain the illusory body without attaining that. This final isolation of mind that is the metaphoric or example clear light occurs on the path of preparation. At that point, one is still not able to directly realize the emptiness. One realizes emptiness with subtle dualistic appearance. 
The wind that is the mount of this final isolation of mind, the metaphoric or example clear light serves as the substantial cause of the impure illusory body. 
The final isolation of mind that is the example clear light serves as the cooperative condition for the impure illusory body.
In order to generate this final isolation of mind that is the example clear light, you need to gather all your winds into the central channel. Not only that, you have to gather them at the heart and have them absorb into the indestructible drop. If you are able to do that, then you are able to cause the very subtle mind to manifest. If you are not able to do that, then you will not be able to cause the final isolation of mind that is the example clear light to manifest.
When all the winds have been absorbed into the indestructible drop, then the various minds—white appearance, red increase, black near-attainment—will manifest and then finally, you have the clear light manifesting. At that point, emptiness appears in the manner of a meaning generality.
In order for all these winds to absorb into this indestructible drop at your heart, you have to engage in verbal isolation or isolation of speech. You engage this practice in order to loosen the knots at the heart. In order to do that, basically, you have to cause the winds to absorb into the central channel at your heart. By causing the winds to absorb into the central channel at your heart, then you engage in vajra recitation. By causing the wind to enter the central channel at the heart, then you are able to loosen the knots there. Then the winds are able to flow into the central channel at your heart.
In order to make it easier to loosen the knots at the heart and having the winds absorb into the indestructible drop, you have to practise first physical isolation or isolation of body by loosening the knots at the navel and the secret place. During this                 
stage of physical isolation belonging to the completion stage, you meditate on the subtle drop so that you can cause the winds to enter the central channel and loosen the knots at the navel and the secret place. In order to cause the winds to enter the central channel, there is the presentation of generating the four joys.
When you are practising physical isolation, you can cause the winds to enter the central channel but they are not able to enter the central channel at your heart.
So, by practising verbal isolation, you cause these winds to be able to enter the central channel at your heart.
With this wind absorbing into central channel at the heart, the four joys are generated and these are superior to the previous joys.
During the verbal isolation or isolation of speech, the winds are able to enter the central channel at the heart but they are not able to enter the indestructible drop at the heart.
During the stage of mental isolation or the isolation of the mind, there are two levels:
The mere isolation of mind 
The final isolation of mind
You are able to cause all the winds to enter into the indestructible drop at the heart and manifest the all empty clear light. Once you are able to manifest this final isolation of mind that is the metaphoric clear light, then you are pervaded with being able to generate the third stage impure illusory body. Once you attain this third stage illusory body, you will never die. On that basis, you will be able to attain buddhahood.
Khen Rinpoche: You will never die. That is what we need. If you don’t want to die, then you need to achieve the illusory body. There is no choice.
This completion stage is a practice on the basis of deity yoga. During the generation stage, you practise calm abiding and special insight, and you train in the clear appearance and divine pride of being the deity. Then you have to be able to clearly visualize the channels and then you can practise the completion stage.
The practice of the generation stage is very important. Because in order to practise the completion stage:
you need to have this clear appearance of being the deity 
you need to visualize this body that is made of light 
you have to visualize of the various deities. 
Therefore, the generation stage is indispensable because you need to have a very stable clear appearance and divine pride to practise the completion stage.
Those are the five stages according to Nagarjuna. It is important for you to know all these stages without any confusion. For example, as soon as you hear the expression, the fourth stage, you should know that this refers to the meaning clear light. As soon as you hear the term, the third stage, you should know that this refers to the impure illusory body. The details on what these various stages are will come later in the text. We will go slowly through those sections.
Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel 
Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 