Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L15.FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.705238
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 15 				                                                        25 May 2017
Debate practice: 1. Is it necessary to have entered the Causal Perfection Vehicle path before entering the Resultant Vajra Vehicle path? 2. Do you need to realise emptiness prior to entering the tantric path? 3. Prior to entering the tantric path, do you need to generate the mind that renounces cyclic existence?
4. Is it correct or not to generate our appropriated contaminated aggregates as the deity?
Is it necessary to have entered the Causal Perfection Vehicle path before entering the Resultant Vajra Vehicle path?

At the end of the last class, I asked you all a question: Is it necessary to have entered the Causal Perfection Vehicle path before entering the Resultant Vajra Vehicle path?
Do you have any answer to that question?
Isn’t it the case that when the entire structure of the path is presented, it talks about the path of the person of small capacity, the person of medium capacity and the person of great capacity. Only then does it talk about tantra. 
If you look at the stages of the path literature, it talks about the six perfections. In particular, Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lam Rim Chen Mo, he discusses calm abiding and special insight as separate topics. He talked about the six perfections but in particular, he focussed on the last two perfections. Only then did he talk about tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand the question? Now answer it. Just make your answer short. If you say, “No,” then explain your reason for saying so. Anyone is welcome to try. We are all learning. Please be brave. If you have thought about it, then it is good to share.
Student 1: It is not necessary for one to actually go through the whole path. I remembered in one of the lessons you mentioned that ...
Khen Rinpoche: My question is not about the whole path. Listen to my question:

In order to enter the path of the Resultant Vajra Vehicle, must one necessarily enter
the path of the Causal Perfection Vehicle? 
That’s my question. 
Student 1: Then my understanding is not really right. Then I don’t have an answer.
Khen Rinpoche: OK. Then sit down. The question hasn’t changed from the last lesson till now. The question is the same.
Student 2: It sounds different. The question was: In order to enter the tantric path, do you first have to enter the sutric path? …
Khen Rinpoche: It means the same thing. The meaning is exactly the same. What I said the previous night, the words are different but the meaning is the same: Before entering the tantric path, do you have to enter the sutric path (first)? The same question is being asked now. It is exactly the same. There is no difference. 
Student 3: I think the answer is still, “No.” If a person meets with tantric teachings and trains in the common paths shared with the persons of small, medium and great capacities—without having generating a path but having met the tantric teachings—and he generates the uncontrived special bodhicitta, he enters the tantric path without having to enter the sutric path.
Khen Rinpoche: Good answer. This is the correct answer. 
Student: 2:  Can I just add to that? Based on what I heard that day, I wanted to say this is because the sutric path in a way is included in the tantric path. When you enter the path, here, the word is “path,” so you will have to generate a renunciation together with uncontrived bodhicitta. In that sense, the answer is “No.”
Khen Rinpoche: So she (Student 3) said, “No.” It is good to share your views. She said, “No.” You (addressing Student 2) said, “Yes.” 
Student 2: Sorry, my answer is, “No.”
Khen Rinpoche: Just now, what you are saying is the “Yes” answer, not the “No" answer.
Student 2: No, you don’t have to enter the sutric path because …
Khen Rinpoche: Because you said you have to have renunciation. Without renunciation, without bodhicitta, how do you enter the tantric path? Didn’t you say that?
Student 2: But then the tantric path includes …
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it the case that without renunciation and without bodhicitta, you can’t enter the tantric path. You said that. That means they are necessary. 
Student 2: In order to enter the tantric path, you generate a path. That path must have renunciation and uncontrived bodhicitta. 
Khen Rinpoche: Does that take place before the tantric path?
Student 2: Can you do that simultaneously? No, you can’t. 
Khen Rinpoche: You can’t. So actually, you said “Yes.” She (Student 3) said “No.” According to Student 2, in order to enter the tantric path, you must have renunciation and bodhicitta. Without them, how can one enter the tantric path?  So, what you are going to say, Student 3?
You know this is how debate works.  
Student 3: You already taught that when you generate bodhicitta, at the same time, you generate uncontrived renunciation. When you generate uncontrived bodhicitta, at the same time, the mind of renunciation is also ...
Khen Rinpoche: Your way of phrasing your sentence is not correct. I didn’t say that. I never said that the generation of renunciation and bodhicitta are simultaneous. I never said that.
Student 3: Then what is the correct way of phrasing it? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know.
Student 2: Isn’t special bodhicitta only generated in Highest Yoga Tantra? It doesn’t apply to Action Tantra. It applies only to Highest Yoga Tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 2: In that sense, I must quickly and more quickly achieve enlightenment. 
Student 3: So, for a person of definite Mahayana lineage, when you generate the mind of bodhicitta, at the same time, the mind of renunciation is generated. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. That is correct. You must understand what you said the first time round and the second time are totally different. But you still have to answer to Student 2. 
She said that in order to enter the tantric path, one must enter the sutric path because you have to have renunciation and bodhicitta. Without that, you can’t enter the tantric path. Do you accept what she said?
Student 3: No. 
Khen Rinpoche: Explain your reason. 
Student 3: Can I assume that for those who enter the tantric path directly for the first
time without entering the sutric path, they are of definite Mahayana lineage?
Khen Rinpoche: You’ve already explained this. I said that it was the correct answer and a good answer.
Student 3: This means when he generates the mind of bodhicitta, at the same time, the mind of renunciation would have been generated, so it’s not necessary for him to generate the mind of renunciation first. 
Student 2: I didn’t say that. 
Student 3: I thought you said first, one had to generate the mind of renunciation. 
Student 2: Don’t you need to have a mind of renunciation in order to generate uncontrived bodhicitta?
Student 3: Mind of renunciation but not uncontrived renunciation.
Khen Rinpoche: A debate doesn’t become emotional. This is a Dharma debate.  Sometimes, one has to be careful. During debate, pointing out that one’s own view is right, then (things can) become difficult. The whole idea is “Why?” Also, you (Student 3) didn’t get what she (Student 2) is saying. 
Does anybody have a different view?
Student 4: I think I heard Khen Rinpoche mention you have to practise the shared path, enter the mandala and then receive the inner initiation. This means first, they have to practise the preliminaries of the path shared with the persons of small capacity and medium capacity. After that, they engage in (the practice of) the person of great capacity and train in bodhicitta. When uncontrived bodhicitta and renunciation are awakened simultaneously, they enter the Mahayana small Path of Accumulation. Then they train in the six perfections, the mind generation and also the four ways of gathering disciples. Then after that, they enter the tantric path.
Khen Rinpoche: I said that?
Student 4: No. I said I heard you mention you need to practise the shared path, then enter the mandala and receive the initiation. I only elaborated on what you said. I may not be right. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because your elaboration is not correct. 
Student 4: That’s fine. Do they need to practise the preliminaries—the reflection of cyclic existence, shared with the person of the small capacity and person with the medium capacity—before they enter the path of the person of great …?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, that’s definitely needed but that’s not the question. My question is: In order to enter the tantric path, do you need to have bodhicitta first or not? That’s the question. The question is the same but I am asking in a different way. 
Student 4: I would say, “Yes,” because that’s the basis for entering …
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, without entering the sutric path, you are not able to enter the tantric path!
Student 4: I thought the basis for entering the Mahayana path is that one needs uncontrived bodhicitta. So whether it’s the sutric vehicle or the resultant vehicle, you still need bodhicitta first. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. That’s not the question! Of course, you need bodhicitta. There’s no doubt about that but my question is not about that.  Prior to entering into tantra, do you need bodhicitta or not? This is the question. I am asking the same thing. 
Student 4: Your question is so simple but so difficult to fathom!
Khen Rinpoche: I think you all understand my question. Which position do you think is correct?
Prior to entering the tantric path, one must have trained in the shared paths. One must have generated the paths that are shared with the persons of small capacity and medium capacity. On that basis, one trains to develop love and compassion, leading up to a mind wishing to achieve enlightenment quickly by depending on the tantric path. For such an individual, he is able to enter the tantric path from the outset without having to enter the sutric path.
Those who enter the tantric path from the onset, i.e., those who are of definite tantric lineage, the love and compassion they develop prior to entering the tantric path is much stronger. In short, there are individuals who are of definite tantric lineage who enter the tantric path from the beginning. 
That’s why Je Rinpoche said there are two kinds of trainees:
Those with special bodhicitta. Then they enter the tantric path. Those of definite tantric lineage who receive the initiation, enter into the mandala and ripen their minds for the practice of tantra. Then they travel the tantric path. 
There are others who enter the sutric path and travel all the way to the end of the tenth ground before entering the tantric path. 
Therefore, there are these two kinds of trainees:
Those who enter the tantric path from the onset who are of definite tantric lineage. 
Those who generate the sutric path first and then subsequently enter the tantric path. 
Do you need to realize emptiness prior to entering the tantric path?

Come. Come. Be ready to say something. Be brave. We are all learning so don’t need to
be shy. 
Student 5: I think the answer is yes because for tantric practice, the practice of wisdom and method has been fused in one consciousness.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to listen to what she said. You must think about her answer. Is she answering my question or not? 
Her answer is that you need the realisation of emptiness prior to entering the tantric
path because the very essence of tantric path is fusing method and wisdom into one indivisible entity. These two can be found in one consciousness. How is that an answer to the question?
Student 6:  She answered your question by assuming that if we can fuse wisdom and method together, it means we have realised the emptiness related to wisdom. 
I think we don’t need to realise emptiness to enter the tantric path. The only condition I can see to entering the tantric path is generating special bodhicitta. So, I don’t see realising emptiness as a condition per se for entering the tantric path.
Khen Rinpoche: It’s good. She (Student 5) said, “Yes,” and he (Student 6) said “No.” All of you also need to think at the same time. Before I ask the second question, does anybody (want to say anything)?
Student 2: Yes, one needs to realise emptiness to enter (the tantric path). If I’m not mistaken, your question refers to entering the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. It wasn’t just the tantric path per se. Anyway, that’s what I got. So one has to realise emptiness to enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra because one needs to take desire into the path, meditate on deity yoga and transform the most subtle wind and the most subtle mind. These have to be done on the basis of emptiness as the object from the sutric view and the emptiness of oneself as the subject who is the basis of accomplishment for becoming the deity. 
Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t get (your answer). It was too long. My mind cannot catch everything. I want a short answer. My English cannot catch up with what you are trying to say so I need a short answer. You need to realise emptiness before entering the tantric path. Give me the reason why.
Student 2:  Practising on the basis because you are going to practise the deity yoga of Highest Yoga Tantra. You need to have the view of emptiness from the sutra point of view but you also have to have the emptiness of oneself as the practitioner generating into the deity. In short, the practice of deity yoga is emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, you don’t have to say specifically Highest Yoga Tantra. All tantra is the same. Therefore, to enter tantra, there is no need to say Highest Yoga Tantra. To enter into tantra, do you need to realise emptiness?
Student 2: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because?
Student 2: Because you have to have the two kinds of emptinesses. 
Khen Rinpoche: Two kinds of emptiness?
Student 2: When we study tenets in sutra, we are taking emptiness as the object. I think that was also from one of your earlier classes. 
Khen Rinpoche: The explanation was done during the explanation of the empty deity. 
In order to meditate on the empty deity, do you need the mind realising emptiness or not?
Student 2: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 2: Otherwise, there won’t be any possibility of generating the empty deity. 
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, you cannot do deity yoga? I’m asking you. Therefore, you cannot do deity yoga because you haven’t realised emptiness? What do you think? What are you going to say?
Student 2: I’m not practising any fully qualified deity yoga. Mine is just pretend deity yoga. 
Khen Rinpoche:  I’m not talking about whether (you are) fully qualified to enter the path or not. That’s not my question.  You practise deity yoga or not? (You practise) self-generation? (You do the) sadhana?
Student 2: Yes. Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Then how do you do them?
Student 2: Through the inferential cognition of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche:  In a debate session, sometimes, you cannot be serious, OK? You can make fun (of someone) but don’t hurt them. 
So you have the inferential cognition of emptiness. That means you realise emptiness!
Student 2: Generally speaking, I would think that that was what the question was asking. Do you have to have a realisation of emptiness in order to enter the actual tantric path? I’m not on the tantric path. I mean to enter the path would mean having the shared paths and all those things we’ve talked about. I thought that was what you were asking, i.e., in order to actually enter a tantric path in the sense of generating a path. 
Khen Rinpoche: You have to realise emptiness. Why? Your reason has to follow that. 
In a good debate, you must follow. You said you’ve to realise emptiness before entering tantra. I asked what the reason is. Isn’t it because you have to meditate on the emptiness of the deity? You can do that without having to enter the tantric path! 
Student 2: But here, we are talking about a properly qualified tantric path.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, I’m talking about perfectly qualified tantra. I’m talking about that of course. My question is clear.
Student 2: Anyway, you need emptiness in order to practise deity (yoga).
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, you are not answering my question. 
Sometimes, it’s good to say to (have a one-on-one). Then you know how much you know. Otherwise, you think you know but you don’t know.  Sometimes, one-on-one is very good to know the depth of your knowledge. 
So what’s the answer now? Student 6’s answer is good and correct. You remember his answer? 
(Student’s response is inaudible). 
Khen Rinpoche: The essence of his answer is that to enter the tantric path, you don’t have to realise emptiness. Is that true?
Student 4: You don’t need to have a direct or inferential realisation of emptiness as long as you have a good understanding of emptiness to start with. In tantra, initially you meditate and purify everything into emptiness. After that, you reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence. Then you generate as a deity. So, initially at least, you need a good understanding of emptiness. Then you can train. Eventually, when you are good enough, you have the inferential realisation (of emptiness). Better still, a direct realisation. For a start, I would say a good understanding of emptiness is sufficient. 
Khen Rinpoche: So your conclusion is ...
Student 4: My answer is that you don’t need the realisation. Here, realisation means either direct or inferential. At this stage, I don’t think you need that. With a good understanding of emptiness, then you can train from there. 
Khen Rinpoche: OK. It’s the same as Student 6.  
Student 4: Student 6 mentioned special bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: You need that. What Student 6 said is correct: You need special bodhicitta to enter the tantric path. Your position is exactly the same.  
(Student’s remarks are not inaudible). 
Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 7): First, you say, “Yes” or “No.” Then you explain.
Student 7: I want to ask Student 4 a question. Can someone who has no understanding of emptiness at all but has special bodhicitta enter the path? 
Khen Rinpoche:  You didn’t get everything of what she said. She said you must have a
good understanding of emptiness but it doesn’t have to be an inferential realisation of emptiness. With a good understanding of emptiness and special bodhicitta, you can enter tantra. That is the conclusion.  
Student 7: I feel there’s something wrong with the conclusion. That’s why I’m asking her. My question is can someone who has no understanding of emptiness at all but just have special bodhicitta enter the path? 
Khen Rinpoche: You still didn’t get what she said. She has already said that to enter tantra, you must have a good understanding of emptiness. She has already confirmed that. So why do you ask this question? This is why you must listen to what people say, then you ask. 
Student 8: If I realise the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent person but I understand all phenomena to be inherently existent, I have special bodhicitta and I’ve taken the initiation of Action Tantra, have I entered the Action Tantra path? I see and hold on to the view that all phenomena are inherently existent. Have I entered the Action Tantra path?
Khen Rinpoche: I consider that to be a very good question. Somebody answer him. 
Student 2: I would like to clarify my understanding of the terms. Based on the discussion we had, when you say, ‘enter a tantric path’, ‘path’ necessarily means having to generate a path similar to the grounds and paths that we’ve been taught earlier. Here, it seems as if the word, ‘path’, has a different meaning. This is why I would like to clarify.
Khen Rinpoche: Path is the same meaning. Path is not a different meaning. Bodhicitta is the same meaning. Emptiness is the same meaning. There’s no difference. Path is path. Renunciation is renunciation. Bodhicitta is bodhicitta. All the same. No difference. Anybody answer the question? 
Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 4): You understand his (Student 8) question?
Student 4 (addressing Student 8): If I’m not mistaken you are saying that if a person has special bodhicitta but still holds the view of the inherent existence of phenomena, then has he entered the path? 
Khen Rinpoche: What is his question? You have special bodhicitta then what?
Student 8: You have a coarser understanding of selflessness, for example, the understanding that the self-sufficient substantially existent person does not exist whatsoever. You hold on (to the view) that everything, persons and phenomena, are inherently existent and can be found from the side of their base. Then you develop special bodhicitta and you take the initiation into the mandala of Action Tantra. Have you entered the tantric path?
Student 4 (answering Student 8’s question): I would say you have entered the path.
Student 8: Then you don’t need to have a correct understanding of emptiness. 
Student 4: But I said a good understanding is required. I did elaborate earlier on. 
Student 8: Of inherent existence?
Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 4): You said you must have a good understanding of emptiness to enter tantra. What do you mean by a ‘good understanding’of emptiness?
Student 4: I just want to elaborate on what I mean by good understanding.  In tantra, you always meditate and purify everything into emptiness. After that, you reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence. After that, you generate (as the deity). I qualify that ‘good understanding’ is related to my elaboration.
Student 8: But I’m holding on to (the view that) every phenomenon is inherently existent. My view is that I don’t have to abandon (inherent) existence from its own side. 
Student 4: But then when you enter the path, you can …
Student 8: Have I entered the path or not with all those conditions present, particularly, holding on to seeing phenomena as inherently exist and (believing that is a view that) does not need to be abandoned? 
Student 4: When you enter the path, you don’t need to …
Khen Rinpoche: (His question to you is that) having this kind of strong belief, can you still enter tantra or not, i.e., seeing everything to be truly existent and not thinking this has to be abandoned. With this kind of concept in his mind, can this kind of person enter tantra or not?
Student 4: A person can change. So can the mind. If you meet a good Mahayana teacher who can teach you the Mahayana path, you can change. 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m not saying that one cannot change. That’s not (what this discussion) is about. But having this concept and belief, can you still enter tantra or not? That’s the question. Of course, you have to change to become enlightened. Without change, that’s not possible.
Student 4: But I thought as long as you have special bodhicitta, you can be considered as having entered the tantric path.
Student 8: In that case, then you do not need a good understanding of emptiness to
enter tantra!
Student 4: A good understanding doesn’t mean a realisation.
Student 8: But I’m holding on to the view of inherent existence, is that a good understanding? 
Khen Rinpoche: That was a good shot. 
Student 4: I will go back and analyse one more time.
Khen Rinpoche: Does anybody have a different view? Yes? No? 
Student 9: I relate this discussion between Student 4 and Student 8 to what Student 5 said earlier—that tantra’s a path whereby you have to practise method and wisdom in one mind. So, if you were to enter the path, although you may have very strong bodhicitta but if you do not have at least the correct assuming consciousness of emptiness, that doesn’t qualify you to even take the initiation. Due to the lack of understanding of emptiness, you cannot actually practise tantra because the definition of tantra is practising method and wisdom in one mind.
Student 8: It follows that I cannot practise the six perfections because I don’t have the wisdom realizing emptiness after entering the Mahayana sutric path of accumulation. This is the consequence based on what you’ve said, i.e, without the wisdom realising emptiness, you cannot practise tantra.
Student 9: I would say if not the wisdom realising emptiness, then at least a correct assuming consciousness of emptiness.
Student 8: It’s the same thing—the correctly assuming consciousness. 
Student 9: That’s not really a realisation. To me, I would take a realisation to be at least an inferential cognition.  
Student 8: Same thing. Similarly, do you accept that I will also not be able to practise the six perfections upon entering the sutric Mahayana because I only have the doubt tending towards the factual with regard to emptiness?
Student 9: But in the sutric path, you do not need to have method and wisdom to practise the path.
Student 8: Aren’t the six perfections cultivated together?
Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 9): Make it short. I’m not getting what you’re saying exactly.  In order to enter tantra, what’s your point? Do you have to understand emptiness or not?
Student 9: You need not realise emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you need a good understanding (of emptiness) or not?
Student 9: Yes, a good understanding (is required). 
Khen Rinpoche: (So what you are saying is) same as what Student 4 said? Aren’t you are saying the same thing? 
Student 9: Yes.  
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, the question has already been stated. There are people who believe in true existence and that this is a right mind that doesn’t have to be abandoned. Having this concept, can such people still enter tantra or not?
Student 9: That to me is outside the boundary of my definition of the correct understanding of emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: I know it’s outside (your boundary). Therefore, can this person enter tantra or not? 
Student 9: No. This person who holds on to phenomena being inherently existent cannot enter the tantric path.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes! Your point is this person is outside your boundary. So this person cannot come inside, correct?
Student 9: Correct.
Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 8): What are you going to say? This person is outside her boundary. Inside is not her boundary so cannot come in. Finished. So now what?
Student 8: Why do you need to realise emptiness in order to enter the path? 
Khen Rinpoche: Listen! She is not saying, ‘realise’. 
Student 8: Why do you need the correct understanding of emptiness in order to enter the tantric path? 
Khen Rinpoche: That is easy to answer.
Student 9: Because the definition of a tantric path is that once you enter the tantric path, you have to practise method and wisdom throughout the path. 
Khen Rinpoche: It’s funny what you’re saying. It seems that you also don’t know what you are saying.  
Student 9: No, no. I know what I’m trying to say. 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that you have to realise emptiness to enter the path? Put
this way, it sounds like that. Put another way, (it sounds like it is not) needed. You have two ideas. To enter tantra, do you need to realise emptiness or not?
Student 9: You need to have a correct understanding of emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: But you don’t have to realise emptiness? 
Student 9: Not realise, just correct understanding.
Khen Rinpoche: But just now you said entering tantra means wisdom and method have to be together. Doesn’t that mean the realisation (of emptiness is required)?
Student 9: That is a realisation. Oh … OK.
Khen Rinpoche: (addressing Student 8) Now, back to your question. 
Student 8: It’s already answered.
Khen Rinpoche: No, it’s not answered. What do you mean? She says this person who is outside the boundary cannot come in. What do you say to that? You didn’t (respond to that statement). 
Student 8: I asked: Why do you need the correct understanding in order to enter the path? Your assertion is that you need the minimum of a correct understanding of emptiness together with other conditions to enter the tantric path. But why do you need this correct understanding of emptiness? What is its purpose?
Student 9: Because the definition of tantric path ...
Student 8: Yes. Khen Rinpoche has addressed that part already. You can’t use that, right?
Khen Rinpoche: That’s very simple. You can answer that. It’s not so difficult. We have already talked about six deities yoga. It’s very simple. From there, you will have an idea how to answer that question. 
Student 9: You have to purify the deity into emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: That’s it. Why do you have to have a good understanding of emptiness? Because in order to generate yourself into the deity, we have the six deities and the first deity is the empty deity. That means without an understanding of emptiness, how you are going to meditate on this? Finished!
Student 8: I can purify all this with my understanding of selflessness according to the Mind Only School (MOS). Why not? I believe that through that path, I can achieve enlightenment. All these six deities are purified through that realisation of selflessness. 
Student 9: That’s not a problem. One can practise tantra using the tenets of the MOS. 
Student 8: You are contradicting yourself already.
Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 9): You keep to your position. Don’t change what you are saying. Because of the empty deity, you need a good understanding. Then what? 
Student 8: So I said if I hold on to the MOS’s view, I can also purify the six deities due
to my understanding of selflessness. 
Student 9: No problem. MOS …
Khen Rinpoche: You cannot say, “No problem!” 
Student 8: It’s a lot of problems.
Khen Rinpoche (addressing Student 9): If you say, “No problem,” that means you are already finished.
Student 8: Your purifying of the six deities is based on the correct or good understanding the emptiness of inherent existence, isn’t it? 
Student 9: Ah … OK.
Student 8: But I’m not using any of that. I’m just using selflessness according to the MOS whereby I feel that everything is inherently existent from the side of the base. So it is absolutely, totally wrong understanding of the final view of reality, isn’t it? That being the case, can I practise purifying the six deities or not? 
Student 10:  It follows that there’s a tantric path that is the union of ignorance and clarity of the deity.
Student 9: No pervasion. We’re not discussing that. We’re talking about entry (into tantra). What you develop after that is a separate question. 
Student 10: I’m following her (Student 9) boundary, i.e., entering means you must be
able to practise correctly. 
Student 8: So, that means I cannot purify all these (deities) and think I’ve purified them based on the view of the MOS after generating special bodhicitta. 
Student 9:  I learnt one can actually practise tantra even by using the tenets of the MOS. There is no need to use (the tenets of the) Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS). When you purify a deity, you need not purify a deity in the sense …
Khen Rinpoche: Come on. Come on. What is your position? Hold on to that and say what it is. You have to say, “How can one meditate on the empty deity without understanding emptiness.” I’m supporting you!
Student 9: That is outside my boundary of the correct understanding of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Boundary talk is now over. Don’t talk (about that anymore). How does one meditate on the empty deity without an understanding of emptiness? That’s it. You understand what I’m saying?
Student 9: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Repeat.
Student 9: How does one meditate on the empty deity without the correct understanding of emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: The emptiness believed in (by proponents of the) MOS is not the real emptiness. It doesn’t work. You say that. You must have a good understanding of the Prasangika view. Only then can you meditate (on the empty) deity.
Student 9: Only when one has the correct assuming consciousness of the tenets of the CMWS will one be able to purify the deity into emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m saying that for the sake of debate. Whatever I say doesn’t mean it’s correct or wrong. Don’t believe me. 
You said that. Well said. Well said. She said that in order to practise tantra, you have to practise self-generation. In order to practise self-generation, you have to have a good understanding of emptiness. A good understanding of emptiness means the Prasangika view. The MOS view doesn’t help. Therefore, one cannot enter tantra. 
Student 9: It doesn’t help you to achieve the result of that path. With what you just said, what is stopping someone to start or enter the path? What you just said or what Khen Rinpoche help you to say, doesn’t help you to achieve the result. That’s not a problem. Because all of us hold the Prasangika view. So you won’t achieve the result. But what is stopping somebody to start or enter the path of Action Tantra? 
Khen Rinpoche: What stops you is because it is not the correct understanding of emptiness!
Why is that needed? Because you have to generate yourself as the empty deity.  Empty deity comes first. At least, you need to meditate on that. Without that, how are you going to practise the self-generation? If you don’t practise the self-generation, how are you going to enter tantra?
Student 8: That comes back to Khen Rinpoche’s question (before). What is the self that is generated in dependence on the deity in the practice of self-generation?
Khen Rinpoche: No, no. That’s a different question. 
Prior to entering the tantric path, do you need to generate the mind that renounces cyclic existence? 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Now the question is this: Prior to entering the 
tantric path, do you need to have renunciation or not? When I say renunciation, it is always understood to be uncontrived renunciation.
Student 9: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Explain.
Student 9: If one were to develop uncontrived renunciation before the path, then the person will generate a Hinayana path. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why? If we have renunciation, you mean we enter the Hinayana path?  Is that necessarily so? 
Student 9: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: My answer was given in the last class. That means if you enter into Mahayana path, you have to enter the Hinayana path?
Student 9: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Sit down. Your mind is not working. 
This is something to think about. What if I were to say: In order to enter the tantric path, you must have realised emptiness because the trainee of tantra has to possess a faculty that’s much sharper than the trainee of sutra. Isn’t it the case that in sutra when we talk about dull and sharp faculties, the sharp-facultied trainees are the ones who realised emptiness prior to entering the path? That was made clear a long time ago. Therefore, those who enter the tantric path must have realised emptiness prior to entering it.
You understand? If somebody were to say that, what are you going to say?
We have already talked about the reasons why in sutra the sharp-facultied trainees would have realised emptiness prior to generating the path. Because of this reason, the trainees who enter the secret mantra from the onset must have realised emptiness prior to entering the tantric path. Why? Because the trainees of the tantric path definitely have faculties that are much sharper than the trainees of sutra. 
Isn’t that so? No? Students of tantra are much sharper than students of sutra. That is true. They are very sharp. Compared to students of sutra, they are much sharper. That is why they achieve enlightenment faster. They are so clever and so sharp that they don’t need three countless great eons. They can get there in one lifetime! If they weren’t sharp, how is that possible? So now what? 
Student 9: I am just toying around with this idea. There are always exceptions. How
about people who are dull-facultied but have a lot of compassion. Through their extraordinary compassion and guru devotion, they develop the merit to be able to enter the tantric path albeit that such a bodhisattva have not yet realised emptiness. 
Based on the root book, Page 23, it says: 
In general a suitable candidate may receive empowerment in either (1) a sand mandala made of colored granules or (2) a painted-cloth mandala … (3) an absorption mandala. 
If everyone who enters the tantric path have realised emptiness, why do we need the first two mandalas? The third one (i.e., the absorption mandala) will be enough because people who have realised emptiness will have no problem generating the absorption mandala.
Khen Rinpoche: Make your question short for me. 
Student 9:  If we were to say that everybody, prior to entering the tantric path, has realised emptiness, it follows that when one receives the empowerment, one only requires an absorption mandala. There is no necessity for the sand mandala or painted-cloth mandala. The absorption mandala only requires concentration and calm-abiding and calm-abiding would have been achieved much earlier than that.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to understand this. 
Obtaining an empowerment and entering the tantric path are not mutually inclusive. They are not the same.
It is not the case that receiving the empowerment/initiation means that you have entered the tantric path. It doesn’t mean that. It is not necessarily so. 
For entry into the tantric path, at the very minimum, you must have special bodhicitta. Otherwise, you cannot enter the tantric path. 
In order to receive the tantric initiation, you can enter any mandala. If you have good concentration, then you can use this (absorption) mandala. 
Go to the point. Go to the point.
Since the trainees of secret mantra definitely have sharper faculties than the trainees of sutra, therefore trainees of tantra who enter the tantric path must necessarily have
realised emptiness. What are you going to say to that? 
Our discussion is somewhere there.
Student 11: Yes, I have no problem with that. To enter the path of tantra, you need to have realised emptiness but during this extensive discussion, there seems to be some confusion between entering the path and doing the practice. There is a huge difference between the two. 
Khen Rinpoche: Of course there’s a big difference. I have made that clear. 
To enter the tantric path, you must have special bodhicitta. That’s the boundary. 
In order to practise, you don’t necessarily enter the tantric path. 
That’s very clear. Who is confused now? Are you confused about whether you have entered the path or not?
Student 11: No. From my side, in order to generate a tantric path, it’s assumed that since it’s a path, there is already uncontrived renunciation in the mind and because it’s a tantric path, there is special bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: Just before this sentence, what did you say?
Student 11: I feel that uncontrived renunciation is subsumed in the fact that it is a path.
Khen Rinpoche: It is a path. No?
Student 11:  Khen Rinpoche has already told us that to just generate a path, one must have uncontrived renunciation. To me, because it is a tantric path, uncontrived renunciation is already there. Because it is a Mahayana path, bodhicitta is there. Because it is tantra, it’s a very special bodhicitta. To say you have to realise emptiness to practise tantra, to me, my answer is, “Of course.”
Khen Rinpoche: Prior to generating bodhicitta, has the uncontrived renunciation already been generated? Yes or no?
Student 11: I think so. I could be wrong. My classmates are already gesturing to me that I am wrong!
Khen Rinpoche: It’s compulsory? Necessary? Pervasive?
Student 11: To have renunciation before you generate bodhicitta? To me, yes. Definitely. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. Somebody asked that question before. I have already made that clear before.

Student 11: I still have problems with that. I know Khen Rinpoche has already spoken about this at great length, about uncontrived renunciation and bodhicitta arising in the mind at the same time. People have tried to explain it to me but I’m still not getting it.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the measure of entering the path the generation of uncontrived
renunciation?
Student 11: That is what I was saying. 
Khen Rinpoche: I am asking a question here.
Student 11: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: At the time when the person of the definite Mahayana lineage generates bodhicitta, upon generating bodhicitta, does he enter the path or not? So, it follows that the person of definite Mahayana lineage must have entered the Hinayana Path prior to entering the Mahayana path.
Based on what you have said, what is the final answer?
Student 11: The final answer is that uncontrived renunciation and bodhicitta are in the mind of person of definite Mahayana lineage when he enters the sutra path.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
Khen Rinpoche: It’s my turn to ask questions today. When I asked people to ask questions, they don’t ask.
One must realise emptiness prior to entering the tantric path isn’t it?
Student 11: Yes, I think so. 
I just want to check whether entering a path is an active decision in the mind of a practitioner, “Now I’m going to cross over this line and I have entered the path.” Or is it something that just arises spontaneously in the mind when one achieves the required conditions, for example, uncontrived bodhicitta. When that thought arises in the mind, do you automatically enter the path or does it have to be an active decision, “Now I am entering the path”?
Khen Rinpoche:  What do you mean by active? Why do you even have this question? Does it have to do with the two divisions of mind generation—aspirational and engaging bodhicitta? They are both entries into the path. When you say, ‘active,’ I don’t understand.
Student 11: I wasn’t thinking of aspirational or engaged bodhicitta when I had this question in my mind. I think I may have to phrase my question more clearly.
Khen Rinpoche: A path arises when uncontrived renunciation is developed. In order to enter the Mahayana path, what is the measure? As soon as the uncontrived bodhicitta arises, simultaneous with that, you enter the Mahayana path. 
Entering the path doesn’t mean that you have to take one step forward.  
Student 11: I understand now. It’s spontaneous. Once you reach that measure, then you enter the path.
IS IT CORRECT OR NOT TO GENERATE OUR APPROPRIATED CONTAMINATED AGGREGATES AS THE DEITY?
Khen Rinpoche: In the practice of self-generation, what is it that is generated into the
deity? It is the self generated as the deity and arising as the deity. What is this self that is generated as the deity? Is it correct or wrong to generate our appropriated
contaminated aggregates as the deity? 
Right or wrong, give me a reason. Don’t just say, “It’s wrong,” and leave it at that. You must give the reason behind your answer.  
Student 9: The deity is going to be the cause for us to achieve the body of a buddha. Therefore, from the perspective of the substantial cause, we cannot generate the deity’s body from something that’s contaminated. 
Khen Rinpoche: What’s wrong with that? So it’s contaminated. Why can’t you generate that as the deity?
Student 9: It cannot be the substantial cause for us to achieve the form body of a buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the deity that is meditated upon the cause of enlightenment?
Student 9: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: So it’s not your contaminated body (that is the cause of enlightenment)? 
Student 9: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: So what problem will there be if you were to meditate on our appropriated contaminated aggregates as the deity? The deity that you meditate on is that which becomes the deity. It is not your contaminated appropriated aggregates becoming the deity. 
Let’s make it simple. Your body is here. You visualise your body becoming the deity, “I am the deity. I am Mother Tara or whatever.” This kind of concept and visualisation, imagining oneself to be Tara, becomes the cause of the form body. 
Student 9: No. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why not? That was my question. 
Student 9: Your body ...
Khen Rinpoche: That’s not your body. Your body is just a basis. No?
Student 9: You are talking about the deity’s body or the contaminated body?
Khen Rinpoche: Your contaminated body is here. Now you visualise this contaminated body becoming empty. Now it becomes a deity. Is that OK or not?
Student 9: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 9: It shouldn’t be that way. The substantial cause of something should be something of the same nature. The substantial cause of a gold pot has to be gold. Therefore, the contaminated aggregates cannot be the substantial cause of the deity’s body.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the substantial cause according to Action Tantra?
Student 9: I don’t know.
Khen Rinpoche: The cause of gold has to be gold? Ok, the last one, then we are going to stop as the time is finished.
Student 8: The ascertaining factor of the wisdom realising emptiness appearing as the deity for the three lower classes of tantra is a coarse mind.
Khen Rinpoche: Compared to?
Student 8: Compared to say, Highest Yoga Tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: But compared to sutra, it is a very subtle mind, no?
Student 8: Yes. The self that is generated in dependence on the deity, what sort of self is that? (That’s Khen Rinpoche’s question). 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 8: The deity arises in dependence upon the ascertaining factor, the wisdom realising emptiness appearing as the deity. So there is a mind and body in one entity. So for the three lower classes of tantra ...
Khen Rinpoche: In all four classes of tantra, we say that the apprehension factor of the wisdom realising emptiness appears as the deity. This is a generic tantric thing.
Student 8: But I am referring to the three lower classes of tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: It is all the same.
Student 8: But according to the three lower classes of tantra, that particular wisdom appearing as the deity is coarse …
Khen Rinpoche: It doesn’t matter, OK. Then?
Student 8: It is a coarse wisdom. For the self that arises in dependence on the deity, that ‘I’ has to be that which moves from life to life, up to enlightenment in reality. Therefore the ‘I’, the self that arises in dependence upon such a wisdom appearing as the deity, which is a coarse mind, is not that which moves on from life to life to enlightenment. Therefore, there is no ...
Khen Rinpoche: We talk from the perspective of Action Tantra. From the perspective
of Action Tantra, by depending on Action Tantra, can you achieve enlightenment?
Student 8: In reality, no.
Khen Rinpoche: According to Action Tantra?
Student 8: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: What is it that goes on to enlightenment? It is the apprehension factor of the wisdom realising emptiness appearing as the deity. What is it that becomes the form body? It is basically the mind itself. The consciousness, the wisdom realising emptiness, becomes the form body.
Student 8: This does not work. It cannot work for them because of this. The consciousness cannot become the form body.
Khen Rinpoche: Aren’t both method and wisdom present together in that consciousness? In that consciousness, both method and wisdom exist.
Student 8: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: So, isn’t it the case then that wisdom realizing emptiness is the substantial cause for both the dharmakaya and rupakaya?
Student 8: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, the wisdom realising emptiness acts as the substantial cause for the form body. 
Student 8: No pervasion.
Khen Rinpoche: There is no question of pervasion or no pervasion! 
Student 8: A wisdom acting as a substantial cause for the form body?
Khen Rinpoche: No? 
Student 8: No. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why no?
Student 8: Consciousness cannot be form.
Khen Rinpoche: Consciousness cannot be form. That is correct. But whether you talk about the substantial cause of rupakaya or the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, that mind realising emptiness, does it appear as deity or not? The point is what is appearing as the deity? Isn’t it that wisdom? At the end of the day, you have to pinpoint something. It is this wisdom realising emptiness that acts as the substantial cause of both bodies. You can have this also in sutra.
Student 8: It also applies to sutra?
Khen Rinpoche: It cannot apply in sutra? No? Yes?  Isn’t it a unique feature of tantra that there is the presence of both method and wisdom fused together in one indivisible entity? Isn’t that an essential uncommon characteristic of secret mantra? As such, etymologically speaking, it has the word, Vajrayana.  
Student 8: Inseparability, yes.
Khen Rinpoche: That doesn’t exist in sutra.
Student 8: Yes. The inseparability of one mind. No, not in sutra.
Khen Rinpoche: The method and wisdom together in one consciousness is only found in secret mantra. 
So you think we don’t have (this feature) in sutra?
Student 8: In one consciousness?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. 
Student 8: No.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you sure?
Student 8: Accompanying it, together
Khen Rinpoche: I am not asking about accompanying.
Student 8: No, it’s not in one consciousness. 
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that it exists in sutra because that is a mind that realises the emptiness of the deity’s body. In sutra, is it possible to have a mind realising the emptiness of the deity’s body by taking the deity’s body as the focal object?
Student 8: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: So it follows that in sutra, both method and wisdom are present.
Student 8:  Yes, method and wisdom are present.
Khen Rinpoche: In one mind? It can exist in sutra if you take the deity’s body as the focal object?
Student 8: But the deity’s body does not appear in equipoise directly realising emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Equipoise, not equipoise, doesn’t matter here.
Student 8: It doesn’t appear.
Khen Rinpoche: It is possible for a person in sutra to see a deity and then realise that the deity is empty of existing inherently. Within that realisation, the deity is still appearing. That person is looking at the deity.
Student 8: But not directly. 
Khen Rinpoche: In tantra, you don’t need ‘directly’, do you? 
Student 8: Not initially. Subsequently, you need to realise that.
Khen Rinpoche: Everything occurs subsequently. That’s why you see in sutra we can have the mind that has both method and wisdom. Yes?
Student 8: OK.
Khen Rinpoche: I thought this is an uncommon feature of Vajrayana. Didn’t we say conclusively in one of the earlier lessons that in sutra, method and wisdom assist one another? They are conjoined with one another but are not fused together. It is only in secret mantra that the two are fused together. I thought we conclusively decided that this was the case. 
Therefore in the Vajrayana, the uncommon feature is that both method and wisdom are fused together as one inseparable entity in one mind. Because of this uncommon feature, that is why tantra is a more powerful path.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 