Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L17FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.261753
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 17	 				                                           1 June    2017
Review. Yoga with signs & yoga without signs. Leaving the recitation. The apprehension factor of the mind realizing emptiness that arises as the deity. 
REVIEW
We’ve been looking at the practice of recitation in the context of Action Tantra that’s done on the bases of the four branches. We’ve completed that. 
There’re two types of absorption with recitation (or concentration with repetition):  
the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra
the recitation observing the sound of the mantra
There’re two types of recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra: 
the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity
the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart as the deity 
We’ve also completed that. 

Recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart
As for the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart as the deity:
when you inhale, imagine that the moon disc at the heart of the front generation deity together with the mantra garland on it comes in with your breath and settles at your own heart. 
You then engage in recitation. 
If you are engaged in mental recitation, you do so while holding the winds.  
When you release the winds, i.e., when you exhale, image that the moon disc at your heart together with the mantra garland on it leave with your exhalation and go back to and settle at the heart of the front generation deity.
That’s clear. What’s not clear is that once the moon disc together with the mantra garland have settled at the heart of the front generation deity, do you engage in recitation focussing on that? That’s not clear in the text.
However, if you look at the two divisions of the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra, we are talking now about the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at your own heart. So in this context, it’s clear that this is the main practice.
It’s also clear in the text that you alternate the positions of the moon disc and the mantra garland on it with the inhalation and exhalation of the breath. That’s clear. What’s not clear in the text is whether you should perform any recitation when the moon disc and the mantra garland returns to the heart of the front generation deity when you exhale. That’s the qualm. Personally, I think probably not. Probably, the object of observation is the moon disc and the mantra garland on the moon disc at your own heart since it’s the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at your own heart. 
The form of the letters
Look at how it’s phrased in the text—“the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra.” It doesn’t just say “the recitation observing the letters.” As for the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra, be it the front generation or at your own heart, what’s the letter? 
Khen Rinpoche: The whole question is: “What’s a letter?” That’s all. When somebody asks you what is ‘A’, how are you going to explain it?
(Student’s response is inaudible).  
Khen Rinpoche: Can you go a little bit deeper?
(Student’s response is inaudible).  
Khen Rinpoche: Is the form of ‘A’ ‘A’? 
(Student’s response is inaudible).  
Khen Rinpoche: Is the shape of ‘A’ ‘A’? 
(Student’s response is inaudible).  
Khen Rinpoche: Quick, it’s easy. One student already said that the shape of ‘A’ is ‘A’.
(Student’s response is inaudible).  
Khen Rinpoche: At the end of the day, you don’t know what ‘A’ is! 
Student 1: The letter ‘A’ is part of what’s used to form a word and the word into a sentence. ‘A’ is not the strokes. In the previous module, it was said that ‘A’ is an ‘A’ because it’s labelled ‘A’ by us. In Sanskrit, it’s not like this. It’s some other strokes.  So ‘A’ is the formation of different parts that come together to form that ‘A’. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. Does anybody have some other idea? Don’t be shy. It doesn’t matter whether you’re right or wrong. Come. Come. 
The form of the letter is not the letter. The form of the letter is the basis of designation of the letter. The basis of designation is not the designated object. So ‘A’ is nothing more, nothing less than the sound that you associate with ‘A’. ‘A’ is the sound that is referred to by the basis of designation. 
Recitation observing the sound of the mantra
After you’ve finished with the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra, you move on to the recitation focussing on the sound of the mantra. 
At the time of engaging in the recitation observing the sound of the mantra, the practice is done on the basis of having meditated well on the four branches. The object of observation is just the sound of the mantra as if you were listening to your own recitation. Then you engage in either the whispered recitation or the mental recitation. 
It’s not clear in the text but I wonder whether one can engage in the recitation observing the sound of the mantra with the self-basis and the other basis. This means focussing on the sound that’s emanating from your heart as the self-generated deity or observing the sound of the mantra that’s resonating at the heart of the front generation deity.
It’s clear in the text that you observe the sound of the mantra that’s at the heart of the body of the deity while you engage in recitation. But it doesn’t say specifically that you meditate on that sound emanating at the heart of the self-basis or the other basis. It just says, “the body of the deity.” 
Of the two absorptions—the absorption with recitation and the absorption without recitation—we have finished with the absorption with recitation. Next is the absorption without recitation.
What I’ve said is summarized in the chart of the second handout.  It’ll be more effective if you go through the process in your head on your own for 10 or 15 minutes. Imagine that you are going to do the practice to develop some familiarity with the practice. We’re not talking about gaining any experience or realization. That’s difficult. Just have a feel of what it’s like to meditate on and to engage in the recitation as it’s taught from the beginning. Visualize the four branches and so forth. Then go through the three types of recitation. If you’re able to do that on your own, it’ll help the practice stick in your mind. 
Sometimes, trying to understand well by reading the material alone may not be sufficient. However, if you try it out and rehearse the process in your mind without referring to the notes and so forth, perhaps the practice will become a bit clearer. It’s the nature of things that when the practice becomes clearer, it tends to stick in our mind for a longer period of time.
In the ideal situation, anybody who’s teaching this material must have the realization of and extensive experience in doing the whole practice. He then imparts the instructions to the disciples. That makes a very big difference. But this is difficult. And even if that’s possible, one may not find a suitable receptacle for such instructions. 
Student 2: When one does the recitation observing the form of the letters at one’s heart, does one visualize the front generation and the body of the self-generation with the moon disc and mantra garland dissolving and only focus on the sound of the mantra?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think so because the recitation has to be done with the four branches present. At the time of performing the recitation focussing on the form of the letters of the mantra at one’s own heart, the front generation is already present.  All the four branches must be present. 
When you breathe in, imagine that the moon disc together with the mantra garland at the heart of the front generation enters you with your inhalation and settle at your heart. So the front generation is there. 
I don’t think you dissolve the front generation because it’s said in the text that you are supposed to alternate between moving the moon disc and the mantra garland from the front generation to the self-generation and back again. When you move the moon disc to your heart, if you were to dissolve the front generation, then before you can send the moon disc back, you would have to visualize the front generation again. 
So when you are performing the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at your own heart, I don’t think you dissolve the front generation though you don’t focus on it because the two focal objects are the moon disc and the mantra garland at your heart.
Student 2: I have a problem with having so many objects of observation yet I’m expected to focus only on the moon disc and the mantra garland. The calm abiding of the tantric practitioners is very powerful (so it may not be a problem for them) having all these objects. How can we make it easier for ourselves to understand the concept of having so many objects, yet we focus only on the moon disc and the mantra garland? The same applies to observing the sound of the mantra.  
My eyes are focussing on either Khen Rinpoche or the Chenrezig statue but the rest are like the objects of an AAA (an awareness to which an object appears but is not ascertained)!
Khen Rinpoche: That’s how a sense consciousness works. Let’s say, in the view of an eye consciousness observing a specific object. There are many other things appearing in the periphery but you don’t pay attention to them. They are not ascertained but nonetheless they do appear. 
In the case of a mental consciousness, we talk about the mental not the sensory experience. When you are meditating to achieve calm abiding, you will be focussing on a chosen focal object. When your mind’s attention is placed on the focal object, I wonder if other things appear to that consciousness or not. 

When calm abiding is realized and the person is completely absorbed in the focal object, it’s said that even if you were to beat a drum or make a huge noise in front of him, it doesn’t affect him as he’s not cognizant of that sound.
When the mind’s more and more concentrated, the mind also becomes increasingly subtle. When the mind is subtler, it also becomes clearer. What’s clearer? Its focus on the object of observation is clearer. Probably, you’re not thinking of anything else. Perhaps this is the case.
Student 2: What’s the measure of proficiency in having achieved these various stages so that the meditator knows that he can move on to the next subtler levels?  
Khen Rinpoche: It’s not clear in the text. I’ve not seen any positing of the boundaries or measure of the three forms of recitation, whether it is observing the form of the letters of the mantra or observing the sound of the mantra. 
It’s clear with regard to the concentration abiding in sound. This will be explained later. The concentration abiding in sound involves the stages up to and includes the actualization of calm abiding. That’s the measure. It’s a clear boundary. 
When do you achieve the concentration bestowing liberation at the end of sound? It’s when the meditator achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness. 
So with regard to these two concentrations, the boundaries are clear. We’ll talk about them later. 
YOGA WITH SIGNS & YOGA WITHOUT SIGNS
The path of Action Tantra is divided into two:
yoga with signs— includes all the different stages of achievement of calm abiding 
yoga without signs—has to do with special insight
With regard to the practices that are subsumed under yoga with signs that lead up to the achievement of calm abiding, probably, there should be a way to correlate them with the explanation of the nine mental stages that we studied in the lam-rim. For example, there should be a way of correlating the explanations of the abandonment of laxity and excitement with the different stages of practice that come under yoga with signs. I’ve not seen any such explanation in the text but I think you can think about it and try to correlate them. Perhaps you may be able to come up with something. 
LEAVING THE RECITATION
Whatever recitation you are engaged in, whether it’s observing the form of the letters or observing the sound of the mantra, how do you stop and leave the session in the end? 
In the rituals of Action Tantra, it’s not very clear on how you should do the necessary dissolutions that come at the end of the session. If we follow the usual structure of an Action Tantra practice, the main practice is like the four-branched recitation:
You visualize the four branches and engage in the recitation of the mantra. 
At the end, you dedicate the merit towards full enlightenment. 
Usually, you present the thanksgiving offerings. 
You recite the verses of praise. 
You ask for forgiveness for any omissions or additions you made in the practice. 
If you have meditated on the front generation, you visualize the wisdom beings of the front generation departing to their natural abodes.  
The commitment being of the front generation dissolves into you. 
In one commentary, it describes the stages of leaving the recitation in this way. It says that you leave the session moving from observing the sound of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity to focussing on the form of the letters of the mantra in the heart of the front generation where there’s the moon disc and mantra garland. This suggests that there is a recitation observing the sound of the mantra with relation to the front generation deity.  
What’s the problem if you were to say that there is a recitation observing the sound of the mantra at the heart of the front generation? If you can find a problem with such a recitation, then you can say it doesn’t exist. Otherwise, what’s wrong with saying that it does exist? 
At this point of the practice, imagine that you’ve done the practices of the recitations observing the form of the letters of the mantra and observing the sound of the mantra. How do you leave the session? It’s said that you leave the session by shifting your observation from the sound of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity to the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of the front generation deity.
By the end of the session, your object of observation is quite subtle as you’re only observing the sound of the mantra. Then as you emerge from the session, your object of observation becomes coarser, i.e., your attention moves to a coarser object. 
In this case, it’s moving from the sound of the mantra to the form of the letters of the mantra on the moon disc at the heart of the front generation deity. 
I guess you can imagine that the sound gradually disappears and takes on the form of the letters of the mantra. Your attention is placed on the letters of the mantra. 
Then you move from observing the letters of the mantra to observing the moon disc that the mantra syllables are seated on. 
Next, you move from observing the moon disc at the heart of the front generation deity to observing the body of the front generation deity. Your attention is gradually placed on a coarser and coarser object.
From observing the body of the front generation deity, you move to the body of the self-generation deity. Whether the front generation deity dissolves into you is another question. In any case, your attention shifts from focussing on the body of the front generation deity to the body of the self-generation deity. 
In the case of the Chenrezig practice, you have visualized yourself as Chenrezig. You move from focussing on the body of yourself as Chenrezig to the six syllables at your heart. If you follow the normal order of progression, you should move from observing the body of the self-generation deity to the moon disc at your own heart. But that’s not mentioned in the text. That’s why it’s not in your handout.  Will there be a problem if you were to add in the moon disc before focussing on the mantric syllables? As you move from observing the body of the self-generation deity to the six syllables at your heart, again the mind is becoming more subtle. 
You move from observing the form of the letters of the mantra to observing just the sound of the mantra. It’s like returning to what we visualized earlier on during the recitation observing the sound of the mantra. As the focal objects become subtler, the mind becomes subtler as well. 
From observing the sound of the mantra, you bring the mind to ascertain the lack of inherent existence of the sound, the ‘I’, self and person, culminating in the wisdom truth body. 
You move from observing the sound of the mantra to the last stage called the wisdom truth body. What does this mean? I guess as the object of focus becomes more and more subtle, the mind becomes subtler too. You imagine that you are able to ascertain the emptiness or lack of inherent existence of that sound of the mantra and the lack of inherent existence of the person, the meditator, the ‘I’. This mind that ascertains the emptiness of inherent existence, while this term is not commonly used, perhaps we can call it the wisdom truth body of the basis (or the basic truth body). This is a term that’s found in Highest Yoga Tantra but is not found here. This concept will be explained in the future but for now, just so that you can get an idea, the wisdom truth body of the basis referred to here is the mind that ascertains emptiness at the time of the basis. 
If we were to turn our mind to the nature of reality after observing the basis, the sound of the mantra, perhaps it does make a difference. It makes it easier to think about the emptiness of the sound. 
If you move from observing the sound of the mantra into observing suchness or emptiness, you’re moving into a state where the sound becomes non-objectified, i.e., it disappears into emptiness or vacuity. We’re not saying that it disappears into nothingness, the ordinary kind of becoming nothing. The point here is you’re moving towards ascertaining the emptiness of inherent existence. At the end of the day, that should be the result.
You need to generate the mind that ascertains and realizes emptiness. This mind that realizes emptiness and the vacuity becomes the basis of designation of the ‘I’. 
When you end the session, from within a state of emptiness, you arise as the deity. It’s often like that at the end of the session. When you arise as the deity, there’s the appearance of things, but you, the meditator, are cognizant of their illusory nature. There’s the appearance of true existence, but there’s no belief in that illusory-like appearance.
THE APPREHENSION FACTOR OF THE MIND REALIZING EMPTINESS APPEARING AS THE DEITY
In the earlier sessions, we talked about the apprehension factor of the mind realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. It’s that wisdom that arises as the deity. As you leave the session, the mind that ascertains emptiness arises as the deity’s body. You cultivate and arrive at that mind realizing emptiness. 
On the path of Highest Yoga Tantra, there’s an additional element of cultivating divine pride in that being your resultant dharmakaya, i.e., you imagine that mind realizing emptiness is your resultant dharmakaya. That’s what you do in Highest Yoga Tantra. At the time of the practice, you identify your mind realizing emptiness as the resultant dharmakaya. With divine pride, you think, “This is my resultant dharmakaya!” 
It’s this very same mind that you think of as the resultant dharmakaya that then arises in the aspect of the deity’s body. You then identify with this deity’s body, “This is my resultant rupakaya, my resultant form body!” 
This is roughly the answer to a question that I’ve asked earlier: what arises as the deity? Simply speaking, it’s the wisdom truth body of the basis. Let’s take it to be the mind that ascertains emptiness.
In Highest Yoga Tantra, you imagine that you generate divine pride, thinking, “This is my resultant dharmakaya.” This is identifying and putting that label on that wisdom truth body of the basis, i.e., that mind ascertaining emptiness. 
It’s this valid mind that then arises in the aspect of the deity’s body. You identify with that deity’s body, “This is my resultant rupakaya, my resultant form body.” You develop clear appearance and generate divine pride with respect to this body.  
This is an extremely important point. You really have to wrap your head around this concept. We use this phrase, the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. Then we talk about the unique feature of tantra whereby in one mind, both factors of method and wisdom are indivisibly fused in one entity. These two factors are found in one mind. These are the key features of secret mantra. 
Why is this crucial? Because when we talk about the resultant state of full enlightenment, the truth body and the form body are one indivisibe entity. They are different but are in one entity. If the resultant stage has such a feature, then at the time of the path—the path that’s the cause of the result—it must possess a similar feature. Both method and wisdom must be fused indivisibly in one consciousness at the time of the path without which we cannot have such a result. 
Because the resultant stage is like that, i.e., the form body and the truth body are one indivisible entity, you must know how to posit that at the time of the path, there is a correct cause that will lead to such a result and how in tantra these two factors of method and wisdom are fused indivisibly in one consciousness. 
Therefore, there’s a need to understand the meaning behind the phrase—the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. 
This apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity is the wisdom realizing emptiness that’s the basis of accomplishment of the deity, i.e., it’s the very thing that transforms into the deity. It’s the mind realizing emptiness appearing in the form or aspect of the deity. This appearance in the aspect of the deity constitutes the factor of method that’s the cause for the form body. This is the appearance factor of the mind. 
The ascertainment factor of the mind is essentially the mind realizing emptiness. This mind constitutes the wisdom factor that is the cause for the dharmakaya. 
We are talking about the same thing—one mind, whether you are talking about its appearance or its ascertainment or realization. These two are together as one. This apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appears as the deity. This becomes the basis of designation for you to identify yourself as the deity. You develop divine pride and clear appearance on that basis. 
Khen Rinpoche: Have you got what I am talking about? You must get that first. There are so many things here. Make sure it goes deep down inside. Later, when I ask another question, you become confused again. Are you getting something? OK. Now ask questions. If you are not clear about this, ask. 
Q & A 
Student 2: In the practices of all four classes of tantra, the apprehension factor of the isdom realizing emptiness appears as the deity. At that level, the wisdom realizing emptiness becomes the basis of designation for the ‘I’ so this happens in dependence on the mind, the consciousness aspect. But at that level, the body is still a coarse body, so there is no basis of designation from the side of the body to be called the ‘I’ of the deity.
Khen Rinpoche: What is posited as the basis of designation of the person?
Student 2: Either the body or mind. In this case, it’s only the consciousness aspect, i.e., four of the aggregates without the form aggregate. We do not use form as the basis of designation for this purpose because the meditator at this juncture …
Khen Rinpoche: There’s a threefold division of the body and mind into coarse, subtle and extremely subtle. This will become apparent in the section on Highest Yoga Tantra. As such, there must be different level of subtleties of the ‘I’ or the person, the designated object. You’ll not be able to find any better explanation of what the ‘I’ is than what’s found in Highest Yoga Tantra. At the end of the day, the final basis of designation of the person is the extremely subtle wind-mind. That’s the basis of designation. The person is designated in relation to that. That ‘I’ is what moves from life to life and onwards to enlightenment.
Student 2: Therefore, with regard to the stages of dissolution presented here, we will not be able to actually achieve the deity’s body. (Referring to the handout) there is the wisdom body (#8) followed by the form body (#9). That form body will not be the actual form body. In other words, one will not be able to achieve enlightenment by practising the three lower classes of tantra. 
Khen Rinpoche: I am just giving you some idea. You do have to leave the session and you do that from within the state of emptiness, arising as the deity, because definitely you have to get out of meditative equipoise. You arise into post-meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment. In subsequent attainment, although the meditation effect is not exactly the same as during the session, nevertheless, it’s said that one has to rely on mindfulness to keep one’s divine pride and clear appearance as much as possible even during the post-meditation session. Therefore, you see instructions such as seeing your body as the deity’s body, seeing your speech as the deity’s mantra and seeing whatever thoughts you have as the dharmakaya. Then without leaving these three recognitions, you go about doing whatever you need to do, making mandala offerings and other offerings, prostrations and so forth to accumulate merit and purify the obscurations.
Student 2: Upon achieving the concentration abiding in sound, it’s said here that one achieves calm abiding. 
Khen Rinpoche: We’ll talk about that later. I haven’t covered that topic yet.
Student 2:  I’m trying to see whether that’s the stage at which one develops bodhicitta because within calm abiding, uncontrived bodhicitta arises. This is the same problem I had during the earlier module on Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds: whether one generates bodhicitta in the beginning or at the chapter on concentration when exchanging self and others is attained. 
Concentration abiding in sound is the measure of having achieved calm abiding in Action Tantra. Is this the point where the tantric practitioner of Action Tantra generates uncontrived bodhicitta?
Khen Rinpoche: (addressing the class) Think about this. You got the question?
Student 3: The text does not say “recitation observing the letters.” It says “the recitation observing the form of the letters” so when we are doing this meditation, are we trying to meditate on the physical form of the syllables on the mantra garland? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. 
Student 3: I was thinking of the two verses in the Foundation of All Good Qualities: 
Please bless me to generate quickly within my mindstream
The unified path of calm-abiding and special insight. 
Having become a pure vessel by training in the general path, 
Please bless me to enter 
The holy gateway of the fortunate ones:
The supreme vajra vehicle. 
It’s said here that the purpose of the practice of mantra recitation is to develop calm abiding. But doesn’t these verses mean that calm abiding has already been attained before doing the tantric practice? 
Khen Rinpoche: That was my question: before entering the tantric path, does one necessarily have to realize all those practices that precede it including calm abiding and special insight? Do you need to follow the order mentioned in that prayer—renunciation, bodhicitta, calm abiding and special insight—in order to enter the tantric path? That was my question. Don’t ask me back. I have my answer.
Student 3: If I am practising tantra, should I practise Action Tantra first before going into Highest Yoga Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: First, action is needed!
Student 3: Does that mean before we practise Highest Yoga Tantra, we should actually go through the door of Action Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: We talked about the three vehicles and the difference between the Hinayana and the Mahayana. We’ve already said that you don’t need to enter the Hinayana path before you enter the Mahayana path. You’re clear about that? Don’t forget that. 
The Mahayana is divided into two: Mahayana sutra and Mahayana tantra. Do you need to enter the Mahayana sutric path before entering the Mahayana tantric path? At the end of the day, the answer is no. 
Likewise, in order to enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra, do you first need to enter the path of Action Tantric Path?  The answer is no. That’s the final answer and conclusion. 
While it’s easy to say that the answer is no, you don’t need to do that, you have to know the reason why. 
It’s easy for you to say no. It’s easy for me to say no. 
For example, let’s start with the Hinayana and Mahayana. Before you enter the Mahayana path, must you first enter the Hinayana path? The answer’s clear. It’s no. But why?
So before you enter the Mahayana path, do you need to enter the Hinayana path? Yes or no? 
Somebody come up and answer. Then I will ask questions to see how stable you are.
Student 4: No. 
Khen Rinpoche: You say no? But don’t you need to generate renunciation prior to entering the Mahayana path?
Student 4: That can be generated together with the mind generation.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it mentioned in the lam-rim that prior to training in the path of the person of great capacity, one must have trained in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. 
Student 4: Different sentient beings have different capabilities. That’s why there are three vehicles.
Khen Rinpoche: First, you answer my question. 
Isn’t it mentioned in the lam-rim that prior to training in the path of person of great capacity, one must have trained in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity? 
Student 4: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the path that’s shared with the person of medium capacity renunciation?
Student 4: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, it follows that prior to entering the Mahayana path, you must generate the Hinayana path. 
Student 4: No. 
Khen Rinpoche: You said no but indirectly, you’ve already said yes. So you are contradicting yourself. Do you get the point? In debate, you must get the point. 
Student 4: No, I follow what you’re saying. In rebuttal, you must have a very strong reason to counter the argument. 
My question relates to the two stains that are abandoned through the water initiation. I was wondering what the two stains are. Do they have something to do with abandoning the stains of the intermediate state and rebirth as mentioned in some of the prayers of Highest Yoga Tantra?  
Khen Rinpoche: Maybe we can elaborate on this in the future.
Student 4: Do these two stains apply across all the four classes of tantra? 
Khen Rinpoche: There are two initiations in Action Tantra. 
The water initiation primarily purifies the defilements of the mind. It establishes the potential to actualize the resultant dharmakaya. 
The crown initiation primarily purifies the defilements of the body. I guess the defilements of the speech must be included in there as well. It establishes the potential to actualize the resultant form body.
But when you talk about the water initiation in Highest Yoga Tantra, that’s part of the vase initiation. In Highest Yoga Tantra, they talk primarily of the four major initiations: the vase, secret, knowledge wisdom and word initiations. In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, it’s the vase initiation as a whole that purifies the defilements of the body. 
If you remember, in Action Tantra, we talked about the three lineages—the tathagata lineage, the lotus lineage and the vajra lineage. The tathagata lineage is the highest lineage and is essentially the factor of purity of the body that arises as the deity, primarily in the aspect of Vairochana. That’s considered to be supreme. 
In Highest Yoga Tantra, it’s the reverse in that it’s the factor of purity of the mind that arises as the deity with Akshobya as the principal. 
Why is there this difference? That’s something for you to think about. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.