Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L24FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.303382
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 24	 				                                            27 June 2017
Importance of mindfulness. Understanding emptiness. Guided meditation.  
(Khen Rinpoche taught this lesson in English in the absence of the interpreter). 
IMPORTANCE OF MINDFULNESS
The key point to doing the meditation is mindfulness.  Mindfulness is extremely important in order to have a good meditation. 
Training in morality is one way to develop mindfulness. It’s very simple. This means how you talk. For instance, if you’re not mindful and you say harsh words. (It also refers to how you behave) physically. You’re not pleasant and you’re hurtful towards others. If you are mindful, you recognize these actions are not good. Then you change. That’s mindfulness. Immediately, you recognize any actions of the body, speech and mind of the ten non-virtues such as stealing, killing and so forth. 
Sometimes because of our habit, our hands just go this way (reaching out to steal) because of very strong past imprints. Harsh words are also like that. Due to being habituated to this, the words just come out without thinking.  
Of course, it’s not easy but the point is we must be mindful of such behaviour. We must immediately recognize when (our behaviour) is not good. It’s negative karma because it harms others. So immediately recognize that and exercise restraint.  That’s why it’s very important to practise mindfulness.  
Morality is one way of training in mindfulness. If you live your life in mindfulness, when you want to meditate, it becomes much easier.  As you’re already trained in being mindful, it’s easier to concentrate on any object of your choice. So, your concentration depends on your mindfulness.  If you have good mindfulness, you’re good in meditation. This mean you have good concentration that is able to focus on the chosen object.
If you’re not trained in morality and not trained in mindfulness, normally, your mind will be constantly wandering all the time.  Without mindfulness, your mind will wander to different objects throughout the day. Your mind has no rest as it continually follows your thoughts. Without mindfulness, your thoughts wander about one after another.  Therefore, when you’re not trained in mindfulness and you’re habituated to that, then it’s difficult to meditate. 
Without mindfulness, it’s impossible to meditate. That’s the biggest challenge for us.  The point is if we don’t have mindfulness, it will lead to dementia! I think so. If you’re not trained in mindfulness, I think it will lead to dementia. I’m not exactly sure but I think so. 
Logically, if you’re not mindful and you keep thinking, thinking, thinking and you keep forgetting, forgetting, forgetting … Well, dementia is all about that.  You don’t remember. I think what really leads to dementia maybe is the accumulation of that. After a while, you also don’t remember what you ate yesterday. You also don’t remember what you ate this morning! 
In other words, if your mindfulness is very good, then I think there will be less dementia. If you’re very mindful, you can develop concentration with a single- pointed mind. Then I think there’s less chance of getting dementia in the future. Because you concentrate on each object, how will you have dementia?  I don’t think it’s possible. Therefore, you need concentration. 
When you have good mindfulness and good concentration, you’re able to focus on the object. This means you’re very mindful and you don’t forget the object. Being mindful means you’re mindful of the object. You don’t forget the object. That’s meditation. Your mind’s there and your mind doesn’t wander. You’re just mindful of the object. That’s meditation with a single-pointed mind. The point is only when you have single-pointed meditation, i.e., when you look at the object with concentration, will you be able to see the object much more clearly than before. That’s the whole point of the training.
Wisdom is about that. When you look at the object with concentration, you see the object much more clearly. For example, when there’s wind, the flame moves. Then it’s not so clear. When the wind doesn’t move, the flame’s very stable and you can see it very clearly. 
Similarly, when your mind is very focussed, when you look at the object, you see it very clearly. With concentration, you’re able to see the object more clearly. So wisdom’s about that. With wisdom, you’re able to judge whether something’s right or wrong. It’ll be so much easier because you understand reality clearly. I think that’s the whole point. 
Here, when we do the meditation of the deity, emptiness is extremely important. I will just give you a simple idea. If we have more time, I thought to do a meditation on emptiness but I don’t think we can do that today. 
UNDERSTANDING EMPTINESS
Of course, the understanding of emptiness is the very basis for the meditation on the deity. To meditate on the deity, the understanding of emptiness is important.  Just to give you some idea. For example, you write ‘A’. (Khen Rinpoche wrote the strokes in the air). If you write only one line, it’s not ‘A’. You don’t know what it is. If you write another line, it’s still not ‘A’. When you write another line in the middle, then the shape of ‘A’ comes about.  That’s the basis of designation of ‘A’. In itself, it’s not ‘A’. It’s just the basis upon which we label ‘A’. The shape is there and based on that, your mind labels that as ‘A’.  
The shape itself is not ‘A’. ‘A’ comes into existence based on the labelling taught to you by somebody else, “This is ‘A’.” After that, you label it as ‘A’. Thereafter whenever you see that shape, you see ‘A’. But in the beginning, from nowhere, without labelling, when you see this shape, you don’t see it as ‘A’. Is this clear? 
When you’re young, before someone taught you ‘A’, you have no idea whenever you see this shape. You don’t see it as ‘A’. You see the basis of ‘A’ but you don’t see it as ‘A’.  Only when someone labels it as ‘A’ and teaches you, “This is ‘A’” then immediately, your mind also labels, “This is ‘A’,” on that basis. 
The problem lies in how you see ‘A’. When you see ‘A’, you never see ‘A’ to be labelled by the mind. You never see that. Whenever you see the shape of ‘A’, it is labelled (by the mind) but you never see it is labelled by the mind. Instead, you see something existing out there. The object ‘A’ is out there.  Do you get the idea?  But in reality, it’s not there. In reality, your mind just labels ‘A’ is there. 
The big question is, “What is ‘A’?”  There’s the shape of ‘A’ but that’s not ‘A’. You see the letter ‘A’ but that’s not ‘A’ either. That is only the basis of designation of ‘A’ in dependence upon which you label ‘A’. Then ‘A’ exists. 
But the problem is, in reality, your mind doesn’t see that. Whenever you see ‘A’ out there, it seems to have nothing to do with your mind.  Whenever you open your eyes, you see the basis, then you think ‘A’ is there. It has nothing to do with your mind. 
So here, emptiness is about that. The idea is that ‘A’ is empty from its own side. ‘A’ exists. How does ‘A’ exist? It exists through labelling. It doesn’t exist from the side of the basis. ‘A’ exists only through labelling but we don’t see that. We see it as coming from its own side. But this is something that doesn’t exist. What we see doesn’t exist. We grasp at something solid over there. ‘A’ is there but it’s something that doesn’t exist from its own side. ‘A’ is empty of (existing from its own side). ‘A’ is just merely labelled and it doesn’t exist from its own side. It is empty of existing from its own side. That’s the emptiness of ‘A’. 
Maybe this is an easier example to understand. Whatever we see, our reality is like that. Our ignorant mind sees that it exists out there. It doesn’t see the merely labelled ‘A’.  Our ignorance labels ‘A’ to be truly existent. We grasp at that and believe in that. But this is not reality. It doesn’t exist (in that way). 
When we see the basis (of designation), immediately, we see it (in that way). Even if 
you are a bodhisattva on the first bhumi, second bhumi, or even eighth bhumi, ninth bhumi or tenth bhumi, as long as you are a sentient being, you will see reality in that way. You don’t see the merely labelled ‘A’. The truly existent ‘A’ appears to your mind. It’s that powerful. 
Only the Buddha doesn’t see that. But every sentient being from the first to the tenth ground bodhisattva will see that. The difference is they may see that but they don’t believe in it after they have understood emptiness. They see ‘A’ existing from its own side, but after having realized emptiness, they don’t believe it exists from its own side.  They don’t have the grasping (at true existence) as they don’t believe that it exists from its own side. That’s the difference!
As long as you still have the imprint of ignorance, you will still see (true existence) except when you are in meditative equipoise on emptiness. Then you don’t see that. Otherwise, once you see the basis (of designation), immediately, you see the truly existent ‘A’. It’s extremely powerful.  Due to the imprint of ignorance, you will see that. There is no other way (out of this) until you’ve abandoned ignorance and the imprint of ignorance.
You may not see that. Only the Buddha can see the merely labelled ‘A’. Others will always see the appearance of the truly existent ‘A’. It’s like that for every sentient being. And for us, not only do we see (the truly existent ‘A’), we truly believe in it. That is our biggest problem. 
Here, I am just giving the example of ‘A’. When you meditate, you meditate on the ‘I’, (your) self. It is exactly like that when you say, “Me!” I gave the example of ‘A’. On the basis of that, you label ‘A’.   It’s the same thing, when you say ‘I’. ‘I’ is labelled based on your body and mind. It’s exactly like ‘A’. There’s no difference, but you don’t see that. Within the body somewhere, the truly existent ‘I’ is there. When you see that, you are grasping at something that doesn’t exist. That’s called ignorance—grasping at the truly existent self. This is the root of samsara. This is the root of the problem. 
There’s no other way of removing this self-grasping, this ignorance, without understanding or realizing emptiness. You have to see this ‘I’ is just merely labelled and doesn’t exist from its own side. The meditation on emptiness is about that. Basically, it’s meditating on the emptiness of the self.   I’m talking about (your) self. On the basis of the mind and the body, the aggregates, the ‘I’ is being labelled (by the mind).  It doesn’t exist from its own side, from the (side of the) object.  
Then you go deeper. Does it exist from the side of the body and mind, from its own side? When you meditate and analyse, looking for that ‘I’, are you able to find the ‘I’ existing on the base? With the basis there, when you analyze and search for it, are you able to find it somewhere within the body or within the mind?  
When you look slowly and deeply, it’s impossible for you to find the ‘I’ within the body or the mind. This shows the ‘I’ doesn’t exist on the basis. It’s clear that when you look at each part of the body, it’s not (your) self. When you look at each part of your mind, it’s not (your) self. You’re able to see that very clearly. When you meditate like that, you won’t find the ‘I’ there. You can go deeper and deeper and search into your heart, but even if you go into your heart, at the end of the day, you cannot find 
(your) self there. 
But not finding the ‘I’ is not really realizing emptiness. It doesn’t mean when you don’t find anything there, the ‘I’ doesn’t exist. If you were to think that way, you would have fall into nihilism. That’s another danger. When you meditate like that— suddenly, the ‘I’ doesn’t exist. Nothing’s there. If the ‘I’ doesn’t exist, why should I create virtue? Why would I create negative karma? Then you fall into nihilism. That’s the danger. 
The conclusion should be the ‘I’ is still there. The ‘I’ doesn’t exist on the basis but you have to understand the ‘I’ exists as merely labelled on the basis. The ‘I’ exists in dependence upon the aggregates, the body (and mind). The ‘I’ is merely labelled exactly like ‘A’. ‘I’ exist as merely labelled by the mind. I think we have to get this conclusion.   
The idea is I am empty and emptiness is I. This is the conclusion you should get. When you look, I am empty but within emptiness I appear, I exist. Emptiness is I. In the Heart Sutra, it says, “Form is empty. Emptiness is form.” That’s the meaning. When you look for the ‘I’, you won’t see it. There’s really nothing there. But within emptiness, in dependence upon the basis, the ‘I’ exists. That means, “Emptiness is I.” Within emptiness, I appear.  
Is it clear? Now, meditate!
The topic, emptiness, is quite challenging. We need more meditation. 
GUIDED MEDITATION 
Today, we will do as before. The six deities. The front generation. We go quickly through the self basis. We already did that in the last class. 
We will do a glance (meditation). I will not say each word. We will list the name (of  
each of the six deities). Then meditate on that. 
We do the breathing meditation as usual. At that time, you can do any kind of meditation but you should not forget the count. Three times. Left. Three times. Right. Then both nostrils. You shouldn’t forget. You should be mindful. Mentally, you count, “One, two, three.” (Left side, right side). Then both nostrils. One. Two. Three. Be mindful of your breathing. This is important. 
When you breath in, there are many visualizations you may like to do. The blessings of the buddhas and bodhisattvas go inside with white colour. When you breath out, all the negative thoughts and emotions come out. You can do this kind of visualization. 
You can also do loving kindness (when you breath in) and (as you breathe out) the self-cherishing thought comes out. 
You can do any kind of visualization.  Simply, of course, you can feel the breath coming in and out. Be mindful. 
Put the thumb on your ring finger. Put your hands on your knees. Then bring your (arms) inward. To the right. Close your left nostril. Breathe in from your right nostril. (3x)
Then place your hands to rest on the knees. (Bring your arms inward as before). Close the right nostril. (Breathe in from your left nostril). (3x)
Then rest both hands on the knees. When you breathe out, you let go (by extending your fingers outwards). Then when you breathe in, bring your fingers inwards again. Breathe through both nostrils. (3x)
The self basis
~ The empty deity
When your mind is neutral, meditate on the ‘I’, oneself, doesn’t exist from its own side. The ‘I’ is merely labelled on the bases of this body and the mind. 
This mind that understands the emptiness of the ‘I’ becomes a moon disc. 
~ The sound deity
Above the moon disc suddenly appears the sound of the mantra of Chenrezig.  In reality, this is the Compassionate Buddha in the aspect of the sound. 
~ The letter deity 
Now, visualize the sound of the mantra slowly becoming the form of the letters of the mantra. They slowly come down to sit on the moon disc.
Before the meditation on the form deity, visualize from the moon disc light rays are emanated and radiate out. On the tip of the light rays, offering goddesses present clouds of offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. These light rays then absorb back into the mantra garland. 
Again from the mantra garland, light rays emanate. On the tip of each light ray, visualize Compassionate Buddha. From each of these Chenrezigs, nectar flows into each sentient being, purifying their negativities and obscurations.  It is also good to visualize all sentient beings becoming Compassionate Buddha. Then all the light rays absorb back into the mantra garland and moon disc. 
~ The form deity
Then this mantra garland and moon disc become more radiant than before. Slowly, the mantra garland takes the shape of light. Slowly, this becomes Compassionate Buddha. Slowly, you are seeing the eyes, legs, the head. Whichever you prefer and am more familiar with—four-armed, two-armed, thousand-armed. Seeing that clearly, you arise as that. 
~ The seal (or mudra) deity
Then you make this lotus lineage mudra and touch the five points. First, touching the heart and then the forehead, the throat, the right (shoulder) and the left (shoulder). 
The other basis
Now you visualize the other basis. Again, try to meditate on emptiness. 
Within emptiness, from your heart, appears the syllable, Bhrum. Slowly, it takes the form of the mandala of Chenrezig in (the space in) front. 
Inside the mandala, visualize Compassionate Buddha. So among the four branches, that’s the other basis.  
The mind basis
Your own mind realizing emptiness takes the aspect of a moon disc at your heart.  
The sound basis
Then on the moon disc, visualize the mantra garland. That’s the sound basis. 
Whispered recitation
So now the four branches are complete within this meditation. Now, we recite the mantra. 
At the heart of Chenrezig in the mandala, there’s the moon disc and on the moon disc is the mantra garland. Now, you focus your mind there. In front, Chenrezig. At his heart, the moon disc.  And on the moon disc, the mantra garland. Try to be mindful of that. Place your mind on the three objects. 
The idea is that your mind is there single-pointedly (focussing) on those objects—the front deity, the moon disc, the mantra garland. You are meditating on them. Seeing them clearly with your mind, then you recite the mantra, Om Mani Padme Hum. Engaging in whispered recitation is about that. Focussing on (those objects) without distraction.  Then you recite the mantra. 
Recite Om Mani Padme Hum verbally, not loudly. At the same time, you meditate. You can recite 21x and focus your mind on the object. Normally, you can do this. Recite the mantra for five minutes, ten minutes. When you recite the mantra, try to focus your mind on those objects. This is one of the meditation. That can be done. 
Mental recitation
Then, of course, there is another meditation. Based on the same object, there is the mental recitation. That means you are meditating, not reciting. The idea is you breathe in, bringing the breath down to the navel. You bring up the winds below up to the level of the navel also. Then hold your breath at the navel and focus your mind on the three objects—the front deity, the moon disc and mantra garland—and concentrate. We can try to do this, just three times. 
If we have more time, we can do longer meditation. Here, we just try to get some idea. 
Recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart of oneself
Visualize the front generation, yourself, the mind basis, the sound basis, clearly. After that, your objects of meditation are only the moon disc and mantra garland. So here it
is recommended that when you breathe in, visualize the moon disc and the mantra 
garland in the heart of the front generation entering yourself and becoming one with the moon disc and mantra garland at your heart. When you breathe in, from the front (generation) the moon disc and mantra garland just come in, dissolve and become one and settle at your mind.  That’s the idea. Then meditate on that. Just look at the moon disc and mantra garland and recite the mantra. You can recite the mantra 21x. You can do the whispered recitation. 
If you want to do the mental recitation, it’s the same thing. You just breathe in, visualize the (moon disc) and mantra garland come to your heart. Then hold the breath at your navel, then meditate and focus on these objects. After a while, you let go. When you breathe out, then visualize the moon disc and mantra garland going back (into the heart of the) front generation. You can do this 3x. 
Recitation observing the sound of the mantra
Now your object of meditation becomes subtler. The main object of the meditation is the sound of the mantra. Now you don’t focus so much on the moon disc or the letters of the mantra. You meditate on the sound of the mantra. 
Here, it is recommended like when you recite the mantra, Om Mani Padme Hum, you are visualizing at the same time the mantra making that sound. As you make the sound, the mantra also makes the sound. Here, you are not hearing this with your ear consciousness. You are hearing with the mental consciousness.  You are hearing the sound mentally. You recite, then the mantra makes the sound and you focus on that. 
When you are able to do this meditation on the sound of the mantra well and more deeply, you will be able to understand emptiness. When you say, ‘sound’, it’s just a label. There is nothing to pinpoint (as sound).  It appears but there is nothing solid there. It is empty from its own side. 
These are the meditations with recitations with the four branches. 
Ending the meditation
After that, when you want to get out from the meditation, (what do you do)? We will go through that for the next five, ten minutes. 
Up to here are the meditations. How do you wake up from the meditations?
You are now at the meditation observing the sound of the mantra. Slowly, you see the sound becoming the letters of the mantra. Before, it was only the sound. Now the object becomes a bit grosser. The shape of the letters appears. 
Now your object of focus is on the moon disc. Focus on the moon disc.
Now your attention is on the front generation. 
Slowly, move your attention to the self-generation. 
Now your attention moves to the moon disc at the heart of oneself as the deity. 
Next, move your attention to the form of the letters of the mantra on the mantra garland at your heart. 
Now your attention moves to the sound of the mantra. Again, if possible, meditate on the emptiness of the sound, its lack of inherent existence. The ‘I’ observing the sound also lacks inherent existence. 
Again within this emptiness, one arises as the deity with one face, two arms, appearing illusory-like. The deity does not exist from its own side. 
Then you come out from the meditation, keeping this mindfulness of yourself as the deity. Your speech is the mantra. Your thoughts are the mind of the deity. Keep mindfulness of these (three) recognitions. With that mindfulness, then you do your daily practice such as prostrations and so forth. (With this mindfulness, watch) how you communicate with people, how you look at people, how you talk with people, how you think of others. Try to think of others in a positive way. 
(The guided meditation ends here). 
I don’t know if this is useful. We are just trying here. We are doing quickly but even the (meditation on the) first recitation takes time. The idea is to develop mindfulness. 
That’s important. 
In the meditation without recitation, then the object (of meditation) becomes more subtle. There must be some reason. You look at sutra and tantra. In sutra, there is very little mention of this—the object getting subtler and subtler.  
In tantra, when you do the meditation on calm abiding, the object becomes even more subtle. I see this in many of the texts. (In the meditation on calm abiding), then the object becomes very subtle. In kriya tantra, the object of meditation is (as small as) the tip of the hair. That’s how subtle it gets.  
According to tantra, when you develop the special calm abiding, even your very, very subtle thoughts can be removed. There must be some reason for that. 
Q & A
(Student’s question is inaudible). 
Khen Rinpoche: As a practice, you can move (from one meditation to the next) after 10 or 15 minutes. You can set your time. 10 minutes. 10 minutes. You can go like that. It’s like lam-rim meditation. You can set your time. 10 minutes. 15 minutes going up to half an hour. It’s the same.  In reality, until you experience very good and stable concentration on that, then you move to the next. It’s similar to lam-rim meditation. 
For the beginner, I think it’s good to do it like that so you’ve some idea. After that, try to get that clear from the beginning. When you are very good, very stable then move to the next.
Student 1: When we recite the mantra, does the form of the letters of the mantra turn around or should we just leave them there?
Khen Rinpoche: Just let them sit there. If they revolve, then your mind will be distracted and your mind also go like that!
Student 2: What’s the purpose of the front generation?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know exactly. Maybe it’s one way for us to understand everything’s coming from your own mind. It could be that.  Another way is that with the front generation, we’re able to make offerings and prostrations to it. As an object, it’s similar to the merit field.
One way of understanding this is the front generation is coming from your mind. Your mind creates everything. It creates your nirvana and your mind creates your samsara. The mind is the basis of everything—both samsara and nirvana. Maybe, you can understand it in that way. Your mind creates nirvana. All the beauty in front of you is created by your mind.  
When you looked at the sadhana, before the self-generation, the section on the merit field has already been done. You visualize the merit field. Then you make offerings and do the seven-limb prayer. Once everything’s done, the merit field is dissolved. Next is the self-generation and only after that comes the front generation. So when you look deeply, the front generation is actually not something outside. It’s really coming from your mind. Part of your mind visualizes the Compassionate Buddha who then dissolves back into you and becomes you. 
Maybe there is some reason there. During dissolution, the front generation disappears. I don’t know why exactly. Maybe you may have a better idea.
Student 1:  I’ve done the Nyung Na recently. I think the reason why we need this front generation is for our mind to always have this image so that when we die, we can follow this image.
Khen Rinpoche: To go there?
Student 1:  Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Good. Front generation helps. She said next time she can go there. I don’t know. 
Student 3: In the Nyung Na text, it also describes the front generation with the four buddhas. At one point, you invite the empowering deities and they actually offer the bath to purify the front generation. Why do you need to purify the front generation? 
Khen Rinpoche: Because you don’t see it as pure.
Student 3: Before we prostrate, we are told to think that the wisdom being comes out and absorbs into the front generation. I don’t quite understand the purpose of this wisdom being being absorbed into oneself. 
The whole idea is to generate divine pride so whether we absorb or not absorb (the wisdom being), if we don’t have divine pride, it means we don’t have it. It’s not going to make a difference, will it?  
Khen Rinpoche: It is stated in some Action Tantra texts that one has to invite the wisdom beings. One also has to invite the empowering deities to offer the empowerment, with the bath offering that purifies. These practices are there. Then you have Amitabha on the crown. The Nyung Na also has these practices. 
But some (Action Tantra) texts don’t have (these practices). They say it’s OK whether you do this meditation or not. The point is that you meditate on yourself as Chenrezig. 
You have to have very clear divine pride, without any doubt, “I’m Chenrezig!” So it’s very clear then. I don’t think it’s necessary to invite the wisdom beings there. 
The whole point is to invite the wisdom beings to dissolve into you so that you will feel that there’s something real there. 
Student 3: But it is not really a necessity? 
Khen Rinpoche: Now if you have very clear divine pride, there could be some blessing there. 
The whole point is that if you visualize and there is more grasping at the self, this could happen so you have to be careful. Otherwise, it contributes to your self-grasping. Then it becomes a problem.
With regard to the purification, there are many rituals such as bathing the Buddha during Saka Dawa for instance. In reality, the Buddha doesn’t have any obscurations to be purified. The question then is why do you need to bath the Buddha since the Buddha is pure? 
When you bathe the Buddha, the idea is to purify our own impure perception. We have this impure perception of the Buddha. So when we bathe the Buddha, we will purify that, not (purify) the Buddha per se. Likewise, (we have impure perception with regard to) our gurus, the buddhas and bodhisattvas. (It depends on) what kind of impure appearance you have. To purify that, the bath offering is done. Just as for the Buddha, the same thing applies to the front-generation. 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan, Lau Geok Chin and Cecilia Tsong; edited by Cecilia Tsong.