Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L44final.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.879599
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 44 				                                          26 September 2017
The motivation. The self-generation rite of Vajrabhairava. The preliminaries. Invocation of the merit field. The seven purities. Tantric vows. The four immeasurables. Meditation of taking death as the path of the truth body. Benefit of visualizing the dissolution process. 
THE MOTIVATION
At the beginning of our class, we recite the prayer of going for refuge and generating bodhicitta three times.  The purpose of reciting this prayer, whether we are teaching or listening to the Dharma, is to adjust our motivation. Ideally, the best motivation for listening to and learning the teachings is bodhicitta. If the act of listening is conjoined with the bodhicitta motivation, then it will bring about great benefit. At the time of reciting the prayer, one should try very hard, to the best of one's ability, to adjust the motivation accordingly, thinking that one is doing this in order to be able to bring benefit to others. 
~~~~~~~~~~
We have been talking about taking death as the path of the dharmakaya.  I am going to say a little a bit about this in relation to the Vajrabhairava practice. 
In the Vajrabhairava extensive self-generation text, the practice of taking death as the path of dharmakaya comes in the actual body of the practice.  There are preliminary practices that precede this actual body of the practice. I’m not going to go into every single detail.  I’m just going to give you an overview.
THE PRELIMINARIES
The practice begins with the request to the root and lineage gurus (p.5). This is 
for the purpose of receiving blessings in one's heart. 
Then one arises instantaneously as Vajrabhairava (p.8).
This is followed by the blessing of the inner offering (p. 8).  
There is the offering of tormas and other offerings to the directional protectors (p. 9). The tormas and other offerings are first blessed and then offered to the directional protectors. 
After offerings are made to the directional protectors, one blesses the offerings for the self-generation (p.13).  
Then there is the practice of the meditation on and recitation of Vajrasattva for the purpose of purifying the negativities (p.13). 
All this fall under the preliminaries. 
INVOCATION OF THE MERIT FIELD
Next is the invocation of the field of merit (p.15). The merit field is a very important element in the practice. If you look at any self-generation rites, you will always find the invocation and worship of the field of merit. If you look at the practices of the Guru Puja or the Six-session Guru Yoga, there is always the field of merit in those practices. Here, in the practice of Vajrabhairava, the field of merit is primarily Vajrabhairava himself.
One's guru is visualized in the form of the lord of the lineage, sitting on the crown of the root face. One's root guru is in the aspect of Vajradhara and is in the nature of all one’s gurus. This is how one should think when invoking this specific merit field. 
It is clear in the self-generation rite that oneself is visualized as Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava with one face and two arms. At the heart, there is a lotus and sun disc upon which there is a blue syllable Hum from which light rays radiate to the ten directions, inviting the field of merit of Vajrabhairava, with one's root guru in the aspect of Vajradhara abiding as the lord of the lineage on the crown of the root face.
THE SEVEN PURITIES
After the field of merit is invoked, one does the practice of what is termed the seven purities (p. 15—16). This is slightly different from sutra but essentially, the practice of the seven purities is specifically for accumulating the collection of merit. The seven purities include the usual practices of:
paying homage 
making offerings 
confessing 
rejoicing 
dedication of the merit towards enlightenment.
Those are the five purities. The other two purities are:
refuge 
generating bodhicitta
I go for refuge to the Triple Gem. I shall liberate all sentient beings and place them in the state of enlightenment. I shall generate purely the bodhicitta. I offer my body to you who are an ocean of excellent qualities (p. 16). 
“I offer my body to you who are an ocean of excellent qualities.” Essentially, this is making a pledge to train in the bodhisattva conduct. You offer your body and pledge to engage in the practices of the bodhisattva deeds. 
Making offerings with the five features
When making offerings, it will be good if the offerings are endowed with the five features. The five features are:
The offering of substance
The offering of mantra
The offering of mudra 
The offering of concentration 
The offering of practice.
~ 1. Offering of substance
The first is the offering of substance. This briefly refers to those objects we normally see and offer such as libation, flowers, incense, lights and so forth. Whatever is offered, we should offer very good quality offering substances. One should place and set up as many offerings as one can afford. There should be numerous offerings of good quality.  This is important as it helps to accumulate more merit. Sometimes, people may think that this is not so important. The main thing is the meditation practice.  I don’t think that’s correct.
~ 2. Offering of mantra
This refers to verbalizing the words of the offering, for example, Argham, Padyam, Gandhe, Pushpe, Dhupe, Aloke, Naividya and Shapta.  
~ 3. Offering of mudra
Accompanying that are the hand gestures. When we verbalize the offering mantra and perform the hand gestures, it becomes an offering of mudra. Sometimes, people may have the idea that it is OK not to do the hand gestures. However, if you do the hand gestures, it becomes the offering of mudra.
~ 4. Offering of concentration
The offering of concentration is visualizing multitudes of offerings by multiplying them exponentially. This probably comes under the offering of concentration. 
~ 5. Offering of practice. 
When one’s offering of practice is performed with the understanding that oneself, the person who is offering, the object to whom one is offering and the offering themselves are in the nature of bliss and emptiness, that becomes an offering of practice. This way of thinking can also be applied when one is dedicating merit. Usually, it’s said that the person who is dedicating the merit, the object to whom one is dedicating the merit and the merit itself, the substance of the dedication, are all in the nature of emptiness. If a dedication is informed by this understanding, it protects the roots of virtue from being destroyed by anger.  Otherwise, the merit that’s not dedicated in such as way is destroyed whenever anger arises. 
Offering oneself as the servant (to the guru)—literally, this is said to be offering one's body as the servant—is also a practice of offering. Here, the idea is that from the depths of one's heart, one dedicates one’s life, i.e., the body, to please the virtuous friend, the guru. So, whatever activities or deeds that are pleasing to the guru, from one’s heart, one dedicates to fulfilling them. If one can have this kind of mind-set, I think it will make a big impact on one's virtuous practices.
TANTRIC VOWS
Then there is the taking of the tantric vows (p. 16).  Taking the tantric vows in the context of the self-generation rite here does not restore those vows if there has been any transgression or infraction. However, if one's tantric vows have not been broken,  then taking the tantric vows here stabilizes one’s vows and increases the strength of the vows. As such, this pleases the guru-deity and because of that, it becomes an offering of practice.
THE FOUR IMMEASURABLES
After taking the tantric vows in the self-generation rite, there is the meditation on the four immeasurables (p. 16). The section from the invocation of the merit field up to this meditation on the four immeasurables is for the purpose of accumulating merit and purifying the mind of negativities and obscurations. This is the essential point. This is an important factor that determines whether one will gain experiences and realizations or not. When you are doing the practices of accumulating merit and purifying the mind of negativities and obscurations, they should be done forcefully with the mind and also mindfully with the appropriate visualizations, reflection and meditation.
Meditation of Taking Death as the Path of the Truth Body
Next begins the practice of taking the three bodies as the path. We start with the first one—taking death as the path of the truth body (p. 17—23). 
As for dissolution of the field of merit, there are different systems for doing this.  Here in the context of Vajrabhairava, you purify the field of merit, the environment and all its inhabitants into emptiness.  This is the way to dissolve the merit field, according to Vajrabhairava (p. 17). 
Om Svabhava Shuddhah Sarva Dharmah Svabhava Shuddho Ham/ Om Shunyata Jnana Vajra Svabhava  Atmako Ham 
Because I myself, the deities, the field of merit and all other phenomena 
are imputations on dependent arisings, everything becomes emptiness having the true nature of identitylessness and devoid of the four extremes such as eternalism, nihilism and so forth.
At the time of death, it is said that we will experience the eight signs of dissolution. During the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya, we must engage in a meditation that is concordant with the aspects of those eight signs of dissolution. 
The eight signs of dissolution arise at the time of death. At the time of the path, prior to the manifesting or arising of the path of clear light, whether it is the example clear light or the meaning clear light, the signs of dissolution also arise. These are the actual signs that precede the path. At the time of death, these are also the actual signs. Here, in the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya, we imagine these signs are happening at the level of imagination. They do not occur at all at the time of meditation on the generation stage.
Before you can do this practice, you must know:
what the basis of purification is
what the path that purifies is  
what the result of purification is 
Recently, we have gone through the presentation of the three dharmakayas:
the dharmakaya of the basis 
the dharmakaya of the path
the dharmakaya of the result
You must have a good understanding of them before you can actually engage in this practice.
In the beginning, before the actual meditation, it is said that one must project a very strong will or intention, “I am going to purify the basis of purification. Therefore, I will meditate on the path that purifies. Through that, I will actualize the result of purification.” This is like setting up the motivation and can be done, in the context of such a practice, only with a good and correct understanding of what the basis of purification, the path that purifies and the result of purification are. 
In the practice of taking the three bodies of the path, after you’ve imagined the achievement of the dharmakaya, you arise as the sambhogakaya. From there, you arise as the nirmanakaya. Since that is done in one stream of practice, therefore, one also projects the will or intention right at the beginning, thinking that, “I will actualize the dharmakaya. From that, I will arise as the sambhogakaya and then the nirmanakaya in order to work for the benefit of all sentient beings.”
Correlated with first stage of dissolution
After projecting this will, from the blue syllable Hum at one’s heart as Vajrabhairava countless beams of light are emitted. These beams of light are in the nature of great bliss. They touch the environment and the inhabitants living in it, melting the entire environment and its inhabitants into light that is in the nature of great bliss. The purpose of doing this is to withdraw the appearances as there are so many appearances of the environment and appearances of the inhabitants. We’re not transforming them into nothingness. Rather, we are withdrawing these appearances and dissolving them into the light that is in the nature of bliss and emptiness. That mass of light dissolves into yourself who is already in the form of Vajrabhairava. When this is happening, you correlate this with the first stage of dissolution, i.e., the dissolution of the earth element into water element. Internally, imagine you are experiencing the sign of the mirage. 
Together with the visualization of the internal sign of the mirage, I think it will be beneficial if you can also accompany that by thinking of the external signs. While this is not mentioned in the commentaries of the generation stage, I guess it should be OK for you to think of the external signs as that will be beneficial for the mind. The external signs associated with the first stage of dissolution are that your body becomes weak and almost immovable and the functions of the body deteriorates. 
At the end of this stage of dissolution, what’s left is only yourself as Vajrabhairava as the environment and inhabitants within it have already dissolved into you.
Correlated with second stage of dissolution
Then begins the second stage of dissolution of yourself as Vajrabhairava dissolves into light from the top and bottom and then dissolves into the syllable Hum at the heart. Together with this visualization of the dissolution from the top to bottom and into the syllable Hum at the heart, you can relate this to the second stage of dissolution—the dissolution of the water element into the fire element. Internally, you imagine you are experiencing the sign of smoke.
At the end of this stage of dissolution, all appearances have already been withdrawn with the exception of the syllable Hum.  During this dissolution into the syllable Hum culminating with only the syllable Hum remaining, imagine you are experiencing the vision of smoke. At the same time, you can think about some of the external signs. For example, how the bodily fluids dry up. Feel that the tongue and mouth are very dry and there is no longer any experience of sweating. Other bodily fluids also dry up to a certain extent. 
Correlated with third stage of dissolution 
The Hum starts to dissolve from the bottom upwards. The curved hook at the bottom of Hum is called the shabkyu in Tibetan and represents the vowel, U. This shabkyu dissolves into the main body of the syllable Ha. As this happens, it correlates to the third stage of dissolution. Internally, imagine you experience the sign of the vision of fireflies. As this phase of dissolution is correlated with the dissolution of the fire element into the wind element, one of the external signs is that the body can no longer digest food because the fire element has dissolved. 
Correlated with the fourth stage of dissolution
The main body Ha then dissolves upwards into the horizontal line called the head of the Ha. This correlates with the dissolution of the wind element into the consciousness. The object of observation is becoming smaller and smaller as the mind becomes more and more subtle. The internal sign of this stage of dissolution is seeing the flame of a butter lamp. During this stage of dissolution, you can see that the mounts (the winds or energies) associated with the sense consciousness have mostly dissolved so there are not many external signs to be observed. The internal sign is seeing the appearance of the butter lamp. At this point in time, you imagine that you stop breathing. This is at the level of imagination. 
Correlated with the mind of white appearance
Then the head of the Ha dissolves upwards into the crescent.  At this time, the sense consciousnesses cease and are no longer in operation. What’s left is the mental consciousness. There are different levels of the mental consciousness, which becomes increasingly more and more subtle. As the head of the Ha dissolves into the crescent, imagine the consciousness dissolving into the mind of appearance. There is no external sign here but internally, there is the whitish appearance.
Correlated with the mind of red increase
The crescent moon dissolves upwards into the drop. You visualize the drop as a sphere of light, not a circle as it is not empty inside. This correlates with the mind of appearance dissolving into the mind of increase. Internally, imagine you experience the red appearance. 
Correlated with the mind of near-attainment
The drop then dissolves into the nada. This correlates with the dissolution of the mind of increase into the mind of near-attainment. Internally, there is the appearance of darkness. The nada has a few curves with an extremely fine tip.
Correlated with the mind of clear light
The nada gradually dissolves into the fine tip and that dissolves into emptiness. It is not dissolving into nothingness. It is dissolving into something, not nothingness or non-existence. Rather, it is the appearance of vacuity that is free of the appearances associated with the minds of appearance, increase and near attainment. What does this look like? It is likened to the clear sky at dawn in autumn that is not polluted by moonlight, sunlight or darkness. This is what you have to imagine. This is not just an appearance. You have to think this is also emptiness and you must ascertain emptiness. 
At the last stage of dissolution, at the level of imagination, imagine that the clear light in the nature of great bliss has manifested. Use that mind to meditate on the meaning of emptiness. Because of that ascertainment of emptiness, you can talk about the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. When you have that, do not think that this is only the path clear light. Rather, with divine pride, think, “This is my resultant dharmakaya!”
After going through the visualization in this way, then recite the words of the text: 
OM SVABHAVA SHUDDHAH SARVA DHARMAH SVABHAVA SHUDDHO HAM / OM SHUNYATA JNANA VAJRA SVABHAVA ATMAKO HAM
You do these dissolutions that culminate in the clear light and imagine that the clear light has manifested in the nature of great bliss and use this clear light to meditate on and ascertain emptiness. Think about emptiness and its meaning. With whatever understanding and ascertainment of emptiness you can manage, that mind becomes the wisdom of bliss and emptiness. Rather than thinking this is the path clear light, think, “This is my resultant dharmakaya. I am the resultant dharmakaya.” Identify this as the actual dharmakaya and generate divine pride. 
This is the practice of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya at the level of imagination. It is emphasized it’s extremely important to stabilize through meditation the meaning of emptiness without being influenced by laxity and excitement. It is said an individual who has a very good understanding and ascertainment of emptiness will be able to withdraw conventional appearances. For such a person, there is no need to meditate on the stages of dissolution. This is absolutely not necessary for such an individual.
However, it does make a difference for us if we engage in the gradual stages of dissolution because there is an impact on the mind. With the stages of dissolution, the objects of observations become more subtle.  As such, there is an impact on the energy, stability and concentration of the mind as well.
We do these gradual stages of dissolving oneself as Vajrabhairava into the syllable Hum at the heart. This syllable Hum becomes smaller and smaller and dissolves into emptiness. This visualization makes a difference because it acts as a ripener for the completion stage. Due to the very nature of this visualization, you are mimicking the movement and dissolution of the winds into the central channel and the heart chakra. This is the special reason for this visualization. This is how you take death as the path of the dharmakaya. As much as possible, one should engage in these visualizations.  
If one has participated in the initiation of Highest Yoga Tantra and has received the tantric vows, then it is extremely important to meditate on emptiness—be it coarse or subtle emptiness—every day. Otherwise, if a day goes by without one meditating on emptiness, one incurs the root downfall of not recollecting the view of voidness (or emptiness). 
Essentially, taking death as the path of the dharmakaya is imagining the actualization of the wisdom of bliss and emptiness to be the actual or resultant dharmakaya. This practice is called taking death as the path of dharmakaya because it is the yoga for purifying ordinary death through which one achieves the resultant dharmakaya of a buddha. 
At the generation stage, this visualization is done at the level of imagination. Taking death as the path of dharmakaya, acts as a cause for actualizing the path clear light— the example clear light and the meaning clear light. By actualizing the meaning clear light, one achieves the resultant dharmakaya.
So, taking death as the path of dharmakaya in the generation stage is an exercise in correlating the stages of dissolution and their internal signs. With the dissolution of the environment and the inhabitants into oneself, and oneself dissolving into the syllable Hum and so forth, in the end, this culminates in the clear light mind. The most important thing is meditating on the meaning of emptiness.
Benefit of visualizing the dissolution process
People may wonder about the benefit of visualizing the signs of the dissolution of death. In our practice, although it is done at the level of visualization, but when we imagine that it is actually happening, such meditation on the signs of death is very helpful for reminding us about impending death. 
Here, we are talking about the tantric practitioner who has already meditated on death and impermanence long before that. He is supposed to have meditated on the certainty of death, that the time of death is uncertain and that, at the time of death, nothing helps except the Dharma and so on. 
This practitioner trains in the generation stage. Because of that training, he is very familiar with the signs of dissolution. So, when actual death happens, this practitioner will not be afraid because he has already rehearsed this many times. He knows what is going to come next and when it comes, he is not surprised because he has already rehearsed it so well and is so familiar with it, knowing exactly what is going to come. So, this person has no reason to be afraid.
We are talking about the practitioner who has trained thoroughly, having all the prerequisites and knows all the ins and outs of the whole technique. He knows the basis of purification, the path that purifies and the result of purification. He has been rehearsing this daily for his whole life. So, when the time of death comes, this practitioner probably welcomes death, “Finally, it’s here. I have been rehearsing all this while and finally, the day has come.” For this very advanced practitioner who has been rehearsing this for his whole life, when the opportunity comes, it is no longer visualization but the real thing. He is so looking forward to it. As such, he will really focus his mind and make full use of the opportunity. There will be no more intermediate state if he actualizes the path of clear light at the time of death.
Such advanced individuals know that if they are able to transform that clear light of death into the path, then there is no more intermediate stage. They will definitely achieve enlightenment. Of course, we are talking about those who have bodhicitta and really wants enlightenment. They are looking forward to becoming buddhas their whole life. They have been rehearsing and waiting for that opportunity. When that opportunity comes, they will be so focussed and filled with joy. For these individuals, there is no fear or worry whatsoever.
As for the rest of us who are not like that, I guess there is still benefit in being very familiar with these signs of dissolution. If one has been rehearsing in life, due to that familiarity, at least, one will not be surprised at the time of death as one knows what to expect and what is going to happen. This helps with the lessening of fear.
Whatever self-generation practice of Highest Yoga Tantra is done, be it extensive or abbreviated, it must possess the practice of taking the three bodies as the path. With regard to taking death as the path of the dharmakaya, you must grasp these essential points. Otherwise, it is just an exercise. 
One also can do this practice in conjunction with the Six-session Guru Yoga. “My supreme Guru,/ Comes to the crown of my head (v. B1). Once more he gladly (merges with me) (v. B2). ” At that time, you can meditate on this death dissolution.
Khen Rinpoche: If have time, we will talk about this in the next class. 
Q & A
Student 1:  By the time of the sixth stage of dissolution—the red increase—all the 25 coarse phenomena would have dissolved. So, at the seventh and eighth stages of dissolution there would be something else other than the 25 coarse phenomena. 
Khen Rinpoche: No. The 25 coarse phenomena have not fully dissolved yet because by the fourth stage, all the first four aggregates have dissolved. The aggregate of consciousness covers many levels of consciousnesses, i.e., all the three minds including the clear light. So, there is still the aggregate of consciousness. If you take the aggregate of consciousness to mean only the coarse consciousnesses like the sense and mental consciousnesses and the 80 indicative conceptions, yes, they have ceased. But the aggregate of consciousness has a bigger pervasion. It does not consist of only that as it consists of all levels of consciousnesses. 
I did not say that the wisdom of dharmadhatu is associated with the fifth, sixth or seventh stage (of dissolution) because it comes down to what is defined as the wisdom of dharmadhatu. I said in class that the wisdom of dharmadhatu or the basis is that which is suitable to be transformed into a buddha’s truth body. If that is the case, then you cannot correlate the wisdom of dharmadhatu as a factor of purification associated with the fifth, sixth and even seventh stage. 
Student 1: I am still not so clear about this. So, at the seventh stage….
Khen Rinpoche:  I will make it clearer in the next class. In the next lesson, we will talk about the achievement of the intermediate state. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau
Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.