Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L08.FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:21.374543
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson                                                                     8
13 April 2017


Q & A. (Enlightenment in Akanishta. Amitabha pure land). The Hinayana  path.
Homework.


Khen Rinpoche: Are there any questions on the grounds  and  paths?  Are  you
getting some idea of the grounds and paths after two  to  three  classes  or
are you totally lost?  If there is  anything  related  to  the  grounds  and
paths that you are thinking about, that  you  heard  and  don’t  understand,
ask.

Student 1: Is the sense consciousness of someone who has entered the path  a
path? When we look at the definitions of the  knowers  and  applications  in
the last module, they are all related to the mental consciousness. I’m  just
wondering about the sense consciousnesses.

Khen Rinpoche: All the sense consciousnesses are not paths.  A path  has  to
be a mental consciousness.

Student 2:  We discussed how long it takes  to  actualize  the  grounds  and
paths. It seems to me that the hardest part of Dharma practice is  where  we
are  right  now—  trying  to  actualize  the  realization   of   death   and
impermanence and giving up attachment to the happiness of  this  life.  Once
you generate renunciation and the mind generation,  you  have  determination
and courage and are very clear minded about your goal. There  is  a  lot  of
work to be done but it is not difficult for the sincere practitioner.  Would
that be a fair observation?

Khen Rinpoche: OK. Any question related to grounds and paths that you  don’t
understand?

ENLIGHTENMENT IN AKANISHTA

Student 3: Why is it that one can only  be  enlightened  in  Akanishta  pure
land? Why can’t one be enlightened in other pure lands such as the  Amitabha
pure land or Tushita pure land?

Khen Rinpoche: You have to think along the lines of the place where one  can
actualize the complete enjoyment body. It was said  that  Shakyamuni  Buddha
achieved enlightenment at the end of the tenth ground  while  in  Akanishta.
When one achieves  enlightenment,  all  four  bodies—one  of  which  is  the
complete enjoyment body—are actualized  simultaneously.  In  that  case,  in
order to actualize the complete  enjoyment  body,  what  other  place  could
there be besides a pure land of the complete enjoyment body? As you have  to
achieve enlightenment in the complete enjoyment body,  where  can  you  find
the complete enjoyment body? Only in Akanishta

Khen Rinpoche: That is the answer. I’m wondering if  you  really  understand
the topic. If you don’t understand, then you must ask questions.  Don’t  sit
there, pretending that you understand.

Student  4:  When  Amitabha  Buddha  attained  enlightenment,  his  complete
enjoyment body was attained in Akanishta first before his own Amitabha  pure
land?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say that.

It is clear in the texts that you  need  to  achieve  enlightenment  on  the
basis found in Akanishta while one is in Akanishta.  We  have  to  come  out
with an answer that fits that. What will that answer be? The answer  I  gave
you is  my  own  opinion.  When  you  achieve  enlightenment,  you  have  to
actualize the four  bodies  simultaneously.  One  of  these  bodies  is  the
complete enjoyment body.

When you achieve enlightenment in the form of the complete  enjoyment  body,
where will you be? Where are you going to find  complete  enjoyment  bodies?
In Akanishta. If you remember from  one  of  our  earlier  discussions,  the
complete enjoyment body possesses five certainties,  one  of  which  is  the
certainty of abode.

The complete enjoyment body is the basis of  numberless  emanations  of  the
supreme emanation body. If you talk about Amitabha Buddha in the  aspect  of
his supreme emanation body, the nirmanakaya, can we say that this aspect  of
Amitabha Buddha is emanated from the complete enjoyment  body  that  is  its
basis of emanation? Once it is emanated, then that Amitabha  Buddha  in  the
aspect of his supreme emanation body aspect can manifest his pure  land  and
so forth. Will it be alright to posit this?

Among the five certainties of the complete enjoyment body is  the  certainty
of the entourage. The complete enjoyment body is surrounded  by  bodhisattva
superiors only. This means  ordinary  beings  can  never  see  the  complete
enjoyment body. Yet the  buddhas  have  to  work  for  the  welfare  of  all
sentient beings. How do the buddhas do this?  Through  numberless  emanation
bodies that issue forth from the complete enjoyment body as their  basis  of
emanation. The buddhas in the aspect of emanation bodies work  for  sentient
beings including manifesting the pure lands. If we were  to  say  this,  can
you accept it?

Another certainty is the certainty of the doctrine  or  the  teachings.  The
complete enjoyment body only teaches the Mahayana Dharma.  Since  they  have
to work for all sentient beings and teach the Hinayana  path  as  well,  the
buddhas need to do this through the aspect of an emanation body.

Then there is the certainty of the time period. The complete enjoyment  body
remains until the end  of  samsara.  It  doesn’t  undergo  birth  and  death
whereas the aspect of the emanation body shows  the  aspects  of  birth  and
death.

This is why there is a difference when it comes to the seven limbs  practice
in sutra and tantra. In tantra, you will not find  the  limb  of  beseeching
the Buddha not to pass away into parinirvana. Why? Because in  tantra,  most
of the time we are  dealing  with  the  Buddha  in  his  complete  enjoyment
aspect. Since the complete enjoyment body does not undergo birth and  death,
there is no need for that limb whereas in sutra, most of the  time,  we  are
dealing with the aspect of the supreme emanation  body.  Since  the  supreme
emanation body shows the aspects of birth and  death,  therefore,  there  is
the limb of beseeching the Buddha not to pass away into parinirvnana.

Student 4: On the one hand, we say that the emanation body  is  emanated  on
the basis of the complete enjoyment body. This  gives  the  impression  that
the complete enjoyment body precedes the emanation body. On the other  hand,
we say that the four bodies are actualized simultaneously.

Khen Rinpoche: In  general,  we  have  to  say  that  the  four  bodies  are
actualized simultaneously. But when we talk about Shakyamuni Buddha being  a
supreme emanation body, we have to say that that comes  after  the  complete
enjoyment body  in  that  the  complete  enjoyment  body  is  the  basis  of
emanation of that supreme emanation body.

Student 5: At the continuum of the end of a sentient being, can that  be  on
the basis of the desire realm or form realm  support?  When  that  continuum
achieves the  path  of  release  of  the  buddha  ground,  he  spontaneously
achieves the four bodies in Akanishta? This means that in  his  last  moment
as a sentient being, he has a desire realm or form realm support.

Khen Rinpoche: When you refer to support, you are referring to the  physical
or the mind?

Student 5: Support is physical.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think that is possible.

Physical is not possible.   At  the  time  of  the  vajra  light  meditative
stabilization of the path of  meditation  which  is  like  the  end  of  the
continuum of sentient being, with that  mind,  the  bodhisattva  is  already
born in Akanishta. He will achieve enlightenment there.

AMITABHA PURE LAND

Student 6: As the Amitabha pure land practice is  quite  popular  here,  for
those who are born in Amitabha pure land, what  is  their  basis?  Are  they
considered to have a desire realm basis, form realm basis or formless  realm
basis? Can they newly enter the path if they have not already achieved  this
in Amitabha pure land?

Khen Rinpoche: The desire realm,  form  and  formless  realms  are  samsaric
abodes. A pure land cannot be in samsara. The texts  often  phrase  it  like
this, “The three realms of cyclic existence are the desire realm,  form  and
formless realms.” You are not going to find  a  pure  land  in  these  three
realms.

With regard to the Akanishta that we have been talking about, this  is  what
is said, “Akanishta is a form realm but it is not the  form  realm  that  is
part of the three realms.”

Is it possible to newly generate a path in Amitabha pure  land?  Yes.  There
shouldn’t be any difficulty in asserting that.

You may accept that answer but do you know  why  it  is  possible  to  newly
generate a path there?

Student 6:  I was told that Amitabha pure land is the only pure  land  where
those who are reborn there can still have afflictions in their mind. If  you
are born with afflictions in the mind, then there will be  suffering.  Since
there is suffering, you are able to generate the path.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you know why  Amitabha  pure  land  is  called  Sukhavati?
Sukha means bliss. There is no suffering there, only  bliss.  So,  once  you
are reborn in Amitabha pure land, there is no suffering!

Student 6: If there is no suffering there, how can one  develop  bodhicitta?
How can one enter the path?

Khen Rinpoche: This is why I’m asking you this question.

Student 6: You gave me the wrong answer?

Khen Rinpoche: I’m checking how clever you are! I am asking you. Did I  give
the wrong answer or the right answer? You think my answer is wrong? Why  did
I say “possible”? Do you think that is wrong?

Student 6: I think it would be very strange  if  you  were  to  pray  to  be
reborn there and after that, you have to come back to the  desire  realm  to
enter the path. You have to be able to enter the path there. This has to  be
one of the reasons.

Khen Rinpoche: So that means I’m giving you the correct answer?

Student 6: Yes, it is possible.

Khen Rinpoche: That means I gave you the correct answer.

Among those who go to the pure lands,  there  are  those  who  have  already
entered the path and there are also those who have yet to  enter  the  path.
So, people who have not entered any paths can  reach  a  pure  land.  It  is
going to be difficult to hold the position  that  once  you  go  there,  you
cannot generate the path and that you have to come back to the desire  realm
to do this. Therefore, perhaps, it is better  to  say  that  you  can  newly
generate the path in the pure land.

As to whether one can achieve enlightenment in Amitabha  Buddha  pure  land,
as we have seen in the last lesson, there are two schools of thought:
 • One school of thought asserts, “No, you cannot achieve  enlightenment  in
   Amitabha Buddha pure land because in order to newly generate the path  of
   seeing, you need a desire realm basis.” For this school of thought,  they
   use that as a reason to say that  one  cannot  achieve  enlightenment  in
   Amitabha Buddha pure land.
 • Another school of thought says that one can achieve enlightenment there.

Do ordinary beings born in Amitabha Buddha’s pure  land  freshly  accumulate
projecting karma for samsara?

Do ordinary brings  reborn  in  Amitabha  Buddha’s  pure  land  possess  the
ignorance that is the ignorance of the 12 links of dependent origination?

If they possess the ignorance that is the  ignorance  of  the  12  links  of
dependent origination, they will  definitely  accumulate  projecting  karma,
won’t they? It follows that even though you are in  Amitabha  Buddha’s  pure
land,  since  you  have  the  ignorance  of  the  12  links   of   dependent
origination, you will definitely accumulate fresh projecting karma.  If  you
accumulate fresh projecting karma, it follows that you have to be reborn  in
cyclic existence again.

I am not saying this is necessarily the case as a matter of fact or  my  own
opinion. This is part of the debate or discussion. If  you  say  this,  then
this and this will happen. That’s all. We are stating  the  implications  of
what is being said.

THE HINAYANA PATH

If we talk about the Hinayana  path,  when  the  person  realizes  emptiness
directly, he enters the Hinayana path of seeing. On that  Hinayana  path  of
seeing,  he  abandons  the  afflictions  that  are  the   path   of   seeing
abandonments.

After that, he enters the Hinayana path of meditation where there  are  nine
levels of innate  afflictions  to  be  abandoned.  These  are  the  path  of
meditation abandonments to be abandoned before he can become an arhat.

The manner of  progressing  from  the  Hinayana  path  of  seeing  till  the
achievement of arhatship is similar in  that  the  same  terms—uninterrupted
path, path of release and subsequent attainment—are employed as well:
 •  When  the  individual  realizes  emptiness  directly,  he  achieves  the
   uninterrupted path of the path of seeing. This is a wisdom of  meditative
   equipoise.
 • Then he achieves the path of release. This is also a wisdom of meditative
   equipoise.
 • When he arises into post-meditative equipoise, he achieves the wisdom  of
   subsequent attainment.
 • Then  he  enters  into  meditative  equipoise  again  and  generates  the
   uninterrupted path of the path of  meditation,  progressing  through  the
   path of  meditation  and  eliminating  the  nine  levels  of  the  innate
   afflictions.

What if you were asked this: How do these individuals on the  Hinayana  path
accumulate merit during post-meditative  equipoise?  Do  they  make  mandala
offerings or prostrations and so on?

Khen Rinpoche: Do they do chanting?

What do they  do  since  they  don’t  have  the  six  perfections?  Do  they
accumulate merit?

Do they  make  100,000  prostrations?  Or  they  read  sutras  like  we  do?
Chanting?

With regard to the bodhisattvas, we have a lot to say, “They do  this,  that
and the other.” But what do the superiors on the  Hinayana  path  do  during
post meditative equipoise?

There is an explanation of the path  of  meditation  abandonments  that  are
abandoned simultaneously and abandoned serially.

When  we  talk  about  the  objects  of  abandonment  that   are   abandoned
simultaneously, we are talking here about  the  innate  conception  of  true
existence of the three realms —the desire, form and  formless  realms.  When
we expand on that, we have nine abandonments and  nine  uninterrupted  paths
have to be generated.

On the eighth path of release, the Hinayana superior  is  about  to  achieve
liberation. The ninth path of release will be the Hinayana path of  no  more
learning.

The innate conception of true existence  or  the  nine  afflictions  of  the
three realms are abandoned simultaneously:
 • one in the desire realm
 • four in the form realm
 • four in the formless realm
How are these nine abandoned? By generating the nine uninterrupted paths.

Within each affliction of each realm,  there  are  another  nine  levels  of
afflictions. For instance, in the desire realm, there is the:
 • big of the big desire realm affliction
 • middling of the big desire realm affliction
 • small of the big desire realm affliction
 • and likewise for the middling and small desire realm afflictions


Therefore, there are:
 • nine levels of the desire realm afflictions
 • 36 levels of the form realm afflictions
 • 36 levels of the formless realm afflictions
In total, there are 81 afflictions.  They  are  abandoned  serially  in  the
sense that all the big of the big of  all  the  nine  levels  are  abandoned
followed by all the middling of the big of all the nine levels  and  so  on.
Therefore, the objects of abandonment are abandoned serially.

I have not seen any clear writings on this but  you  can  say  that  in  the
Hinayana  path,  there  are  also  dull  facultied   and   sharp   facultied
practitioners. I  wonder  if  there  is  a  relationship  between  the  dull
facultied  and  the  sharp  facultied  with  abandoning   the   objects   of
abandonment simultaneously or serially.

In   the   Hinayana   path,   the   objects   of   abandonments—the   innate
afflictions—are abandoned simultaneously by the  nine  uninterrupted  paths.
The ninth path of release is the path of no more learning  of  the  Hinayana
path.

For the objects of abandonments that are abandoned serially, then there  are
81 uninterrupted paths.

Khen Rinpoche: If I’m not wrong,  I  think  I  mentioned  this  once  before
either during this Basic  Program  or  the  first  Basic  Program.  I  don’t
remember.

To be an arhat (or foe  destroyer),  you  need  to  abandon  the  afflictive
obscurations. According to the Consequence Middle  Way  School  (CMWS),  the
afflictive obscurations are related to the grasping at  true  existence  and
in order to become a foe destroyer, you have to abandon the innate  grasping
at true existence.

Let’s say that somewhere along the  line,  the  arhat  enters  the  Mahayana
path.   In  order  to  do  that,  they  have  to  generate   the   mind   of
enlightenment. Once the superiors on the Hinayana path  have  abandoned  the
afflictive obscurations—the innate grasping  at  true  existence  and  their
seeds—they become arhats. It is said that they  then  remain  in  meditative
equipoise in nirvana for eons. At some point in time, the  buddhas  shine  a
light on them, telling them to wake  up—“You  are  not  going  to  become  a
buddha by doing that”—and giving them instructions.

In order for these arhats to enter the Mahayana path, they have to  generate
bodhicitta.  They  enter  the  Mahayana  path  from  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation and progress through the Mahayana grounds and paths in the  way
we have discussed earlier—the Mahayana path of  accumulation,  the  Mahayana
path of preparation, the Mahayana path of seeing and the  Mahayana  path  of
meditation.

This question now is this: What is the function of  the  uninterrupted  path
of the Mahayana path of seeing in the continuum of a person who has  already
become an arhat?

Khen Rinpoche: What is its purpose? What does it abandon?

Student 1: One of the functions of the path of seeing is to  overcome  doubt
in the mind of the arhat with regard to enlightenment.

Khen Rinpoche: Doubt?
Student 1: He doubts his  own  enlightenment  because  he  has  very  strong
Hinayana  imprints.  During  the  path  of  accumulation  and  the  path  of
preparation,  he  still  has  doubts  about  the  possibility  of  achieving
enlightenment. So this is one of the functions of the uninterrupted path  on
the path of seeing.

Khen  Rinpoche:  What  doubt  can  there  be?  When  you  achieve  the  mind
generation that is like gold, there is no turning back because you know  for
sure that enlightenment will  happen.  This  is  on  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation. On the Mahayana path of preparation,  that  certainty  becomes
even more powerful.

We are talking about an arhat who enters the Mahayana path. Right  from  the
beginning of entering the Mahayana path, he already has the wisdom  directly
realizing emptiness. Why would he have doubt?

Student 4: Does that  make  him  a  sharp  facultied  bodhisattva  since  he
directly realizes emptiness before entering the path? This is more  powerful
than the inferential realization of emptiness. Isn’t  that  the  reason  for
being considered sharp facultied, i.e., the realization of emptiness  before
entry into the path?

Khen Rinpoche: On which path did he realize emptiness?

Student 4: The Hinayana path.

Khen Rinpoche: In that case, what need is there to  say  that  he  is  sharp
facultied? He has realized emptiness prior to entering  the  Mahayana  path.
It follows that he fulfils the definition of having sharp faculties.

Student 4: I say he is sharp facultied because of that reason. In  fact,  it
is rather strange. For example, Shariputra actually generated and then  gave
up his bodhicitta. At that point in time, he hadn’t realized emptiness  yet.
Technically, he would be considered a dull facultied bodhisattva.

If you realize emptiness before entering the path, it is  not  possible  for
you to abandon bodhicitta when you generate the  path.  The  reason  why  he
abandoned bodhicitta is because he was a dull facultied bodhisattva at  that
time. He went into the Hinayana path, became an arhat and directly  realized
emptiness. If he were to join the  Mahayana  path,  he  will  be  considered
sharp facultied. So whether one is dull or sharp facultied pertains  to  the
realization of emptiness.

Khen Rinpoche: What are you talking about now? Are you  asking  a  question?
Why don’t you answer the original question:  What  is  the  function  of  an
uninterrupted path of the Mahayana  path  of  seeing  in  the  continuum  of
someone who has already become an arhat?

Student 4: Is self-cherishing an obscuration? If it is an obscuration,  does
it fall under an afflictive obscuration or knowledge obscuration?

Khen Rinpoche: Is self-cherishing an object of abandonment?

Student 7: Yes, it is.

Khen Rinpoche: Doesn’t it exist in the continua of the hearer arhats?

Student 7: Yes, it exists in the continua of the hearer arhats.

Khen Rinpoche: If it is an  object  of  abandonment,  is  it  an  afflictive
obscuration or knowledge obscuration?

Student 7: It should be a knowledge obscuration.

Khen Rinpoche: So it is a knowledge obscuration that is a consciousness.

Student 7: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: This means self-cherishing  is  subtler  than  self-grasping.
Yes or no?

Student 7: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Once one generates the mind of enlightenment,  probably,  you
can say that there is no self-cherishing in one’s mind. If you remember  the
earlier discussion about the differences  between  the  dull  facultied  and
sharp  facultied  trainees  with  respect  to   attaining   the   signs   of
irreversibility, it is said that  the  dull  facultied  bodhisattvas  attain
those signs only on the eighth ground.  Although  self-cherishing  will  not
manifest, if you relate this to the signs of irreversibility, maybe you  can
say that for the dull facultied trainees, it’s only  at  the  eighth  ground
that they have this confidence that they have  destroyed  all  opportunities
for such a self-cherishing mind to arise.

Student 8: From the  perspective  of  the  Mahayana  sutra,  why  can’t  the
bodhisattva  of  sharp  faculties  achieve  enlightenment  faster  than  the
bodhisattva of dull faculties given the fact that there are  differences  in
their qualities? At the end of the day,  it  still  takes  them  both  three
countless great eons to achieve enlightenment.

Khen Rinpoche: Someone answer this  question.  I  want  to  listen  to  your
answer. I think she is asking why both the  dull  facultied  and  the  sharp
facultied bodhisattvas have to accumulate merit for  three  countless  great
eons. Why can’t the sharp facultied bodhisattva be faster?

Student 6: Generally speaking, it is true  that  it  takes  three  countless
great eons. But if you are really  sharp  facultied,  you  only  take  three
years!

Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, you don’t need to practise  tantra.  If  in  sutra
you can be enlightened in three years, why do  you  need  tantra?  That’s  a
very interesting answer. You  say  that  sharp  facultied  bodhisattvas  can
become enlightened in three years. What makes you say three  years  and  not
one year?

Student 6’s response is inaudible.

Khen Rinpoche: Our founder Guru Shakyamuni Buddha entered the Mahayana  Path
from the onset. He didn’t go to  the  Hinayana  path  first.  Was  he  sharp
facultied when he was a bodhisattva?

Student 6’s response is inaudible.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you have any example of the  sharp  facultied  bodhisattva
who became enlightened within three years? Are they the  same  or  are  they
different?

Student 7: The reason why we  still  need  three  countless  great  eons  is
mainly because the accumulation of merit takes time. It cannot be  the  case
that within three years you can accumulate  the  same  amount  of  merit  as
somebody who has been accumulating merit for a longer  period  of  time.  Is
that the reason why we  need  that  length  of  time?  This  is  a  question
actually.

Khen Rinpoche: Student 8’s comment was that whether one is  sharp  facultied
or dull facultied, one still takes  three  countless  great  eons.  Then  it
doesn’t matter whether one is fast or slow. One  achieves  enlightenment  at
the same time. So,  are  all  the  sharp  faculties  faster  than  the  dull
facultied?

Student 7: Probably, they will achieve the realization of  emptiness  faster
but the fact is that the merit is still …

Khen Rinpoche: No. To achieve enlightenment, the final result?

Are they faster or not? Student 6 said  they  are  faster.  It  takes  three
years. Now you make it two years, OK?

Student 7: I will stick to the sutra path,  i.e.,  that  it  actually  takes
three countless great eons.

Khen Rinpoche: So, whether one is dull facultied or sharp  facultied,  there
is no difference in speed?

Student 7: They will achieve certain things faster on the path. It  is  like
the story of the tortoise and the rabbit. The tortoise will catch up.

Khen Rinpoche: That is not being sharp facultied. It may go  faster  but  it
is not clever.

Student 7: If you talk about the accumulation of  merit,  won’t  it  be  the
case that time is a constraint? You need that length of time  to  accumulate
the merit necessary.

Student 9:  I am thinking the three countless great  eons  is  the  standard
measure of time. If Guru Shakyamuni Buddha took three countless  great  eons
to  attain  buddhahood  and  he  was  a  sharp  facultied  bodhisattva,  the
implication is that maybe the dull facultied  bodhisattva  needs  more  time
than that. Maybe five countless great eons. I don’t  know  what  the  number
may be. But he will get there eventually.

Khen Rinpoche: Your answer is that the  clever  one  takes  three  countless
great eons.  The dull facultied takes 500 countless great eons? That’s  your
answer. Anyone else has a different idea?

Student 10: I think be it one, two or three countless great eons,  they  are
referring to the amount of merit to be accumulated. So, it does not  pertain
to the length of time per se.  The  sharp  facultied  bodhisattva  with  his
earlier realization of  emptiness  makes  his  accumulation  of  merit  more
powerful so he is able to accumulate one countless great eon of  merit  much
faster than the dull facultied bodhisattva.

Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that at the end of the day they are faster.

Student 10: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Since there is a difference in faculty,  therefore,  we  have
to say that those who are of sharp faculties are more capable  of  achieving
enlightenment faster. Just as some people can complete 100,000 mantras in  a
few weeks, others can take forever!

Khen Rinpoche: Student 10’s answer  sounds  better  than  the  answers  from
Students 6 and 9. It is something like that.   The  point  is  that  if  you
think, you will have an answer. That is what I want you to do. Always  think
and have your own ideas. It could be  wrong  or  it  could  be  right.  That
doesn’t matter. What is important is coming up and sharing what you think.

Student 5: I would like to find out the reason  why  when  one  generates  a
path, one would not lose it. I have been thinking about  this.  I  think  it
only applies to dull  facultied  trainees,  whether  they  are  Hinayana  or
Mahayana.

For the dull facultied bodhisattva, he can lose his  bodhicitta  even  after
having entered the path because his self-grasping is very  strong.  So  much
so that he becomes discouraged with working for sentient beings.  His  self-
cherishing manifests and thus, he loses his bodhicitta.

Whereas for someone who enters the Hinayana path, he has both  self-grasping
and self-cherishing. For a dull facultied  Hinayana  trainee,  he  will  not
lose his path because of his strong  self-cherishing.  After  meditating  on
true sufferings and true origins, he cherishes  the  mere  ‘I’  greatly  and
wishes for that ‘I’ to be freed from suffering. Because of this strong self-
cherishing, he will not  let  go  of  that  thought  to  free  himself  from
suffering and achieve liberation.

Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t catch everything you said.

Student 5: We are talking about how the dull  facultied  trainees  can  lose
his bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: Mahayana or Hinayana?

Student 5: Both. This only applies to dull facultied trainees.  For  someone
who loses his bodhicitta …

Khen  Rinpoche:  You  mention  bodhicitta  so  you  are  talking  about  the
Mahayana.

Student 5: The person who is a Mahayanist loses his  bodhicitta  because  he
has strong self-grasping. He sees these inherently existent sentient  beings
making difficulties for him so  he  gets  discouraged.  His  self-cherishing
manifests. Therefore, he loses his bodhicitta. This is due to  strong  self-
grasping.

It is said that one will not lose the path. I was thinking  how  this  would
apply to the dull facultied  Hinayana  trainees.  I  was  thinking  that  he
meditates on realizing true sufferings and true origins, thinking about  the
‘I’. Even  though  he  may  be  positing  the  inherently  existent  ‘I’  in
accordance with the other schools, in reality, he  is  cherishing  the  mere
‘I’, wishing that mere ‘I’ to be free from suffering. Because  he  cherishes
his mere  ‘I’  strongly,  wishing  that  mere  ‘I’  to  achieve  liberation,
therefore, he will never give up his path.

Khen Rinpoche:  Is  it  possible  for  the  dull  facultied  bodhisattva  to
degenerate the path?

Student 5: Yes. On the  small  path  of  accumulation  before  reaching  the
middle level of that path.

Khen Rinpoche: We are talking about the path in the continuum  of  the  dull
facultied bodhisattva.

Student 5: While he is on the small path of accumulation.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it possible to degenerate the path or not? Yes or no?

Student 5: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: If the path degenerates in  this  person’s  continuum,  where
does he go after that? He becomes a person who is not on the path?

Student 5: He will fall to a lower path.

Khen Rinpoche: But you just said there is no path because the path has  been
degenerated.

Student 5: That lower path is a different path from the Hinayana.

Khen Rinpoche: Then the path exists. The path has not  degenerated.  If  the
path exists, isn’t it either a Hinayana path or a Mahayana path?

Student 5: I don’t get the question.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Let’s  say  this  dull  facultied  bodhisattva   gives   up
bodhicitta. Do all the paths in his continuum disappear?

Student 5: No. He has lost the Mahayana path.

Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, the path exists in his continuum. Even  though  he
has degenerated his bodhicitta, the path still exists in his mind.

Student 5: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Why is there still a path in his mental continuum?

Student 5: Because of his very strong self-cherishing, he  seeks  individual
liberation.

Khen  Rinpoche:  In  his  first  moment  of  generating   the   path,   this
individual—whose path has now degenerated—didn’t generate the  path  looking
for liberation for his own happiness. So, he won’t  have  this  strong  wish
seeking his own liberation.

Student 5: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: If that is the  case,  i.e.,  he  doesn’t  have  the  thought
seeking to achieve his personal liberation, is it possible for him  to  lose
the path?

Student 5: It has been said that it is not possible to lose  the  path.  But
he falls into a lower path whereby he seeks his  individual  liberation.  In
that sense, the strength of his renunciation pertains to himself only.

When he loses bodhicitta,  of  course  he  will  not  lose  the  thought  of
liberation for himself. After he loses bodhicitta,  doesn’t  he  fall  to  a
lower path?

Ven. Gyurme: When did that thought of self-liberation  arise?  What  is  its
cause?

Student  5:  That  is  also  my  question.  Because  you  have   uncontrived
renunciation and bodhicitta arising  simultaneously,  you  do  not  generate
uncontrived renunciation for personal liberation.

Before the person enters the Mahayana path, he generates the  path  that  is
shared with the person of medium  capacity,  albeit  this  is  not  a  fully
qualified path.  At that point in time, he  has  not  generated  uncontrived
renunciation.

Is it possible to say that this  was  the  cause  for  him  to  achieve  the
uncontrived renunciation for individual liberation? At that  point,  he  has
only meditated on true sufferings. He has not attained  the  realization  of
true origins yet. When he enters the path shared with the person  of  medium
capacity, he realized true sufferings but not true origins yet.

When he  realizes  true  origins,  simultaneously,  he  also  generates  the
renunciation  seeking  non-abiding  nirvana.  Perhaps  that  could  be   the
cause—the realization of true origins.

Then he also meditated on other  aspects  in  order  to  generate  both  his
special renunciation and bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t get exactly what you are trying to say.
Ven. Gyurme: So, realizing true origins and generating  the  wish  for  non-
abiding nirvana occur simultaneously?

Student 5: Because you said the realization of renunciation  and  bodhicitta
has to be simultaneous. The renunciation only comes when  you  realize  true
origins.

Khen Rinpoche: This is difficult and not  so  straightforward.  We  have  to
think about it.

We said that for an individual who is entering the Mahayana  path  from  the
onset—who did not enter the Hinayana path first—in  the  continuum  of  that
person, renunciation and bodhicitta are generated together.

What is the measure of renunciation? As we saw in the  Three  Principles  of
the Path, if the thought seeking liberation  arises  spontaneously  day  and
night, this is the measure of one having generated renunciation.

In order for the thought seeking liberation to  arise  day  and  night,  the
person must have already reflected well  on  true  origins,  the  manner  in
which one enters cyclic existence and from  that,  how  one  gets  out  from
cyclic existence.

True origins are the causes of true sufferings. In order to understand  true
origins well, the person has to see  what  the  principal  true  origin  is,
i.e., the root of cyclic existence.

To realize renunciation and bodhicitta, you need to  see  that  grasping  at
true existence is the root of samsara. The person would  also  need  to  see
that the grasping at true existence is a wrong consciousness.  In  order  to
have any chance of generating  renunciation  and  bodhicitta,  you  need  to
realize emptiness. This is moving towards the position that anyone  who  has
entered the path has necessarily realized emptiness.

The measure of having generated renunciation is that  day  and  night,  that
thought arises. What must be done for this thought to arise day and night?

Yet, nobody says that in order to enter the path, you must have  necessarily
realized emptiness. In the texts, it is said that among the sharp  facultied
and the dull facultied trainees,  the  sharp  facultied  are  the  ones  who
realize emptiness prior to entering the path and the dull facultied are  the
ones who can enter the path without the wisdom realizing emptiness.

HOMEWORK

There will be no classes for the next three sessions as I  have  to  make  a
short trip to Nepal to attend the  long  life  puja  for  Kyabje  Lama  Zopa
Rinpoche.

Although we will not have classes for these three sessions, please  use  the
time to review what we have covered on the grounds and paths.  You  need  to
get a very good grasp of the overview and the  manner  of  progress  through
the Mahayana grounds and paths according to sutra. If you have  a  question,
please write it down.
The innate afflictions are divided into nine levels and these are  abandoned
by their respective uninterrupted paths. Having said that,  in  one  of  the
earlier modules, we looked at the position  of  the  Sera  Je  College  that
posits ten levels of the innate  afflictions  instead  of  the  usual  nine.
According to the  position  of  Sera  Je  College  position,  you  have  ten
uninterrupted  paths  before  the  afflictive  afflictions  are   abandoned.
Therefore, two interrupted paths are posited at the seventh ground.

According to the position of Sera Je  College,  there  are  also  more  than
three levels of the knowledge  obscurations.  Therefore,  according  to  the
position of Sera Je College, on  the  eighth  ground,  there  are  also  two
uninterrupted paths instead of one.

I think this was explained and put into a chart that we distributed  a  long
ago. You should revisit that.

Khen Rinpoche: Look at that chart. We will miss  three  classes.  Make  sure
that next time when I ask a question, answer quickly! You should  know  what
the abandonment at each ground is. Not quite  like  memorization.  You  must
think a little bit. Have some ideas. So, this is the homework for the  three
classes. This Tuesday, we will still have class. This  Tuesday,  there  will
be the real tantra talk. Today we were not  supposed  to  talk  about  sutra
again.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

