Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L25FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.005155
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 25	 				                                                4 July 2017
Yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity explained. Root text, p. 52—57. Performance Tantra (cont’d). The yoga severing the root of samsara.  When does the basis of emptiness appear? The four types of deity yoga. 
YOGA OF NON-DUAL PROFUNDITY AND CLARITY EXPLAINED
You have heard the phrase, ‘yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity’. We have talked about this recently. You must know and be able to say the words. On that basis, you must seek to understand the meaning of those words. This is an important point.
In the phrase, ‘yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity’, what does profundity refer to?  It refers to the mind realizing the absence of inherent existence.  Profundity refers to this specific mind. This mind is a wisdom.  Clarity here refers to the deity appearing clearly.
The meaning of yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is the same as saying the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness arising as the deity. In this context, the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness refers to the mind realizing emptiness. This mind has the aspect of emptiness.
Even if you don’t get everything, you must at least remember what I have said about the meaning of the phrase, the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness arising as the deity.  You must keep in mind at least what was said and hold on to that.
In sutra, we talked about the union of method and wisdom. Method in sutra refers to bodhicitta. Bodhicitta complements the wisdom realizing emptiness, i.e., wisdom is complemented or assisted by method. With these two assisting or complementing one another, one moves to enlightenment.
In tantra, there are method and wisdom too.  With method and wisdom, one progresses to enlightenment. But tantra has its own uncommon presentation about the union of method and wisdom.  In short, in tantra, the union of method and wisdom refers to both factors of method and wisdom being present in one consciousness. 
Whether we are talking about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity or the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness arising as the deity, at the beginning, there is always the meditation on emptiness. Whether we are talking about the mind that has some understanding of emptiness or the mind that has ascertained emptiness, it’s this very mind that arises as the deity. Essentially, it is one mind—the mind ascertains emptiness and at the same time, the deity’s body appears to that mind. 
This one mind is both method and wisdom. Why is it method?  Because this mind appears in the aspect of the deity. Why is the appearance factor of this mind or the appearance of the deity’s body to this mind called method? Because this appearance of the deity’s body is the cause for actualizing the form body.
This same mind is also wisdom. Why?  This mind realizes emptiness. Therefore, it’s called wisdom. It’s wisdom because it’s suitable to be transformed into the truth body, the dharmakaya. This very same mind is also that which becomes the form body of a buddha, the factor of method or appearance of the deity. 
This begets the question: Why do you need a mind having both method and wisdom conjoined in one entity at the time of the path? While you are training on the path, why do you need such a mind? The reason is because at the time of enlightenment, the truth body and the form body are one undifferentiable entity.  
It’s said the Buddha’s mind pervades all phenomena. Wherever the Buddha’s mind pervades, the Buddha’s holy body is there. Which means to say there’s nowhere not pervaded by the Buddha’s body. This is possible because the Buddha’s body and mind are one undifferentiable entity. Because this is the characteristic of the result, the path must share the same characteristic.  In short, both method and wisdom must be fused into one undifferentiable entity at the time of the path, the cause of the result. 
Khen Rinpoche: You must be clear about this. You understand (what I’m saying)?  Don’t forget!  Next time I ask, you cannot forget. It’s important to keep this in your brain, “This is important. I have to know this!” 
There are so many divisions. If you can’t remember (them all), that doesn’t matter but you must catch at least some of the points.  Next time when I ask you, “Why do you need wisdom and method in one mind?” and you say you don’t know, then that’s not correct.
If someone asks you, “Why do you need both method and wisdom within one mind?”
now you can answer the question, no? By now, you should be able to do that. 
If it’s still not clear, ask.  If you’re not clear about what I said in this sentence now, ask immediately if you don’t understand.  Don’t ask things not related to what I said just
now.
Student 1: Method and wisdom is indivisible in one entity, one consciousness. Is it correct to say there’s no dualistic appearances to this mind?
Khen Rinpoche: No, because the deity’s body appears to this consciousness. This means there is dualistic appearance because the deity’s body appears to this mind. 
Student 1: In an earlier lesson, it was mentioned there’s no dualistic appearance during that occasion.
Khen Rinpoche: No, I don’t think I said that.  
It depends on the context. If you are talking about the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, that’s a different thing. The wisdom directly realizing emptiness, in the context of tantra, is also the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.  So, in this context, if you’re talking about the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, then there’s no dualistic appearance during meditative equipoise.
Student 1: With regard to the wisdom directly realising emptiness, the deity doesn’t even appear.  During the ordinary path, the deity appears to this wisdom realizing emptiness. Now I’m confirming there is duality.  I was very confused. In Lesson 18, it was said there’s no dualistic appearance, not (pertaining to) directly realizing (emptiness) but just the wisdom realizing emptiness. So, there is dualistic appearance. 
During the direct realization of emptiness, the deity doesn’t even appear. Can I understand how is there a dualistic appearance for this non-dualistic mind abiding in the non-dual profundity and clarity during the time of the ordinary path? Dualistic appearance means there is a mental image, so there is a separation of the consciousness and the mental image. In this case, we are conceiving it as non-dual. How is it non-dual and yet there is a mental image?
Khen Rinpoche: In the phrase, the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, ‘non-dual’ refers to method and wisdom not being of different entities. 
You must be clear on this point.  So, you must listen and place your full attention here. 
The ‘non-dual’ in the (yoga) of non-dual profundity and clarity means the method and wisdom are one undifferentiable entity.
The question from Student I: Is there dualistic appearance for this yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity? The answer is yes. There is dualistic appearance.
Do you see the difference?  
Student 2: Does it mean that the deity appears clearly as (if it is) inherently existent?  That’s why it’s dualistic appearance. 
Khen Rinpoche: There are different meanings to the phrase, dualistic appearance. 
One meaning is the appearance of subject and object as being different or distinct from one another. That’s one kind of dualistic appearance.
Another meaning of dualistic appearance is conventional appearance. Basically anything other than emptiness is a dualistic appearance to the mind.
If there’s appearance of true existence to that mind, then we can say for that mind, there’s dualistic appearance. That’s another meaning of dualistic appearance, i.e., it refers to the appearance of true existence. 
Student 3: The mind appears as the deity, which then is actualizing the form body.  Can I interpret this in such a manner: The mind that ascertains emptiness appears as the deity and there is no contradiction because it is really one entity?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 4:  The mind appears as a deity. So that appearance of the body of the deity is an appearance of the mind.  The form body is the final result. Can we understand the form body to be form as opposed to a consciousness? Previously, Khen Rinpoche explained that consciousness can only come from a moment of consciousness and form can only come from form.  I’m trying to reconcile the fact the mind generates the appearance of the deity. The final result of that is going to be the arising of the form body. I’m making a connection where the consciousness is ultimately giving rise to something that’s form.  
Khen Rinpoche: Is anybody able to answer (her question)?  
Student 2: In tantra, it is mentioned that the form arises from the winds, and the winds and the mind are actually one entity.  So that’s the reason. 
Student 4: But a wind is also something that’s physical.  I can accept something physical coming from a physical source. We know when you become a buddha, the form body and the wisdom truth body arise simultaneously. There’s something about that mind that transforms into a form. The only way I can reconcile this is to think that the form body is just the English word ‘form’ and I shouldn’t think of the form body of a buddha as something physical.  Then I don’t have a problem with this. 
Khen Rinpoche: There are different kinds of form. There are forms appearing to the sense consciousnesses. There are also forms that don’t appear to the sense consciousnesses but only appear to the wisdom consciousness. For example, the phenomena source form.
For example, what appears as water to us appears as pus to the pretas. This appearance of pus to the pretas is a phenomena source form. It’s a form that appears only to the mental consciousness.
Let’s see whether we can posit the appearance of the deity’s body to the wisdom realizing emptiness in the context of tantra as a phenomena source form. While positing it’s a phenomena source form, yet we also need to think about its substantial cause. What is its substantial cause? It doesn’t mean that we’re trapped or we have to say the substantial cause of the appearance of the deity’s body is the consciousness itself. Because it’s just a factor of appearance, i.e., it’s an appearance to the wisdom consciousness. We don’t have to force ourselves to think it’s the wisdom consciousness acting as the substantial cause for this appearance.
So still need to think some more about this.
Philosophical texts are like that. They are not so simple that you can explain (everything) in one sentence. This is just an idea. When you think about it, there is more to think about until you can get a very clear (understanding). 
Student 4: So the fact is it’s an appearance to the mind.  In the end, the final result is a mind that has evolved into a state of buddahood giving rise to the wisdom truth body and the form body (rupakaya). What is the entity of that rupakaya? That rupakaya is supposedly a form but it’s still coming from a mind. I can no longer say it’s an appearance because it’s already the final result. Of course, it’s not the blood and flesh coarse body. It is an energy body but you can still say an energy body is still something physical. How do I reconcile that?
Khen Rinpoche: First, let’s start at the time of the path. There is the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. To this mind, there is an appearance of the deity’s body. It is form and you posit that as a phenomena source form.
You must catch the words of what I’m saying. What is a phenomena source form? You must know what it is. Can you give me another example (of a phenomenon source form)? 
In short, in the three lower classes of tantra, other than this explanation, there’s no other explanation of what constitutes the cause of the form body. While this is the presentation of the three lower classes of tantra, it doesn’t mean this is the reality. 
The explanation that accords with reality is found only in Highest Yoga Tantra. In Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a presentation of the extremely subtle wind-mind acting as the substantial cause for the form and truth bodies. Only in Highest Yoga Tantra will you find the correct and detailed explanation of the causes of the two bodies. 
In Highest Yoga Tantra, they talk about the substantial cause of the form body. That substantial cause must be a continuum of a similar type. Therefore, in Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a presentation of the two illusory bodies—the impure illusory body and the pure illusory body—acting as the substantial causes that are a continua of a similar type that go on to enlightenment. That’s why in Highest Yoga Tantra the explanation fits nicely, without any difficulty at all. 
The substantial cause of the form body is the illusory body on the path. 
Likewise, it is the extremely subtle mind that acts as the substantial cause for the truth body. 
Student 5: Why is the emptiness of the form body not mentioned as one of the bodies of a buddha? The reason I’m asking this question is because in order for the form body to carry out the enlightened activities, in the first place, the form body has to be empty of inherent existence. Yet somehow this phrase, the emptiness of the form body, is not mentioned as one of the bodies of a buddha. 
The only conclusion I can arrive at is that the form body is the reflective appearance of the truth body (dharmakaya). Somehow, it dissolves into the dharmakaya and it manifests from the dharmakaya. In the case of the truth body, we have the wisdom truth body and the nature truth body, the emptiness of the truth body. But when it comes to the form body, there are only the complete enjoyment body and the emanation body. Can Khen Rinpoche please explain why this is so? Thank you.
Khen Rinpoche: You are asking why the emptiness of the form body is not a buddha body? I guess you can posit the emptiness of the mind of a buddha superior and the emptiness of the form body are the same. 
When we talk about the naturally abiding lineage, essentially we are talking about the suchness of the mind. We don’t talk about the suchness of the body. Likewise, with the nature body of a buddha. At the time of the basis when we talk about the naturally abiding lineage, we are talking about the suchness of the mind. Likewise, at the time of the result, we only talk about the body in relation to the mind—the wisdom truth body. The emptiness of that is the nature body. This is how it goes at the time of the basis. At the time of the result, those two truth bodies—the wisdom truth body and the nature truth body—are basically the same thing. They are without defilements. 
Student 5: The Tathagata Essence is written by Asanga, is it not? The impression I get is that the explanation of the naturally abiding lineage is explained from the perspective of the Mind Only school. That’s why the emptiness of the mind is emphasized.
Khen Rinpoche: Did you get what I’ve said earlier on? The point is this: Why do we talk about the nature body? The nature body is essentially the emptiness of the wisdom truth body. Why is that the explanation? Because at the time of the basis, when we talk about the naturally abiding lineage, we are essentially talking about suchness of the defiled mind. 
First, do you agree with that? Did you get my answer?
We are talking about the naturally abiding lineage. We are not talking about the emptiness of the form body.
That’s the answer to your question.
Student 5: Perhaps the qualm is that at the time of the basis of the path, it should constitute the union of the mind and the body as well. So at the time of the result, you have the union of the body and mind. It’s just that one is the unenlightened aspect, and at the time of the result, it will be the enlightened aspect. Similarly, the method to achieve the truth body and the form body of a buddha should be cultivated simultaneously in unison, simultaneously together at one time and not so much in one consciousness. 
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, (the important thing here is) you have to know the meaning and the essential points behind the phrase, the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. 
~~~~~~~~~
PERFORMANCE TANTRA (CONT’D) 
When we talk about yoga without signs, it’s necessarily a mind that realizes emptiness. In the context of the three lower classes of tantra, when we talk about yoga without signs, it is basically the special insight observing emptiness. During the time of yoga with signs, there are instances where there is the realization of emptiness. Therefore, one cannot distinguish yoga with signs and yoga without signs on the basis of whether one has realized emptiness or not. 
Between the meditation on emptiness and the meditation on the deity’s body, yoga with signs is the yoga primarily meditating on the appearance of the deity’s body. 
The deity yoga that is the yoga without signs is a mind that meditates primarily on emptiness.
So between the meditation on emptiness and the meditation on the deity’s body, the yoga without signs is the yoga that primarily meditates on emptiness. I think you can say that the yoga without signs is basically the union of calm abiding and special insight. 
As I have mentioned before, the process of being able to harm ignorance starts when the special insight observing emptiness is achieved. Only when one attains this special insight focussing on emptiness does one enter the path of preparation. Only then does the meditator gain the ability to suppress the manifest grasping at true existence. Before that, nothing happens. This is when the process of acquiring the direct antidote to ignorance starts.
While this is not clear in the text, if you think about it, in the path of Action Tantra, with the absorption not reliant on recitation, you have the absorption on fire followed by the absorption on sound. It is said that calm abiding is achieved during the absorption on sound. It is also explained that when you reach that level of practice, slowly even the mind does not observe sound. The mind moves on and goes into emptiness. If the mind goes into emptiness, that would also suggest a subsidence of dualistic appearance.
The yoga severing the root of saṃsāra
General Classes of Tantra states: …
…
… based on past advice. (pp. 53) 
This quotation is saying that during the yoga without signs, the meditator do not meditate on the deity’s body. 
Khen Rinpoche: Is that true? This contradicts what I said earlier. Do you see that or not? It is not complementary but contradictory. You must see the point. What I read (from
the root text) and what I said is contradictory. 
And: …
…
… neither truly one nor many, and so on. (p. 53)
Here it’s saying it’s the mind that meditates only on emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: First, you must get that.
When does the basis of emptiness appear?
Someone says: …
…
… explicitly realizing emptiness. (p. 54)
Then the author’s position follows.  
Reply: That is not logically necessary …
…
… Stages of the Path state just that. (p. 54)
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting what I’m trying to say here?
Basically, it’s saying there’s no problem. There’s no fallacy in saying the deity’s body appears to the wisdom realizing emptiness. There’s no fallacy in saying that the deity’s body appears to the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.
In fear of … Exposition of the Two Truths. (p. 56)
The objector who raised the qualm responds. 
In response he says: …
…
… your [Ngawang Palden’s] thesis is tenable. (p. 56)
Again there is a reply (from the author). 
Reply: That is not logically necessary …  deity does not appear to it. (p. 56)
The author’s position is that when you have the special insight observing emptiness, you achieve the path of preparation. The path of preparation is not a direct perception of emptiness. It is a conceptual (realization). In tantra, the deity’s body appears to this conceptual consciousness realizing emptiness on the path of preparation. There’s no problem with that.
If it’s a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, does it mean that the deity’s body will appear to that mind? Not necessarily so. For example, on the path of seeing in Action Tantra—the direct perception of emptiness—dualistic appearances do not exist for that consciousness. 
Nevertheless, is it a deity yoga? It is a deity yoga because it is posited due to the continuity of mind. It is a continuation of a former moment of the deity yoga. Therefore, even the direct perception of emptiness on the path of seeing in Action Tantra is considered a deity yoga, although the deity’s body does not appear to that wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
Is it the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity? Yes, it is. 
Is it deity yoga? Yes, it is. 
In the case of Action Tantra, is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness on the path of seeing a deity yoga? Yes, because it is posited to be due to the continuity of the mind even though the body of the conventional deity does not appear to it.
This is something for you to think about: Is anything that is a continuity of the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity necessarily a deity yoga or not? There are many continuities of that mind. Here, we are talking about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. 
This paragraph is essentially saying if it’s a deity yoga, it does not necessarily mean that the deity’s body has to appear to it.
This is why I said you have to read the text before coming to class so that at least you know what I am referring to.
The four types of deity yoga
In general, it is not logically necessary …
…
… yoga without signs. (p. 57) 
There’s no pervasion the deity’s body must necessarily appear in deity yoga, because in this context, there are four yogas:
deity yoga 
empty yoga
wind yoga 
recitation yoga
Whether it is deity yoga, empty yoga, wind yoga or recitation yoga, they all fall into yoga with signs and yoga without signs.
Mantric Stages states: …
…
… yoga without signs. (p. 57)
Q&A
Student 6: You mentioned for the conceptual consciousness realizing emptiness during the path of preparation, the deity does appear. What is the appearing object of this consciousness realizing emptiness? Previously, we learnt for the mind realizing emptiness, the appearing object is emptiness. For a conceptual consciousness realizing emptiness, it’s actually a mental image of emptiness. If you were to say the deity actually appears, then the mental image is emptiness or the deity?
Khen Rinpoche: Since the deity’s body appears to this conceptual consciousness, we have to say that the meaning generality of the deity’s body is the appearing object to this consciousness. Probably not the meaning generality of emptiness.
Student 6: Then why would you say it’s a conceptual consciousness realizing emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: What does this conceptual consciousness ascertain? Doesn’t it ascertain emptiness? 
The ascertainment factor of this consciousness is ascertaining emptiness.
The appearance factor of this consciousness is the appearance of the deity’s body, i.e., the meaning generality of the deity’s body. 
So there is the ascertainment factor and the appearance factor. 
Student 6: You can still ascertain the deity. So that mind actually ascertains two things—the deity’s body as well as emptiness. Even though what is appearing is the mental image of a body but it ascertains two things.
Khen Rinpoche: When we talk about what the mind is ascertaining, we have to think primarily about the object of its mode of apprehension. What is the object of the mode of apprehension of this mind? Then you can see what it is ascertaining. This will take us back to the topic, mind and mental factors, again.
Student 6: In sutra, a person who has never learnt about tantra looks at a deity. For example, the person meditates on Chenrezig. He can actually explore and think about the emptiness of Chenrezig, couldn’t he? Let’s say this person has never taken an   initiation. It’s possible isn’t it? Because any object can be an object of meditation? This person can call to mind a mental image of the Buddha and also ascertain emptiness. But do you call that deity yoga?
Khen Rinpoche: That’s why a long time ago, we had this question: In sutra, is there such a thing as method and wisdom being fused in one consciousness? The answer is very clear. There’s no need for any doubt. The answer is no! In sutra, they are not able to posit method and wisdom as one undifferentiable entity.
Back to your question. For somebody who is not involved in tantra, who doesn’t have an initiation, visualizes the deity in front and at the same time, meditates on the emptiness of that appearance, are we going to say that’s a case of method and wisdom being one undifferentiable entity?
Is this an example of the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity?
If somebody were to say, “It follows it’s a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity because the deity’s body is appearing and you are observing the emptiness of the deity’s body,” what are you going to say?
You have to go back to the meaning of the apprehension factor of the wisdom reali-
zing emptiness arising as the deity. This example of a sutra practitioner meditating on the deity in front and thinking of its emptiness is not the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness arising as the deity. 
Student 4: We talked about this in our group discussion. Yes, in sutra, you can look at the deity in front of you and meditate on its emptiness. But the main thing about tantra is we have the practice of self-generation—“I am the deity”—whereby we are actually practising the four complete purities at the time of the path. This is what makes it different. You’re meditating on emptiness, yourself being empty and the deity you are arising as being empty also.
Khen Rinpoche: Among sutric practitioners, you mean we’re not able to find even one person who thinks about emptiness and based on that, arising as the deity?
(Student’s response is inaudible). 
~~~~~~~~~~~
Of the four yogas, the two main ones are the conventional deity yoga and the empty yoga. These are the main factors establishing the two bodies.
Recitation yoga is a branch invoking the mind of the deity being meditated upon. As such, it is included as a branch of conventional deity yoga. 
Wind yoga is a branch stabilizing both deity yogas, the conventional and ultimate. We have talked about holding the wind. Since it’s the branch stabilizing both deity yogas, it occurs within both yogas. 
From this you can see if it’s a deity yoga, it’s not necessarily a mind to which a deity’s body has to appear because there are four yogas there. There are also the recitation yoga and the wind yoga as well.
Khen Rinpoche: We’re almost done with Performance Tantra. There’s a little bit of Yoga Tantra. Once we finish that, we start with Highest Yoga Tantra. You should read the section on Yoga Tantra. 
Student 6: Right in the beginning, we talked about the bliss from gazing, holding hands with the goddess and so forth. How does this bliss of gazing upon the goddess come into the picture in the yoga with signs and the yoga without signs? 
Khen Rinpoche: You read another two or three pages from where I stopped. There is some discussion there.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
Source: Master’s Program, Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa 