Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L13FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.008463
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 13	 				                                            18 May 2017
Root text (pp. 15—34). Types of mandalas. Initiations conferred. Keeping vows and commitments purely.  Action Tantra: The six deities. 
Pledge to compose

With the wish to place imprints on my mind …
… four classes of secret mantra. (p. 15)
Requesting permission to reveal tantric subjects

Through the chance to properly meditate …
 … in conformity with their intention. (p. 16)
The main teaching
In explaining the principles of the grounds and paths …
…
… the way to progress on the path of highest yoga tantra (p. 17) 
A brief presentation of the way to progress on the path of the three lower classes of tantra
The first has two divisions: 
… the five paths and the ten grounds for them (p. 17)
The actual lower classes of tantra
The first has three divisions: 
… the path of yoga tantra (p. 18)
How to progress on the path of action tantra
This has four divisions:
… 
… having achieved approximation  (p. 22)
It’s important to read the outlines so that you can have an idea of what the text is trying to present. 
How to become a vessel suitable for meditating on the path
First train your mind well … 
…
… explanations of the different classes of tantra. (p. 21) 
This is clear. I don’t think there’s anything here that you don’t understand.
In order to practise any of the classes of Buddhist tantra, first, one must have received an initiation (empowerment or wang). In order to receive a wang, one does so in dependence upon a mandala. First, one has to enter the mandala on the basis of which one receives the initiation. What kinds of mandala are there and what are the empowerments they bestow? 
TYPES OF MANDALAS
Types of maṇḍalas
Question: In what maṇḍala …
… is conferred in an absorption mandala. (p. 23)  
In action [2b] tantra … 
…
… are features of highest yoga tantra alone. (p. 23) 
For the three lower classes of tantra, the initiation is conferred in dependence upon either a coloured sand mandala or a painted-cloth mandala. The sand mandala is the one that’s normally seen and is constructed out of small, fine coloured sand grains. The initiation may also be bestowed on the basis of a painted-cloth mandala that has been drawn. 
In the context of a special master and a special student, the initiation can also be conferred on the basis of a visualized (or concentration) mandala: 
when the person conferring the initiation has a very stable concentration with the realization of calm abiding
the student receiving the initiation also has a similar level of concentration and calm abiding
in the special circumstances when the conditions are not possible for a sand mandala to be constructed or a painted-cloth mandala to be obtained 
In the lower tantras, initiations are not conferred on the basis of a body mandala. This is found only in Highest Yoga Tantra. When we refer to the body mandala, it does not simply mean visualizing deities on the body. We talk about the body mandala in terms of the three principal deities—Yamantaka, Guhyasamaja and Heruka Chakrasamvara. 
In the context of Yamantaka, there’s neither the practice of the body mandala nor an initiation into the body mandala.
As for Guhyasamaja, there’s the practice of the body mandala but there isn’t an initiation into the body mandala. In Guhyasamaja, the body mandala practice is done through using the body as the basis of completion and from there, generating the deities.
As for Heruka Chakrasamvara, in the tradition of the Mahasiddha Ghantapada, there’re both the practice of the body mandala and the initiation into the body mandala. 
What I’ve just said is to plant imprints.
In the four initiations in Highest Yoga Tantra: 
The vase initiation is conferred on the basis of either a sand mandala or a painted-cloth mandala. 
The secret initiation is conferred in dependence upon the conventional bodhicitta (or relative-bodhicitta) mandala.
The knowledge-wisdom initiation is conferred in dependence upon the bhaga (or lotus) mandala.
The word initiation is conferred in dependence upon the ultimate-bodhicitta mandala. 
INITIATIONS CONFERRED
In the three lower classes of tantra, only the vase initiation is bestowed and the secret, knowledge-wisdom and word initiations are not given. 
There is a difference … 
… at the end of the ceremony. (p. 25)  
Performance Tantra … 
… 
… ritual objects at the end. (p. 25) 
Highest yoga tantra … 
… higher empowerments. (p. 26) 
Kālacakra as a specific highest yoga tantra … 
… great lord vajra master. (p. 26) 
Kalachakra as a specific Highest Yoga Tantra has 16 initiations:
The first to the seventh initiations (1—7) are the seven initiations in the pattern of childhood.
The eighth to the eleventh initiations (8—11) are the four higher initiations. 
The twelfth to the fifteenth initiations (12—15) are the four highest initiations
The sixteenth initiation (16) is the initiation of the great lord vajra master. 
What I’ve just said is all in the root text. You’ve to read it on your own and memorize it—in this class of tantra, there is such and such, and so forth. You’ve to know all this. 
We’ve finished with the section on how to become a suitable vessel for meditating on the tantric path. One has to train the mind in the shared paths and on this basis, one enters the mandala and receives the appropriate initiations. 
KEEPING VOWS AND COMMITMENTS PURELY  
How to keep the vows and commitments purely after becoming a suitable vessel
Second, one who is capable …
… as the basis of tantric practice. (p. 27)
When empowerment is conferred, … 
…
… in the Central Path to Enlightenment. (p. 28) 
In Action Tantra and Performance Tantra, you’ve to take the bodhisattva vows when you enter the mandala. Ideally, it’s said that the candidate taking the bodhisattva vows should be one who’s capable of taking and keeping any of the seven types of pratimoksha vows. If not, then at the very least, the person must possess the ethical discipline of abandoning the ten non-virtues. The bodhisattva vows are taken with that as the basis. 
After taking the bodhisattva vows, one must guard and protect these vows purely. One has to abandon the 18 root downfalls and the 46 transgressions as explained in Je Rinpoche’s Jangchub Shunglam, the Central Path to Enlightenment, his commentary on the bodhisattva vows where he talks about how to keep the vows purely and how to restore any degeneration in those vows.  
The third outline is on how to approximate the deity on the basis of keeping the vows and commitments. After taking an initiation, on the basis of keeping the vows and the samayas purely, one engages in the approximation of the deity. 
How to approximate the deity while keeping the commitments
The third has two parts: … 
… not reliant on recitation (p. 29)
Absorption with recitation
You generate yourself … 
…
… combining restraint with vitality exertion. (pp. 29—30) 
Vitality exertion
The term vitality exertion … 
… the same in each. (p. 33) 
The meaning of vitality exertion … 
…
… without letting them disperse externally. (pp. 33—34) 
THE SIX DEITIES
Since all of you have received initiations, you must understand how one arises as the deity. This is important. Here, in the context of Action Tantra, one arises as the deity through the process of generating the six deities. At very least, you must know what the six deities are. They are:  
1. the empty deity
2. the sound deity
3. the letter deity
4. the form deity
5. the seal deity
6. the sign deity
Empty deity 
In the practice of tantra, whenever you generate as a deity, it’s always done on the basis of first reflecting and meditating on the meaning of emptiness. In the context of Action Tantra, when you generate yourself as a deity through the process of the six deities, empty deity means meditating on the emptiness of yourself, the meditator,  and the emptiness of the deity that you are meditating on, recognizing that both are of one taste, i.e., equal, in emptiness.
Essentially, you need to have a mind that understands emptiness, be it a doubt tending towards the factual, a correctly assuming consciousness or better still, a valid cognizer ascertaining emptiness. With that mind ascertaining emptiness, within that state of ascertainment, nothing appears to the mind. All appearances have been withdrawn. What appears is just a vacuity. You visualize that mind transforming into a moon disc.
Sound deity
In the space above the moon disc, suddenly, there’s the sound of the mantra of the deity. If it’s the Action Tantra practice of Chenrezig, you imagine the sound of the mantra Om Mani Padme Hung resounding in space. It’s the aspect of sound but in entity, it’s Chenrezig. At the time of the sound deity, you place your attention on that sound. 
Letter deity
The sound of the mantra that’s resonating in the space above the moon disc slowly descends, taking the form of the letters of the mantra and settles on the moon disc. 
In the context of the Chenrezig practice, in the middle of the moon disc, there’s the syllable Hri surrounded by the syllables, Om Mani Padme Hung. They appear very clearly as if you’re seeing them directly with your own eyes. This is the meditation on the letter deity. 
Form deity
Now you have the moon disc with the letters of the mantra. Light rays radiate from these letters, going out in all directions. At the tips of these light rays are Chenrezigs. From the bodies of these Chenrezigs, light rays and nectar flow into all sentient beings, purifying them of their sufferings, negativities and obscurations. 
Some of the light rays emanate from their tips offering goddesses who present clouds of offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. This meditation is commonly found in many practices. 
With regard to the visualization of the light rays going out:
purifying sentient beings of their sufferings and negativities and
making offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas
this is the meditation of fulfilling the two purposes. Once you know this, when you see this again in other practices, you’ll understand what it is right away. 
All the light rays are then reabsorbed back into the moon disc and the mantra garland. The moon disc and mantra garland completely transform into the deity, in this case, Chenrezig. This meditation is called the form deity because you have generated the complete full body of the deity that is being meditated on. 
When the light rays emitted are reabsorbed back into the moon disc and mantra garland, a complete transformation occurs in which one is transformed into the deity with all its features. 
If one is proficient in this meditation, one will generate oneself as the deity in its complete aspect. This is what will happen. There’s no need to think of the colour, the face, the hands and so forth. This is what you’ll find in the practice that describes, “Now you are Chenrezig with this number of faces, this number of arms and so forth”. If one’s able to arise instantly as a deity, then there’s no need for these long descriptions. But since most people are unable to do that, then the practice has these descriptions of what the deity looks like and so forth in order to help the meditator in his visualization. 
If you’ve done the practice of the Nyung Nay before, you’ll know what I am talking about. In that practice, the six deities are very clearly laid out one by one, starting with the empty deity, the sound deity and so forth, telling the meditator what to think and what to meditate on.
After you arise as the deity, you place the syllables Om Ah Hung at the forehead, throat and heart respectively. In the context of Chenrezig, you arise as Chenrezig. In your heart, you visualize a moon disc in the centre of which is the syllable Hri surrounded by the mantra garland.  
Seal (or mudra) deity
Here you perform the hand gesture (or mudra) that’s concordant with the lineage of the Action Tantra deity. In Action Tantra and Performance Tantra, we talk about the three lineages:
the tathagata lineage
the lotus lineage 
the vajra lineage
There is a difference in the superiority of these lineages. In terms of superiority:
the tathagata lineage is said to be the highest 
the lotus lineage is middling 
the vajra lineage is the lowest
The tathagata lineage is the factor of the purity of the body appearing in the form of the deity. 
The lotus lineage is the factor of the purity of speech appearing in the form of deity. 
The vajra lineage is the factor of the purity of the mind appearing in the form of deity. 
One of the ways in which we can identify the lineage to which an Action Tantra deity belongs is by looking at its lord of the lineage. 
For Action Tantra deities like Sitatapatra, White Umbrella Deity, Namgyalma or Ushnishavijaya, after the initiation is done, the overflow of nectar is transformed into Vairochana at their crown. Deities of Action Tantra that belongs to the tathagata lineage are crowned with Vairochana. 
Chenrezig belongs to the lotus lineage. If you look at the practice of Chenrezig, after the wisdom beings are absorbed and the initiation is conferred, after the seal impression is done, the overflow of the nectar transforms into Amitabha at the crown of his head. If the head of the deity is crowned by Amitabha, we can say that this deity belongs to the lotus lineage. 
Action Tantra deities, such as Sangye Mitrugpa, who belong to the vajra lineage are crowned with Akshobhya. 
This is a rough way of identifying the lineage to which a particular Action Tantra deity belongs. 
It’s said in the teachings that the tathagata lineage is supreme, followed by the lotus lineage and the vajra lineage, i.e., the lotus lineage is superior to the vajra lineage. This is mentioned but no reasons are given. This is something that we can think about. Why is the tathagata lineage superior to or the principal of the three lineages? 
Let’s see if this may qualify as a reason. The whole point of achieving enlightenment and becoming a buddha is to be able to work for the welfare of sentient beings. The buddhas work for the welfare of sentient beings through a multitude of form bodies. After appearing to sentient beings, the buddhas work for sentient beings through their enlightened speech. Let’s say we link this to the lotus lineage since it is the factor of the purity of speech appearing in the form of a deity. The buddhas work for sentient beings through their enlightened speech motivated by their pure compassion. 
The enlightened mind of the buddhas cannot appear to sentient beings. In that sense, compared to how the buddhas benefit sentient beings through their bodies and speech, the benefit offered by the enlightened mind is more limited. In that sense, the vajra lineage is placed last. 
This is just my opinion. You can always share any other suggestions or opinions that you may have regarding this.  
The form deity is where you meditate clearly on all the features of the deity that you’ve arisen into. You are supposed to perform the appropriate hand gesture (or mudra) of the lineage of that deity. In the case of Chenrezig, the deity of the lotus lineage, you perform the hand gesture of the lotus lineage. 
If you were to do this extensively, you put your hands in the appropriate hand gesture and you touch the seven points of your body, starting with:
the crown
the forehead
the eyes (counted as one)
the throat 
both shoulders 
the heart 
the navel 
It is mentioned in the Chenrezig practice that with the appropriate hand gesture, you touch the five places:
the heart
the forehead 
the throat
the right shoulder
the left shoulder
The fifth deity, the seal deity, then is first placing your hands in the appropriate hand gesture and touching it to the different parts of the body. 
Sign deity
The sixth deity, the sign deity, refers to the meditation on the deity’s body in order to elicit a clear appearance and divine pride. Focussing single-pointedly on that is the sign deity. 
In the context of the practice of Chenrezig, after you have generated yourself as Chenrezig, in your heart on the moon disc, the syllable Hri is surrounded by the mantra garland. From the syllable Hri at the heart of yourself as the commitment being—the deity that you have generated yourself into, Chenrezig—light rays go out to invite the actual Buddha Chenrezig, the wisdom being. You imagine that the wisdom being dissolving into you, the commitment being, and becoming indifferentiable. This makes a difference to the meditator’s mind because you will feel that you have absorbed a real buddha into you. This will help your meditation of generating clear appearance and divine pride. 
After the absorption of the wisdom beings, usually, there’s also the visualization of receiving the initiation and doing the seal impression. In the case of Chenrezig, after you’ve absorbed the wisdom being into yourself as the commitment being, again from the syllable Hri at your heart, light rays go out and invite all the initiation deities.
The initiation deities confer initiation upon you by pouring nectar over your body. As a deity, imagine that through the nectar, all your negativities and obscurations are purified. After that, you do the practice of seal impression. The nectar overflows from the crown of your head and transforms into the lord of the lineage, in this case, Amitabha. You are sealed with Amitabha.
After you have generated all the six deities, when you reach the sign deity, it is not an absolute must to do the practices of inviting the wisdom beings and initiation deities to confer initiation and the practice of the seal impression. These’re not absolutely necessary. It’s good to do them but even if they’re not done, that’s not considered to be an omission.
Q & A
Student 1: The main focus of tantra is the four complete purities. I wonder at the point where we visualize the moon disc and mantra garland and then enact the activities of sentient beings, could we say that they are the practices of the complete purities of enjoyments and enlightened activities, even before the supported and supporting mandala have been generated? 
Khen Rinpoche: They are not considered to be the practice that is concordant with the aspect of the complete purity of enlightened activities although there’s the visualization of fulfilling the two purposes.  In the context of the letter deity, which is part of the process of generating as a deity, it’s not concordant with the aspect of the complete purity of enlightened activities. That comes later, perhaps at the time when you do the recitation of the mantra and the visualization of enacting activities for sentient beings.
Student 1: So it’s not part of the practice of the six deities. 
Khen Rinpoche: Here we’re talking about the process of generating yourself as a deity. In Action Tantra, one generates oneself as the deity through this process of the six steps. As said in the root text, “You generate yourself as a deity by relying on the six deities.” This is in the section of generating yourself as a deity.
Student 1: It was mentioned earlier in the lesson that a suitable person who takes the initiation refrains from committing the ten non-virtuous actions. When it comes to tantric practice, in particular Highest Yoga Tantra, such as the Kalachakra or even when we recite the six-session guru yoga where we vow to avoid intoxicants and so forth, I am taken aback that many people who are practising tantra are continuing to take alcohol. It really bothers me. Can I please clarify this because when I received the Kalachakra initiation years back, it was made very clear to me that one should refrain from taking alcohol as a lifetime vow?  
Khen Rinpoche: If you drink and you are not drunk, then it’s OK!
We have to look at the whole picture and not just focus on one small part. It all depends. In the context of a person who’s suited only for the Hinayana teachings, the Buddha said that he must abandon all the ten non-virtues. There’s no exception whatsoever. 
When it comes to the Mahayana sutra, the Buddha gave permission to those who are qualified to engage in the three bodily non-virtues and the four verbal non-virtues. If the person’s qualified and there’s a reason for them to engage in those non-virtues, it doesn’t become a fault. 
In tantra, it literally says that one can take attachment as the path. If you take the lay precepts, the pratimoksha vows for the layperson, and become a full upasika adopting the five precepts, then you are not supposed to drink alcohol. 
In the vinaya, the ethical code of conduct for the ordained community, the Buddha said the ordained person should not touch even a small drop of alcohol, i.e., akin to a drop on the tip of a blade of grass. The Buddha said this very clearly in the vinaya with regard to the consumption of alcohol. 
It doesn’t mean that one can drink alcohol in tantra. For people who say they can drink alcohol, they must have the capacity to transform that alcohol. For example, in the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra, there is the blessing of the five meats and the five nectars. You do the purification of blessing them, actualizing them as nectar and increasing them. For somebody who can actually transform the five meats and the five nectars into nectar and can partake of it, for that person, then alcohol is not a problem.  
Basically, it is better for people to know what level they are at. If you know you are not at that level, then don’t do the practice that is not at your level. 
However, sometimes, it is part of the practice such as tsog or a situation where you have to taste the alcohol that has been transformed into nectar.  You don’t have to taste it. It doesn’t mean that you really have to taste it or drink it. You can just do the gesture of touching it and imaging that you are experiencing the nectar. For us, we can think it’s nectar but it’s still alcohol. We should not use such situations as the reason to taste the alcohol. Then that is wrong.
Since it’s said that tantra is accomplished through visualization, just imagine that you are touching the alcohol and tasting it as nectar. Don’t drink and touch it if the basis is alcohol. If you are not at that level, then don’t do it. 
For a practitioner who is ordained, generally, we don’t use alcohol as the basis of accomplishment for the inner offering. It’s strongly advised to use tea as the basis of accomplishment. This is often strongly emphasized. It’s mentioned in certain practices of Highest Yoga Tantra that you need to present offerings like meat and alcohol. As objects of offering, they’re OK because they’re part of the requirement. But it’s a completely different matter whether you’ve to taste them or not. If you’re not at that level, then you don’t have to taste them. Just perform the gesture of tasting it, imagine that you’re doing so and generate the wisdom of great bliss that is non-dual with emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: So then there is no problem. 
In the past, when His Holiness gave long life initiations, as part of the long life initiation, there’s the long life nectar. The basis of accomplishment was alcohol or chang (Tibetan beer) was usually used. Many Tibetans would snatch the chang because they like beer. 
They will take one bottle after another. This was changed to milk after His Holiness advised not to use any more chang. If you’re not careful, then it becomes like this. This is blessing and after two bottles, it really becomes great bliss! 
(A student seeks clarification regarding the English translations for the initiations). 
Khen Rinpoche: In Action Tantra, definitely, you must have the water and crown initiations. For Action Tantra, there’s no need to confer all the five knowledge initiations. If you talk about the five knowledge initiations—the water, crown, vajra, bell and name initiation—they’re part of the vase initiation. So whether it’s the crown initiation or vajra initiation and so forth, these’re all part of the vase initiation. 
Etymologically speaking, why are they called the vase initiation? Because at the end of all the initiations, whether it is a crown initiation or vajra initiation, it always concludes with the water initiation and the sprinkling of the vase water. As such, it’s called the vase initiation. 
For Action Tantra, there’re definitely the water and crown initiations. The vajra, bell and name initiations are not necessary. However, if they’re conferred, that’s also OK. Anyway, there’re different views regarding this. There’re some scholars who say it’s not OK. There’re others who say it’s OK. The conclusion is that you need the two initiations—the water and crown initiations.  On top of that, if you’re to confer the three initiations—the vajra, bell and name—it’s OK. But if you don’t confer them, it’s also OK.  
The path of Action Tantra consists of the yoga with signs and yoga without signs. 
By taking the water initiation, you are empowered to meditate on the yoga without signs. It leaves the potential for you to achieve the resultant dharmakaya, the truth body, in the future.  
When the crown initiation is conferred, you are empowered to meditate on yoga with signs. It leaves the special potential for you to achieve the resultant rupakaya, the form body, in the future. 
If that’s the case, you’re empowered to do whatever you need to actualize the Action Tantra path, the yoga with signs and the yoga without signs. You’re empowered to meditate on both as you’re empowered to actualize both bodies. So there’s nothing missing. 
Yet it’s said that on top of the two initiations, it’s OK to confer the vajra, bell and name initiations. If it’s okay to confer them, then what’s the purpose of doing so? But it doesn’t say. We get this question.
Khen Rinpoche: Since you all have the root text, please read it before coming to class.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.