Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L49FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:26.316788
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson                                                                    49
 12 October 2017


Conception & the process of  birth.  Taking  rebirth  as  the  path  of  the
nirmanakaya. Importance of meditating on emptiness.


CONCEPTION AND THE PROCESS OF BIRTH

I have finished with:
 • presenting the establishment of the intermediate state
 • the meditation of taking the  intermediate  state  as  the  path  of  the
   sambhogakaya
 • how that meditation is concordant with aspects of the intermediate state
 • discussing that in relation to the Vajrabhairava practice.

Next is taking rebirth as the  path  of  the  nirmanakaya.  Since  it  is  a
meditation that is concordant with aspects of  birth,  I  will  mention  now
something about birth.

What is the purpose or benefit of the practice of  taking  ordinary  rebirth
as the path of the nirmanakaya? In a way, this practice:
 • purifies the ordinary rebirth that happens due to karma and afflictions
 • ripens the mind for the illusory bodies—both the pure and impure illusory
   bodies—of the path to be able to enter and abide within the  coarse  body
   and through that, work for sentient beings
 • is also a  cause  for  actualizing  the  resultant  emanation  body  that
   emanates or issues forth from the enjoyment body.

In the context here, the process of birth is explained from the  perspective
of a human born from the  womb  who  possesses  the  six  elements.  Rebirth
generally has to happen via the intermediate state. The  intermediate  state
being has to die before rebirth can  happen.  When  the  intermediate  state
being dies, there is a death process as well that culminates  in  the  clear
light of death. The cessation of the clear light of
death, the arising of the mind of near-attainment  of  the  reverse  process
and the entry of the consciousness into the fertilized egg (or ovum)  happen
simultaneously.

Some favourable conditions are required in order for rebirth to happen.
 • The mother’s womb must be free of defects and free of disease.
 • The mother must have regular menstrual cycles.
 • The intermediate state being who is going to be born as the child of that
   couple must be nearby.
 • The couple must be lying together.

There must also be the absence of any unfavourable conditions:
 • The centre of the mother’s womb cannot be too clean.
 • Both the semen of the father and  the  blood  of  the  mother  must  flow
   together and must mix. Even if the semen and blood flow together and mix,
   but if there is any fault in either one or both, then  rebirth  will  not
   happen.
 • The intermediate state being must have accumulated the karma to  be  born
   as the child of that couple. That is why this text says that  there  must
   be no fault on the part of the  intermediate  state  being  to  not  have
   accumulated the karma for this couple to be his or her parents.
 • The couple must have accumulated the  karma  to  have  that  intermediate
   state being to be born as their child.

Even if the semen and blood  flow  concurrently,  are  free  of  faults  and
defects and are mixed, does it mean that conception  will  necessarily  take
place? The answer is no.

Another condition must be present. The  consciousness  of  the  intermediate
state  being  consciousness  must  enter  the  ovum.  Otherwise,  conception
doesn’t happen. So it’s clear that  conception  doesn’t  necessarily  happen
just because the woman has  an  ovum.  This  shows  there  must  be  another
condition before conception  can  happen.  From  the  Buddhist  perspective,
there must be an intermediate state being whose  consciousness  has  entered
that ovum. Otherwise, conception doesn’t happen.

Also, in order for that to happen, the intermediate state  being  must  have
accumulated the karma to be born as  the  child  of  that  couple  and  that
couple must have the karma to have this intermediate state being to be  born
as their child.

Some people have no  issue  with  getting  pregnant  and  some  people  want
children but never get pregnant,  despite  the  meeting  of  the  semen  and
blood. This shows  there  must  be  another  condition.  From  the  Buddhist
perspective, in relation to rebirth,  we  talk  about  the  existence  of  a
consciousness  that  enters  the  fertilized  egg.  This   is   helpful   in
understanding rebirth.  Otherwise,  if  you  were  to  say  that  conception
necessarily takes place once  one  has  a  fertilized  egg,  there  will  be
problems in explaining rebirth. Likewise, (there will be  problems)  if  you
were to say conception necessarily takes place just because of  the  meeting
of the semen and blood.

But will conception necessarily take place even if all  the  conditions  are
there?
 • The mother’s womb is free of defects.
 • There is nothing wrong with her menstrual cycles.
 • She has the capacity to give birth.
 • Even the egg has mixed with the sperm.

The answer is clearly “No”. It is not necessary that conception will  happen
and it doesn’t happen all the time. What does this show?  This  shows  there
must be another condition for conception to take  place.  If  you  say  that
there will be conception just by the meeting of the egg and sperm, then  you
have a problem. It is like saying there is no need to have a  consciousness.
Then the concept of reincarnation falls apart. Even the scientists say  that
conception doesn’t necessarily take place just because  the  egg  and  sperm
meet.

The intermediate state being  must  have  the  karma  to  be  born  as  that
couple’s child. If there is the karma,  then  when  the  intermediate  state
being dies, it enters the fertilized  egg  and  life  begins.  Before  that,
there is no life.

When the intermediate state being is near the future  parents,  it  is  said
that the male and female are engaged in sexual intercourse. In  some  texts,
it says the intermediate state being sees them lying in embrace.
• If the intermediate being is to be born  as  a  male,  that  intermediate
  state being has aversion for the future  father  and  attachment  to  the
  future mother and wishes to embrace the mother.
• If the intermediate  state  being  is  to  be  born  as  a  female,  that
  intermediate  state  being  has  aversion  for  the  future  mother   and
  attachment to the future father and wants to embrace the father.
• Out of its desire  to  embrace  either  the  father  or  mother,  as  the
  intermediate state being goes nearer to the couple, what the intermediate
  state being sees are only their genitals. Then it gets angry, faints  and
  dies. The consciousness enters into the fertilized egg.

From this alone, we can see that in general, most intermediate state  beings
don’t take rebirth with a happy mind. Rather,  their  mind  is  filled  with
attachment or aversion. Therefore, rebirth  happens  within  attachment  and
aversion.

As for where  the  consciousness  enters,  different  texts  have  different
explanations.
 • One text says that the consciousness enters either through the  crown  of
   the father or mother.
 • Another text says it is through the mouth of the father.
 • Yet another text says it is through the secret place of the mother, i.e.,
   it enters through the womb.

The  intermediate  state  being  has  to  die  before  taking  rebirth.   It
experiences the eight signs of dissolution, culminating in the  clear  light
of death. When the clear light of death stops, the mind  of  near-attainment
of the reverse process arises. This is when  the  consciousness  enters  the
centre of the fertilized egg. This is the start of the birth existence.  The
very first mind of the birth existence is the mind of near-attainment of
the reverse process. From the mind of near-attainment  arises  the  mind  of
increase  followed  by  the  mind  of  appearance  and  the  80   indicative
conceptions. During the reverse process of the arising of the wind  element,
fire element, water element  and  earth  element,  the  potential  of  those
elements to act as a support for the consciousness gradually develops.
There are five stages in the development of the foetus:
1. For  the  white  bodhicitta,  the  first  is  called  ‘oval-shaped’.  The
   development of the foetus in the first week is  called  ‘oval-shaped  and
   melting’.  The text describes the body of this  foetus  to  be  like  the
   cream on top of boiled milk.   From  the  outside,  it  looks  thick  but
   inside, it is fluid.

Khen Rinpoche: You know how to boil milk? Have  you  seen  this  example  or
else you won’t understand? You boil the milk  first.  Then  you  will  know.
After you boil it, set it aside for a while. On top,  there  is  some  cream
like a layer of skin that is very delicate but if you touch it, it  is  just
liquid inside. Anyway, that’s the idea.

2. The second stage of development, in the second week, is  called  ‘like  a
   red lump’. Both the inside and outside of  the  body  of  the  foetus  is
   viscous.
3. The third week is called ‘like a pebble and a lump’.  This  is  the  time
   when flesh begins to form. Although it is becoming like flesh, it  cannot
   bear to be pressed.
4. The fourth week is called ‘turning solid’.  This  is  the  time  when  it
   becomes flesh and now can bear a little bit of pressing.
5. The fifth week is called ‘producing hands and feet and well mixed’.  This
   is when there are signs of the five limbs developing. When  you  look  at
   the mixture, you can see stumps protruding out in the part of  the  head,
   the two hands and the two legs. These are called the five limbs.

By the 35th and 36th weeks, the body  is  almost  fully  formed  with  hair,
nails, teeth, tongue, palate and so forth.  It  is  said  that  to  a  large
extent, the baby has mindfulness.

 • If the child is male, it is said that he faces the back of the mother and
   he lies on the right side in the womb.
 • If the child is female, it is said that she lies  on  the  mother’s  left
   side, facing towards the front.
 • If twins or more babies are to be born, these are two  or  more  separate
   consciousnesses. It is not as if one consciousness is  divided  into  two
   (or more). Two separate individuals,  i.e.,  two  consciousnesses,  enter
   into two separate fertilized eggs. It is said that the twins will develop
   individually in the womb. One will be on the right and the other  on  the
   left.
 • If the foetus is born with indeterminate sex, i.e., with  both  male  and
   female genitals, then the baby will remain in the centre of the womb.

Khen Rinpoche: I’m just wondering what I have just read, do  you  have  some
idea how accurate this information is—the boy  facing  the  back,  the  girl
facing the front and so forth? I’m just wondering because  2000  years  ago,
we don’t have ultrasound scans.  I’m  just  wondering  how  they  can  tell.
According to the scientists or doctors, what I have just explained from  the
text, is it accurate or not? Does anybody have experience of this?

In ancient times, you don’t need to scan and they know whether it is  a  boy
or a girl. By touching (the stomach), they know whether it is  a  boy  or  a
girl. Now you can tell with a good machine. Anyway, try to find out  whether
what I have read is accurate or not.

One very interesting thing is about the solar  eclipse  and  lunar  eclipse.
Nowadays, scien-
tists have so many technological aids to see this,  but  in  ancient  times,
they don’t have the technology. But with the Tibetan calculation,  they  can
predict exactly when the sun will  eclipse,  the  time  and  where  it  will
happen. Without any technology, just by calculation! I don't know  how  they
do it. (The eclipse) will occur exactly on the right day and  at  the  right
time.

In my hometown, at night, they will look at the stars  and  they  can  tell,
“Summer is coming. Winter is coming.  Rain will come.” Just  by  looking  at
the  stars.  But  now  (with  climate  change)  the   weather   has   become
unpredictable.

I’m just wondering how they can find out. This is why when I  read  this—how
the baby is conceived, the direction the baby faces, front, back …  I  don't
know how accurate it is. Those who are mothers should know.

There is also a description of the posture of  the  baby  while  inside  the
womb. It sits with the feet and hands bent and the two  little  fingers  are
inside the nostrils.

Khen Rinpoche: This happens only after the baby comes  out.  (Khen  Rinpoche
makes the gesture of sucking the thumb). In the womb,  you  don’t  do  this.
I’m not sure how accurate this is.  Any doctor here has some  experience  of
this?

I have never seen a scan so I don't know. I’m wondering how the  (baby  sits
inside the  womb).  This  can  be  a  general  (presentation).  It  must  be
something like that as the text mentions this.

How is the baby nourished? This comes  from  the  nutrients  from  the  food
eaten by the mother. This is delivered to the  baby  through  the  umbilical
cord, which is attached to the foetus’ navel.

Khen Rinpoche: This must be accurate as there is no other way. This  is  why
after the (baby comes out), they have to cut (the umbilical cord).  This  is
why there is a hole in the navel.

Since the mother’s womb is located directly below the stomach,  it  is  said
that:
 • When the mother ingests hot food or drink, the baby will feel as  if  hot
   water is being poured over it.
 • When the mother eats very cold food or drink, the  baby  will  experience
   the suffering that is like being thrown into ice.
 • When the mother is running and jumping, the baby will feel as  if  it  is
   falling over a
   cliff.
This is taught by Buddha in the sutra called The Sutra  of  Entry  Into  the
Womb where
the Buddha describes the many sufferings that the baby experiences.

In general, the baby is said to remain in the womb for up to 38 weeks.
 • By the 35th week, the body is fully  formed  with  hair,  nails,  tongue,
   palate, teeth and so forth.
 • By the 36th week, the baby develops the desire to exit.
 • In the 37th week, the baby experiences bad smells and filthiness.
 • In the 38th week, by the force of the karmic wind,  the  baby  starts  to
   turn upside down with the head towards the exit of the womb.
Then it starts to stretch its limbs and the baby starts to come out  of  the
womb. When the  baby  comes  out  of  the  mother’s  womb,  it  is  said  to
experience great suffering akin to its skin being pricked by thorns.

Khen Rinpoche: This is why when  babies  come  out,  not  a  single  one  is
smiling. I think every baby cries, no? When the baby comes out,  it  doesn’t
cry?

Student 1: They usually slap it to make it start crying. I can  ask  my  mum
as she has delivered a lot of babies.

Khen Rinpoche: In our hometown, we don’t have  the  facilities.  The  mother
gives birth in the house. (Sometimes) they go to the fields  or  jungle  and
deliver the baby just like that. So definitely,  they  will  cry.   I  don't
know.

Here, they don’t cry? They only cry  when  you  hit  them?  Otherwise,  they
don’t cry? I’m just wondering. I am surprised (to hear that).  According  to
the text, you don’t need to hit them as there is so  much  pain  (when  they
are born); immediately, they will cry. Sometimes,  (the  baby)  has  a  blue
mark. Maybe it is because of (being hit)? I’m not sure. One needs to  check.
I am just reading from the text.

 • People usually wash the baby when the baby comes out. They think they are
   doing a fantastic job but it is said that the baby feels as if hot  water
   is being poured over its very sensitive skin.
 • The mother would like to hold the baby with love but actually,  the  baby
   feels as if it is being held by someone with claws.
 • Even though the baby is placed on very soft cloth, it’s  said  that  it’s
   like being placed on a thorn bush. The baby experiences great suffering.
In essence, there is great suffering when the baby is in the womb and  there
is also a lot of suffering on the way out when the baby  is  born.  When  we
put all this together, it is clear that  everything  is  in  the  nature  of
suffering. The intermediate state being dies with suffering. It then  enters
the fertilized egg. The baby suffers in the womb and it also suffers on  the
way out.

TAKING REBIRTH AS THE PATH OF THE NIRMANAKAYA

If we look at the practice of taking birth as the path for  the  nirmanakaya
in relation to
Vajrabhairava in the  sadhana  of  the  self-generation  rite[1],  you  have
already arisen as the Causal Vajra-holder, Manjughosha. Then it says:

      At my heart, from an Ah comes a sun-disc mandala, ... (p. 23)

At  the  time  of  taking  the  intermediate  state  as  the  path  of   the
sambhogakaya, one has
already arisen as the Causal Vajra-holder, yellow Manjughosha. In the  heart
of oneself as the Causal Vajra-holder, Manjughosha, there is a  syllable  Ah
that melts and transforms into a sun-disc mandala. In  reality,  the  entity
of this sun-disc is the wisdom of great bliss but it  is  appearing  in  the
aspect of a sun-disc.

Light rays radiate from the sun-disc, invoking and inviting all the  buddhas
and bodhisattvas to dissolve into it.

      … light rays (emanate and)  invite  forth  all  the  Buddhas  such  as
      Vairochana, Bodhisattvas such as Vajra-sharp, Wrathful Deities such as
      Vajra-hook and Knowledge-holders such as Lady Vajra-mind,  from  where
      they reside in the ten directions (p. 23).

In the commentary, it’s said 49  different  deities  are  absorbed  but  for
simplicity’s sake, just think that they are all  absorbed  in  the  form  of
Vajrabhairava into the sun-disc.

Then you as Manjugosha dissolves  into  light,  from  top  and  bottom,  and
dissolves into the sun-disc at the heart. At the end, what is  left  is  the
sun-disc, which becomes even more radiant than before. Whether you  call  it
the ‘I’ or your mind, identify yourself  with  that  sun-disc  and  generate
divine pride.

On top of the sun-disc comes a dark blue syllable Hum  radiating  light  and
resonating so loudly it is like  the  roar  of  a  dragon.  The  light  rays
radiate from the dark blue Hum, inviting all the  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas
in the aspect of Vajrabhairava. They dissolve into this Hum.  Then  the  Hum
completely transforms into a black nine-spoked vajra.

Light rays radiate from this vajra adorned with the Hum  at  the  navel  (of
the vajra). On the tips of these light rays are infinite  small  vajras  and
also various other emanations that are suitable for  subduing  all  sentient
beings. From these forms, light rays and nectar flow  into  sentient  beings
and purify them of their negativities and obscurations. After purifying  all
the sentient beings of their negativities  and  obscurations,  imagine  they
are placed in the state of Vajrabhairava or the state of enlightenment.  All
these sentient beings have been  transformed  into  Vajrabhairava.  Together
with all the vajras, whatever forms have  been  emanated  are  all  gathered
back and absorb into the vajra.

 • At this time, there is the moon-disc.
 • On top of that is the sun-disc.
 • On top of the sun-disc is a nine-spoked vajra at the navel  of  which  is
   the syllable Hum.
 • This completely  transforms  and  one  arises  as  Vajrabhairava  in  his
   complete form.

There are many different ways in which you can talk about the generation  of
a deity, one of which is the arising of the deity through the five  manifest
realizations:
1. the manifest realization from the moon
2. the manifest realization from the sun
3. the manifest realization from the six syllables
4. the manifest realization from the hand implements
5. the manifest realization from the complete body

In  the  self-generation  rite,  what  follows   is   the   description   of
Vajrabhairava—the number of faces, hands, legs and so  forth.  The  idea  is
that after you have arisen as the deity, you are supposed to train in  clear
appearance and divine pride.

In the section of taking  birth  as  the  path  of  the  nirmanakaya,  after
everything is absorbed into the vajra, one arises as the deity and says:

      I  arise  as  the  Resultant  Vajra-holder,  the  great  and  glorious
      Vajrabhairava, with a body dark  blue  black  in  color,  nine  faces,
      thirty-four arms and sixteen legs, standing in the pose of right  ones
      bent and left extended. (p. 24)

For somebody who has trained, then there is  no  need  to  go  on  with  the
description. But as this not possible in the beginning and since there is  a
need to train in clear appearance and divine pride, therefore,  there  is  a
description in the sadhana.

      Description of Vajrabhairava
      With the ability to devour the lords of the Three  Realms,  I  chortle
      “Ha-Ha”, with my tongue darting,  my  fangs  bared,  my  mouth  having
      wrinkles of anger, my brow also wrinkled in anger, with  my  eyes  and
      eyebrows ablaze like  the  eon  of  destruction  and  my  orange  hair
      bristling upward. (p. 24)

You can read the rest of the self-generation rite. After that is:
 • The blessing of the sources, body, speech and mind (p. 26).
 • Meditating on the triple stack heroic minds (or three-tiered  being)  (p.
   26).
 • Invitation of the wisdom deities (p. 27).
 • Inviting the empowering deities (p.27).
 • Initiating and sealing by the empowering deities (p. 28).
 • Making the outer offerings (p. 28).
 • Making the inner offerings (p. 28) and so forth.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. That is all. I think I have covered the three kayas.

IMPORTANCE OF MEDITATING ON EMPTINESS

One of the really essential points right at the beginning is the  meditation
on emptiness. One really has to learn and understand well  the  presentation
of emptiness that is found in sutra. After that, one must meditate,  reflect
and analyse.

If one does not bring to mind and meditate on emptiness every day, there  is
a danger
of committing the tantric root downfall of  not  recollecting  the  view  of
emptiness. So at the relevant sections of the self-generation rite, as  much
as possible, try to mediate on emptiness for five or ten minutes.  You  must
develop this habit.

 • After meditating on emptiness,  imagine  the  mind  that  understands  or
   ascertains emptiness is the wisdom of great bliss that has the appearance
   of the sun-disc.
 • I seem to remember reading in one text that on top of  that  sun-disc  is
   oneself in the ordinary aspect.
 • This then gradually dissolves and becomes a ball of light that  is  about
   one cubic high.  One identifies with that.
 • Then that ball of light, one cubic in height, gradually  becomes  clearer
   and takes on the form of the deity, one face and two-armed Vajrabhairava.


This is a very short meditation of taking the three bodies as the  path.  It
may be easier for beginners to start with this.

However, if we are  doing  this  in  relation  to  the  Vajrabhairava  self-
generation rite, whether it is the short or long one, do this  according  to
the words there and then you meditate. The practice of Vajrayogini  has  its
own way of doing it. So once you know the essence, you will know how  to  do
it. You can also apply it to the Six-Session Guru Yoga.

Q & A

Student  2:  After  arising  as  Yamanataka,  the  three-stacked  being   is
mentioned. When do we visualize this  and  what  is  its  purpose?  When  we
recite the mantra, what are we supposed to visualize?

Khen Rinpoche: In the self-generation rite, the  meditation  on  the  three-
tiered being comes after one has arisen “as the Resultant Vajra-holder,  the
great and glorious Vajrabhairava, with a body  dark  blue  black  in  color,
nine faces, thirty-four arms and sixteen  legs,  standing  in  the  pose  of
right ones bent and left extended.” (p. 24)

 • The commitment being is you, yourself, as Vajrabhairava.
 • In the heart of the commitment being, sitting on the  moon-disc,  is  the
   wisdom being, Manjugosha.
 • In the heart of Manjugosha, on the sun-disc, is the syllable Hum. The Hum
   is the concentration being.

The meditation on the three-tiered being comes after  the  blessing  of  the
sources.

As for the three-tiered beings, the text talks about:
 • the three-tiered being of the basis
 • the three-tiered being of the path
 • the three-tiered being of the result

The three-tiered beings of the basis are as follows:
 • The commitment being of the basis will be the present coarse body.
 • The wisdom being will be the extremely subtle wind.
 • The concentration being is the extremely subtle mind.

The three-tiered beings of the path are as follow:
 • The commitment being of the path is the coarse body in which  the  impure
   and pure illusory bodies of the path enter and abide.
 • The two illusory bodies of the path—both the  impure  and  pure  illusory
   bodies— are the wisdom beings of the path.
 • The example and meaning clear light of the  path  are  the  concentration
   beings of the path.

The three-tiered beings of the result are as follows:
 • The resultant emanation body is the commitment being of the result.
   Here we talk about union, in particular, the union of no  more  learning,
   i.e., enlightenment or buddhahood. In the continuum  of  the  person  who
   achieves the union of no more learning, union means the  coming  together
   of two things—the pure illusory body and the meaning clear  light—in  the
   continuum of the non-learner.
 • The (pure) illusory body is the wisdom being of the result.
 • The wisdom of great bliss, the meaning clear light, is the  concentration
   being of the result.

So, the concept of the three-tiered being can be understood in terms of  the
basis, the path and the result. In terms  of  the  basis,  the  three-tiered
being symbolizes something.  In terms of the path, it  symbolizes  something
else. In terms of the result, it symbolizes the result.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] The Vajrabhairava self-generation text referred to  in  this  lesson  is
Victory Over Evil: Meditation on Vajrabhairava by Kyabje  Phabongkha  Dechen
Nyingpo.  Compiled  and  translated  by  Sharpa  Tulku,  Richard  Guard  and
Alexander Berzin. ©1990 by Library of Tibetan  Works  and  Archives.  ©1990-
2006 Alexander Berzin (www.berzinarchives.com).  Last  revised  3/2006  with
corrections by Michael Müller.


