Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L27FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:05.274366
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 27	 				                                             13 July 2017
Reflecting on death and impermanence.  Q & A. Review—Yoga Tantra. Root text, p. 66—70. How to establish the siddhis. How the supreme siddhi is obtained. Why common siddhis must precede the supreme siddhi in the three lower tantras. Why this is not necessary in the case of Highest Yoga Tantra. 
REFLECTING ON DEATH AND IMPERMANENCE
The Kadampa masters said if one meditates on death and impermanence for a long time and thinks about death and impermanence often, then one will be able to give up attachment to the affairs of this life. Such a person will not have any difficulty in achieving the goals and happiness of future lives. 
Naturally, those who reflect well on death and impermanence will be able to practise the Dharma. The whole point of thinking about death and impermanence is to be able to practise the Dharma. The Kadampa masters are saying for those who think about death and impermanence and practise the Dharma, they will experience mental joy and will not experience any mental unhappiness. Those who reflect well on death and impermanence will naturally see that anything that has nothing to do with the Dharma is completely pointless and without any purpose. 
So, the Kadampa masters say that these three things come together:
thinking about death and impermanence
giving up this life 
being able to practise the Dharma
This reflection on death and impermanence is extremely important because this is the foundation for all practices. Whether any Dharma practice will be stable, bear fruit and be successful depends on whether one has this foundation or not. Without this foundation, it doesn’t matter what you do—meditate on bodhicitta, meditate on emptiness or meditate on tantra—none of those practices will be fruitful nor will they be stable.  Without this foundation, you can meditate on these topics but when the time comes when you need to have something to show, something that is of practical benefit in dealing with life, you will have nothing to show. In essence, you have to think about death and impermanence regularly and constantly. With this, your Dharma practice can start. 
~~~~~~~~~~
Khen Rinpoche: I’ve passed out a new chart for Yoga Tantra (see handout below). I’ve already talked about this in the last class. I don’t know whether you can get some idea from this chart or you need an explanation again. If you need me to go through it again, I will go through this again. 
I give you five minutes to read through the chart. If you have any questions, ask. Just read the first page. Don’t read the second page for the time being. Finish the first page. I’m not sure if it’s correct or not. It’s not final. Any questions? 
This is supposed to be the summary of the previous class. I made some slight changes. If you notice them, then ask questions. Any questions on the first page? 
Q & A
Student 1: Why are there three kinds of approximation—the extensive, medium and abbreviated—for Yoga Tantra when doing the yoga with signs, focussing on the basic deity? Could it be due to the different capacities of the trainee?
Khen Rinpoche: It could be. There are the short, medium and long approximations. It depends on how one wants to do them. Some people do the short one. Others want to do the extensive one where there are more details to meditate on. 
Student 1: Will there be a difference in the result? For the extensive approximation, it is more difficult and one has to do more things. Is there more merit? 
Khen Rinpoche: Of course, with regard to the extensive approximation, you have to put in more effort, do more meditation and you need more time. 
Student 2: What is the vajra hand symbol?
Khen Rinpoche: The vajra hand symbol is the vajra held in the hand. For instance, Vajrasattva holds the vajra and bell in his hands.
The hand implement does symbolize something. In the case of the lotus lineage, the deities often hold a lotus as their hand implement. Likewise, the deities of the vajra lineage hold vajras. 
Student 3: Is there a special quality to the uncontrived divine pride generated in Yoga 
Tantra? For most of us, divine pride is generated with a great deal of effort and it does not come up spontaneously. I presume uncontrived divine pride is like uncontrived bodhicitta, i.e., it’s spontaneous and arises without effort. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. 
Student 3: Does that means the divine pride in Yoga Tantra is of a higher quality than what we try to do in Action Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: No. It’s the same thing. 
Student 3: So it is always spontaneous and without effort? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 4: Under the yoga focussing on the hand symbols, when you say the hand symbol goes up from the heart or navel, travelling to the point between our eyebrows, what is the process of doing that? Do you have to do it rapidly or is there a particular way of visualizing the way the vajra travels up? What is the significance? 
Khen Rinpoche: It goes up and goes here (to the space between the eyebrows). 
This is a practice belonging to the yoga focussing on the subtle hand symbols. The yoga observing the subtle is done after having completed the yoga observing the basic (or coarse) deity.
One starts with the yoga focussing on the basic deity after generating the supported and supporting mandala. Then one elicits clear appearance and divine pride. Within that, one visualizes the subtle hand implement, either at the navel or at the heart according to one’s choice. 
Whether you choose the navel or the heart, essentially you are focusing on a very subtle object, the vajra hand symbol that’s supposed to be as small as the size of a mustard seed. Focussing on that, you achieve stability with respect to it. Then you draw the hand symbol to the point between the eyebrows and focus on that for the purpose of achieving calm abiding. In one text, it says after drawing the hand symbol up to the point at the mid-brow, one focusses on that and meditates until calm abiding is achieved. 
Focussing on the hand symbol at the mid-brow, one meditates until one is free of laxity and excitement and until one’s mind is conjoined with the bliss of pliancy, both physical and mental, i.e., until one achieves calm abiding. 
The text says when the mind attains stability in this yoga, you should then practise emanation and absorption and so forth. The mind attaining stability means calm abiding is achieved. Only then does one start with the practice of emanation and absorption. 
One trains to develop this skill in concentration. One starts emanating vajras from that vajra hand symbol at the mid-brow. These vajras pervade your body, your abode, the four continents and then go out, pervading the entire three thousand-fold world systems. When you reabsorb the vajras, likewise, you gather all these numberless vajras back into the original vajra. One does the practice of emanation and absorption
without distraction till one develops the special insight observing emptiness. 
When the special insight observing emptiness is achieved, one achieves the yoga without signs.
In one text, it says after reabsorbing all the emanated vajras, the original vajra comes to settle back at your heart or the navel. 
What’s the purpose of moving the vajra down to the heart? When you emanate starting from the heart, that vajra goes up to the mid-brow and then you do the emanation and absorption. At the end, you bring the vajra back down to the heart. I wonder if there’s a purpose for doing this. Perhaps, it may be showing the way and moving the mind in the direction of Highest Yoga Tantra. In Highest Yoga Tantra, it is explained that the extremely subtle wind-mind abides at the heart.
There should be also some connection between this and how all phenomena are said to be the display of the mind, in the nature of mind or established by the mind.
Student 4: Does the practitioner visualize the implement according to the particular deity that’s being practised? Let’s say the deity has a pink lotus. Then you have to use a pink lotus. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 5: Pertaining to the practice of calm abiding, when you are focussing on the vajra at the mid-brow, do you focus solely on the vajra and merge your mind with that or do you still have the clear appearance and divine pride of yourself as the deity?  
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t think one meditates on the latter while forgetting the former. So I don’t think it’s a case of losing whatever clear appearance one has as the deity while meditating on the yoga of the subtle. I don’t think that’s the case.
Student 6: How does performing the emanation and absorption help one to gain the special insight focussing on emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: The emanation and absorption is done after calm abiding is achieved because if it’s done prior to achieving calm abiding, it will be an obstacle to achieving calm abiding. After calm abiding is achieved, one does the practice of emanation and absorption for the purpose of developing skill in concentration. 
From the perspective of it being a wisdom, the special insight observing emptiness is a wisdom of analysis. This analysis is not separated from calm abiding. Rather, it’s done within calm abiding. It’s a mind of investigation and analysis on emptiness using limitless avenues of reasoning. Therefore, training in developing this skill in concentration will help in achieving the special insight observing emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: You can now read the second page of the handout. Are there any questions there? 
Student 7: Yoga without signs occurs at the path of preparation. What happens after that, at the path of seeing and path of meditation?
Khen Rinpoche: What comes after that is still yoga without signs. The path of seeing and the path of meditation are all yoga without signs. 
Student 7: Where do they draw the line?
Khen Rinpoche: I think the root text is very clear about this point though it does not appear in the chart—when you achieve the path of accumulation, when you achieve the path of preparation, the path of seeing and the path of meditation.
Student 7: This thing about the vajras multiplying one by one is like a mental exercise.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. It is a mental exercise within concentration.
Student 7: You have explained before how Samantabhadra emanates 25 Samantabhadras and so forth. That’s quite similar to this. Also this thing about the bones; there was one meditation about the body.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. It’s also like that. 
Student 7: So all these practices originate from tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: They did not originate from tantra. Sutra has such practices also.  The meditation on the environment being filled with skeletons is found in sutra. For those who really meditate on seeing the whole environment filled with skeletons, I 
guess they actually feel or see it that way.
Student 7: You have mentioned that the subtlety of the object also makes the mind more subtle. If I were to look at this the other way round, when I meditate on a very big object, does that make my mind grosser? This small vajra becoming countless vajras, then it is like a mental exercise of expanding the mind to become gross and subtle? When it comes to the meditation on emptiness, technically, emptiness doesn’t have any size whether it’s the emptiness of a very big object or a very small object. So does it really matter whether it’s a sutric way of meditating on emptiness or a tantric way of meditating on emptiness? If it’s only talking about the size (of the object of meditation), why would the mind be subtler based on size of the phenomenon?
Khen Rinpoche: What is your question?
Student 7: When we talk about the subtlety of the mind meditating on the object, it was based on how subtle the object is. If the subtlety of the object is based on just its size, then when it comes to emptiness, emptiness does not have size. It’s a permanent phenomenon. What is the difference then between the emptiness of a house and the emptiness of a small vajra?
Khen Rinpoche: In the previous lesson, when we talked about the mind becoming subtler when the object of observation is subtle, we’re talking about subtle awareness. In this context here, we’re not talking about the extremely subtle wind-mind that’s explained in Highest Yoga Tantra. That’s a completely different matter. 
The very essence of the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra is to achieve this extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. Being very subtle, this extremely subtle mind is not restricted to only realizing the emptiness of something small or realizing only certain things. At the time of the basis, this extremely subtle wind mind doesn’t realize anything. When one progresses on the path, the extremely subtle mind is transformed into the entity of the path. Then it realizes emptiness. This extremely subtle mind at the time of enlightenment being the dharmakaya realizes all phenomena directly.
Student 7: I wasn’t talking about Highest Yoga Tantra. I was just talking about the three lower classes of tantra. We haven’t talk about the subtle wind-mind yet.
Khen Rinpoche: In the context of Yoga Tantra, while we say the mind becomes subtler when the object of observation is small, we’re not talking about it in terms of how it is normally discussed in Highest Yoga Tantra. In fact, when your mind is focussing on a small object of observation, it’s natural for the mind to become more withdrawn. The smaller the object, the more the mind withdraws inwards. So, in that sense, it’s more refined and subtler. With that subtler state of mind, you can use it to realize many objects. It’s that focussed and withdrawn mind that is meditating on the emanation and absorption. 
Student 7:  Even in sutra, it has this thing about a small skeleton becoming big. So it 
 also has this feature for developing a subtler mind. In that sense, this is not really unique to tantra for the three lower classes of tantra.
Khen Rinpoche: It’s possible. In sutra, you can talk about achieving calm abiding and within that, developing the skill in concentration. 
Any questions on (page two of) the handout? 
Student 8: (Referring to page 2 of the Handout). It was mentioned that a sign of the speech having been purified is the “natural appearance of intonation of speech as sound of mantra.” I do not understand this expression. Does it mean that as you speak, you hear your speech as mantra?
Khen Rinpoche: Sorry, I’m very slow. My English is not good enough so I really have to think about what it is that you are asking. 
Yes, that’s it. Your speech becomes mantra.
Student 8: (Referring to page 2 of the Handout). Under Akshobhya, you have the commitment seal of the mind to purify the ordinary mind and to purify anger. Then (under Amitabha) you have the (dharma seal of speech to purify ordinary speech) and to purify ignorance. Normally, when we talk about the mind, the mind is linked with ignorance. So why is it that here, when you meditate on the (dharma seal of speech to achieve the result of the speech of a buddha) it also purifies ignorance and then when you meditate on (the commitment seal of the mind to achieve the result of the mind of a buddha) it is to purify the anger?
Khen Rinpoche: Can somebody give some idea to answer her question? Mainly, she is asking why speech relates to ignorance and why the mind relates to anger. Her question is that. Any idea or suggestion?  
Student 7: Speech is related to Dharma. When you teach the Dharma, Dharma counteracts ignorance. When you are attached to the body, then there is attachment. 
Khen Rinpoche: Perhaps, it has to do with ignorance being eliminated. Ignorance is a state of not knowing. So when you eliminate somebody’s ignorance by teaching him or her the Dharma, that Dharma is delivered with speech. Perhaps, this is the connection. 
As mentioned in the Praise of Dependent Origination, among the four activities of the Buddha, the supreme activity is the enlightened activity of speech. Speech is able to eliminate the misunderstandings in the minds of sentient beings and it is speech that’s able to cause them to generate wisdom. It is speech that delivers the instructions on what are to be abandoned and what are to be cultivated. It cannot be done with the body nor can it be done with the mind. 
REVIEW—YOGA TANTRA
As mentioned in the previous class, in the root tantra, the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas is divided into four chapters.  We also talked about the factor of purification of the five aggregates appearing as the deity.
The first chapter of the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas talks primarily about the meditation on Vairochana. Vairochana is the factor of purification of the aggregate of form appearing as the deity.
The second chapter of the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas talks primarily about the meditation on Akshobhya. Akshobhya is the factor of purification of the aggregate of consciousness appearing as the deity.
The third chapter of the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas talks primarily about the meditation on Amitabha. Amitabha is the factor of the purifi-
cation of the aggregate of discrimination appearing as the deity. 
The fourth chapter of the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas talks primarily about the meditation on Amoghasiddhi. Amoghasiddhi is the factor of purification of the aggregate of compositional factors appearing as the deity. 
The fourth chapter also talks about the meditation on the path with respect to Ratnasambhava. Ratnasambhava is the factor of purification of the aggregate of feelings appearing as the deity. 
These five buddha lineages (or the five buddha types) will be mentioned again in the section on Highest Yoga Tantra. The point here is that the factors of purification of the five aggregates appear as the five buddha lineages. How did they originate? Essentially, what you have to remember is that they are the factors of purification of the five aggregates appearing as the deity. That’s how you get the five buddha lineages. 
How to establish the siddhis
Fourth, it is said … fire pūjās. (p. 66)
Here, it’s said the siddhis are accomplished through these three practices:
absorption 
recitation 
fire pujas
Absorption refers to having achieved the union of calm abiding and special insight. On the basis of having that kind of yoga, concentration and realization, one can achieve any siddhis. If not, one depends on recitation and burnt offerings, i.e., the fire puja. 
When one achieves mastery over subtle concentration, without needing to depend on recitation, by that concentration alone, one can achieve both the common and the supreme siddhis.
As I mentioned earlier, having achieved calm abiding by focussing on the yoga of the subtle, when one’s calm abiding is stable, one does the practice of emanation and absorption for the purpose of developing skill in concentration. 
When one achieves the special insight focussing on emptiness with that kind of concentration, one has developed mastery over subtle concentration. Then one can achieve any of the siddhis, both common and supreme by concentration alone. That kind of absorption doesn’t need to depend on recitation or burnt offerings.
Does that mean people who do not have such mastery over concentration have no hope of attaining the siddhis? It’s not like that. They still can achieve some of the siddhis by depending on recitation and burnt offerings.
Mantric Stages states …
… 
… the great seal of their deity’s body . . . (p. 66)
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what they’re talking about? I don’t understand it myself. That’s why I’m asking you. I thought maybe the translation into English is easier to understand sometimes. Some Tibetan words are difficult to understand. You don’t have any idea of what it is saying? I also have no idea! 
It is said here “that the best siddhis is that of the supreme disciples of yoga tantra may first accomplish” are, for example, directly seeing the deity or accomplishing the knowledge mantra. 
I’m not sure what “holding the knowledge mantra” means. Perhaps, it means one has the accomplishment of reciting the deity’s mantra to the point whereby just by doing that, you can accomplish the four activities of pacification, increase, controlling and wrath. 
Perhaps “obtaining the form of the great seal of the deity’s body” means achieving the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity with respect to the tantra of a Yoga Tantra deity being practiced. 
. . . and in action and performance tantras, … the great siddhi of the body. (p. 66) 
“The siddhi of the knowledge-bearer” I guess refers to achieving the life knowledge-bearer siddhi, a kind of longevity. 
How the supreme siddhi is obtained
The Great Commentary to the Kālacakra …
…
… the generation and completion stages. (p. 67)
“The supreme siddhi” is enlightenment. In order to accomplish enlightenment in the context of the three lower tantras, that must be done in reliance on having previously accomplished the worldly siddhis first. But this is not the case with Highest Yoga Tantra because in Highest Yoga Tantra, enlightenment can be achieved just by “uninterruptedly meditating on the generation and completion stages” without relying on the worldly siddhis. This is stated in the Great Commentary to the Kalacakra.
Khen Rinpoche: Did you read this section? If you have read it and you have questions, something you don’t understand, ask. 
Also Mantric Stages states:
…
… uncommon siddhis. (p. 67) 
This is saying in the three lower classes of tantra, through meditating on the yoga with signs and yoga without signs, you achieve the common siddhis. It is through the power of having the common siddhis the practitioner progresses from ground to ground, i.e., he moves from the lower to the higher ground in dependence upon the  
common and uncommon siddhis.
You must understand …
… 
… in a single practice. (p. 67)
What this is saying is just by depending this alone—“combining wind yoga, recitation yoga, empty yoga, and deity yoga in a single practice”—you cannot assert that to be the mode of progression from ground to ground. Rather, it’s by depending on the common and uncommon siddhis. Why is this the case? The author cites scriptural authority. 
Why common siddhis must precede the supreme siddhi in the three lower tantras
The reason why …
… 
… are for the purpose of wisdom. (p. 68)
It’s saying in the Bodhicaryavatara, the first five perfections are practised for the purpose of making the wisdom realizing emptiness powerful.
Thus in both systems …  the wisdom realizing emptiness. (p. 68)
What enhances the wisdom realizing emptiness? It is the factor of method. This is the case in both systems of the Mahayana, the Paramitayana and the Vajrayana. 
According to the Perfection Vehicle, … 
…
… obscurations to knowledge. (p.69)
The wisdom directly realizing emptiness is present in the hearers, solitary realizers and bodhisattvas. Why can’t the wisdom directly realizing emptiness of the hearers and solitary realizers help them to achieve full enlightenment whereas the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continua of the bodhisattvas can do so? The difference lies in the factor of method. The hearers and solitary realizers do not possess the factor of method, bodhicitta.
Why this is not necessary in the case of highest yoga tantra
According to highest yoga mantra, … 
…
… as the path. (p. 69)
Here, they are talking about the practice of taking desire as the path, especially in Highest Yoga Tantra. The whole point is to manifest the extremely subtle mind, using that to realize emptiness. This extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness is very powerful and can get rid of the knowledge obscurations. This is the special feature of Highest Yoga Tantra that makes it very powerful in achieving enlightenment quickly. 
We have talked about the Perfection Vehicle. We have talked about Highest Yoga Tantra. What about the three lower classes of tantras? 
In the three lower tantras …
…
…  blessed by buddhas and higher bodhisattvas. (p. 70)
This is the answer to how it’s done in the three lower classes of tantras. As mentioned earlier in the text, in the three lower classes of tantras, the practitioners achieve the common siddhis. With the common siddhis, they are able to directly perceive the buddhas, hear their speech and be directly blessed by them. This makes their wisdom directly realizing emptiness powerful. This is how they progress from ground to ground on the path to enlightenment.
In the three lower classes of tantras, they do not talk about manifesting the extremely subtle mind, transforming that into the entity of the path and moving with that to the path to enlightenment. There is no such discussion in the lower tantras.
The next chapter on the grounds and paths is essentially the same (as what we have covered). It’s just some slight differences due to the assertions of different colleges. Other than that, in essence, it’s pretty much the same.
In short, in the lower classes of tantras, what accounts for the mode of progression from ground to ground and then towards enlightenment? What makes it quick? What makes the practitioner’s wisdom directly realizing emptiness become stronger and stronger to overcome the different levels of obscurations? This is basically done on the basis of the achievement of the common siddhis that allows them to make such progress. So, this is the essential answer given by Choje Ngawang Palden, the author of this particular salam, citing quotations from the Mantric Stages.
Khen Rinpoche: Hopefully, we can start on Highest Yoga Tantra in the next class. 
Student 4: Just to clarify about the time taken to achieve enlightenment based on the three lower classes of tantras as compared to the one lifetime in Highest Yoga Tantra. Khen Rinpoche explained that one can attain enlightenment in the (three lower classes of tantra) after seven to 16 lifetimes. Because of these siddhis that they practice in the lower tantras, they can achieve longevity. So with regard to the seven or 16 lifetimes, is that on the basis of this special attainment of having a very long life, counting that as one lifetime?  Or do those lifetimes refer to the normal human lifetime? 
Khen Rinpoche: It’s clear in Highest Yoga Tantra one can achieve enlightenment in one brief lifetime in this degenerate age in one body, i.e., the human body. 
In the three lower classes of tantras, you achieve the common siddhis, such as the great siddhi of immortality that bestows a very long lifetime. In that one lifetime, you achieve enlightenment. So that one lifetime could be for a very long period of time. 
The question here this: Is there such a thing as achieving enlightenment in one body in the lower classes of tantra? This is something to think about. Probably, we may have to say that in the three lower classes of tantra, you can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime but not in one body. That’s my answer. You can think about that and see how that works. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong. (Handout & extra chart from Master’s Program attached below).
HANDOUT—PAGE 1
HANDOUT—PAGE 2
Source: Master’s Program, Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa