Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L28FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.524825
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 28	 				                                             18 July 2017
Review. Root text, p. 69—79. Why this is not necessary in the case of highest yoga tantra. Points of debate. Defining the shared path. The purpose of generating blissful consciousness. The purpose of the three types of bliss. Do we need to amass merit for three countless eons in the lower tantras? Is enlightenment possible in one life and one body? Chapter Four: Grounds and Paths. How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of action tantra. The path of accumulation. 
REVIEW 
In the Perfection Vehicle, essentially it is the method, bodhicitta, that empowers the wisdom directly realizing emptiness to act as the antidote to the knowledge obscurations. However, in Highest Yoga Tantra, the idea is to manifest the extremely subtle mind and transform it into the entity of the path. Here, it requires using desire as the path. The whole point is to induce bliss and causing that bliss to ascertain emptiness. With that special consciousness, the yogi removes the knowledge obscurations.
As for the meaning of taking desire as the path, I think I have mentioned before, I don’t think it means attachment or desire itself transforming into the entity of the path. Rather taking desire as the path means to manifest the wisdom of great bliss, the extremely subtle mind and causing that mind of great bliss to ascertain emptiness.
While this is the case for Highest Yoga Tantra, the mode of progression on the grounds is not like that in the three lower classes of tantra. We see this in the last section of (Chapter Three) in the root text.  
In the three lower classes of tantra …
… 
… blessed by buddhas and higher bodhisattvas.  (p. 70)
It is through this that they progress on the grounds.
You have to understand and remember what makes the wisdom directly realizing emptiness powerful enough to act as an antidote to the knowledge obscurations in the Perfection Vehicle, the three lower classes of tantra and in Highest Yoga Tantra.  
Khen Rinpoche: Is that clear? If somebody were to ask, then you must know how to answer. According to sutra, why is it powerful? It is because of this, this and this. According to the three lower classes of tantra, why is it powerful? Because of this, this and this.  According to Highest Yoga Tantra, (it is powerful) because of this, this and this. You must be able to answer.   
Points of debate
Defining the shared path
One scholar says: …
…
… both Mahāyāna vehicles.
Reply: That is not logically necessary …
…
…  Illuminating Lamp. (p. 71)
The reason why this qualm is raised is because in the preceding paragraphs, it’s stated that in the Perfection Vehicle, the trainee needs to train for a long period of time “in limitless distinct forms of generosity and so on” (p. 69).  But in the three lower classes of tantra, this is not necessarily so. This is what the author said prior to this qualm being raised. 
The author addresses the qualm in his reply stated above. The author is saying bodhicitta and the general need to train in the six perfections is a path shared with the Perfection Vehicle and Mantra. However, the author is saying that training “in limitless distinct forms of generosity and so on is different from the path of mantra.”  This means in Mantra, there’s no need to engage “in limitless distinct forms of generosity and so on” because that’s the feature of the Perfection Vehicle. 
In short, the answer to the qualm is this. Bodhicitta and having to train in the six perfections in general is a shared path. It is something that’s common to both the Perfection Vehicle and Secret Mantra. But having to train “for an incalculable period in limitless distinct forms of generosity and so on” is a peculiar feature of the Perfection Vehicle and not Secret Mantra.
Another qualm is brought up. 
The purpose of generating blissful consciousness
One says: It cannot be asserted …
…
… the special awareness realizing emptiness. (p. 72)
The reason for this qualm is due to the earlier statement made by the author: 
According to highest yoga mantra, … 
…
…  the union of the two sexual organs as the path. (p. 69) 
The author also made this statement: 
Instead you must strengthen …
…
… blessed by buddhas and higher bodhisattvas. (p. 70)
Prior to this, the author said:
… nor is it said … according to highest yoga mantra. (p. 70) 
The objection is raised as stated above. 
The author asserts it is not necessarily so. The essence of the author’s reply is this: In the three lower classes of tantra, there is the practice of taking desire as the path but it is not for the purpose of generating the special awareness realizing emptiness.
This is why the author replies in this way:
Reply: The latter part of the reason … a feature of highest yoga tantra alone … (p. 72)
His answer is that taking desire as the path for the purpose of generating the special awareness realizing emptiness is a feature only of Highest Yoga Tantra. He cites the Lamp Illuminating the Five Levels of Guhyasamaja: 
Taking desire … other than highest yoga tantra.  (p. 72)
The person who raised the earlier qualm then replies to the author's answer by raising this point:
The purpose of the three types of bliss
One says: It follows that … the special awareness realizing emptiness. (p. 75)
The author’s reply:
Reply: This should be analyzed… they do function in this way. (p. 75)
The reason why there are four classes of Buddhist tantra is because there are four ways in which desire is taken as a path. Having said that, if you think about it, the whole point of taking desire as a path and producing that consciousness that comes about as a result of taking desire into the path, you will probably have to say those consciousnesses do comprehend emptiness. Probably, you will have to give this answer. The point of taking desire as the path in the four classes of tantra is to produce the blissful consciousness. That bliss does comprehend emptiness.
You also have to say in the three lower classes of tantra, the point of taking desire into the path is not for the purpose of generating a special awareness that comprehends emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: You have to keep this in mind. Otherwise, you will be confused by what I am talking about.
Is there taking desire as the path in the lower classes of tantra? Yes. 
When desire is taken as the path, is bliss produced? Yes. 
Does that bliss comprehend emptiness? Yes. 
Then someone may say, “Therefore, the purpose of taking desire as the path in the lower classes of tantra is to produce the bliss that comprehends emptiness.”  
In the three lower classes of tantra, the purpose of taking desire as the path is to produce bliss. Does that bliss comprehends emptiness? You have to say, “Yes!” 
Does the bliss generated as a result of taking desire as the path in the three lower classes of tantra comprehend and realize emptiness? You have to say, “Yes!” 
Is the purpose of taking desire as the path in the three lower classes of tantra to generate the special awareness realizing emptiness? The answer is no! 
In the final analysis, it boils down to the special awareness realizing emptiness. It is determined by what you understand by that. In short, the special awareness realizing emptiness is the extremely subtle mind that transforms into the entity of the path. That is not taught in the three lower classes of tantra. Therefore, it is said that in the three lower classes of tantra, the purpose of taking desire as the path is not for the purpose of generating the special awareness realizing emptiness.
This is why there’s a quotation from Je Rinpoche’s Lamp Illuminating the Five Levels of Guhyasamaja: 
Taking desire for pleasurable objects … highest yoga tantra. (p. 72)
In other words, generating a special awareness realizing emptiness is a feature of Highest Yoga Tantra alone. If that’s the case, then this special awareness realizing emptiness can be taken to mean the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. 
Ven Gyurme: There may be a difference in the editions of the Tibetan text for there seems to be one paragraph missing.
Khen Rinpoche: My text also doesn’t have this paragraph. It may be missing. I will have to check another text. 
Imagining that this is not a qualm and therefore it’s not a reply.  Next is the quotation from Mantric Stages:
Reply: That is not logically necessary … 
… 
… through taking desire as the path. (p. 76)
In the three lower classes of tantra, there is the practice of taking desire as the path.  Through that, you generate the bliss from observing (or gazing), smiling and holding hands. This is done in relation to a visualized object. It’s not an actual person but a visualized object such as a goddess.
Do we need to amass merit for three countless eons in the lower tantras?
Again one says: …
…
… for countless eons. (p. 77)
Khen Rinpoche:  What are they saying? What is the qualm? What is the answer?
The question is this: In order to achieve enlightenment in the three lower classes of tantra, do you need to accumulate the collections for three countless eons? 
Khen Rinpoche: The text is asking that question. What are you going to say? What do you think the text is saying?
Seeing what is in front of you, is enlightenment possible in the three lower classes of tantra without depending on accumulating the collections for three countless eons? 
Khen Rinpoche: What is the author saying? I’m asking everyone. I’m not asking one person. When you read the text, you get some idea, right? What is the text saying? You understand it’s possible or not possible? 
(Students’ responses are inaudible).
Khen Rinpoche: When you read the text, is that what the text is saying? So I am asking: In the three lower classes of tantra, in order to get enlightened, do you need to practice for three countless eons or not? The text is saying what? Yes or no?
(Student’s response is inaudible). 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know how you read the text! The text is not saying that. I just want to know how you read the text. That’s the point. 
Student 1: The text says, “they are not said to enable enlightenment in a single lifetime or forego the need to accumulate merit and wisdom for countless eons.” This means they have to accumulate merit and wisdom for countless eons.
Khen Rinpoche: Is that what the text is saying? 
(Discussion amongst students themselves. Inaudible). 
The author is saying in the three lower classes of tantra, although the progress towards enlightenment is faster than the Perfection Vehicle, it is also not contradictory to say that such an enlightenment in the lower classes of tantra must depend on accumulating the collections for three countless eons. 
Khen Rinpoche: This is what the text is saying. 
You can see this in his answer. The author says that there is no pervasion.
Reply: That is not logically necessary …  for countless eons. (p. 77)
The author states in the three lower classes of tantra, they are not said to enable enlightenment in a single lifetime.
This leads to the question: Does enlightenment in one life exist in the lower classes of tantra? 
You have to remember what was said in the earlier section. In the lower classes of tantra, you will achieve common siddhis such as the siddhi of immortality. With that long life, then you achieve enlightenment. 
In the Action Tantra and Performance Tantra sections, we saw that you achieve the siddhi of immortality (or the life knowledge bearer) whereby you live for many eons.  Through that, you achieve enlightenment so there is enlightenment in one lifetime, isn’t it?
Student 2: The siddhis are achieved after one has culminated the absorption bestowing freedom at the limit of sound. This means before that, for that yogi from the point of entering the path to achieving the absorption bestowing freedom at the limit of sound is also within one body and within one life. 
Khen Rinpoche: You can say that is one life. 
Student 2: This means from entering the path up to that point, he has yet to achieve the siddhi of longevity, the life knowledge bearer. If that is the case, then he must achieve the absorption bestowing freedom at the limit of sound or achieve the siddhis quickly within that life before dying because he has not achieved the siddhi of the life knowledge bearer.  
Khen Rinpoche: Before entering the path, he must practice quickly and achieve the siddhis. Otherwise, what will happen if he dies quickly? I’m just saying that.
Student 2: My understanding is that achieving enlightenment within one lifetime is at
the point of entering the path. We start counting from there.
Khen Rinpoche: Not necessarily so. 
Student 2: How then do we start counting the three countless eons? To achieve enlightenment in the three lower classes of tantra normally takes three countless  
great eons. I’m not sure exactly what figure that is. 
Khen Rinpoche: Basically, you can say one achieves enlightenment with the basis that one has achieved on the path of preparation onwards. We start from the path of preparation.
Student 2: So it’s not from the point of entering the path? 
Khen Rinpoche: No. That’s not necessarily so. I don’t know. This can be debated. 
If you look at the author’s reply to this particular qualm, he’s saying in the three lower classes of tantra, there is no enlightenment in one lifetime and the enlightenment in the three lower classes of tantra is dependent on accumulating collections for countless eons. 
Mantric Stages states:
The feature of highest yoga tantra …
…
…  accumulating merit and wisdom for countless eons. (p. 77)
Is enlightenment possible in one life and one body?
And:
You do not accomplish buddhahood … unique, highest path of mantra. (p.77)
If somebody were to say to you, “In fact, there’s no enlightenment in one lifetime in the three lower classes of tantra,” how are you going to respond? This is what the author is saying. 
Khen Rinpoche: First, you must guess. Then when I give the answer, it makes sense. First, you must get what my question is. What are you going to say?
(Response from student is inaudible). 
Basically, you answer like this: It is said that achieving enlightenment in one life in this age of conflict is a feature of only Highest Yoga Tantra. If you take the earlier statement by the author where he said the three lower classes of tantra are not said to enable enlightenment in one single lifetime, you can argue that the single lifetime here refers to one brief lifetime of the degenerate age. Then you have no problem. 
You need to look at the quotation he cited from Mantric Stages: 
Do not assume … for countless eons. (p. 77)
According to the respective assertions and presentations of their own path, the three
lower classes of tantra assert that enlightenment is possible in their system and one’s does it in one lifetime on the basis of achieving the siddhi of immortality. Whether this is true or not is a different matter. 
In the three lower classes of tantra, is enlightenment achieved by depending on accumulating the collections for three countless eons? Yes! While that’s the case, that need not be done over many lifetimes. Rather, it can be achieved on the basis of achieving the siddhi of immortality whereby one can live for a long period of time. One then achieves enlightenment in that lifetime.
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is all there. The (explanation of the) two sentences are all finished! 
Student 2: According to this assertion, let’s say the yogi achieves the life knowledge bearer of immortality on the basis of the human support and he goes on to achieve enlightenment. But that takes three countless great eons on planet earth. Planet earth cannot survive that long because there will be the age of destruction.
Khen Rinpoche: Why?
Student 2: According to Buddhist cosmology, there is the eon of destruction. Planet earth with all the humans on it cannot survive the eon of destruction. How do they survive the three countless great eons in one human body?
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody come up and answer that question. Come. Come. 
(Response from student is inaudible). 
In the Perfection Vehicle, the body of the bodhisattva on the path of preparation is true suffering. It’s possible to have a human being who has achieved the supreme mundane quality of the path of preparation going on to achieve the path of seeing in the same body. When you achieve the path of seeing, you gain a special mind and your body transforms into the mental body. This comes down to whether this mental body needs to abide in an environment that we are used to.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what I am saying? One way is like that. You can think of it that way.
Student 2: So that’s the explanation of one life and two bodies, i.e., achieving enlightenment within one lifetime on the basis of two bodies—the human support and after achieving the arya path, somehow you transform into a mental body, leaving the human support behind and going somewhere else.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. The idea is something like that. 
According to the sutric system, when you achieve the mental body, you undergo the inconceivable transference of death.  You have true suffering. Then when you achieve the path of seeing, you have the mental body. 
Are they two different bodies? Yes. 
Is it one life? 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Is it one life with different bodies or the same body in one life? One doesn’t have to die to achieve the path of seeing. So I’m saying that within meditation, one achieves the path of seeing. One’s body changes. One becomes sixteen years old when before one was eighty years old!
What do you think? Is it the same body or a different body? 
One is true suffering. One is not true suffering. So one is uncontaminated. 
If you say they are different bodies, then what I’ve said is OK. Different bodies, one life is OK.
In sutra, after one has achieved the mental body on the path of seeing, enlightenment is not achieved in one’s lifetime because one undergoes the inconceivable transference of death. 
On the path of seeing, one achieves the superior path and the mental body. If you are talking about sutra, the mental body is subject to the inconceivable transference of death that is included within the twelve links of dependent origination and belongs to the knowledge obscurations. The mental body is a product of the level of the predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma.
In the three lower classes of tantra, you achieve the siddhi of immortality. Within that one long life, you achieve enlightenment. That long life is not subject to the inconceivable transference of death. I remember reading somewhere there is enlightenment in one life but not in one body in the three lower classes of tantra. 
But you have to remember that one of the features of achieving enlightenment in the three lower classes of tantra is similar in manner to achieving enlightenment in the Perfection Vehicle. This means you have to assert that in the three lower classes of tantra, the place where you newly achieved enlightenment is Akanishta. 
We have to think about this: In the three lower classes of tantra, after achieving the mental body, does the individual go to Akanishta? In that life, does he achieve enlightenment or not?
So when you put everything together, you have to say there is enlightenment in one lifetime in the three lower classes of tantra but not enlightenment in one body. Although there’s enlightenment in one lifetime in the three lower classes of tantra, there is no enlightenment in one brief lifetime of the degenerated age.
Student 2: I remembered someone asking for those who achieve enlightenment in seven or 16 lifetimes after keeping the vows purely then dying, whether this was before or after entering the path. Khen Rinpoche’s reply was—it is better to say that it is before entering the path.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes? 
Student 2:  I got the idea that that means when you enter the path, you don’t need to take 7 or 16 lifetimes to achieve enlightenment. You only take one lifetime. So, for me, the conclusion is that the time it takes to achieve enlightenment within one lifetime starts upon entering the path and not from the path of preparation onwards. That was my conclusion. The point is to answer how you can achieve enlightenment within 7 to 16 lifetimes. When does it start? The reply was before entering the path.
Khen Rinpoche: Primarily, the context here is that in Highest Yoga Tantra, we are talking about tantric vows. It may also be possible in Yoga Tantra but let’s say we are talking mainly from the point of Highest Yoga Tantra. 
The teachings say that once you have received the vows, from then on, it takes about 7 or 16 lifetimes. The point is it is said it is from the time you take the vows. It doesn’t say from the time you enter the path. 
It is said that after you have received the vows and keep the vows and samaya purely, then within that stipulated time, you will achieve enlightenment. This means you don’t have to start counting only after entering the path.
Whether or not such this is the case for Action Tantra or not is something we can think about. 
You may say, yes, it’s possible even in Action Tantra when you generate the bodhicitta that is spoken of in Action Tantra. With that bodhicitta, you enter the Action Tantra path. Prior to that you already taken the bodhisattva vows. You can argue that if you keep the bodhisattva vows purely, then you can achieve enlightenment in x number of lifetimes. That’s their own system. They can say whatever they like. Whatever is asserted by the individual system is not necessarily  the reality but they can make their own assertions,  
It’s not clear, but let’s say they assert, “According to the path of Action Tantra, if you take the bodhisattva vows purely, then within a certain amount of lifetimes, you can actually achieve enlightenment.” Will there be anything wrong with that?
CHAPTER FOUR: GROUNDS AND PATHS
How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of action tantra
The path of accumulation
First, the path of accumulation … 
…
… bestowing freedom at the limit of sound.” (p. 79)
So, please think about the words, “derived from meditating.”
We will read this in the next class.
The implication is that it makes a difference as to where the boundary lies between the yoga with signs and the yoga without signs. Will the absorption bestowing freedom at limit of sound necessarily become a yoga without signs or not? 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.