Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L38FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.091945
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson     38                                                              5
September 2017


Review (of Lesson 37). Ordinary death:  The  human  being  of  the  Southern
Continent possessing the six constituents.   The  winds,  the  channels  and
the indestructible drop. The two truths of  the  basis,  the  path  and  the
result.


REVIEW

What does the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra consist  of?  It  consists  of
the two paths—the generation stage and the completion stage.

The definition of the generation stage is:

      A yoga that matures the mental continuum …
      …
      … the three stages of birth, death, and the  intermediate  state.  (p.
      100)

As I mentioned in the last lesson, the generation stage  is  defined  as  “a
yoga that does not arise  from  causing  the  winds  to  enter,  abide,  and
dissolve in the central channel.” In order to  understand  that,  first,  we
must have an idea of what the winds entering the central channel means.

Likewise, since the generation stage is the  yoga  that  meditates  on  “any
aspect related to the three stages of birth,  death,  and  the  intermediate
state,” in order to understand what this meditation entails, first, we  must
understand what ordinary rebirth, ordinary death and  ordinary  intermediate
state are.

As I also mentioned earlier, before we can start to gain some idea what  the
generation stage  and  completion  stage  are,  first,  we  must  have  some
understanding of the presentation of the three bodies:
 • the three bodies of the basis (or the three bodies that are the basis  of
   purification)
 • the three bodies of the path (or the three bodies that are the paths that
   purify)
 • the three bodies of the result (or the three bodies that are the  results
   of purification)
Whether we call them the three bodies of the basis or the three bodies  that
are the basis of purification, essentially, the three  are  ordinary  death,
ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth.

The important point here is the practice to eliminate ordinary death.
 • If ordinary death is not eliminated, you will not be  able  to  eliminate
   the intermediate state.
 • If the intermediate state exists, then rebirth will happen.
The methods for doing so are the meditations on  the  generation  stage  and
the completion stage.

The  question  may  arise:  Is  the  meditation  on  the  generation   stage
meditation really able to overcome  ordinary  death,  ordinary  intermediate
state and ordinary rebirth? The answer is no. Nevertheless,  the  meditation
of the generation stage is a method for overcoming these three.

The meditation of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya
At the beginning of the generation stage practice, there is  the  meditation
on the aspect that is concordant with ordinary death. Essentially,  this  is
the meditation on emptiness and is the practice of taking death as the  path
of the dharmakaya, i.e., the meditation on the  aspect  that  is  concordant
with death.

This is one of the essential  points  of  the  practice  of  the  generation
stage. When someone says he or she is practising the generation stage,  this
is the essential point of the practice. It starts with taking death  as  the
path of the dharmakaya, the meditation on  the  aspect  that  is  concordant
with ordinary death. This is crucial. During the generation stage, when  one
meditates on taking  death  as  the  path  of  the  dharmakaya,  it  is  the
meditation on emptiness.

This  practice  is  a  yoga  that  matures  the  mental  continuum  for  the
completion stage.  How is this so?  It is preparing the mind to be  able  to
realize emptiness with the extremely subtle mind on  the  completion  stage.
This is one of the ways in which the generation stage practice  matures  the
mind for the completion stage.

The generation stage yoga basically is at the level of imagination and make-
believe. Nevertheless, it acts as a ripener of the mental continuum for  the
completion stage.  Such a meditation on the  generation  stage—specifically,
taking death  as  the  path  of  the  dharmakaya—ripens  the  mind  for  the
completion  stage.  During  the  completion  stage,  there   will   come   a
time—specifically, during the final mental isolation—when one generates  the
example clear light.

When one is able to manifest the extremely subtle mind,  causing  that  mind
to realize emptiness, this is the result  that  comes  from  what  has  been
imagined to have occurred when one was practising the generation stage.

When the yogi reaches the final mental isolation, he  achieves  the  example
clear light,
i.e., the extremely subtle mind realizing emptiness. For that person,  there
is no more death as he has overcome ordinary death.

This example clear light that is achieved during the final mental  isolation
is the actual path that purifies  ordinary  death.  The  meditation  on  the
aspect that is concordant with  ordinary  death,  i.e.,  the  practice  done
during the generation stage, is just a ripener for the completion stage.  At
the time of the generation stage, as the meditation is at the  level  of  an
imagined visualization, ordinary death is not purified.

The three practices that are posited to be the path that  purifies  ordinary
death are:
 • the meditation on the aspect  that  is  concordant  with  ordinary  death
   during the generation stage
 • the example clear light of the final mental isolation
 • the fourth level meaning clear light
These three are posited as the path of the dharmakaya.

For now, you just have to remember that these three  practices  are  posited
as the path of the dharmakaya. As to what they really are, this will  become
clearer progressively as we go through the text, particularly when we  reach
the completion stage. Only then will you have an idea of  what  exactly  the
final mental isolation, example clear light, the meaning clear light and  so
forth are.  But for now, just memorize these three points.

For you to have some little understanding now, just note  that  the  example
clear light of the final mental isolation is the extremely subtle mind  that
realizes emptiness. But  this  mind  does  not  realize  emptiness  directly
whereas the fourth stage meaning clear light is the  extremely  subtle  mind
that realizes  emptiness  directly.  This  is  the  difference  between  the
example clear light and the meaning clear light.

The meditation  of  taking  the  intermediate  state  as  the  path  of  the
sambhogakaya
In the generation stage, after the practice of taking death as the  path  of
the dharmakaya, the next essential point  is  the  practice  of  taking  the
intermediate state as the path of the sambhogakaya.

Taking the Vajrabhairava  tantra  as  an  example.  At  this  point  of  the
practice, one arises as Manjughosha. This may not be so clear  if  you  were
to look at  the  extremely  abbreviated  self-generation  of  Vajrabhairava.
However, if you refer to the extensive practice of  the  self-generation  of
Vajrabhairava, these practices—taking death as the path of  the  dharmakaya,
taking the intermediate state  as  the  path  of  the  sambhogakaya  and  so
forth—are clearly specified.

How does this practice of taking the intermediate state as the path  of  the
sambhogakaya during the generation stage ripen the mind for  the  completion
stage?  This meditation acts as the condition for ripening the  mind  during
the completion stage when the yogi arises from the example clear light  into
the impure illusory body.
The accomplishment of the impure illusory body that occurs  after  the  yogi
has risen from the example clear light is the result  that  happens  due  to
this meditation done earlier during the generation stage, i.e., in terms  of
the Vajrabhairava practice, arising as Manjughosha.

The impure illusory body arises from within the example clear  light.  As  I
mentioned earlier, the  example  clear  light  is  the  path  that  actually
purifies ordinary death. Once the example clear light is achieved, there  is
no more ordinary death for the individual. As  such,  for  that  individual,
there is also no ordinary intermediate state. What comes  in  place  of  the
intermediate state is this impure illusory body that is concordant with  the
intermediate state. So this impure illusory body is the path  that  actually
purifies the intermediate state. This impure illusory body is a very  subtle
body. Its substantial cause is the extremely subtle wind that is  the  mount
of the example clear light. If you posit this in  terms  of  the  completion
stage, this impure illusory body is the sambhogakaya of the path.

As the yogi progresses on the path, after the impure illusory body, he  will
achieve the fourth stage meaning clear light. This meaning  clear  light  is
also posited as the dharmakaya of the path. Arising from the  meaning  clear
light,  the  yogi  achieves  the  pure  illusory  body  that  is   also   an
uncontaminated body.  This  pure  illusory  body  is  also  posited  as  the
sambhogakaya of the path.

The meditation of taking rebirth as the path of the nirmanakaya
Back to the generation stage. The third essential point of the  practice  of
the generation stage is the practice of taking ordinary rebirth as the  path
of the  nirmanakaya.  Essentially,  one  arises  from  Manjughosha  and  one
changes into Vajrabhairava with nine faces, 34 arms and  16  legs.   If  you
look at the extensive self-generation rite, there is a detailed  description
of these aspects of Vajrabhairava.

If you are talking  about  this  in  terms  of  the  generation  stage,  the
meditation of Vajrabhairava that is taking the ordinary rebirth as the  path
of the nirmanakaya, this is posited as the nirmanakaya of the path.

This generation stage practice is a ripener for  some  achievements  of  the
completion stage.

It is said that one cannot do extensive work for sentient  beings  with  the
impure illusory body alone. The physical body is the result of karma.  Since
the connection of the impure illusory body with the  physical  body  as  its
basis (or support) has not been
severed, this impure illusory body enters the physical  body,  its  support,
again. Therefore, this impure illusory body  is  said  to  take  hold  of  a
coarser body. It is then able to do  extensive  work  for  sentient  beings.
This impure illusory body entering into the old physical body  that  is  its
basis is posited as the emanation body (or nirmanakaya) of the path.

Since the illusory bodies are extremely subtle bodies, as such, they  cannot
be seen by most people. In order to  benefit  others,  the  illusory  bodies
need to inhabit a coarser form.

If you were talking about the pure illusory body,  it  can  either  enter  a
physical body
that is its basis or another body. So  the  pure  illusory  body  can  enter
another body as well and  hold  that  coarse  body.  Anyway,  this  is  also
posited as the emanation body of the path.

This is how we posit the emanation body of the path time.

For now, just hold on to this. Memorize and remember this. Later on  in  the
future, it will become clearer. Now is not the time to  ask  the  what,  how
and why.

These are the three bodies of the path time that eliminate the three  bodies
of the basis time.

When the completion stage is culminated, one  achieves  the  bodies  of  the
resultant time.
 • One achieves the body of unification that possesses the seven branches of
   unification. This is the complete enjoyment body (or sambhogakaya).
 • The wisdom of the non-dual bliss and emptiness in the  continuum  is  the
   wisdom truth body (or dharmakaya).
 • The complete enjoyment body is the basis of emanation for the  multitudes
   of emanation bodies emanated to work for sentient beings.  Generally,  we
   say that the four bodies of a buddha are actualized simultaneously. If we
   are talking about the supreme emanation body, the supreme emanation  body
   issues forth from the complete  enjoyment  body  that  is  its  basis  of
   emanation.

So, remember the terminologies:
 • the three bodies that are the basis of purification
 • the three bodies that are the paths that purify
 • the three bodies that are the results of purification
Another way of phrasing them are:
 • the three bodies of the basis time
 • the three bodies of the path time
 • the three bodies of the resultant time
You must be able to identify and say what they are.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you able to do that? If you have any  questions  so  far,
(ask). I have already talked about this in  the  last  class.  Today,  I  am
repeating. Do you understand?  Are  you  getting  some  idea  or  not?  It’s
difficult or not difficult?

You should get a rough idea what the three bodies of the  basis  time,  path
time and result time are. But your ability to understand all  of  that  will
be based on how well  you  understand  the  basis  of  purification—ordinary
death, ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth.

Without understanding these  three,  there  is  no  way  to  understand  the
generation stage, much less practise it. Since the generation stage  is  the
meditation on aspects that is concordant with  these  three—ordinary  death,
ordinary intermediate state and ordinary rebirth—before you can meditate  on
the  aspects  concordant  these  three,  you  must  know   what   they   are
individually. Specifically, what is ordinary death?  What  is  the  ordinary
intermediate state? What is ordinary rebirth?

In order to understand ordinary death, first, we must understand the  stages
of dissolution related to the death process.

ORDINARY DEATH

The human being of the Southern Continent possessing the six constituents
We have talked about the four periods that make up an eon:
 • the period of formation
 • the period of abiding
 • the period of disintegration
 • the empty period

In the Abhidharmakosa, there  is  an  explanation  of  how  our  world,  the
Southern Continent, came into being and after its formation, how  the  first
human beings came into being. The Abhidharmakosa says that the  first  human
beings of this world were all miraculously born.

Khen Rinpoche: There is no other way. No father. No mother.

The very first human beings of the Southern Continent were said to:
 • be miraculously born
 • have an immeasurable lifespan
 • have complete faculties and sense powers
 • have bodies that naturally emitted light
 • all possess a similitude of the marks, signs and exemplifications
 • not consume coarse food like us but sustained life with the food of joy
 • possess miraculous powers, going wherever they like

But at some point in time, the predisposition to  consume  coarse  food  was
activated. In order to partake of coarse food, they needed to have a  mouth.
Then the necessary orifices began  to  develop.  Gradually,  both  male  and
female sexual organs were developed. When they acquired both  the  male  and
female  sexual  organs,  the  predisposition  for  sexual  intercourse   was
activated. They then engaged in sexual intercourse.  Thus,  it  came  to  be
that human beings were born from the  womb.  As  such,  these  human  beings
possessed the six constituents (or elements). This is how it  was  explained
in the Abhidharmakosa—how human beings were born from the womb.

One way of counting the six constituents is:
1. earth
2. water
3. fire
4. wind
5. channels
6. drops
Another way of counting the six  constituents  is  dividing  them  into  two
groups of three constituents each:
 • The three constituents received from the father are the bone, marrow  and
   semen.
 • The three constituents received from the mother are the flesh,  skin  and
   blood.
This is one way of counting the six constituents  possessed  by  someone  in
the Southern Continent who is born from the womb. It is said only with  such
a basis—a  human  being  born  from  the  womb  in  the  Southern  Continent
possessing these six constituents—can one enter the tantric  path  from  the
onset and achieve enlightenment in one short  lifetime  of  this  degenerate
age with that very same basis. In terms of achieving  enlightenment  in  one
brief lifetime of the degenerate age, it is only possible with this kind  of
body. It is not possible in any other kind of body.

From this, we can understand how precious  a  human  body  of  the  Southern
Continent is because the human body of the Southern Continent  is  the  only
basis that possesses the six constituents.  This  is  the  only  basis  with
which one can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime in one body.

Such a basis is not possessed even by the beings in the pure  land.  So  you
can say that a rebirth in  the  pure  land  alone  cannot  bring  about  the
achievement of enlightenment in one lifetime. It is said even beings in  the
pure land, for example, the bodhisattvas, pray to be reborn in  this  world,
the Southern Continent, with a body that possesses the six constituents.

Khen Rinpoche: They pray to come here and we pray to go there!

If you  understand  the  significance  of  this,  then  when  you  read  The
Foundation of All Good Qualities where it says,  “The  precious  freedom  of
this rebirth is found only once,/ Is greatly meaningful …,” this is  another
reason to truly appreciate this line in the prayer.

In all the tantras, it is definite you need such a physical support—a  human
being  born  from  the  womb  in  the  Southern  Continent  with   the   six
constituents. It is the very basis from the  time  of  entering  tantra  and
then achieving enlightenment in that same lifetime. It is pervaded by  being
so. This means it is necessarily so. This  must  be  the  basis.  Naturally,
this leads to the question, “Why is this so?”

I said earlier, one way of  counting  the  six  constituents  are  the  four
elements (earth, water, fire, wind) plus the channels and  drops.  How  many
channels are there in this body of a human being in the Southern  Continent?
It’s said there are a total of 72,000 channels. Of  the  72,000,  the  three
principal ones are the central channel and the left and right channels.

The winds, the channels and the indestructible drop
How does death occur for a human being of the Southern Continent?
 • At the time of death, the winds coursing in the 72,000 channels gather in
   the left and right channels.
 • The winds in the left and  right  channels  then  enter  in  the  central
   channel from the bottom and the upper ends of the central channel.
 • They dissolve into an extremely small drop—even smaller than the size  of
   a mustard seed—that is a mixture of the white and  red  bodhicitta.  This
   drop is said to reside at the level  of  the  heart  inside  the  central
   channel and acts as the basis for the extremely subtle wind and  mind  to
   abide there.

This tiny drop in the middle of the heart chakra inside the central  channel
is obtained from the father and the mother. It is the very essence  obtained
from the father and mother that abides as  this  white  and  red  bodhicitta
drop in the centre of the heart. You could  say  they  are  abiding  in  the
entity of having the potential of those two substances.

 • We call this very small drop, the indestructible drop.  It  acts  as  the
   basis for the extremely subtle wind  and  mind  to  reside  inside.  This
   indestructible drop exists as long as one is alive.
 • The extremely subtle wind-mind that resides  within  this  indestructible
   drop is called the eternal indestructible drop. It is eternal because  it
   is indestructible and will never  go  out  of  existence.  The  eternally
   indestructible  extremely  subtle  wind-mind  is  the  naturally  abiding
   lineage (or buddha lineage) that goes on to enlightenment.

The very essence of the indestructible drop, the mixture of  the  white  and
red bodhicitta, is received from our parents. Part of these two  bodhicittas
exists in a coarser form at the crown and navel within the central  channel.
The white bodhicitta resides at the crown and the red bodhicitta resides  at
the navel.

The even coarser form of those two bodhicittas exists, in the  case  of  the
white bodhicitta in the form of bone, marrow and semen. In the case  of  the
red bodhicitta, it exists in the form of flesh, skin and blood.

THE TWO TRUTHS OF THE BASIS, THE PATH AND THE RESULT

In the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, you can talk about the two truths  of
the basis in  terms  of  the  extremely  subtle  wind-mind.  These  are  the
terminologies used in the Buddha’s teachings:
 • the two truths of the basis:
      o The extremely subtle mind would be the ultimate truth of the basis.
      o The extremely subtle wind would be the conventional  truth  of  the
        basis.
 • the two truths (or method and wisdom) of the path:
      o The clear light will be ultimate truth of the path.
      o The illusory body will be the conventional truth of the path.
 • the two truths of the result:
    o The wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness, the dharmakaya,  would  be
      the ultimate truth of the result.
      o The complete enjoyment body would be the conventional truth of  the
        result.

The two  truths  of  the  results  are  made  possible  by  actualizing  and
meditating on the two  truths  of  the  path.  Because  it  is  possible  to
meditate and actualize the two truths of the path, namely, the  clear  light
and the illusory body, therefore, one can achieve the  truth  body  and  the
enjoyment body of the result.

It is possible to meditate and actualize the two truths of the path  because
in the very first place, we possess the  two  truths  of  the  basis.  Every
sentient being possess within them the extremely  subtle  wind-mind  as  the
basis of accomplishment. That is the very  thing  that  can  be  transformed
into the two truths of the path and the two truths of result.

Put simply, the extremely subtle mind can  be  transformed  into  the  clear
light of the path (or the path clear  light)  progressively.  The  extremely
subtle mind can manifest and realize  emptiness.  So  the  extremely  subtle
mind that realizes emptiness at the time of the path is the clear  light  of
the path.

At the time of the path, by engaging  in  repeated  familiarization  through
meditation, this clear light of the path becomes the extremely  subtle  mind
realizing emptiness that can  be  transformed  eventually  into  the  wisdom
truth body.

When the clear light of the path is actualized  and  when  one  arises  from
that clear light, one achieves  the  illusory  body.  It  is  the  extremely
subtle wind, the mount of the path clear light  that  becomes  the  illusory
body of the path. As the  whole  path  is  culminated,  this  illusory  body
becomes the form body of the complete enjoyment body.

These are the critical points of Highest Yoga Tantra. From here, we can  see
it is only in Highest Yoga Tantra that we will  find  the  perfect  complete
explanation of how the two bodies, i.e., the truth and the form bodies,  are
actualized. In essence, the two bodies of the result are actualized  on  the
basis of having attained the clear light and illusory body of the path.

The clear light and the illusory body are only possible because in the  very
first place, we possess the extremely subtle wind-mind that  in  essence  is
the very thing that becomes the clear light and  illusory  body.  These  two
then go on to become the two bodies of a buddha.

Such a presentation of the extremely  subtle  wind-mind  together  with  the
presentation of the slightly coarser levels of  mind  that  exist  prior  to
that—the minds of appearance, increase and near attainment—are not found  in
sutra.

All the winds coursing in the 72,000 channels in the body  at  the  time  of
death gather
in the left and right channels. The winds in the  left  and  right  channels
then enter the central channel from its upper and lower  ends  and  dissolve
into the indestructible drop at the heart.

Only when all the winds dissolve into the  indestructible  drop  inside  the
heart chakra does death occur. Specifically, this death refers to  the  mind
of death, the extremely subtle mind.  Only  then  is  death  manifest.  This
clear light of death is also referred to as the mother clear light.

When the winds in the 72,000 channels start to gather in the left and  right
channels, followed by the central channel and then into  the  indestructible
drop, this is happening at the time of death. There  are  many  signs,  both
external and internal,   that occur during this whole process. You  must  at
least have a rough idea of what these signs  are.  Otherwise,  it  would  be
impossible to understand, much less meditate on the generation  stage  since
meditating on the generation stage has to be  a  meditation  on  the  aspect
that is concordant with death and so forth.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed  by  Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Alison
Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau
Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



