Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L26FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:16.643531
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 26	 				                                             11 July 2017
Remembering death and impermanence. Root text, p. 59—65. Performance Tantra (cont’d). How to establish the siddhis.  Yoga Tantra. How to progress on the path of Yoga Tantra. How to become a suitable vessel. How to keep the vows and commitments purely. How to approximate the deity. Yoga with signs. Yoga focussing on the basic deity—The four seals. Meaning of approximation. More on the seal impression of the four seals. Measure of accomplishment of the four seals. Yoga focussing on specific hand symbols. Yoga without signs. 
REMEMBERING DEATH AND IMPERMANENCE
The Buddha said all composite phenomena are impermanent. The Buddha was pointing out the continual remembrance of change and impermanence is very important without which nothing can be accomplished.
Geshe Potowa said if we don’t meditate on impermanence constantly, then doing practices is like building a house on ice. Without the continual remembrance of death and impermanence, the practices one does will never be stable. He goes on to say when one sits down to meditate on emptiness, when everything is going smoothly, one will have the experience of vacuity. But when difficulties come, suddenly, one loses that experience and will have nothing to show for it. 
So, he’s saying without the foundation of remembering death and impermanence, even if one meditates on emptiness, it will not be so beneficial. However, with the understanding and remembrance of death and impermanence, whatever practices one does in addition to that will be much more stable. 
Therefore, without remembering death and impermanence, whatever practices one may do will not have a proper foundation and will not become stable. However, if there is a foundational practice of remembering and meditating on death and impermanence, then whatever practices one does and builds on that, be it meditating on bodhicitta or emptiness, they will become stable.  
In the writings of the Kadampa masters, the mind that remembers death and impermanence is called a bright lamp, because with a bright lamp, one can eliminate one’s attachment to the happiness of this life. Whether one’s Dharma practice will continue or succeed depends on whether one has the continual remembrance of death and impermanence, without which nothing happens. However, with the continual remembrance of death and impermanence, one can build other practices upon it. 
Without remembering death and impermanence, trying to do any other practices will be like building a house on ice. This means whatever practices one may do, those practices will never become solid and stable because there’s no foundation for them at all.
There’s nothing I’ve said that you are hearing for the first time. You know this already.  It’s just that you need to remind yourself every now and then.
~~~~~~~~~~~~
PERFORMANCE TANTRA (CONT’D)
How to establish the siddhis
Fourth, it is stated …
…
… other siddhis are stated here and elsewhere. (p. 59)
Here, we are talking about Performance Tantra. After having meditated well on the four external branches and the four internal branches, the practitioner seeks to attain the common siddhis such as the knowledge bearer of the sword. When the siddhi of the knowledge bearer of the sword is attained, it’s said one can travel anywhere one wishes by just thinking about it. 
The practitioner may also receive signs such as Manjushri stroking his head and saying, "Well done!" and so forth. He will also obtain the concentration that never forgets bodhicitta.
There are many other attainments. Many of them are already mentioned in the section on Action Tantra.  In short, in the three lower class of tantra, after completing the recitations, achieving the siddhis is said to be very important. This is because in the three lower classes of tantra, it is through actualizing the siddhis that one comes much closer to enlightenment and enlightenment can be achieved more quickly.
As in the Action Tantra section, it’s mentioned there’s a siddhi called the life knowledge bearer. It’s like actualizing immortality. One attains a long life and one is then able to achieve enlightenment during that long life. However, achieving enlightenment in one brief lifetime of this degenerate age is an uncommon feature of Highest Yoga Tantra.
In the Perfection Vehicle, there is no such practice of achieving immortality and attaining enlightenment with one’s very long life.  However, in the three lower classes of tantra, achieving the siddhi of the life knowledge bearer is mentioned, i.e., achieving a long life and during that lifetime, achieving enlightenment. So, one achieves enlightenment in one lifetime of that very long life.  But in Highest Yoga Tantra, there’s no need to accomplish the attainment of immortality and then achieving enlightenment during that very long life. Rather one can achieve enlightenment in one short lifetime or a brief lifetime of this degenerate age.
YOGA TANTRA 
How to progress on the path of yoga tantra
This has four parts: …
…
4. How to establish the siddhis (p. 60)
How to become a suitable vessel
First, you become a vessel …
…
…  tantric vows. (p. 60)
The root tantra for Yoga Tantra is the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas. There are also other Yoga Tantras such as Purification of Lower Realms and First Supreme Glory and so forth.  
The root tantra, the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas is divided into four parts: 
The first part deals primarily with accomplishing Vairochana.
The second part deals primarily with accomplishing Akshobhya. 
The third part deals primarily with accomplishing Amitabha. 
The fourth part deals primarily with accomplishing Amoghasiddhi and condenses accomplishing Ratnasambhava. 
First, one must become a suitable vessel to meditate on the path. This is done through obtaining the appropriate initiations in the mandala such as the vajra sphere (vajradhatu), which is in the first part of the root tantra, Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas, in the lineage of Vairochana. 
For students who are only able to keep the bodhisattva vows and unable to take on the tantric vows, only five initiations are conferred.  For the students who are also able to keep the tantric vows, on top of the five initiations, the vajra-master initiation is conferred.
How to keep the vows and commitments purely
Second, if you are a suitable basis …
…
… and Vajra Peak. (p.62)
If one is holding the pratimokṣa vows, one must keep them well. On top of that, one takes the bodhisattva vows. For those who are taking the tantric vows, they have to keep these three classes of vows.
How to approximate the deity
The third has two parts: … 2. Yoga without signs (p. 63) 
Yoga with signs
The first has two parts: … subtle hand symbols (p. 63) 
The third section on “How to approximate the deity” has two parts:
Yoga focusing on the basic deity
First, by merely obtaining …  the flower landed. (p. 63) 
Those who only have the student empowerment and have not received the vajra-master empowerment will just focus on the principal deity and engage in the recitation of the mantra of that deity.  This is the yoga of focussing on the basic deity.
By obtaining the master empowerment …
…
… each of the great yoga deities. (pp. 63—64)
For those who have obtained the vajra-master empowerment, there are three kinds of approximation—the extensive, middling and abbreviated.
In Yoga Tantra and Highest Yoga Tantra, if you’re talking about the practice of the extensive approximation, the generation of the deity is divided into three sections:
the concentration of the initial application
the concentration on the supreme-conqueror mandala 
the concentration on the supreme-conqueror activities
The extensive approximation involves meditating without missing out any of the three concentrations. 
The middling approximation is meditating on:
the concentration of initial application  
the concentration on the supreme-conqueror mandala 
As for the abbreviated approximation, one does not meditate on the concentration on the supreme-conqueror mandala and the concentration on the supreme-conqueror activities. Rather, one engages only on the concentration of the initial application together with the recitation of 100,000 mantras of each of the great yoga deities. This will constitute the shortest approximation. 
We are only stating what these three types of approximations are. You will only become clear about this if you were to refer to an actual full ritual of a Yoga Tantra deity such as Sarvavid (or Kunrig in Tibetan). You have to look at the extensive self-generation in order to be able to figure out what the first part—the concentration on the initial application—involves and what the second and third parts of the concentration will involve. Otherwise, there’s no way to be clear about this. 
In the practice of the generation of the basic (or coarse) deity, after the practitioner has generated both the supporting and supported mandalas, he seeks to elicit clear appearance and divine pride.
In the yoga that focusses on the basic deity, the meditator seeks to elicit very clear appearance of the deity up to the point he feels as if he’s looking at the deity with the naked eye. It’s so clear to be almost tangible and within reach. This is clear appearance. Then there is also the meditation on divine pride. 
The four seals
In one of Longa Lama Rinpoche’s writings, he talks about what the very essence of a deity yoga in Yoga Tantra is. He presents four bases of purification (or the four seals of the basis of purification):
ordinary body
ordinary speech 
ordinary mind 
the activities of the practitioner
You have to remember these four bases of purification—ordinary body, ordinary speech, ordinary mind and the activities of the practitioner—that need to be purified by the four purifiers. 
Essentially, this is meditating on the path concordant with the aspects of the body, speech, mind and activities of the resultant state. These four purifiers are also called the four seals of the purifying path. 
By meditating on the four seals of the purifying path, one can achieve the four seals of the result—a buddha’s body, speech, mind and enlightened activities of the resultant stage. 
Meaning of approximation 
We talked about approximation. What does an approximation really mean? 
During approximation, one generates the supporting and supported mandalas. With that, one seeks to elicit such clear appearance of the supported and supporting mandalas to the point one feels one can almost touch them. They are as clear as if one were to look at them with the naked eye. With that clear appearance, one also seeks to develop a very stable divine pride. In fact, one develops uncontrived divine pride.  This is the main approximation. 
On top of that, there’s usually a need to accumulate a certain number of recitations of the mantra of the deity. At the end, one should conclude the approximation with the compensating burnt offering ritual. If all of these are done, it’s said one has completed the approximation well. 
You can look at approximation in different ways. There’s the approximation of time, the approximation of number, the approximation of sign or indication and the   approximation of mental stability.  
The approximation of time is deciding beforehand how long you are going to engage in approximation, be it three or six months. After you have decided, you stick to it and finish the approximation in that time frame.  
The approximation of the number is accumulating a certain number of mantras of the deity. Once you have finished the number, that’s it.
The approximation of the sign would be doing the approximation until you receive signs such as seeing the deity and the deity speaks to you.
The approximation of mental stability is achieved when one acquires a stable yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.
Khen Rinpoche: You must meditate until the deity speaks to you!
More on the seal impression of the four seals
In Yoga Tantra, the seal impression of the four seals is emphasized. When we say to seal-impress with the four seals, this means it is not correct to have the four seals kept separately. Rather, these four seals must come together, i.e., you must meditate on all the four seals. As mentioned earlier, they are:
the four seals of the basis of purification 
the four seals of the purifying path 
the four seals of the result 
I said earlier there are four bases of purification—the body, speech, mind and activities. There are also four afflictions to be purified—attachment, anger, ignorance and miserliness. Also included within the bases of purification are the four elements—earth, water, fire and wind. 
There are these four seals: 
the great seal (mahamudra) of the body
the dharma seal (dharmamudra) of speech 
the commitment seal (samayamudra) of the mind
the action seal (karmamudra) of the activities
Khen Rinpoche: First you must understand this term, the four seals. 
The root tantra, the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas, is divided into four parts:
In the first part, the main meditation is on the body—the great seal. This has to do with meditating on Vairochana and is for the purpose of purifying attachment. 
In the second part, it talks primarily about meditating on the mind—the commitment seal. This has to do with meditating on Akshobhya and is for the purpose of purifying anger. 
In the third part, it talks primarily about meditating on speech—the dharma seal.  This has to do with meditating on Amitabha and is for the purpose of purifying ignorance (also known as bewilderment or confusion).  
In the fourth part, it talks about the activities—the action seal. This has to do with meditating on Amoghasiddhi. Ratnasambhava is included here. This is for the purpose of purifying miserliness. 
The four elements of earth, water, fire and wind are purified by the meditation on the first, second, third and fourth parts of the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas respectively. 
Measure of accomplishment of the four seals
The main purpose of engaging in the Yoga Tantra meditation involving the seal impression of the four seals is to purify ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness with respect to the ordinary body, speech, mind and activities for the purpose of actualizing the body, speech, mind and activities of a buddha.
What is the measure of having accomplished the great seal of the body? The bases of purification are one’s ordinary body and the environment. One purifies them and in their place, one generates the supporting and the supported mandala—oneself as the deity and one’s abode as the mandala. Then one elicits very clear appearance of oneself as the deity and the environment as a mandala. On the basis of such clear appearance, identifying with being the actual deity and the actual mandala, one elicits divine pride. When one has the sense of stable clear appearance and divine pride. This is the measure of having meditated on the great seal of the body.
What is the measure of having accomplished the dharma seal of speech? 
The measure of having accomplished the dharma seal of speech is when the practitioner’s recitation of the mantra is able to bring about all the beneficial effects and power mentioned in the root tantra. 
Another measure of having accomplished the dharma seal of speech is when the natural intonation of speech appears naturally as the sound of mantra to the practitioner. 
What is the measure of having accomplished the mind commitment seal? The commitment seal of the mind is accomplished when the practitioner achieves the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity combined with stability with respect to that practice. 
What is the measure of accomplishing the action seal of the activities? This is accomplished when the practitioner reaches the point when most of the time, there’s no sense of ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness with respect to the activities of his body, speech and mind. In addition, when he engages in the meditation on emitting and gathering back light rays, he’s able to accomplish the four activities of pacification and so forth. 
Even if you can’t remember all these points, remember the main point of Yoga Tantra is this: When one meditates on the path of Yoga Tantra, the meditation involves the seal impression of the four seals. This means one must not be separated from the meditation on the four seals. 
With regard to the four seals:
There are four seals that are the bases of purification, i.e., the body, speech, mind and the activities of the practitioner are to be purified. Likewise, there are the four afflictions—attachment, anger, ignorance and miserliness—and the four elements—earth, water, fire and wind. All these are the bases of purification. 
These are purified by the four seals of the purifying paths.
Through that, one achieves the four seals of the result. 
The whole purpose of purifying the four bases of purification with the four seals of the purifying path is to achieve the four seals of the result, i.e., to achieve the body, speech, mind and enlightened activities of a buddha.
This is with regard to the yoga observing the basic deity.
We are still talking about the yoga with signs. This involves two parts:  
Meditating on the coarse—the yoga focussing on the basic deity
Meditating on the subtle—the yoga focussing on specific hand symbols
We have completed the meditation on the basic deity. Without losing that, one continues with the yoga focussing on the specific hand symbols.
Yoga focusing on specific hand symbols
Second, while clearly visualizing …
…
…  practice emanation, absorption, and so on. (p. 64) 
How small is the “small vajra hand symbol”? Sometimes, it is said to be as small as a 
mustard seed. Sometimes, it’s even smaller than that, i.e., as small as the tip of a hair. 
Where is this vajra hand symbol? Initially, this is done by placing a small vajra hand symbol at the navel. One then pulls up that object of observation to the heart and finally to the point between the eyebrows. When the small vajra hand symbol is between the eyebrows, one focusses on it without distraction. 
After one has drawn up the small vajra hand symbol to the point between the eyebrows and developed clarity and stability with respect to that object of observation, one then does the practice of emanation and absorption. One starts by emanating two hand symbols from the one, then four from the two and so on, exponentially emanating small vajra hand symbols till the entire universe with its three thousand-fold world systems are filled with these small vajra hand symbols. With that clarity, you then gather them back in the same way they were emanated (i.e., the reverse process). Finally, they culminate in the original small vajra hand symbol at the mid-brow.
First, you have to concentrate on the initial small vajra hand symbol at the mid-brow.  Your concentration has to be stable before you do the practice of emanation and absorption.
Yoga without signs
Second, you conclude …
…
… as mentioned previously. (p. 65) 
We have talked about this earlier on. When one achieves the yoga without signs, one enters the path of preparation. When one enters the path of preparation, one has actualized the special insight observing emptiness.
In yoga with signs, there’s the yoga observing the basic deity and the yoga focussing on the specific hand symbols. Calm abiding is achieved during the yoga observing the specific hand symbols. 
When you read the explanation of developing concentration in the three lower classes of tantra, there seems to be a real difference in how calm abiding is accomplished. I am talking about the technique for cultivating calm abiding that’s not found in sutra. In tantra, it talks about achieving calm abiding by depending on subtle objects of observation.
In Action Tantra and Performance Tantra, they talk about the absorption on fire and the absorption on sound. It’s said that calm abiding is only achieved when one is at the absorption on sound where the object of observation is just the sound of the mantra.
Here in Yoga Tantra, calm abiding is said to be accomplished when one is engaged in yoga focussing on the specific hand symbols. We are talking about really subtle objects of observation. If it’s a vajra hand symbol, it’s said to be as small as a mustard seed or even as small as the tip of the hair.
So when you compare the explanation for achieving calm abiding in sutra and in tantra, it seems that the explanation of tantra with respect to achieving calm abiding is subtler.
In the writings of Kachen Yeshe Gyaltsen, he said that the techniques for developing calm abiding taught in sutra are not able to overcome subtle dualistic appearances. Perhaps, the justification behind that statement alludes to what we have been discussing.
I think as the object of observation presented in tantra for developing calm abiding is
much subtler than the objects generally taught in sutra, the mind focussing on these objects of observation must also be very subtle. Because the mind that meditates on calm abiding focussing on these chosen objects of observation are more subtle, therefore they are also equally more powerful in dealing with the subtle dualistic appearances.
Student 1:  Why do you need to purify the elements of earth, water, fire and wind? With regard to concentration, it’s always mentioned if there’s mental sinking, we should visualize the object at the upper opening of the central channel and if there is excitement, we visualize the object at the lower opening of the central channel. What’s the reason for this? 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m not very sure as to why the earth, water, fire and wind are stated as bases of purification. I guess it may have to do with the nature of the body. That is a basis of purification and the physical body is a composite of the four elements.
We also need to look at the relationship between the bases of purification, which are categorised together. 
Categorised with the body as the basis of purification is the element, earth. That is also linked to attachment.
Likewise, in the second part of the root tantra (the Compendium of the Reality of All Tathagatas), anger is categorised together with the element of water and the mind.
In the third part of the root tantra, speech is linked with ignorance and the element of fire. 
In the fourth part of the root tantra, activities are linked with the affliction of miserliness and the element of wind. 
Within each of the basis of purification, there are these three things. Are they also connected in one way or another?
Furthermore, the four parts of the root tantra are related to the four deities— Vairochana, Akshobhya, Amitabha, and Amoghasiddhi. Respectively, they are essentially:
the factor of purification of the body appearing as the deity 
the factor of purification of the mind appearing as the deity
the factor of purification of speech appearing as the deity 
the factor of purification of activities appearing as the deity. 
There is a relationship between the mood of the mind and the development of laxity and excitement. When the mind is too down, laxity arises. The mind is too relaxed and too loose. But when the mind is too high or too excited, then excitement arises. It’s also said when the mind is too uptight, then excitement arises.
When laxity is present, the mind is loose and feeling down. It doesn’t help if you were to choose an object of observation and focus on the lower part of the body. It’s possible you may make the mind even looser and more lax. This is why to dispel laxity, the object of observation is usually placed at the higher part of the body. 
Conversely, if the mind is too excited, too uplifted, if you were to try to focus on something visually higher, you may agitate the mind further. In that case, it will make
a difference if one chooses to focus on a lower part of the body.
Student 2: What is meant by subtle dualistic appearance? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. I have to think about that. I saw the quotation by one of the masters. I still have to think what the meaning of subtle is in this context. 
This is something you can think about. In Highest Yoga Tantra, we talk about the mind of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment. These are posited as subtle dualistic minds. However, these three minds are not discussed or taught in the three lower classes of tantra. 
Is there any relation with the three lower classes of tantra as a mode of progression towards Highest Yoga Tantra? I’m not sure. I have to think about it.
I brought up that statement by Kachen Yeshe Gyaltsen where he mentioned in his writing that the techniques for attaining calm-abiding in sutra are not able to overcome subtle dualistic appearances whereas in tantra, it is possible.
Read the remaining sections of this chapter. Maybe, we will finish the remaining sections in one session, especially the section on the points of debate. If you do your reading, from my side, I can finish my explanation in one session. You have to read the text. If you don’t understand anything from your reading, you should write it down and ask in class.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
Handout in class