Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L20FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.069678
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 20	 				                                            13 June 2017
Review. The assertion of Sera Je College: When one enters the Mahayana path, one necessarily has calm abiding and special insight. When is calm abiding achieved in tantra? Cultivating calm abiding in tantra.   
REVIEW
We’ve seen that it’s not necessary to enter the Hinayana path prior to entering the Mahayana path.  While there’re people who enter the Hinayana path, there’re also others who enter the Mahayana path from the beginning. However, it’s also clear that one must have trained in the path that’s shared with the person of small capacity prior to entering the Mahayana path.
The Mahayana itself is divided into two:
the Causal Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana)
the Resultant Vajra Vehicle (Vajrayana)
Khen Rinpoche: I’m repeating what I’ve said in the last class. Concentrate. I’ll try to make it shorter.
Is it necessary to enter the path of the Causal Perfection Vehicle prior to entering the path of the Resultant Vajra Vehicle? The answer’s no. There’re people who enter the path of the Vajrayana from the beginning.
These are the two Mahayana paths—the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajra Vehicle. As stated in the lamrim, whichever of the two paths you choose to enter, bodhicitta is the only gateway for entry. 
I cited Khedrup Sangye Yeshe. He said there’s no difference in terms of the superiority or inferiority of the mind generation in the Causal Perfection Vehicle and the Resultant Vajra Vehicle. Mind generation’s a mind that aspires to enlightenment and to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings.  While this is not the technical definition of mind generation, in essence, this is what it is—the mind that aspires to enlightenment and to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings.  This is the mind generation that you need whether you’re entering the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajra Vehicle. 
However, the mind generation that’s the doorway to tantra is said to be stronger than the mind generation explained in sutra. The mind generation in tantra is called the special mind generation in that it’s more powerful. It’s a mind aspiring to achieve full enlightenment quickly in one lifetime.  In that sense, it’s a more powerful form of mind generation. 
That individual needs the determination to achieve enlightenment quickly by meditating on the aspects of the body, the abode, enjoyments and activities of a buddha. He meditates on these four aspects straightaway, right now during the time of the path in order to achieve full enlightenment. 
Sentient beings are varied. They have different imprints (or predispositions). As such, we say sentient beings can be from different lineages. Some sentient beings are predisposed to the idea that others are more precious than themselves. When they hear that concept, they take a liking to and are attracted by it. It agrees with their mind. 
For others, even if you’re to explain this concept to them, they may find it difficult to accept. As such, individuals who find it easy to accept the instructions— such as seeing all sentient beings to be their mothers, recognizing and remembering their kindness and practising the exchange of self and others—are probably more inclined to be attracted to them and accept these practices. Therefore, you can say there’re sentient beings who’re more likely to enter the Mahayana path from the beginning.
Within the category of sentient beings predisposed to the Mahayana ideal—they want to achieve enlightenment to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings—you can definitely say there’re individuals who want to achieve enlightenment quickly. In order to do that, I guess these individuals probably must have some kind of predisposition for tantra as well. They have these tantric imprints. These individuals have the wish to achieve enlightenment quickly and will take tantric elements into consideration. They have the wish and ability to practise the tantric path. They are eager to meditate on the path concordant with the four complete purities of the resultant stage right away.    
With regard to entering the Mahayana sutric path, if we base our discussion on the assertions of the works of Jetsunpa, the author of the textbooks of Sera Je College, probably you’ve to say the person who has entered the Mahayana path would have the union of calm abiding and special insight. 
It’s mentioned in the lamrim once calm abiding is attained, one’ll not be moved by the winds of discursive thought.  On the basis of having attained calm abiding, one’ll be able to achieve the insight that leads to the abandonment of all wrong views. You’ll be unassailable and will not be disturbed by any conditions. It’s similar to developing
irreversible faith.
In short, with calm abiding, one becomes immovable and with special insight, one becomes as firm as a mountain. The point is with special insight, you develop the definite ascertainment of whatever object you focus on.  You will not waver from the object because you have definite ascertainment of the object. You become very stable. 
It’s also said with calm abiding, whatever virtues one performs become very powerful.  Without the basis of calm abiding, the virtue that’s done is very weak. It’s also mentioned in Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds any recitation or meditation done with a distracted mind will not bear fruit and fulfill its purpose. Therefore, whatever virtue done with the mind that’s focussed on its focal object becomes very powerful. 
THE ASSERTION OF SERA JE COLLEGE—WHEN ONE ENTERS THE MAHAYANA PATH, ONE NECESSARILY HAS CALM ABIDING AND SPECIAL INSIGHT
According to the position of the textbook of Sera Je College, when one develops uncontrived mind generation and enters the Mahayana path, one necessarily has calm abiding and special insight. 
Let's think about it in this way:
There’s a relationship with the claim that with bodhicitta, your virtue becomes very powerful. 
Without a stable and focussed mind, it’s difficult to produce an uncontrived mind generation.
What I’m going to say is not found in the text. This is my opinion. 
You’ve great compassion followed by the wholehearted resolve that precedes mind generation. Perhaps, we can say it is during the stage of wholehearted resolve that calm abiding must be attained.  Calm abiding here generates the resolve, thinking, “I will work for the welfare of sentient beings by myself alone!” This makes the resolve firm, stable and unmovable. 
That calm abiding also induces an analysis of one’s ability, “Can I do this or not?”  One discovers, “I can’t do this remaining as I am. Therefore, I must achieve full enlightenment in order to be able to do this!”  
Then one has the mind generation. The thought thinking, “I must achieve enlightenment” is the result of the analysis induced by calm abiding. The point is that one has both calm abiding and special insight. 
I’m not saying this is definitely the case. I’m just offering my opinion. The assertion of the textbook of Sera Je College is that upon achieving bodhicitta, the uncontrived mind generation, you would also have calm abiding and special insight.  That’s clear but you’ll not find an explanation of that assertion. What I’ve said is my own personal opinion on how that assertion can be explained. 
There are five obscurations that interfere with the achievement of calm abiding:
desire (the manifest desire included in the desire realm)
malice 
regret and excitement
lethargy and sleep
doubt
If we think about this, if an individual hasn’t managed to suppress the manifest desire included in the desire realm and malice, probably it’s difficult to say that individual will generate uncontrived bodhicitta. In order to suppress them, you need calm abiding and special insight. 
If we’re to think along these lines in order to understand why we need calm abiding to generate uncontrived bodhicitta, would it work?
This is the assertion of Sera Je College—you need calm abiding and special insight to enter the Mahayana path from the onset. It’s also said for those of definite Mahayana lineage:
On the great path of accumulation, the bodhisattva achieves the calm abiding focussing on emptiness. 
When special insight focussing on emptiness is achieved, the bodhisattva enters the path of preparation.
This much is clear. You mustn’t mix everything up. If you are clear about this, you need to keep it in mind. 
WHEN IS CALM ABIDING ACHIEVED IN TANTRA?
Then you move on to tantra. When is calm abiding achieved in the context of the tantric path?
If we follow what was explained earlier with regard to entering the Mahayana path, are you going to say, “For those who enter the tantric path from the onset, when they enter the tantric path, they need bodhicitta as well?” Are you going to say that individual necessarily must also have calm abiding and special insight? Is it possible to say for those of definite tantric lineage, definitely, they will have calm abiding and special insight?
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting what I’m asking you? You cannot mix everything up. You need to lay them out neatly, “This is this … this … this ... this.” 
Now if we look at Action Tantra, we have the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation. The latter is divided into three:
the absorption on fire
the absorption on sound
the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound
It’s stated clearly in the root text:
Calm abiding is achieved during the absorption on sound. 
Special insight is achieved during the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound.
This absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound is achieved simultaneously with the attainment of the path of preparation. 
But based on the statement in the root text that calm abiding’s achieved during the absorption on sound, it’s like saying calm abiding is achieved after entering the path. 
Does the absorption with recitation happen prior to entering the path or after entering the path? That’s not very clear. Based on the explanation of Mahayana sutra, according to Sera Je College’s position, you enter the tantric path with special bodhicitta. That individual also has calm abiding and special insight at that time. 
When that individual attains the absorption abiding on sound, he has calm abiding focussing on emptiness. 
When he achieves the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound, he has the special insight focussing on emptiness. 
Would it be OK to explain it like that? 
Khen Rinpoche: Your brain must be very active. Otherwise, nothing’ll go inside. You’ll be totally lost as to what I’m talking about. 
I think it’s possible to have those absorptions with recitation after entering the path. 
CULTIVATING CALM ABIDING IN TANTRA
Now let’s look at how you can answer the earlier question about the cultivation of calm abiding in tantra. 
In sutra, we were told that calm abiding is achieved while focussing on a single chosen focal object. 
In Action Tantra, it seems there’re so many dissimilar objects of observation moving from three focal objects to two to one.  
You move from the absorption observing the form of letters of the mantra to the absorption observing the sound of the mantra, from the front generation to self-generation and so forth. You start with three objects of observation and as the objects of observation become subtler, you have two focal objects and then just one focal object. They are not the same. That being the case, at the end of the day, do you focus on generating calm abiding on the bases of all these dissimilar objects of observation? This seems unlike the sutric explanation of cultivating calm abiding.  
I will refer to the lamrim in the section on cultivating calm abiding. The words are exactly the same whether it’s in the Lamrim Chen Mo or in the Middle Length Lamrim. 
It’s mentioned the practice of calm abiding is done with the mental consciousness and not with the sense consciousness. As such, the actual object of meditation for developing calm abiding is an object of mental consciousness, not an object of the sense consciousness. 
According to the outline of Middle Length Lamrim, it says there’s “the need to deter-
mine just one object in the beginning.” (p.218)
In the Lamrim Chen Mo, it says:
Furthermore, there are both subtle and gross features of the Buddha’s bodily
form. It is stated elsewhere that at first you focus on the gross features, and later, when these are solid, you must focus on the subtle. (p. 44, Vol. Three)
Do the words, “It is stated elsewhere” refer to the explanations on tantra?
The Lamrim Chenmo continues: 
As experience also shows, it is very easy to raise an appearance of the gross features, you must develop your object of meditation in stages, starting with the gross features.
An especially important point is that until you have accomplished satisfactory concentration as explained below, it is never appropriate for you to cultivate meditative concentration by shifting your focus to many different types of object of meditation. For, if you cultivate concentration by moving to many dissimilar objects of meditation, it will be a great impediment to achieving calm abiding (pp. 44—45).
I didn’t get to read the annotations to the Lamrim Chenmo pertaining to this particular section. There’s another set of texts for the annotations. 
But back to the earlier statement, “It is stated elsewhere.” Does this “elsewhere” refer to the tantric position or is it referring to the views of some other learned ones?  Let’s say I take this statement, “It is stated elsewhere” to mean how it’s usually explained and applied in the context of tantra. 
So, in the context of self-generation in Action Tantra, we meditate on the six deities, culminating in the sign deity. At that point, you’re supposed to elicit a clear appearance of yourself as the deity. You meditate on the entire body, i.e., the coarse body. You can call that object of observation coarse because you are focussing on the entire body of the deity. 
Once you’ve developed stability with regard to this object of observation, you move your attention to subtler objects of observation as we’ve seen so far. 
At the end of the six deities when you’ve the sign deity, you’ve arisen as the deity. That’s the entire body of the deity, the coarse body of the deity. You focus on that. With that as the basis, you elicit clear appearance and divine pride. I think you can achieve calm abiding by focussing on that deity’s body. 
The Lamrim Chenmo says, “It is stated elsewhere that at first you focus on the gross features.” Let’s apply that to what we’ve been discussing and take that to be the deity’s coarse body. 
“And later, when these are solid, you must focus on the subtle.” “The subtle” refers to the form of the letters of the mantra, then moving on to the sound of the mantra. The objects of observation are becoming more and more subtle. Then you move on to the absorption on fire and the absorption on sound.
This presentation of moving from the gross (or coarse) to the subtle object of observation as one develops concentration is explained only in tantra, not sutra. In tantra, as your concentrations develops, you make your object of observation smaller and subtler. In that way, the mind that’s meditating also becomes more subtle and as it becomes subtler, it becomes clearer and therefore, more powerful. This movement from the gross to the subtle as explained in tantra can be seen in experience. As this seems to be the case, the Lamrim Chenmo goes on to say: 
As experience also shows that it is very easy to raise the appearance of the gross features. You must develop your object of meditation in stages starting with the gross features. (p.44) 
Therefore, Lama Tsongkhapa says that if you look at the manner of presentation in tantra, it’s like that. But also from your own experience, that’s how it works. Lama Tsongkhapa is stating this in definitive terms. Lama Tsongkhapa’s intent lies in the position of tantra. 
The Lamrim Chenmo continues: 
An especially important point is that, until you have accomplished satisfactory concentration as explained below, it is never appropriate for you to cultivate meditative concentration by shifting your focus to many different types of object of meditation (p. 44).
This is saying after you’ve achieved calm abiding, you can do whatever you want. The point here is that you can shift your focus to something subtle. You’re not going to be harmed by that because you already have concentration. But prior to achieving calm abiding, you don’t move your focus around. If you apply this to the context of the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation, even before that, once you’ve developed stable calm abiding on the basis of the deity’s coarse body, then you can move on to observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart and the sound of the mantra. That’s not going to harm you. 
What I’ve said here is the answer to the student’s question (in Lesson 18). I’ve thought about the question. This is what I think so far. I’m not saying this is definitely the case. I have pointed out my reasons for saying what I’ve said to you. You should compare what’s said in the root text and what’s mentioned in the Lamrim Chenmo about cultivating calm abiding. See whether the position I’ve offered here is OK or not. You need to think about it and discuss it.
Further down in the same section, Lama Tsongkhapa goes on to say:
When you are practicing deity yoga in the mantra vehicle, you definitely have to establish a clear image of that deity. So until this arises you must use many methods for developing it (p.46). 
Lama Tsongkhapa said you have to establish a clear image of the deity. So until this arises you must use many methods for developing it. With the basis of yourself abiding in deity yoga, you are the deity. You focus on the body of the deity. Then you try your best to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. 
Lama Tsongkhapa advises: 
However, in this non-tantric (sutric) context, if you have great difficulty in making an image of the deity appear, you may adopt any one of the objects of meditation presented above and keep your attention on it because the main purpose is simply to achieve a concentration of meditative serenity (p. 46). 
In short, to answer the question, one can achieve calm abiding during the time of the sign deity. After you’ve arisen as the deity through the six deities, then at the sign deity, with the coarse body of the deity as the object of observation, you try to elicit clear appearance and divine pride.
During that time you, I think you can achieve calm abiding. After calm abiding is achieved, you move on to subtler objects of observation and cultivate the absorption observing the form of the letters of the mantra at the heart and so forth.
Read the root text and then compare it with the section on calm abiding in the Lamrim Chenmo or the Middle Length Lamrim. Think about it. 
Moving on, what about achieving the calm abiding focussing on emptiness and the special insight focussing on emptiness in the context of the path of Action Tantra? Is it OK to say:
at the time of the absorption on sound, you achieve the calm abiding focussing on emptiness? 
when you achieve the special insight focussing on emptiness, that’s when you have the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound? 
Khen Rinpoche: My talk’s done. I’ve answered that question.
Q & A
Student 1: It was taught that when the person reaches the absorption on sound, the person focusses on the sound inside the tongue of flame. You’ve just mentioned it’s also the calm abiding focussing on emptiness. How did the object suddenly change from sound to emptiness? At that point, aren’t you actually focussing on the sound inside the flame? 
Khen Rinpoche: What if we’re to say that you are focussing on the emptiness of the 
sound? 
This is because if you look at the stages of leaving the session at the end, you leave from sound to the emptiness of sound. You focus on the emptiness of the sound. Definitely, the sound exists because you can experience it. However, when you analyze it, you cannot find it. When you search for the imputed object, the sound, you cannot find it. Yet it exists because it exists in dependence upon various causes and conditions. Therefore, by nature, it’s necessarily empty. So you focus on the suchness of the sound.
Student 1: So the absorption on recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation, the three focal objects such as the deity’s form, the moon disc and mantra garland on the moon disc, essentially, you’ll be meditating on their emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: In general, this is how it’s done in tantra. It all leads to the understanding of how all things exist in mere name. That’s why you have the letters and the generation of the deity from the syllables and so forth. This is showing how everything exists in mere name.
There’s no problem in saying one can realize emptiness prior to realizing the calm abiding focussing on emptiness. But it doesn’t mean that when you have realized emptiness, necessarily you’ll have the calm abiding focussing on emptiness. 
Even when you talk about this in the sutric context, those who are sharp facultied have realized emptiness prior to entering the path. 
When is the calm abiding focussing on emptiness attained? On the great path of accumulation.  
Student 1: I’m very curious about the subtlety of the mind. We say that the object moves from the gross form to the moon disc, the form of the letters of the mantra, the sound of the mantra, and the emptiness of the mantra. So in terms of the object, it becomes subtler as if the object has become smaller. Correspondingly, the mind’s also subtler because of the object of observation. When it comes to the sutric explanation of focussing on emptiness and the tantric explanation of focussing on emptiness, the two minds are equally subtle? They are both emptiness, just as both objects are equally small? 
In Action Tantra, if it’s said that the absorption on sound is the emptiness of sound, what about the sutric explanation on the emptiness of the apple? Emptiness per se is just as subtle. Why would one mind be subtler than the other? 
Khen Rinpoche: There’s no disputing that the mind is extremely subtle in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra. On the path, the consciousness that takes emptiness as its object, let’s say in the three lower classes of tantra, are they subtler than the consciousness that realizes emptiness in the sutric context? That’s something to think about.
In tantra, they talk about taking attachment as the path. The three lower classes of 
tantra definitely have the practice of taking attachment as the path. Through that, they generate the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. Having said that, the question is: Is the mind that realizes emptiness in the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity more subtle compared to the wisdom realizing emptiness in the sutric context? This is something to think about.
We don’t talk about the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity in sutra. You do talk about that in tantra, in the three lower classes of tantra.
I think on Sunday, we have the discussion groups. Last time, we had eight bodhisattva groups. Now I am going to make them into five groups. You’ll all be in different groups, not the same group as before. I thought of doing that today but we don’t have enough time today. 
We used to have very active Sunday discussions. They’re doing quite well for some time but now they’re not functioning. It could be the group leader or the group members. I don’t know. My point is to make the discussions better. I hope that in this way, we can learn better. That’s the idea. 
On Thursday, I will divide you all into five groups. Whatever group you’re in, please go to that group. Also, I highly encourage you to come to the discussions if you can. If you really don’t want to do that, that’s your choice but I encourage you to come. This is what I think. 
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION ON SUNDAY, 18 JUNE 2017
(a) In tantra, how are both method and wisdom present in one consciousness?
(b) What’s the purpose of this?
(c) What would be the fallacy of positing method and wisdom as separate entities as in sutra? 	
Are the practices of refuge and mind generation in tantra more powerful than    in sutra?
(a) What are the initiations in the three lower classes of tantra?
(b) What is the meaning of receiving an initiation, i.e., how is an initiation received?
It’s said that when you take a tantric initiation and keep the vows purely, you can achieve enlightenment in seven or 16 lifetimes even if you don’t practise the path (p. 10, Lesson 12). How is this the case?
Yoga with signs is said to be the absorption with recitation, the absorption on fire and the absorption on sound. Yoga without signs is said to be the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound. What’s the difference between yoga with signs and yoga without signs?
Do you need to achieve calm abiding prior to achieving bodhicitta? 
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t repeat what I’ve said. That’s not the point. You should get your own idea. What I said may be totally wrong. So don’t follow me. You get your own new idea and come to some conclusion. 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.