Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L60 FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.962029
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 60 				                                                     21 April 2018
Root text, p. 119—. Motivation. Importance of not forgetting. Reviewing the level of the beginner. The three kayas. Q&A: The ordinary ‘I’ and the self-generated deity. Two ways of explaining the apprehended aspect. The extraordinary power of Highest Yoga Tantra. Generating bliss and taking desire into the path. Everything arising as the deity. Overcoming laxity & excitation by meditating on the subtle drop. Special announcement re teachings by Lama Zopa Rinpoche in September.
MOTIVATION
Whether we are listening to the Dharma or teaching the Dharma, what we do in the beginning is that we recite three times the prayer of refuge and bodhicitta.  By going for refuge, we distinguish our practice from wrong practice. By generating bodhicitta, we distinguish our practice from the Hinayana practice. It is by conjoining ourselves with refuge and bodhicitta, then we set up the motivation for engaging in the Dharma. 
When we listen to the Dharma, we have to ensure that we set up a good motivation. It is important for you to have the motivation of bodhicitta. If you are able to give rise to this motivation and adjust your body and mind accordingly, it is said that you will be able to accumulate infinite merit.
Now you are here to listen to the Dharma. It is important for you to focus your mind.  You need to be able to concentrate. In that way, you will be able to hear the teachings.
Whether or not you will be able to understand the teachings depends on how interested you are in the teachings and how much you are seeking these teachings.  If you are able to listen carefully, then it will make a difference to your understanding of the teachings.
IMPORTANCE OF NOT FORGETTING
As I mentioned before, it is important for you to not forget what has been taught in the previous few classes.  You attend the later classes by adding the information that you obtained from the previous classes.  If you forget what has been taught in the previous classes and then try to attend the later classes, then it will be difficult for you to understand them.  It is on the basis of remembering what has been taught previously that you add on more information by attending future classes. In that way, you will come to a fine understanding of the topic.
You need to develop this very strong mind of wanting to understand the teachings, “What is the generation stage?”  You need to have this kind of strong interest thinking, “I have no choice but to understand what the generation stage is.”  Such keen interest is necessary. That will help you to concentrate on the teachings. If there are things that you don’t understand, you ask questions so that you can understand the topic.  If you lack this strong interest, then it will be difficult for you to understand the topic. You have to listen and if there is anything that you don’t understand, immediately, you should ask questions.   
We are talking about the generation stage. 
What is a generation stage?  It is the stage of generating the deity. 
Who is generated as a deity?  You are generated as a deity.  
Khen Rinpoche: That’s it. It’s as simple as that. If you know that, you will know the generation stage.
There are four levels of practitioners.  The first level is the beginner. You have to be very familiar with all these terminologies.  It is difficult for me to say everything that I had said previously.  How many of you are able to explain what this beginner is?  Raise your hand.
Khen Rinpoche: Just raise your hand. I just want to know. (Khen Rinpoche counts). One, two, three, four, five, six. OK.  Only six people.
It seems that the majority of you are not able to explain what a beginner is.  Those of you who cannot explain it, what is it that you cannot understand?  What is it that you do not know? You should ask questions.  
I want to know the answer to why you don’t know (what a beginner is). I have been explaining this for three or four classes.  I’m just wondering why you are not getting it.  That is my question.  Maybe some people know but you didn’t put up your hand. Maybe it’s like that. That’s possible. But only a few people (put up their hand). I don’t know.  Why? You have any idea?  It is because of what? 
If somebody can say something, that will be good. Those who don’t understand, why (don’t you understand)?  Then I can explain in a different way.  Otherwise, I have to repeat like in kindergarten every time over and over again.  I’m not sure whether you need that. 
Do you have any idea why (you don’t understand)? It is good to share your view of why you are not getting it. Am I going too fast? There must be some reason why you don’t get it—whether (it is because) you don’t have enough time, you are not reading or you 
are not thinking. 
Question: On the second level, those attaining some pristine wisdom, what does pristine wisdom refer to?
Answer: It doesn’t seem like there is a precise explanation of this exalted or pristine wisdom.  But when you reach the third or fourth level, you have completed the coarse generation stage and you are able to practise the union of calm abiding and special insight.
REVIEWING THE LEVEL OF THE BEGINNER
During the first level, the level of the beginner, (that is when) you begin to meditate on the generation stage.  The main practice on the generation stage is bringing death, intermediate state and rebirth as the path of the three buddha bodies. You generate yourself as the deity and you meditate on that.
During this beginner’s level, what you do is you visualize yourself as a deity and you meditate. How this is done is that you read the sadhana and then you try to reflect according to the description of the words there. In that way, you try to complete this meditation on death, intermediate state and rebirth as the path of the three bodies. As you recite, you do the reflection and slowly you perform all the visualizations. This is what happens in the beginning.  
An actual meditator on the generation stage will practise slowly and try to develop stability and clear appearance.  Following what is described in the sadhana, the person tries to meditate in a stable way, making the appearance clear and without forgetting what has been visualized in the training on the first stage. Then one moves on to the second stage and train in a similar way, trying to obtain stability and clear appearance. Then without forgetting that stage as well, one moves on to the third stage and then trains in having stability and clear appearance.
Let’s suppose it takes about three hours for you to complete the (long) sadhana. As you read, you also reflect on the description. As you move on, you add on more and more to your visualization. Finally, when the three hours are over, you have finished the sadhana. At that point, you should be able to have everything appear clearly to your mind.  This is the level of a beginner.     
By practicing in this way again and again, eventually, when you practise the sadhana, you are able to cause the visualization to appear clearly without much difficulty.  Simply by turning your mind to the visualization, it appears clearly through the force of familiarization. You are able to cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly. This is called the uncontrived experience.  
Through such repeated practice, you will be able to cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly to your mind in a stable way.  Due to this attainment, you are able to stop the appearances of ordinariness.  Based on that, you have to cultivate divine pride.  Through such practice, eventually, you will be able to arrive at a good level of clear appearance and divine pride. This means that you will be able to stop the appearance of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness.  
The appearance of ordinariness appears to us all the time.  They appear to our sense consciousness. They also appear to our mental consciousness. You assent to these appearances and adhere to ordinariness.  The purpose of the generation stage is to stop the appearance of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness.  How do you do that? You purify everything into emptiness and you meditate on emptiness.  This is the way to stop ordinary appearance and adherence to ordinariness.  
THE THREE KAYAS
When we meditate on bringing death to the path as the truth body or the dharmakaya, we meditate on emptiness. We begin by visualizing the death process, the dissolution of the four elements and so forth. Then we visualize the syllable Hum being absorbed. Finally, even the nada, the squiggle at the top, is also absorbed into emptiness. Then you visualize the clear light and meditate on that.  This is when you meditate on emptiness. Everything becomes more and more subtle and eventually, there is just emptiness. Everything has been purified into emptiness and emptiness appears to the mind, nothing else. In that state of voidness, we place our mind on the meditation on emptiness.   
From that state of emptiness, one goes on to practise the second stage, which is bringing the intermediate state to the path as the complete enjoyment body, the sambhogakaya. 
From that state of emptiness, one visualizes a blue shaft of light, one cubit in height. That light transforms into the deity with one face and two arms. This is the brief way of meditating on bringing the intermediate state to the path as the sambhogakaya. The shaft of blue light that appears from the state of emptiness corresponds to the state of bringing the intermediate state to the path as the sambhogakaya.  
That shaft of light transforms into the deity with one face, two arms and so on.  That is bringing rebirth to the path as the nirmanakaya or emanation body.  In brief, from the state of emptiness, you generate into a deity. Eventually, you try to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride with respect to that.
By training in this way, eventually, you will be able to generate clear appearance of the deity. On that basis, you should think, “I am the deity of the resultant type.  I am the actual, for example, the dharmakaya/ sambhogakaya/ nirmanakaya.  I am the actual deity, the body of the time of the result.  I am not ordinary.”  This is how you should train initially. By training in this way, you will be able to obtain a stable and clear appearance and divine pride through the force of familiarization. When this occurs, there is no appearance of ordinariness to your mind and there is also no adherence to ordinariness.
By cultivating clear appearance and divine pride, you are able to meditate on the body of the deity. When you are meditating, you should always think, “Even though the deity appears, the deity does not exist inherently. There is no inherent existence.” You should think about the meaning of emptiness at that time too.  
If you are able to meditate with a combination of these three qualities—clear appearance, divine pride and the absence of inherent existence, then your meditation will become very powerful.  
This is because:
by having clear appearance, you stop the appearance of ordinariness
by having divine pride, you stop the adherence to ordinariness 
by meditating on the absence of inherent existence you are able to stop the conception of self or the grasping to self.  
At the level of a beginner, in the beginning, you have to meditate slowly on the sadhana and visualize all the various objects. Eventually, you will be able to meditate on the entire supporting and supported mandala.  Going through all the various stages, you will be able to generate the entire mandala. This occurs on the level of the beginner.  So, this is what you need to understand about the beginner.  
Khen Rinpoche: Are you a beginner?  Not yet? Now, you understand what a beginner is, what it means to be a beginner?   
THE ORDINARY ‘I’ AND THE SELF-GENERATED DEITY
Question: Are the ordinary ‘I’ and the self-generated deity separate? The ordinary ‘I’ is made of flesh and blood, whereas the self-generated deity has nothing inside.  
Answer: The main point you have to think about is this.  You have generated yourself as the deity. What is the basis for you to generate yourself as the deity? It can be said that the five aggregates are meditated on as the deity, the five aggregates that are the bases of designation of the ‘I’. So, you generate the five aggregates as the deity. 
In fact, there is this explanation that when you purify the five aggregates, you obtain the buddhas of the five families.  This is not easy.  It is said that when the form aggregate becomes completely purified, it becomes Vairochana.
Another way to think about this is to recall the fact that the ordinary coarse appropriated aggregates cannot be transformed into the deity. These ordinary coarse contaminated or appropriated aggregates cannot turn into a deity. This is why you have to purify everything into emptiness and then generate the deity from the state of emptiness.    
We say that from the state of the emptiness, the shaft of blue light, one cubit in height, appears. Then this blue light transforms into the deity.  This blue light then becomes the basis for you to meditate on the deity’s body.  
This phrase, “from the state of emptiness,” is crucial because the generation of the
deity occurs from the state of emptiness. It does not just arise but rather it arises from the state of emptiness. This means that whatever you generate from the state of emptiness is a mere imputation. It exists in mere name.
It is not the case that your contaminated aggregates with flesh and blood, bone and so on become the deity. You actually have to purify them into emptiness. Then from the state of the emptiness, you generate the deity.  
When we meditate, we purify everything into emptiness. We have a very subtle mind ascertaining emptiness. This very subtle mind ascertaining emptiness then becomes the basis for us to think, “I am the actual dharmakaya. I am the dharmakaya at the time of the result.” This is what we do when we bring death to the path as the dharmakaya or truth body. The basis for us to establish this dharmakaya is our very subtle mind ascertaining emptiness. It is on this very basis that we are able to generate this thought, “I am the actual dharmakaya,” and later on, “I am the actual sambhogakaya” and “I am the actual nirmanakaya.” 
In the final analysis, when you want to identify what buddha nature or buddha lineage is, we say it is that which is suitable to transform into a buddha body. What is this buddha lineage? It is actually our very subtle wind and mind and it is the very subtle wind and mind that transform into the buddha bodies. For example, in terms of this very subtle mind, it is simply this factor of clarity and knowing. That is what becomes a buddha’s dharmakaya. Similarly, the very subtle wind becomes a buddha’s rupakaya or form body.
What transforms into a buddha’s bodies? What are the bases that actually become a buddha’s truth body and form body? It is our very subtle wind and mind. The very subtle mind realizes emptiness. That realization of emptiness appears or arises as the deity’s body. So, by meditating in this way, you practise the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.
We talked about the apprehended aspect of the realization of emptiness appearing as the deity. If you take the expression “apprehended aspect” to refer to the object, then this means emptiness. Therefore, from the state of emptiness, the deity appears.
Sometimes, in certain texts, you will see this explanation that you meditate on the five aggregates as the deity. Some scholars have said that there is no fault in saying that. You can say that the five aggregates are meditated on as the deity. 
In most of Lama Tsongkhapa’s explanations, he talks about the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appearing as the body of the deity. What this means is that the exalted wisdom realizing emptiness appears as the deity’s body. Actually, this is a unique feature of tantra. In this meditation, you have the union of method and wisdom within a single mind. They are simply one entity with different isolates. 
Then you have this yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. You are able to accumulate both collections—the collection of merit and the collection of wisdom—at the same time. If you are able to combine method and wisdom into a single mind, then this mind becomes very powerful. This is a unique feature of tantra. This means that there is no differentiation between meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment. Even in subsequent attainment, you are able to accumulate easily the two accumulations of merit and wisdom.
As I mentioned in the previous class, the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity can also be found in the lower tantras. What is special in Highest Yoga Tantra is that there is this feature of bliss and emptiness also. Even though actually you may not generate bliss, at least, you visualize that you are experiencing bliss. You absorb all the coarse minds and you cause the very subtle mind to manifest. In such a state then, all appearances have vanished. This mind is generated in the nature of great bliss and by using this mind that is in the nature of bliss, you meditate on emptiness. This blissful mind ascertains emptiness. 
This practice is an uncommon and unique feature of Highest Yoga Tantra. By causing the very subtle mind to manifest, you are able to stop all the appearances and this mind becomes very blissful. It has a special ability to realize emptiness. So, using this blissful mind, you ascertain emptiness. 
We talked about taking desire to the path. What this means is that through the deity and the consort entering into union by the joining of the two organs, you cause all appearances to vanish. Using this blissful mind, you then meditate on emptiness. 
Back to the original question, “What is the basis of generating the deity on the first level?” It will be difficult for you to generate the deity based on your ordinary self, the ordinary ‘I’. Without purification into emptiness and so on, how do you do this practice of embracing a consort and generating a blissful mind for meditating on emptiness? It is not done on the basis of the ordinary ‘I’. One has to follow the instructions of purifying into emptiness and then generating as a deity. You have to meditate on stopping the appearances of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness. You also need to meditate on emptiness. 
With that kind of basis, you have clear appearance and divine pride. Then you are able to visualize entering into union with a consort generating this blissful mind and so on. Without these steps, if you just think that this ordinary ‘I’ is being generated as deity, then all these steps will be very difficult. Then this entering into union with a consort will be just some kind of very mundane thing. It will be of no benefit and in fact, it will generate negative karma.
In the generation stage, we are making use of the exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness. This blissful mind is used to ascertain emptiness. It is this exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness that arises as the deity’s body. If you have emptiness as the foundation, then this practice becomes easy. 
The techniques in tantra involve these steps. For example, in the four joys of the forward process and the four joys of the downward process, the bliss becomes greater and greater. As this happens, you are able to stop the coarse mind. All appearances will be stopped. Such a state becomes very powerful for the realization of emptiness. For example, it is said that if the male practitioner is not able to retain the white bodhicitta and this white bodhicitta is emitted from the body, actually this is an infraction in tantra. 
We have to understand tantra in an accurate way. If we see tantra as some kind of ordinary activity, then without understanding it properly, there is the danger we may generate wrong views. So, we have to be careful. It is not easy at all. If you do not understand tantra properly, there are many drawbacks. That is a good reason for why tantra is said to be secret. 
On the level of beginner, one meditates on the mandala slowly. One is able to generate clear appearance and one also trains in divine pride. Through practicing in this way again and again, eventually, the practitioner will be able to cause the entire supporting and supported mandala to appear clearly and instantly. 
In a short instant, the entire mandala appears clearly through the force of great familiarization. Simply by thinking about it, the entire mandala appears in the correct order with all the correct number of objects. One has clear appearance and one also has stable divine pride. Once one reaches that level, one belongs to the level of those who has attained some pristine wisdom. On this level called those attaining some pristine wisdom, one is able to cause the entire mandala to appear clearly in a very short period of time. In a period of a finger snap, everything appears clearly.
Khen Rinpoche: OK. Don’t forget these two things. In the next class if I ask, don’t say you don’t know again. Otherwise, it will take forever. 
TWO WAYS OF EXPLAINING THE APPREHENDED ASPECT
Question:  When we say the apprehended aspect of the realization of emptiness can refer to both the object and the object possessor (the mind), is it because the object and the mind realizing emptiness are indistinguishable and are in one entity? 
Khen Rinpoche: You say they are the same. I say they are not the same. 
There are two different ways of explanation. They are not the same thing. There are two ways of understanding what this apprehended aspect is.
One way is to understand it as the exalted wisdom realizing emptiness. 
The other way is to understand it as the object, emptiness. 
According to Lama Tsongkhapa, it is the former. In other words, for Lama Tsongkhapa, the apprehended aspect refers to the exalted wisdom realizing emptiness. There are two ways of understanding this expression. One way is the mind. The other is the object. These two are not the same. 
Question: What is the reason for there being two different ways of understanding the same expression? I think the reason is because the mind realizing emptiness and the object, emptiness, are one entity. 
Answer: The reason why this expression, “apprehended aspect,” can refer to either the object or the object-possessor is because the word, “aspect,” can be understood in two ways. It can refer to the object aspect or it can refer to the subject aspect. Because of the word, “aspect," this is why it can refer to emptiness or the mind realizing emptiness.
THE EXTRAORDINARY POWER OF HIGHEST YOGA TANTRA 

Question: Which of these two practitioners is more powerful in terms of purifying negativities and accumulating merit:
The first practitioner is a person who is on the generation stage of Highest Yoga Tantra and is practising the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity conjoined with indivisible bliss and emptiness but that bliss is imagined and this person has not yet attained calm abiding.
The second practitioner is a person who is practising one of the three lower classes. This person is also practising the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity and is on the path of accumulation and has achieved calm abiding? 
Answer: Highest Yoga Tantra has extraordinary power. It is said that you are able to attain full enlightenment in a single lifetime in the same body during these degenerate times. In Highest Yoga Tantra, there is an explanation of the absorbing of the elements, the clear light mind manifesting and then using that mind to realize emptiness. Such a technique does not exist in the lower tantras. This presentation of the various levels of the subtlety of mind is not found in the lower tantras. So, using this very subtle mind to meditate on emptiness is very powerful. This extraordinary power is found only in Highest Yoga Tantra. 
Unique technique for attaining calm abiding in Highest Yoga Tantra
The technique or procedure for attaining calm abiding in sutra, in the Perfection Vehicle, is the same as that taught in the lower tantras. Guntang Rinpoche said that because the procedure for attaining calm abiding is the same in the lower tantras, one is not able to stop the subtle conceptions. 
In Highest Yoga Tantra, there is a unique way of achieving calm abiding. It is said that you achieve calm abiding in Highest Yoga Tantra during the third of the four levels (of practitioners). You do not achieve calm abiding before that. 
For example, on the second of the four levels, you would not have achieved calm abiding. This means that when you do achieve calm abiding during the third level, you attain a very powerful calm abiding that is different from the calm abiding presented in the sutra system. Such a very powerful calm abiding is able to stop even the subtle conceptions. 
On the second level, you are able to cause the entire supporting and supported mandala to appear clearly in an instant. You have clear appearance and divine pride. However, you are not able to cause that clear appearance of the deities of the sense bases to appear instantly. If you want them to appear clearly, you may have to meditate for one or two hours. On the second level, you are able to meditate on the coarse deities instantly but not these subtle deities instantly. 
You need to train in being able to see the deities of the sense bases clearly also in a very short period of time. Through such training, then eventually, you will be able to see, for example, Kṣitigarbha at the eyes very clearly and instantly. When you are able to do that, you move on to the third level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom. 
Once you reach the third level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom, not only are you able to instantly generate the coarse deities clearly in a stable way, you are also able to do that for the subtle deities of the sense bases, i.e., the eyes and so forth. At this level, you have clear appearance and divine pride with respect to both the coarse and subtle deities. 
Once you reach this level, then you don’t need a long time to do your sadhana. You don’t need an hour and so on. You close your eyes and you are able to visualize the entire supporting and supported mandala.
Khen Rinpoche: If you are tired of your commitment to do the long sadhana, then make sure you achieve that level! Once you reach that level, then everything is there (in an instant). You don’t need two, three hours. You go (like that). (Khen Rinpoche gestures the visualization coming up in an instant). Then finished. Even if you have a 100 deities initiation, that’s no problem. 
GENERATING BLISS AND TAKING DESIRE INTO THE PATH
Question: I would like to clarify on the meditation of great bliss and wisdom. The way I meditate on bliss is that when I eat a delicious piece of cake, I get bliss in my mind. Then I think, “This bliss is empty of inherent existence. It is merely labelled by the mind. All phenomena, including me, are all empty of inherent existence.” Then I think the guru, who is a buddha, is also experiencing bliss. The guru realizes that the bliss he is experiencing is also labelled by the mind and is empty of inherent existence. Even though I think that the bliss from eating the cake is truly existent, I make the effort to think that it is empty of inherent existence. In that way, I try to conjoin that with the realization of emptiness. I want to check whether the imagination of the great bliss wisdom is something like that? Or is it something else? 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. The cake must be delicious! 
Answer: In general, there are two ways to experience bliss. Bliss can occur in the
retinue of a sense primary consciousness or bliss can occur in the retinue of a mental primary consciousness. 
When we experience bliss, that bliss appears to us as inherently existent. We also adhere to that bliss to be inherently existent. When that occurs, our attachment to that bliss will not decrease. In fact, it will increase. Therefore, it is important on such occasions to remember that the bliss is empty of true existence. It is like an illusion.
When we meet an object and we feel blissful, it is important for us to remember that that bliss is empty of true existence and is like an illusion. If we do not remember that, then we will generate attachment to that bliss and that will become the cause for us to circle in samsara.
We should remember that all phenomena are empty of true existence. They are like illusions. Not just bliss but all phenomena in samsara and nirvana are empty of true existence. They are like illusions. It is important for you to meditate on that. 
What does it mean to take desire into the path or to take sensual objects into the path? It isn’t just like what you had described. What is involved here is that you use a condition of joining the two organs to cause the winds to enter the central channel. If you are able to penetrate the essential points, then you are able to cause the winds to enter the central channel. Then as a result of that, the coarse minds are stopped, all appearances are stopped and so on. 
This also occurs, for example, during the process of fainting. This occurs on various other occasions such as when the two organs are joining, when one is falling asleep, fainting or dying and so on. Naturally, the coarse mind will be stopped and the subtle mind will manifest. When the subtle mind manifests, you are able to use it to ascertain emptiness. Then this becomes a very powerful practice. This process involves all the coarse conceptions stopping in an automatic way. This is what is involved when you take desire into the path.
EVERYTHING ARISING AS THE DEITY
Question: When we do our sadhana, when everything dissolves into emptiness, at the end, for ourselves, a clear appearance appears, say, with one face and two arms. After that, do we do this mental meditation every day or only when we are in meditation?  Let’s say I do my meditation, for example, Yamantaka. Now I am not Yamantaka because my face is still the ordinary me. We are supposed to see everybody as Yamantaka, but I still see everybody with the same face because my mind is still not pure. 
Answer: It is mentioned in the stanza LC 110 from Lama Chopa: 
I seek your blessings to cleanse all stains of ordinary appearance and grasping
Through the first stage yoga of transforming birth, 
Death, and the bardo into the three bodies of a buddha, 
So that whatever appears may arise as the deity. 
This stanza contains all the essential points of the generation stage. The generation stage involves, “transforming birth,/ Death, and the bardo into the three bodies of a buddha.” Then the stanza ends by saying, “I seek your blessings (to cleanse all stains of ordinary appearance and grasping) … So that whatever appears may arise as the deity.” This is not an easy practice but that is the goal.
For a beginner, this is hard to do. It is hard for everything that appears to arise as the deity. In fact, there are instructions on how you should practise during and in between the sessions. This means that even when you are out of session, there are many instructions for practice. So, this is something that you have to practise not just during the session. It is not as if after you get out of the session, you just leave everything behind. No! Even after the session, you have to practise. 
All these instructions are to be practiced. This occurs not just in tantra. You also see this in sutra. For example, there is the instruction or advice in the sutra that you should train in seeing all sentient beings as the teacher, a buddha. Also in the context of practising devotion to the spiritual master and relying on the guru, there are many instructions on how you should train in developing faith in your teacher. There are many instructions on how you should train to understand that things don’t exist in the way they appear. They appear in a certain way but those appearances are not necessarily real. Starting from the beginning, there are many instructions that you have to train in. Through this gradual process, eventually, when you train in tantra, you will be able to train in seeing everything that appears as the deity’s body.
As we have explained, you have to train in stages starting from the level of a beginner and then going to the next level, the second level. When you reach the third level, those who had attained some control over pristine wisdom, you are able to cause the entire supporting and supported mandala to appear instantly. Simply by thinking about the mandala, the entire mandala appears clearly. So, you have clear appearance and you also have divine pride. You are also able to remember that they are empty of inherent existence. So, by training, then simply by thinking, you are able to do all that.
OVERCOMING LAXITY & EXCITATION BY MEDITATING ON THE SUBTLE DROP
In the presentation here, it is said that you attain calm abiding only during the third level. So, this very stable mind is attained only during the third level. This means that on the first and second of the four levels, you do not have calm abiding. That implies that it is possible for you to come under the influence of laxity and excitation and that your mind can become distracted and so on. If laxity and excitation and so on occur, it will become difficult for you to have this clear appearance of the deity’s body and so on. It is said that in order for “whatever appears may arise as the deity,” this is the training you have to do. This occurs on the generation stage.
On the third level, you have this stability to cause the coarse and subtle bases to appear clearly and instantly. When you attain the third level, the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom, you have attained both stability in the coarse generation stage and you have also completed the coarse generation stage.
In fact, there is this explanation on what you should do on the first two levels. 
Further, those on the first two levels …  in realization meditation.(p. 119)
On the first two levels, you will still have laxity and excitation. In order to counter them, you are instructed to meditate on the subtle drop.
You must be able to know what these terms mean. So, whenever you hear these terms, for example, beginner, you have to immediately be able to tell this is what it means. Whenever you hear the expression, those who have attained some pristine wisdom, immediately, there is some meaning generality or idea in your mind as to what this means. If you do not have this kind of understanding, it will be difficult for you to understand the text.
Khen Rinpoche: You get these two things now? It is like eating cake. You must get the bliss, “Ah, these two levels!” It is not only cake. There is bliss in studying also.
On the first two levels—beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom—you try to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride with respect to the supporting and supported mandala. On these two levels, you still have mental laxity and excitation. How do you overcome them? The method is meditation on the subtle drop.
If laxity is predominant, meaning excitation is not as predominant, then what do you do? You have to meditate on the subtle drop at the upper opening. You can meditate on subtle drop or the subtle minute hand implement or symbol. 
Where is this upper opening? It is this point between your eyebrows. It is said that the central channel goes upwards, curves and ends at the point between your eyebrows. At the end here, there is this opening inside. You meditate on a tiny five-spoked vajra. By meditating on this minute five-spoked vajra at that point, you will be able to reduce laxity. By meditating on this minute vajra, which is the size of a mustard seed, at the opening, you will be able to cause laxity to subside. 
This is not the main meditation. You still have to return to the visualization of the supporting and supported mandala in order to cultivate divine pride and clear appearance. The meditation on the tiny vajra at the upper opening is simply for the sake of overcoming laxity. Once laxity has been taken care of, then you don’t have to meditate on it again. You should return to meditating on the supporting and supported mandala. By meditating in this way, you want to cause the mandala to appear clearly and instantly.
What happens if excitation is predominant? In that case, you should meditate on the subtle drop at the lower opening. The lower opening is situated at your secret place. It’s where the lower end of the central channel is located. Inside of the lower end of the central channel, you should meditate on this subtle object that’s given the name, the substance drop. You have to meditate on this object, which is as small as a mustard seed, and then you overcome your excitation. As soon as excitation is overcome, then you return to meditating on the mandala, cultivating clear appearance and divine pride.
Meditations involving the subtle drop and their purpose
Beginners and those attaining some pristine wisdom …
…
… inside a hand symbol or subtle drop. (p. 119)
Further, those on the first two levels …  in realization meditation. (p. 119)
It is said that …  achieved from the third level. (p. 120)
I have already given the commentary. The words are quite clear. If you read these passages, you should understand what they are saying. You have to read the text again on your own. Read again and again. Then you can understand what the text is saying. You have to ask yourself again what this passage is saying.
The passages after that talk about when calm abiding is attained, when special insight is attained, when do you have the union of calm abiding and special insight and do you achieve the two together? 
Some scholars say that you can achieve calm abiding and special insight simultaneously. 
There are some other scholars who say that calm abiding and special insight are attained serially as in the case of the sutra system. 
There is one scholar who says that calm abiding is attained when you complete the subtle generation stage. But the reply then says that this does not explain when it is newly attained and so on.
SPECIAL ANNOUNCEMENT
You know Rinpoche is coming here and giving the Lama Chopa and Yamantaka initiations. He will also be giving the Lama Chopa commentary. These teachings will last for about one month in September. 
Many people worry about the commitment for (receiving the commentary of) Lama Chopa. I checked. Of course, Rinpoche highly encourages people to do Lama Chopa every day. That’s his main wish. It is part of the guru devotion practice, so he thinks it is extremely important to do Lama Chopa every day. He wants people to do as many (Lama Chopas) as possible. 
Rinpoche said if people have difficulty with doing Lama Chopa every day, then they should do the Lama Tsongkhapa Guru Yoga every day. 
So, Rinpoche says, “Don’t need to worry.” So, that is quite clear. 
So, don’t worry so much about the commitments. Of course, the best is if you can commit to do Lama Chopa every day and especially, to learn tantra as well as possible. Then when Rinpoche comes and explains, you can understand better. Lama Chopa is all about tantra. Now is the preparation. When I explain on generation stage and completion stage, listen well. 
When Rinpoche comes and explains, then you will have a clearer idea. Some people worry so much about the commitment. So, I checked and the advice is something like that. So, OK, now you can take (the commentary).
Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel 
Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 