Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L01FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.409081
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 1	 				                                        21 March 2017
The makings of a real Buddhist. The validity of the Buddha and his teachings. Need for pure refuge. Practising according to the lam-rim. Entering the Mahayana path. 
THE MAKINGS OF A REAL BUDDHIST
It is said in the sutras that all phenomena are under the influence of causes and conditions. It is also said that whatever happens in the future and whatever we seek to achieve will have their roots in the power of our aspiration. As such, whatever aspirational prayers we make will bear fruit in the future. In other words, if we want to achieve something, our heart has to be in it. We must really want it. Whether we call it belief, aspiration or yearning, it is what moves our mind towards the objective we want to achieve. 
A real Buddhist is someone who seeks to achieve liberation from the very depths of his heart. A person who merely seeks the happiness of this life alone does not make that person a Buddhist at all. It is difficult to call this person a Buddhist. 
Even if a person is looking for a good rebirth, based on that motivation alone, it is still difficult to justify calling that person a Buddhist. 
If a person is practising Dharma for the sake of achieving some peace and happiness in this life or some level of concentration, those motivations do not make that person a Buddhist. There are techniques to achieve the different levels of concentration and formless absorptions but engaging in those practices alone does not qualify one to be a Buddhist. 
It is very important to understand this clearly. Many people turn to and practise the Buddhadharma to have some calm, peace and happiness of the mind. But that does not make one a Buddhist at all. It is important to understand this. 
As we said earlier, a Buddhist is someone who is yearning for liberation from the depths of his heart. This is the motivation that is driving this person. This is what he is looking for. His mental attention is focussed on this all the time. 
The object of attainment is the sorrowless state, that is, the complete pacification of every single suffering. But even if one achieves a level of concentration whereby one no longer experiences the suffering of pain and the suffering of change whilst in cyclic existence, this attainment is not permanent and doesn’t last. One will fall from this state of attainment into another rebirth in cyclic existence and once again experience the manifest suffering of pain and the suffering of change. The goal of real happiness has not been achieved. 
But to achieve even these states in samsara is no mean feat. One has to put in so much hard work just to achieve the actual concentrations of the form and formless realms. Those states of concentration can only be achieved on the basis of having attained calm abiding (or meditative stabilisation) first. When one has achieved those states of concentration, the manifest afflictions are suppressed and one does not experience any suffering of pain or suffering of change. But despite all the hard work, at the end of the day, those states are temporary and do not last. When one loses those states of attainment, one has to experience the different manifest sufferings again. 
So you are either a Buddhist or not a Buddhist. To be a real Buddhist, you have to be someone who is seeking liberation from cyclic existence from the depths of your heart, putting all your energy towards achieving this goal. This is what your mind focusses on. This is what you need to do if you were to call yourself a Buddhist. 
THE VALIDITY OF THE BUDDHA AND HIS TEACHINGS
On the basis of having this heartfelt yearning for liberation from cyclic existence through learning and reasoning, we discover that our kind teacher and founder, Guru Shakyamuni Buddha is a valid authority. On the basis of having established through reasoning that he is a valid authority, then we can establish that his speech and doctrine are also valid. We have to gain that ascertainment and conviction for ourselves. 
On the basis of generating this firm conviction and ascertainment that the Buddha and his teachings are valid as the foundation, we enter then into the practice of the Buddhadharma. This is how it should be done. When we say we have entered into the practice of the Buddhadharma, it means that we are doing so after having developed a firm conviction in and ascertainment of the validity of the Buddha himself and the validity of his teachings.  
NEED FOR PURE REFUGE
To be a real Buddhist, we need to have pure refuge, i.e., entrusting ourselves purely to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. On the basis of having developed the conviction and ascertainment of the validity of the Buddha and his teachings, we see how important the Three Jewels—the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha—are and how they are absolutely essential for our own liberation and happiness. When we see this, then the connection we feel towards the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha will be very special. We will actually taste it. There will be some real feeling. We need to be like that. 
When we don’t feel this personal connection with the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha because of not understanding how essential they are for our own liberation and happiness, we will think the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are just something out there. That’s about it. Our refuge will be just like that.  So we need to attain a level whereby we truly feel in our heart that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are absolutely essential for our well-being, liberation and happiness. 
The importance of reflecting on death and impermanence
But before we can develop this feeling of refuge, first, we must have reflected well on the subject of impermanence, particularly, our own impending death as taught in the lam-rim, the stages of the path to enlightenment—death is certain, but our time of death is uncertain and at the time of death, nothing helps except the Dharma. We have to have some experience of all these points before we can even talk about generating real refuge. 
Since at the time of death nothing is of use to us except the Dharma—everything else is useless—then what we have left and the only hope we have is the Three Jewels. We come to the understanding that at the time of death, only the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha matter. Therefore, it is really important continually to be mindful of death and impermanence. 
In order to be a real Buddhist, we need to have genuine refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. And in order to generate some real feeling of refuge, it is indispensable to have some experience of having thought about our own impending death and impermanence. When we are really mindful of this, having reflected well on our own death and impermanence, then even just reciting the refuge prayer once—“I go for refuge and entrust myself to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha”—will have so much meaning for us because we are reciting that from the depths of our heart. 
Everybody is so excited about tantra—wanting to learn about it, wanting to practise it. We have the idea that we will become a buddha very soon because of practising the tantric path. Please forget about this as this is not going to happen. It is impossible! We don’t even have fundamental refuge! What we need is refuge and before real refuge can happen, we must think about our own impermanence and death. 
Yes, the Vajrayana is supreme amongst all the vehicles. But if we don’t have this working capital, then it will not become the supreme vehicle for us. This is not going to happen. We can forget about achieving enlightenment when we don’t even have the fundamentals under our belt. If we don’t build the correct foundations, then the practice of tantra is only a cause for us to go to the hell realms. We will not accomplish our goal through our practice of tantra. 
Yes, we are here to study about tantra. There is a time and place for that. When we study the Buddhadharma, we should learn as much as we can. It is good to know what tantra is. Hopefully, sometime in the future, when you are ready, you can put it into practice. 
Studying and learning is one thing. We can learn many things. But in terms of practice, there is no such thing as practising tantra right now. We have to practise whatever is necessary, starting from the beginning of the path. We cannot jump over any steps. We have to be very clear about this. Studying is one thing. When we practise, it is a completely different thing. 
The first thing we need to do is to make sure that we are real and not just nominal Buddhists. Whether we become a Buddhist or not depends on the purity of our practice of refuge. As I have mentioned earlier, in order for our practice of refuge to be pure, at the very least, we have to rely on the continual mindfulness of death and impermanence every day. In the same way, from our heart, we have to focus our mind on seeking liberation every day. When we put all these things together, then we can have some kind of real refuge. Only then perhaps, we qualify as a real Buddhist.
So with this different mindset, attitude and motivation, only then do we engage in the learning of the Buddhadharma. Please keep in mind these different mindset, attitude and motivation.
PRACTISING ACCORDING TO THE LAM-RIM
When we are practising the Dharma, we have to do it in accordance with how it is set out in the lam-rim, the stages of the path to enlightenment. It is divided into the path that is shared with the persons of small capacity, the path that is shared with the persons of medium capacity and the path of the persons of great capacity. 
The path that is shared with persons of small capacity—giving up our attachment to this life 
First, we have to engage in the practices that are common to a person of small capacity. We have to be trained in overcoming our current preoccupation with and attachment to this life and substitute it with a mind that is always seeking the happiness of future lives. This has to arise in our heart naturally and should be our driving force. This acts as the first milestone that we need to achieve. 
What are we seeking? What do we really want? If we were to check, what we really want is the happiness of this life alone. If this is what drives us every day, with that kind of worldview and attitude, even if we were to study, learn, meditate on and engage in Dharma practice, none of these activities will become Dharma. 
The great Kadampa geshes said, “What determines what is Dharma and what is not Dharma? If we are looking for the happiness of this life, nothing is Dharma!” So whatever is done with that motivation is not Dharma. But if one were to reverse the attraction to this life and being driven by the pursuit of this life’s happiness, seeking instead from the depths of one’s heart only the happiness of future lives, then that qualifies as Dharma. This is the minimum entry level to qualify as Dharma. Therefore, any activity that is done motivated by seeking the happiness of this life—even if it is studying the Dharma or any meditation practice—does not become Dharma practice.
All of us have taken many initiations and vows, with huge commitments to do this and that. Let’s take the example of the six session guru yoga practice. For some people, even doing that daily commitment is a torture and a cause of suffering! They find it a burden to do the six session guru yoga practice. Even when they do their practice, it doesn’t seem to solve their problems in this life. 
But in the first place, why are they doing the practice? If they are just concerned with the happiness and problems of this life, they will be miserable and unhappy when they have to do their six session guru yoga commitment. The problem lies with their attitude of looking for the happiness of this life. But if their mind is focussed solely on the happiness of future lives, then they won’t find doing their commitments as a source of suffering.
Right from the very beginning, we have to be very clear about what we are looking for. We get into trouble because in our heart, we are still concerned about this life. We want the Dharma for the happiness of this life, to solve the problems of this life. Then it doesn’t matter what we do. We will still be very miserable and unhappy.  The problem lies there. 
This is the minimum entry level. First, we have to become a person who is not interested in this life but is mainly looking for the happiness of future lives. When this is what drives us every day, then there is no difficulty with doing commitments, practising the Dharma and learning the Buddhadharma and so forth. 
But this is difficult to achieve. It is not going to happen if we just sit around and do nothing. In order for us to become such a person, first, we must remember death and impermanence at all times. We have to realize how our life is very fragile as we can lose it very easily. When we do not recall this reality, automatically, we will fall back into our old ways and habits. We will think that we are going to live forever, that our life is so strong and stable. 
If we do not overcome our strong attachment to this life, then nothing we do becomes Dharma. We may recite many mantras and circumambulate stupas thousands of times. We may make many offerings, practising generosity and so forth.  But nothing will become Dharma. Not only are such activities not Dharma, often they only serve to increase and strengthen our attachment to this life. 
We always like numbers. When we accumulate any number of mantras, circumambulations or offerings and so forth, because we are still so attached to this life, these so-called practices become conditions for our pride to arise. We advertise and boast, “I did x number of circumambulations. I gave away x $. I did x number of mantras.” Isn’t this what happens? After we finish one hundred thousand or many hundreds of thousands of prostrations, we feel, “I did this!” We start to advertise this fact, wanting people to know about our achievement. 
If we are not certain of what we are looking for, there is always this danger that our so-called Dharma activities will only become causes for us to increase our attachment to this life.
The Kadampa masters had advised, “The greatest obstacle to making whatever we do Dharma, the greatest obstacle to us becoming a Dharma practitioner, is our attachment to this life’s happiness.”
We have to be extremely careful about this. We really must work at giving up our preoccupation with and attachment to this life’s happiness. In whatever we do, whether we are learning the Dharma or engaging in reflection, meditation or virtue, we have to be very careful. We have to examine to make sure that these activities are not mixed with or driven by looking for something in this life alone. Otherwise, it will be like having a plate of very delicious food that is mixed with a little bit of vomit. The food may good but the vomit transforms it into something that is no longer desirable. Likewise, whatever virtue we may want to do, we have to make sure that it is not influenced by our attachment to this life. 
~ Transforming our mind into Dharma
Whatever we do, we have to try to make it become Dharma. It has to benefit the mind. This is where we need to start. When we practise the Dharma, we cannot start at the top. We have to start from the beginning. The minimum entry level is that first, we have to transform our mind into the Dharma. This means that whatever we do, it cannot be mixed with attachment to this life. We have to start from there. 
But it is not sufficient for the practice that we are doing to become Dharma. Our mind has to transform into Dharma too. If our mind is not transformed into Dharma, then whatever Dharma practice we do will not help. What helps is transforming our mind into Dharma. But as I mentioned earlier, if we do not loosen our tight grip on our preoccupation with the happiness of this life, it will be very difficult for that to happen. 
We have to pay attention to this extremely important point—our mind has to be transformed. We have to work at overcoming the attachment to this life and make a heartfelt effort to change our worldview to seek the happiness of future lives.  This is when we truly transform our mind. 
This is what we call ‘transformation through practice.’ Otherwise, practising the Dharma without transforming the mind is not helpful at all. Some of us here have been practising the Dharma for a long time—maybe 10, 20, 30, even 40 years—but still we find that our mind has not changed. This is an example of practising the Dharma that does not help. The mind also has to change into Dharma. 
~ The teachings are our personal instructions
When we receive teachings from our virtuous friends and teachers, we may be physically present but how we receive those teaching makes a huge difference as well.  We should receive those teachings as if they are specifically meant for us alone. It doesn’t matter what other people are thinking or doing. We shouldn’t be wondering whether the teachings are meant for particular people. We have to look at the teachings as personal instructions, “This is a direct instruction to me, telling me what I need to do and what I shouldn’t do.” It will be beneficial if we can listen to teachings with this attitude. This is the reason why it is mentioned in the teachings that it is important to have devotion towards our teachers or gurus. Otherwise, we won’t take the teachings to heart. We don’t see the teachings as instructions that are meant for us. Instead, we will see them as instructions for somebody else. At times, we may even think of them as just a general talk. 
Khen Rinpoche: The teachings becomes like news from Channel News Asia or the BBC! 
This is why it makes a huge difference if we were to choose to receive teachings from gurus who we have faith in.  Whatever the guru says will have an impact on our mind. This is our experience. This is why it is important to receive teachings from someone in whom we have faith. The teachings will then be very effective for the mind. Otherwise, receiving teachings from anybody in general will be an accumulation of information with no real impact on the mind as the heart is not moved. Therefore, in order for the teachings to have some impact, we need devotion. 
As mentioned at the beginning of the lam-rim, the root of the path is correctly devoting to the virtuous friend. This emphasizes the importance of having single-pointed devotion towards the guru for his teachings to have an impact on our heart and mind. This is very important. Please keep this in mind. 
When we say that we have to give up this life, we have to understand why it is so important to give up attachment to this life. We have to see that for ourselves. Even if we were to study a lot of Dharma and meditate and reflect on what we have learnt, if we were to do so with strong attachment to this life and are unable to give it up, we have to see why those activities do not become Dharma. Why do they not help the mind? Why is it that the mind doesn’t change at all? This is an extremely essential point that we have to realize for ourselves. 
Once we are able to see the point, then all we have to do is to be mindful and recollect continually our impending death and impermanence. Through such continuous training and mindfulness, we will reach the point where naturally we are only interested in future lives and we will not place so much emphasis on this life. What really drives us then is the happiness of future lives, which will influence everything we do. Whatever decisions we make, the main consideration will be whether they are going to help us in our future lives. When we have reached this point, we become a person of small capacity. Only then are we qualified to say, “I am a Dharma practitioner practising the Dharma.” 
Khen Rinpoche: Otherwise, we cannot say that.
What I am driving at here is that when we do our practice but we still don’t find ourselves changing or we find that doing our commitments is tough and burdensome, we have to investigate carefully. Why are we like that? What is the cause? What is the problem? Once we have found the source of the problem, we have to deal with it and get rid of it.
If we were to weigh the happiness of this life and the happiness of all our future lives, which is more important? If we compare the length of time that constitutes this life versus that of all our future lives—i.e., not only our next life but life to life after that— logically, it is reasonable to say that our future lives are much more important than this one life. But to achieve this ascertainment is really not easy because our attachment to and preoccupation with this life’s happiness is very strong. If we don’t do something equally strong to counteract it, it is not going to go away on its own. 
We have to work on the preliminary practices such as the strong mindfulness of death and impermanence and so forth to weaken our attachment to this life. It would be wonderful if we can completely reverse our attachment to this life. But even if we cannot do so completely, simply by reducing our attachment to this life, then whatever virtuous practices we do—learning, studying and meditating on the Dharma and so forth—will actually become Dharma practice that will benefit the mind in an effective way. 
The path that is shared with the person of medium capacity ~ reflecting on the four noble truths
Next is the training that is shared with the path of person of medium capacity, i.e., when one has to reflect well on true suffering. When one understands well what true suffering is, there will come the day when one is not interested with anything that is included within samsara. When there is no attachment to any samsaric perfections, then one become a person of medium capacity. 
To be a person of medium capacity, first, one must realize suffering in all its aspects. A person of medium capacity is not attracted to any samsaric perfections at all since he realizes that everything that is included in samsara is in the nature of suffering. 
However, that alone is not sufficient. One also has to understand the causal relationship between true origins and true suffering. Ideally, one needs to understand the whole process of entering into samsara through the presentation of the twelve links of dependent origination in both their forward and reverse processes. 
One needs to understand that true cessations are to be attained by meditating on true paths. It is very important that one feels, “True cessations are achievable and are not just some fairy tale. I can do it. One day, I can achieve nirvana.”  With this kind of uncontrived yearning for liberation, one enters the path automatically. One will not have any difficulty in accumulating merit, purifying one’s obscurations and doing one’s commitments.
Khen Rinpoche: I am talking about those people who have many commitments. 
The person who has an uncontrived and heartfelt yearning for liberation will be able to engage in the main practice of the three higher trainings: 
the higher training in ethics 
the higher training in concentration 
the higher training in wisdom
This person will find these practices easy and not challenging at all because she will be so driven to achieve liberation. 
First, she will have no difficulty in keeping ethical discipline. The higher training in ethics helps to control many afflictions. Because of being able to live in ethical discipline, the non-virtuous actions of the body and speech are controlled, tamed and disciplined. 
This makes it much easier for that person to develop concentration if she wishes to do so. Since the body and speech are well controlled, it makes it easier to control the mind. As the mind becomes more peaceful, she can engage in the practice of concentration. When her concentration becomes stable, due to that stability, many afflictions are not able to manifest. 
The higher training in ethics is the foundation for the higher training in concentration because the former leads to the restraint of non-virtues of the body and speech. When one is able to restrain the non-virtues of body and speech, it is so much easier for one to achieve peace in the mind. With fewer distractions, it is easier to develop a focussed mind. 
In the context of the higher training in concentration, this pertains to the development of calm abiding or meditative stabilization. When calm abiding is achieved, many of the afflictions are suppressed, i.e., they are not able to manifest. 
On the basis of the higher training in concentration, one can then achieve the higher training in wisdom. In this context, the higher training in wisdom refers primarily to special insight or vipassana, which is essentially a wisdom that is developed from having calm abiding. This wisdom is developed for the sake of cutting the root of samsara, the root of all our suffering. 
With the achievement of special insight, one attains the path of preparation. 
With further meditation practice, there will come the time when one sees the truth directly. One has entered the path of seeing. 
But just seeing the truth directly is not sufficient because at that point, the afflictions have not been removed yet. One needs to familiarize oneself with the direct perception of the truth over and over again. That is why we have the path of meditation. 
When one reaches the end of the path of meditation, all the afflictions together with their seeds will be destroyed. One becomes an arhat or foe destroyer. 
We are talking about this from the perspective of the Hinayana path. The liberation mentioned in the teachings refers to liberation from cyclic existence or liberation from the afflictions. Such liberation can be achieved by both the hearers and solitary realizers. 
In terms of the path to achieve liberation, is that the end of the journey? The answer is no. It is not the end. 
Although one has achieved liberation—all the afflictions and their seeds have been destroyed—there is still something to be abandoned. This is the imprints or predispositions left on the mind by the afflictions. Anyone who has these obscurations is not able to do perfect work for sentient beings. Therefore, the foe destroyers have to enter the Mahayana path, going through all the paths and grounds till the end of the tenth ground after which they will achieve enlightenment. 
But is this the only manner of progression? Must one enter the Hinayana path and then come back again to start the Mahayana path? 
No, that is not the only manner of progression. There are many individuals who enter the Mahayana path from the onset. There is a systematic way of achieving this. 
As I mentioned earlier, first, one has to renounce the happiness of this life and overcome one’s attachment to this life. One becomes a person of small capacity. 
On this basis, one needs to develop an aversion to every single samsaric perfection. On the basis of this personal understanding of samsara, one realizes how everything in samsara is in the nature of suffering. One also sees that everybody else in samsara is in the same situation and is also suffering. With training, one is able to develop great compassion for every being in samsara. 
The path of the person of great capacity
On the basis of such great compassion, one develops the wholehearted resolve with the courageous thought of taking on the personal responsibility of working for others.  One becomes a person of great capacity at which point one is about to but has not yet entered the Mahayana path. 
If one has the very courageous thought—“I will do it alone. I will carry the burden of liberating all sentient beings!”—with this big heart, we could say that one is a person of great capacity. 
We should not think that this is a very unhappy person who thinks, “Now I have to bear the burden of the world.” She is not like that. She is unbelievably courageous. Because she is doing this for a reason, she does this so happily. I think such people are unbelievably happy and joyous. She is aiming to liberate all sentient beings. With this wholehearted resolve based on great compassion, she then wonders, “What must I do in order to achieve what I am looking for?” 
ENTERING THE MAHAYANA PATH
The wholehearted resolve should then lead to the generation of bodhicitta because she realizes, “There is no choice really. I must achieve full enlightenment in order to liberate all sentient beings.” When this bodhicitta arises, she becomes a bodhisattva. It is only then that the Mahayana path begins with the Mahayana path of accumulation. By attaining this uncontrived bodhicitta, she enters the Mahayana path. 
On the first of the five Mahayana paths—the Mahayana path of accumulation—the bodhisattva achieves the calm abiding that has emptiness as its focal object. 
When the bodhisattva achieves the special insight focussing on emptiness, he enters the Mahayana path of preparation. There are four levels on the path of preparation: 
heat
peak
forbearance 
super mundane quality
As the bodhisattva progresses through the Mahayana path of preparation, it is said that the dualistic appearance in the mind of the bodhisattva subsides gradually. 
When all dualistic appearances have completely subsided, this leads the bodhisattva to directly perceive the truth, emptiness, for the first time. This is when he achieves the Mahayana path of seeing, i.e., the bodhisattva sees emptiness directly for the first time when he enters the Mahayana path of seeing. 
This is not the end but only marks the beginning of the destruction of the afflictions because they are very difficult to overcome. Although he has already realized emptiness directly, the bodhisattva has to meditate on emptiness over and over again on the path of meditation for the purpose of removing all the different layers of ignorance. 
The bodhisattva has to alternate between meditative equipoise and post-meditative equipoise. During meditative equipoise, he focusses directly on emptiness to cut the different layers of ignorance. Then he comes out of meditative equipoise. During post-meditative equipoise, he accumulates the collection of merit to empower his wisdom consciousness. 
The bodhisattva alternates between meditative equipoise and post-meditative equipoise from the first to the seventh grounds. Only when all the seeds of ignorance are removed, does the bodhisattva achieve the eighth ground.
On the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds, the bodhisattvas still have to overcome the knowledge obscurations. These are the imprints or predispositions of ignorance. The bodhisattva has to meditate over and over again on the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds for the purpose of overcoming the knowledge obscurations. From the perspective of the Mahayana sutra, the bodhisattva can travel all the way to the end of the tenth ground. By depending on the sutra path, this is as far as the bodhisattva can go. 
Without entering the tantric path, enlightenment is not possible. So by depending on the sutric path, at the end of the tenth ground, the bodhisattva has to enter the tantric path. In the presentation of tantra, there is an explanation of the extremely subtle knowledge obscurations that can only be abandoned through the tantric path. 
Therefore, at the end of sutric path, the bodhisattva enters the path of highest yoga tantra. He then achieves the clear light, illusory body and unification. 

As the bodhisattva progresses on the tantric path, with those realizations, he abandons the subtle knowledge obscurations presented in tantra. When these are overcome, the bodhisattva is enlightened and becomes a buddha.
For the next few lessons, we will review the presentation of the grounds and paths according to sutra. If you don’t have some basic idea of them, it is going to be complicated because there is nothing for you to compare when we talk about the tantric grounds and paths. 
The purpose of this particular module is to find out what are the essential points of tantra. If you want to know, then you really have to put in the effort to study. You need to read and think.  It is useful to learn about tantra and its features because people often have all kinds of weird ideas and wrong views about tantra. Whether we can practice tantra or not is a different matter but it is good to know because, at least, we can remove some of these strange ideas about tantra.  
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong and Rachel Tan; edited by Cecilia Tsong.