Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L09FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:14.927213
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson                                                                     9
18 April 2017


Bringing something home with you. The Buddhadharma &  liberation.  Homework.
Scriptural Dharma. Realizational Dharma. The  Mahayana  &  the  Hinayana—not
differentiated by the view but by conduct. Upholding the Dharma.  Liberation
& the wisdom realizing emptiness.


BRINGING SOMETHING HOME WITH YOU

Most of you must have come from work. You must be tired after a full day  at
work.  Nevertheless, do try your best to focus whenever you  are  in  class.
In every class, you should aim to learn at least one or two new  things  and
pick up some new concepts and terms.

Here, there is a mixture of students  of  different  levels.  Some  are  new
while others have been around for a while.  Whatever it is, at  the  end  of
every class, you should  bring  something  home  with  you.  “Today,  he  is
talking about this topic and making these points.”

You should not have this idea, “Whatever happens, happens. It’s OK if I  get
it. If I don’t get it, I’ll try again next time.” This  is  the  reason  why
there are students who have been here for five, six  years  ending  up  with
nothing!

Even if you can’t understand everything that’s said in class,  at  the  very
least, you should be able to say, “Yes, this is the main point!”   You  must
bring home something with you.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what I am saying here?   After  the  class,
you shouldn’t say, “I don’t  know  what  Geshe-la  taught  today!”  I’m  not
talking to a particular person. I’m  talking  to  everyone,  especially  the
older students. I’m not talking about those who’re old in age but the  older
ones who have been learning the Dharma for a long time.
THE BUDDHADHARMA & LIBERATION

You should endeavour to gain the heartfelt understanding that  in  order  to
achieve liberation, i.e.,  permanent  happiness,  there’s  no  other  method
besides studying the Buddhadharma.  You have to arrive  at  that  point  for
yourself when you see that the permanent happiness of  liberation  can  only
be achieved by relying on  the  Buddhadharma,  nothing  else.  You  have  to
arrive at that point in your development.

When we talk about the Buddhadharma, there’s the scriptural Dharma  and  the
realizational  Dharma.  By  learning,   understanding   and   applying   the
scriptural Dharma, one will gain the  experience  and  realizations  of  the
path. When that happens, the scriptural Dharma is born in the  mind.   These
are the two aspects of the Dharma.

You have to see for yourself why one has to  rely  on  the  Buddhadharma  in
order to achieve liberation.  There is no other  way.   Then  when  we  talk
about the Hinayana path and the Mahayana path, we have to see  how  one  can
progress towards liberation by depending on these paths.

If you truly understand that there’s no other method except reliance on  the
Buddhadharma to achieve liberation, and the mode of progressing on the  path
as it’s explained in the grounds and paths literature, it’s said  this  will
bring great joy in the mind.

In order for such joy and enthusiasm to come about, you  have  to  know  the
procedure of how to go about achieving liberation and  enlightenment.   This
is the whole point of knowing the grounds and paths.  If you understand  and
gain a conviction in the presentation of the  grounds  and  paths  and  what
they  entail  and  involve,  joy  and  interest  will  arise   followed   by
enthusiasm. But for this to happen, there is no other way  besides  studying
and learning the mode of progress through the paths that lead to  liberation
and enlightenment.

HOMEWORK

There’s no class this coming Thursday and for the whole of  next  week.  But
this doesn’t mean that you are free because you’ve been  given  homework  to
do. If you consider yourself to be a student, someone who  wants  to  learn,
then you have to commit yourself to learning. As such, it’s compulsory  that
you do the homework.

We’ve talked about the grounds and paths, both recently  and  in  the  past.
There’s a lot of material around.  You have to revise and  review  what  was
covered and at the very least, gain  an  understanding  of  what  the  paths
constitute.  What  is  the  path  of  accumulation?  What  is  the  path  of
preparation? What do they involve? What is the path of seeing and  the  path
of meditation? You must revise and review the materials to  have  all  these
points clearly in your mind.

This is written homework. You need to produce short notes and a chart  about
the different paths—what happens on the path of accumulation,  the  path  of
preparation, the path of seeing, the path of meditation  and  so  forth.  In
particular, your chart should highlight the manner in which  the  afflictive
obscurations and the knowledge obscurations are abandoned.

Based on revising the materials and whatever understanding you  gain,  write
your own notes and produce your own chart.   During  that  process,  if  you
have qualms or questions with regard to the grounds  and  paths,  list  them
out at the side of your notes. It is not a matter  of  cutting  and  pasting
the chart that was given to you!

For example,  what  is  the  milestone  for  the  path  of  preparation?  As
indicated in the chart, you need the  union  of  calm  abiding  and  special
insight focussing on emptiness.  You have to think  before  you  write  this
down. You need to be prepared so that if someone were  to  ask  you—“Why  do
you need the  union  of  calm  abiding  and  special  insight  focussing  on
emptiness in order to enter the path of preparation?”—from  your  own  side,
you must have the answer. Whatever answer  it  may  be,  it  doesn’t  matter
whether it is right or wrong. But you must have an answer. Don’t just  write
down something without any thought or reason. Mere regurgitation is not  the
point!

If you have qualms—“If I were to say this, then this is the implication.  If
I were to say that, that is the implication.”—you’ve to write these down  as
well.

This is the homework.  Please make a set of notes  as  if  you’re  giving  a
talk on this topic for an hour and a half or two hours. From your own  side,
you have to be able to  present  with  confidence.  “This  is  the  mode  of
progress on the Hinayana path. This is the mode of progress on the  Mahayana
path.” You have to be thoroughly familiar with the subject  matter  in  your
head.

Of course, we do not have the time for everyone to  stand  up  here  for  an
hour and a half or two hours to give their presentations.  But  the  aim  of
your homework is to prepare you to present the mode of progress through  the
Mahayana path and the Hinayana path in front of a group of people  for  this
length of time. Do you have the knowledge in your head to give such a  talk?
This homework is an exercise to build up your confidence to be  able  to  do
so.

Khen Rinpoche: Now do you have the idea of what is required?   We  will  try
that.

The Dharma is divided into two—the scriptural Dharma and  the  realizational
Dharma.

SCRIPTURAL DHARMA

The scriptural Dharma consists of the three collections (the  three  pitakas
or baskets):
1. the vinaya
2. the sutras
3. the Abhidharma

Subject matter & verse of homage
What is the subject matter of the vinaya? This is the scriptural  collection
that has  as  its  main  subject  matter  the  higher  training  in  ethical
discipline. You must remember this.

But if you were to pick up any treatise, you may not  be  able  to  discover
its main subject matter so easily. As such, the Tibetan Dharma kings of  the
past made a rule with regard to the verse of  homage  at  the  beginning  of
those texts that were translated from Sanskrit to Tibetan or when  treatises
were composed.

The purpose of these three different verses of homage  is  to  indicate  the
category of scriptural collection that a particular treatise belongs to.  By
looking at  the  verse  of  homage,  one  will  be  able  to  identify  this
immediately with ease.

In order to indicate that a text is from the vinaya pitaka, the homage  must
start with “Homage to the Omniscient One.” So if you see  any  treatises  in
Tibetan that starts with “Homage to the  Omniscient  One,”  immediately  you
know that this text is part of the vinaya pitaka.

Khen Rinpoche: It is very easy so don’t forget. Next time  when  people  ask
you, you must know this answer.

You have to remember everything. When we start with the  scriptural  Dharma,
you must know:
 • that the scriptural Dharma is divided into three pitakas
 • what is their main subject matter
 • how to identify that a text belongs to the vinaya pitaka
You cannot remember one point and along the  way,  you  forget  the  earlier
points. At the end of the class, it is as if you learnt nothing.  From  your
own side, you must have the wish, “I must try to remember everything that  I
hear. This is being said. This is the point.” You must have  this  wish  all
the time. Otherwise, it is not going to work.

The subject matter of the sutra pitaka covers mainly the higher training  in
concentration. When we look at the Tibetan translation of  a  treatise,  how
do we know that the text belongs to the sutra pitaka?  If  the  text  starts
with the verse of homage, “Homage to  all  the  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas,”
this is a sign that the text is included in the sutra pitaka.

The main subject matter of the Abhidharma pitaka is the higher  training  in
wisdom.  How do we know if the text is included in  the  Abhidharma  pitaka?
If the text starts with  the  verse  of  homage,  “Homage  to  the  youthful
Manjughosa,” then this text is included in the Abhidharma pitaka.

You have to memorize what these  three  scriptural  collections  are,  their
main subject matter and how to identify them based on the  verse  of  homage
at the beginning.

|Scriptural    |Subject matter            |Verse of Homage             |
|collections   |                          |                            |
|Vinaya pitaka |Higher training in ethical|Homage to the Omniscient One|
|              |discipline                |                            |
|Sutra pitaka  |Higher training in        |Homage to all buddhas and   |
|              |concentration             |bodhisattvas                |
|Abhidharma    |Higher training in wisdom |Homage to the youthful      |
|pitaka        |                          |Manjughosa                  |

Hinayana scriptural collections & Mahayana scriptural collections
Another way of looking at the scriptural collections is dividing  them  into
the Hinayana  collections  and  the  Mahayana  collections.   How  are  they
differentiated?
 • The Hinayana scriptural collections are intended primarily  for  Hinayana
   trainees.
 • The Mahayana scriptural collections are intended for Mahayana trainees.

There are also terms such as:
 • the scriptural collections that are common to both the Hinayana  and  the
   Mahayana
 • the uncommon Hinayana scriptural collection
 • the uncommon Mahayana scriptural collections

The Mahayana scriptural collections can be divided into:
 • the scriptural collections of the Causal Paramitayana
 • the scriptural collections of tantra or the Resultant Vajrayana

As for the tantra or the Resultant Vajrayana, there are four divisions:
1. action tantra
2. performance tantra
3. yoga tantra
4. highest yoga tantra

REALIZATIONAL DHARMA

The realizational Dharma consists of the three higher trainings:
1. the higher training in ethics (or ethical discipline)
2. the higher training in concentration
3. the higher training in wisdom

Another way of looking at the realizational Dharma is in terms of the  clear
realizations of the three yanas or the three vehicles:
1. the clear realizations of the hearers’ vehicle
2. the clear realizations of the solitary realizers’ vehicle
3. the clear realizations of the great vehicle.

When the clear realizations of the three vehicles are expanded:
For the clear realizations of the hearers’ vehicle, there are:
1. the hearers’ path of accumulation
2. the hearers’ path of preparation
3. the hearers’ path of seeing
4. the hearers’ path of meditation
5. the hearers’ path of no more learning

For the clear realizations of the solitary realizers’ vehicle, there are:
1. the solitary realizers’ path of accumulation
2. the solitary realizers’ path of preparation
3. the solitary realizers’ path of seeing
4. the solitary realizers’ path of meditation
5. the solitary realizers’ path of no more learning

For the clear realizations of the Mahayana Vehicle, there are:
1. the Mahayana path of accumulation
2. the Mahayana path of preparation
3. the Mahayana path of seeing
4. the Mahayana path of meditation
5. the Mahayana path of no more learning

This may not be easy for some of you. Nevertheless, there is no choice.  You
have to pay attention and  work  hard.  You  need  to  put  in  the  effort.
Otherwise, it is not going to work.  There  is  no  basis  for  learning  or
understanding the explanation if you don’t even know the words. So there  is
no choice. At the very least, you have to know these terms.  Only  then  can
we talk about their meaning.

THE MAHAYANA & THE HINAYANA—DIFFERENTIATED NOT BY VIEW BUT BY CONDUCT

The Great Vehicle or the Mahayana has two divisions:
1. the Causal Perfection Vehicle
2. the Resultant Vajra Vehicle

In general, there are the two vehicles—the Hinayana and  the  Mahayana.  How
are they differentiated? This you must know:

      The Hinayana and the Mahayana are not differentiated on the  basis  of
      the view. Rather they are differentiated on the basis of conduct.

You have to memorize this. Even if you don’t know the reason, you should  be
able to say, “The Hinayana and the Mahayana are not  differentiated  on  the
basis of the view. Rather they are differentiated on the basis of conduct.”

But that is not enough. This is only the basis to build on,  to  wonder  and
to ask the next  question,  “Why  is  the  Hinayana  and  the  Mahayana  not
differentiated by the view but rather by conduct?”

“The view” here refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness. The  Hinayana  and
the Mahayana are not differentiated on the basis of the view,  because  even
to  achieve  the  Hinayana  liberation—the  Hinayana   path   of   no   more
learning—you need the wisdom realizing emptiness. From this,  you  know  why
it is not correct to differentiate the Hinayana  and  the  Mahayana  on  the
basis of the view.

This is an example. Often  people  may  say,  “I  know.  I  know.  Yes,  the
Hinayana and the Mahayana are not differentiated  by  the  view  because  in
order for the Hinayana trainee to achieve  liberation,  you  also  need  the
wisdom  realizing  emptiness.”  They  stop  there   but   it   is   not   so
straightforward. Do you know why?

If somebody were  to  ask  you,  “Why  do  you  need  the  wisdom  realizing
emptiness to achieve liberation?” and you can’t answer that  question,  then
you cannot say you have understood this issue.

You have to see the reason why it  is  necessary  to  realize  emptiness  in
order achieve the Hinayana liberation. In order  to  answer  that  question,
you have to see the reason why one cannot achieve  the  Hinayana  liberation
without the wisdom realizing emptiness.

There are many scriptural citations that can be found in the works  of  Arya
Nagarjuna, Aryadeva and Chandrakirti’s stating  that  in  order  to  achieve
liberation, one has to realize emptiness.

Do you have the confidence to be able to answer  this  question  if  someone
were to ask, “Why do you need emptiness  just  to  achieve  liberation  from
samsara? We are not even talking about enlightenment here.”

Khen Rinpoche: You must have the confidence. I am  asking  whether  you  are
confident or not of answering this question. It’s very good if you  can  ask
yourself, “If somebody were to ask me, do I have the  confidence  to  answer
or not?” Then you learn. Otherwise, you never learn anything.

Student 1: In order to attain liberation, you must realize your true  nature
and have no dualistic  appearance.  All  phenomena  are  empty  and  nothing
exists inherently. You must see that all phenomena do not exist  from  their
own side.

Khen Rinpoche: Good. If you have a better idea and you are  confident,  come
up and give your answer. Don’t waste time by talking too much.  Your  answer
should be short and quick.

Student 2: I think  it  is  to  cut  the  root  of  samsara  by  eliminating
ignorance so that there is no need for you to go through the 12 links.  This
is how you get liberated.

Khen Rinpoche: So your answer is that it is to cut the root of samsara?

Why do  you  need  the  wisdom  realizing  emptiness  to  cut  self-grasping
ignorance?

All of you must follow and understand when  I  ask  questions.  This  is  to
indicate how to pursue a topic. From one question to another, it leads to  a
deeper understanding. So everybody has  to  hear  the  questions  and  think
about them.

You are not able to answer the question fully because in  the  first  place,
you are unable to posit exactly what samsara is. It is  very  easy  to  say,
“The root of cyclic existence is the self-grasping ignorance,”  but  if  you
cannot answer why you need  the  wisdom  realizing  emptiness  to  cut  this
ignorance, then …

This is very basic. You should be able to answer this. If you cannot  answer
this after so many years of study, it is not acceptable.

Give a precise and concise answer as to why you need  the  wisdom  realizing
emptiness just to achieve liberation, not even enlightenment.

Student 3: So that you can cut the karma and afflictions because rebirth  in
samsara is due to karma and afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you need the wisdom realizing  emptiness  to  overcome
karma and afflictions?

Student 3: Because it is the wisdom  that  overcomes  ignorance,  the  self-
grasping of the inherently existent ‘I’. Due to that, karma and  afflictions
arise.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you need the wisdom realizing emptiness to overcome  self-
cherishing?

Your earlier answer is not complete. There is something there  but  that  is
not how discussions are carried  out.  You  can’t  just  stop  there.  I  am
showing you how you can extend the analysis and  discussion.  In  order  for
the debate to carry on,  you  must  be  able  to  continue  and  extend  the
analysis.

The statement that I am putting forth to you now is this: “There is no  need
for the wisdom realizing emptiness to overcome ignorance  because  ignorance
is just grasping at the ‘I’. Why do you need the wisdom realizing  emptiness
to overcome that?"

Student 3: It is because of that—seeing the ‘I’ to  be  inherently  existent
and more important than others—that other afflictions arise.

Khen Rinpoche: All I  am  saying  is  that  there  is  no  need  to  realize
emptiness to overcome self-grasping or the grasping at the ‘I’.

Student 3: Because there are other possibilities?

Khen Rinpoche: Do you need the wisdom realizing emptiness to overcome  self-
cherishing?

Student 3: Yes, I think there is a need.

Khen Rinpoche: You think there is a need? If that is  so,  it  follows  then
that self-cherishing  and  self-grasping  are  the  same  thing.  Are  self-
cherishing and self-grasping the same?

Student 3: No.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the difference then?

Student 3: One is seeing that  the  ‘I’  exists  inherently.  The  other  is
seeing that I am more important than others.

Khen Rinpoche: Which subsumes the other?

Student 3: You mean which one has a larger pervasion?

Khen Rinpoche: OK.

UPHOLDING THE DHARMA

Often, at the very most, you all have just one question and  then  you  stop
there. This should not be the case. As a  result  of  asking  one  question,
there has to be a consequence in that it should lead  to  another  question.
We are not saying that  you  should  talk  about  anything  under  the  sun.
Obviously, your questions should be connected. Precisely because  there  are
many connections, therefore, you  cannot  stop  at  one  question.  Whatever
position you may hold, there is always an implication that leads to  further
questions and further analysis.

You must think of  everything  when  you  are  studying.  This  is  just  an
example. You may be able to say, “Yes, in order to achieve just  liberation,
you need the wisdom realizing emptiness,” but you  cannot  stop  there.  You
have to think and think until you figure it out and you have the  confidence
in your mind, “Yes, these are the reasons why this is so!”

Until you reach that level of  ascertainment,  then  you  have  to  keep  on
thinking about it. This  means  that  you  must  really  want  to  know  the
answers. From your own side, you must find it important enough  for  you  to
want to think more deeply about it. You must think and think and think!

You must have the interest. Only when you have the interest will  you  think
and think and think. Then one day, when you hear  your  teacher  giving  you
the summary, because of having thought about it and  wanting  very  much  to
know the answer, when an answer is given that really hits the mark, it  will
stay in your mind forever. You will feel so happy. Finally, you  have  found
something that makes sense. This is how you develop a  real  taste  for  the
teachings of the Buddha. “Wow! The Buddha’s teachings are  so  amazing.”  In
order for this to happen, in the first place, you must want to know. Do  you
even want to know? Without that interest, it is not possible.

It is vitally important that when  you  learn  the  Buddhadharma,  you  must
really want to know and you must always think about the subject. “Why is  it
like this? Why is it like that?” We need to analyze all the time.

If you don’t do that, I can sit here and tell you,  “The  Hinayana  and  the
Mahayana are not differentiated by the view but rather by conduct.” You  may
feel very good. “Yes, I learnt something today.” Then you just leave  it  at
that. But nothing is really achieved because when somebody wants  to  pursue
the topic further and asks you to explain, then you are stuck.

When you study the Buddhadharma, you must reach  a  point  whereby  you  are
able to overcome whatever doubts you  have  pertaining  to  the  topic.  You
should have no more doubts or qualms. You must gain this  conviction,  “It’s
like this and not like that.” This is the kind of confidence you need.  This
is how you uphold the Buddhadharma.

Upholding the scriptural Dharma  is  done  on  the  basis  of  learning  the
Buddhadharma first. Then on the basis of such learning, you think about  the
subject matter to the point where you  gain  an  ascertainment,  “It’s  like
this and it’s not like that because of these reasons.” You  have  eliminated
your doubts.  Then  you  can  share  your  understanding  with  others  with
conviction and confidence. This is what is meant by spreading and  upholding
the scriptural Dharma.

It  is  on  the  basis  of  personal  learning  and   gaining   a   decisive
understanding through having eliminated your doubts and qualms that you  are
then able to share the  Buddhadharma  correctly  and  with  conviction  with
others. This is what is meant by propagating and  upholding  the  scriptural
Dharma. In this way, you  are  able  to  eliminate  the  misconceptions  and
misunderstandings in the minds of sentient beings.  This is  what  is  meant
by working for others by eliminating their wrong views and misconceptions.

As mentioned in the lam-rim, sentient beings create negative  karma  because
of either not knowing or having wrong  ideas.  Because  of  not  knowing  or
holding wrong beliefs, they accumulate a lot of non-virtue,  especially  the
extremely heavy negative karma of abandoning the  Dharma,  as  explained  in
the lam-rim. How do you stop them from doing that? You have to help them  to
overcome their lack of or wrong understanding by  giving  them  the  correct
knowledge.

The gift of the Dharma is the supreme gift  far  surpassing  the  giving  of
material gifts.  You have to see the reason why this is so.  When  you  give
material gifts, you only solve the problem here and now,  and  at  the  very
most, offer some temporary relief. But the gift of Dharma is a gift of long-
term happiness to others because through  this  gift,  people  are  able  to
eliminate their wrong views and lack of  understanding,  and  through  that,
eliminate the karma that causes them to remain  in  cyclic  existence.  From
this, you can see why the gift of  the  Dharma  greatly  surpasses  material
gifts.

It  is  so  important  to  learn  the  Buddhadharma  to  overcome   whatever
misunderstanding, wrong concepts and doubts you  may  have.  From  your  own
side, you must gain the conviction, “It is really like  this  and  not  like
that!” When you gain this kind of ascertainment and conviction, it  makes  a
big difference to how you share the Dharma with others. It also makes a  big
difference to your own personal practice.

As  mentioned  in  the  teachings,  through  hearing  and  reflection,   you
eliminate all qualms and doubts about the teachings. Then  you  meditate  on
the meaning that you have ascertained through your hearing  and  reflection.
It is through these three activities of hearing, reflection  and  meditation
that  you  remove  your  doubts.  Then  by  gaining  an  ascertainment   and
familiarizing yourself with that, this is how you progress  on  the  grounds
and paths.

LIBERATION & THE WISDOM REALIZING EMPTINESS

Why do you need the wisdom realizing emptiness to attain liberation?  Attain
liberation here means attaining liberation from cyclic existence.

In order to be free from cyclic existence, we have to overcome the  root  of
cyclic existence. Without overcoming the root of cyclic existence, there  is
no liberation to speak of.

The principal cause  of  our  own  cyclic  existence  is  the  three  mental
poisons—  ignorance,  anger  and  attachment.  Of  the  three,   anger   and
attachment are said to come from ignorance. This  means  that  ignorance  is
the root of cyclic existence and it is the root of all the  afflictions.  We
must be able to explain why this is the case.

Self-grasping ignorance is the root of cyclic  existence.  What  exactly  is
this self-grasping ignorance?  All  the  four  Buddhist  tenets  agree  that
ignorance  is  the  root  of  samsara,  but  they   all   have   their   own
interpretations as to  what  ignorance  means,  i.e.,  they  have  different
interpretations as to what constitutes the root of cyclic  existence.  Since
you have already studied the tenets, you should know this by now.

The Great Exposition School (GES),  Sutra  School  (SS),  Mind  Only  School
(MOS) and the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS) all say  that  in  order  to
achieve liberation,  there  is  no  need  to  realize  the  selflessness  of
phenomena. One only needs to realize the selflessness of persons.  You  must
be able to answer why this is so.

Here,  we  are  speaking  from  the  context  of  the  highest  school,  the
Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS). The CMWS is the same  in  saying  that
ignorance is the root of samsara but it does not posit ignorance to be  mere
unknowingness.

As stated in the lam-rim, ignorance is of two types:
1. merely not knowing something
2. the discordant class of wisdom, i.e., a  fundamental  misapprehension  of
   reality
Of the two, the fundamental misapprehension of reality is posited to be  the
root of cyclic existence.

We have looked at this before in the  lam-rim.  If  you  haven’t  forgotten,
then this is it. However, if you’ve forgotten, you should check where it  is
mentioned in the lam-rim.  If  you’ve  the  interest  to  learn  and  you’ve
forgotten  where  it  was  mentioned  in  the  lam-rim   because   of   your
interest—“Now I know it is in the lam-rim but I cannot remember where. I  am
going to find it.”—you’ll have the strong desire to check it  out  when  you
go home. So even if you’ve forgotten, you  must  still  have  that  wish  to
learn. Otherwise, there is no way we can continue with our studies here.  It
is not easy. It requires effort.

The main thing I am trying to say to you is this: “Do you want to  learn  or
not? Are you bothered enough to learn?”

If we look at the CMWS's manner of positing  ignorance,  this  self-grasping
ignorance is basically the mind grasping at true existence.  Whether  it  is
grasping at a truly existent person or a truly  existent  phenomenon,  self-
grasping ignorance is grasping at true existence.  Therefore,  according  to
the  CMWS,  the  self  of  persons  and  the  self  of  phenomena  are   not
differentiated  by  their  objects  of  negation.  They  are  differentiated
according to their bases of emptiness.

According to the CMWS, the root of samsara (or  cyclic  existence)  is  this
self-grasping ignorance that  is  none  other  than  the  grasping  at  true
existence.

What is the way  to  overcome  this  self-grasping  ignorance?  The  way  to
overcome this self-grasping ignorance is to see that whatever is grasped  at
by this mind does not exist. By realizing the object that this ignorance  is
grasping at does not exist, when you see the emptiness of that object,  this
is what is  meant  by  realizing  selflessness.  The  self,  the  object  of
negation that is conceived by ignorance, does not  exist.   Seeing  that  is
the seeing of selflessness.

This is how you should answer the earlier question. You need to be  able  to
say and explain that in order to overcome samsara, we must be  able  to  cut
the root of samsara. What is the root of samsara? It  is  the  self-grasping
ignorance. In order to overcome this self-grasping  ignorance,  we  have  to
realize emptiness.

If you pursue this matter in detail, along these lines  of  reasoning,  then
this is about it. Or do you think that there  is  something  else  that  you
need to settle before you can say decisively, “Yes, this is it!”?  Have  you
pursued this question to the  end,  i.e.,  have  you  fully  justified  your
answer?

This is how you pursue the line of reasoning to answer the  question  as  to
why you need the wisdom realizing emptiness to achieve liberation.
 • In order to achieve liberation, this means to free  oneself  from  cyclic
   existence.
 • In order to free oneself from cyclic existence, one has to  overcome  the
   root of cyclic existence.
 • The root of cyclic existence is self-grasping ignorance.
 • In order to  overcome  the  grasping  at  true  existence,  you  have  to
   actualize the wisdom realizing emptiness.
 • Why? Because in order to overcome the grasping of true existence, we have
   to generate a  mind  whose  mode  of  apprehension  is  the  opposite  of
   ignorance.
This is a brief description of the line of reasoning used in the answer.

Are there any additional questions  to  resolve  why  you  need  the  wisdom
realizing emptiness to achieve liberation? With this line of reasoning,  are
you still not confident and feel that the question is not answered?

Student 4: You said that the Hinayana and the Mahayana have the  same  view.
Both the Hinayana path and the Mahayana path entail going through  the  five
paths. When they reach the path of seeing, is their seeing of emptiness  the
same?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

Student 4: Then if the seeing of emptiness is  the  same,  this  means  that
pursuing just the one meditation thinking of  the  selflessness  of  persons
should be sufficient.

Khen Rinpoche: The subject realizing emptiness is the same.

Student 4: For the Mahayana, the object of negation  is  the  same  but  the
bases of that emptiness are different.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what you  mean.  When  you  say  the  bases  are
different, what do you mean by that?

Student 4: The floor and the microphone. Their bases are different.

Khen Rinpoche: The Hinayana path of seeing sees the emptiness of  the  floor
and the emptiness of the microphone in the same way as the Mahayana path  of
seeing. What is the difference?

Student 4: So the mind analyzing whatever  basis,  the  emptiness  (of  that
basis) will be the same?

Khen Rinpoche: The emptiness is the same. What is the next  question—whether
the path of seeing is the same thing?

Student 4: Yes. The conclusion is that by meditating on the selflessness  of
a person, that should be sufficient to realize emptiness directly.

Khen Rinpoche: I understand where you are coming from.

All the four schools use the term, “grasping at a self of persons” but  they
differ greatly as to what that means. All the other  tenets  have  the  same
view except the CMWS so although they use the same  words,  you  cannot  mix
them up.

I would like to ask you: According to the CMWS, what is a  self  of  persons
and what is the selflessness of persons?

According to the CMWS, grasping at a self of persons  means  that  with  the
person as the basis, the mind apprehends the person to  be  truly  existent.
This is different from the grasping at a self of persons  that  is  asserted
by the other tenets.

From the perspective of the CMWS, the grasping of the self of  persons  that
is asserted by the lower  tenets  is  considered  to  be  very  coarse.  The
grasping of the self of persons that is asserted by the CMWS is subtler.

According to the CMWS, when you  reach  the  path  of  seeing,  you  realize
emptiness directly. You realize both the selflessness  of  persons  and  the
selflessness of phenomena, because the object of negation is true  existence
or inherent existence.
 • The true existence that is negated on  the  basis  of  a  person  is  the
   selflessness of a person.
 • The true existence that is negated on the basis of a  phenomenon  is  the
   selflessness of a phenomenon.
Therefore, according to the CMWS,  selflessness  is  differentiated  on  the
bases of emptiness and not on the object of negation.

On the Mahayana path of seeing, when you achieve the uninterrupted  path  of
seeing, you acquire the antidote to overcome the  (intellectually)  acquired
grasping of the self of persons and the (intellectually)  acquired  grasping
of the self of phenomena. According to the CMWS’s point of  view,  when  you
achieve the Mahayana path of seeing, you not only realize  the  selflessness
of persons but you also realize the selflessness of phenomena  at  the  same
time.

Student  4:  For  the  Hinayana  path  of  seeing,  they  only  realize  the
selflessness of persons?

Khen Rinpoche: When one achieves the path of release of  the  Hinayana  path
of seeing, that individual has also removed  the  (intellectually)  acquired
grasping at the self of persons and the (intellectually)  acquired  grasping
at the self of phenomena.

When that individual progresses through the Hinayana path of meditation  and
reaches the Hinayana path of no more learning, he  has  necessarily  removed
all forms of grasping at the self, be it the self of persons or the self  of
phenomena. So when one becomes a foe destroyer  or  arhat,  one  necessarily
has abandoned both the grasping at the self  of  persons  and  the  self  of
phenomena.

Therefore, according to  the  CMWS,  these  two  graspings—at  the  self  of
persons  and  the  self  of   phenomena—are   posited   to   be   afflictive
obscurations. Because that arhat has abandoned the afflictive  obscurations,
therefore he is called an arhat or foe destroyer.  He  is  called  an  arhat
because he has abandoned the afflictive obscurations.

The arhat has abandoned the grasping at the self of phenomena. How  does  he
abandon  that?  Definitely,  he  must  have  realized  the  selflessness  of
phenomena, without which there is no way to  abandon  the  grasping  at  the
self of phenomena.

Student 4: This is why I’m a little confused.  When  we  studied  the  Sutra
School, the Hinayana is concentrating on only the selflessness  of  persons.
It is only in the CMWS that you then emphasize both selflessnesses. This  is
the confusion. That the endpoint is still the same. How could they  come  to
that?

Khen Rinpoche: One thing good about Student 4 is that whenever  she  asks  a
question, she has thought about the subject. This  is  very  important.  You
must always think about the subject matter.

Please hand in your homework. Please do it.

Khen Rinpoche: Do it with happiness and joy. Don’t treat  it  as  a  burden.
Try your best!



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed  by  Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Alison
Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

