Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L02FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:17.495337
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 2	 				                                        23 March 2017
The Three Principles of the Path. The faults of being attached to the happiness of this life. Taking joy in your Dharma practice. How Guru Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment from the perspectives of the Hinayana tenets, the Mahayana Paramitayana (Causal Perfection Vehicle) and tantra. 
THE THREE PRINCIPLES OF THE PATH
Lama Tsongkhapa said in the beginning of his The Three Principles of the Path, 
The gateway of the fortunate ones desiring liberation—
This I shall try to explain as much as I can. 
“The gateway of the fortunate ones desiring liberation” means that the gateway that leads one to the teachings of the Buddha is the desire for liberation. This shows the motivation we must have whenever we learn and practise the Buddhadharma. What should be our driving motivation for wanting to learn and practise the Buddhadharma? Our motivation whenever we engage in any virtuous practice should be the achievement of liberation. 
In the same text, Lama Tsongkhapa goes on to say, 
Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara],
Who strive to make freedom and endowments meaningful,
Who entrust themselves to the path pleasing the Victorious Ones –
You fortunate ones: listen with a calm mind.
“Those who are not attached to the pleasures of cyclic existence”: For people who want to make their human life of freedoms and endowments meaningful, they should not be attached to the pleasures of cyclic existence. 
Most of you have already received the teachings of the entire lam-rim. 
Some of you have received such teachings many times. Since most of you have already received many teachings on the lam-rim, as I have suggested before, you should memorize this short text, The Three Principles of the Path and recite it on a daily basis as a kind of a practice. 
Among all your daily commitments and recitations, reciting The Three Principles of the Path from memory and using it as the basis for reflection makes it the best daily commitment practice. You should recite it slowly and take the opportunity to reflect on it. If you persist, definitely, you will be able to see some change in your life. 
“Those who are not attached to the pleasures of circling [samsara],/ Who strive to make freedom and endowments meaningful”: This means that if we want to make our lives meaningful, we have to reverse our clinging to and our interest in samsara. Continuing to be interested in samsara and being attached to cyclic existence are the opposites of liberation. There is no way one can desire liberation and yet, at the same time, want samsara. 
In order to develop our desire for liberation, first, we must look at the disadvantages and the undesirable aspects of samsara. Then we seek to overcome and reverse our attachment to samsara. 
While we all need to overcome our preoccupation with samsaric happiness, that is not easy to do. How do we do it?  The Buddha was very skilful. First, he taught we should overcome our preoccupation with and strong attachment to this life’s happiness. As Lama Tsongkhapa said in The Three Principles of the Path:
Freedom and endowments are difficult to find
And life has no time to spare.
By gaining familiarity with this,
Attraction to the appearances of this life is reversed.
As I mentioned in the last lesson, the continual recollection of and reflection on our impending death and our own impermanence is extremely important. By recollecting strongly and continually on our impending death and impermanence, we will start to reverse our attraction to the happiness of this life and to overcome our preoccupation with and attachment to this life’s happiness. On that basis, we can proceed to reverse our attachment to samsaric happiness. 
By thinking over and over again
That actions and their effects are unbetraying,
And repeatedly contemplating the miseries of cyclic existence,
Attraction to the appearances of future lives is reversed.
A text like The Three Principles of the Path is short and sweet but it is power-packed with meaning. To be able to appreciate this, first, one must have studied well the entire lam-rim. Having learnt the lam-rim well, then by depending on a short text such as this one that summarizes its key meanings in a few words, we will be able to appreciate what the text is trying to convey.
For those of you who have been around for a while, this is something you should really consider—memorizing The Three Principles of the Path and recite it as your daily prayer and think about it as you recite. If you are able to do this, it is very beneficial. It will be one of the best practices that you can do. 
However, when I say that you should recite it as part of your daily practice, I don’t mean doing so in a nominal way, i.e., just reading the text mindlessly. This is not what I mean. It is important to know what you are reciting and for you to reflect on the words that you are reciting. Therefore, you should do it slowly to give yourself time for its meaning to arise in your mind. This is an opportunity for you to recollect and to bring to mind the words that you have already learnt. 
THE FAULTS OF BEING ATTACHED TO THE HAPPINESS OF THIS LIFE
We should examine our life experiences. In the course of our lives, we have all kinds of ideas, thoughts, views, worries and fears. There are all these conceptualizations (rnam rtog) going on in our mind. If we were to sit down and try to pinpoint the source that gives rise to this busyness of our mind, it is clear that much of it comes from our sole preoccupation with this life’s happiness. In fact, all our fears and worries come from our emphasis of the happiness of this life. We don’t care about anything else except this life’s happiness. 
This fundamental worldview gives rise to all our fears, worries, unhappiness, problems and all kinds of conceptualizations in our daily lives. Since this is the source of our problems and we are here to practise the Dharma in order to make ourselves happy, then whatever practice we do must at least harm the source of our fears and worries. If whatever we do are not able to harm these troublemakers, then no matter what we do—studying and practising the Dharma, doing prostrations and circumambulations, reciting sadhanas and so forth, declaring “I’m a Dharma practitioner” or “I’m a tantric practitioner”—all these practices do not help us to close the door to the lower realms. We need to be careful about this point. 
This is where the troublemakers are. We have to know why we are stuck and why we are in trouble. If we are not careful about this and at the same time, we do all kinds of things, confidently thinking, “I am studying the Dharma. I am a Buddhist. I am practising the Dharma,” yet whatever we do doesn’t help us to close the door to the lower realms, then what is the point? So we really have to be careful about this. 
What is the result if we are not able to damage or hurt our preoccupation with and strong attachment to this life’s happiness? As I mentioned in the last lesson, there is no way to have pure refuge in our heart. It is impossible. 
If we don’t even have real refuge, how is it possible for us to close the door to the lower realms? It is not possible. The very thing that closes the door to the lower realms is refuge. 
As I mentioned in the last lesson, in order for real refuge to come about, first, we must overcome our attachment to this life’s happiness. This can be done by thinking about our own impending death and impermanence. Without this, it is very difficult to even weaken our attachment to this life. Without this, there is no way we are going to have real refuge. Without this, there is no way we can close the door to the lower realms. 
As mentioned in the teachings, when we have refuge, we will close the door to the lower realms and be protected from them. But refuge here does not refer to the mere verbal recitation of the prayer, “I go for refuge to the Buddha ...” Refuge is the state of mind that comes about on the basis of at least having subdued our very strong attachment to this life’s happiness. 
What I have just said is something that all of you already know. I don’t think anybody here is not aware of this, at least on an intellectual level. This is where we need to direct our attention in our daily lives. We have to meditate on death and impermanence. This is what is mentioned in the beginning of the lam-rim. We have to think about this topic every day and, as much as possible, be continually mindful of it.  Only then can we see some change. Please pay attention to this.
We have to be continually mindful of death and impermanence, reminding ourselves that attachment to and preoccupation with this life’s happiness are harmful for us. We have to constantly remind ourselves of this.  If we don’t and let our mindfulness slip, we may completely lose track of our efforts to give up our attachment to this life’s happiness. At the same time, we engage in what we believe to be virtue. Yet very often, our supposed practices and good intentions seem to lead to more complications and problems. If that is the case, then those practices can’t be virtue, can they?
On the other hand, if we are continually mindful in every moment of our lives and, as much as possible, work at turning away from attachment to the happiness of this life, we will see that much of the unnecessary fears and worries that make our lives so busy and complicated will slowly go away. 
It is only when all these unnecessary worries and fears that make our lives so complicated subside that we will have more mental clarity and mental space for the wisdom that discriminates between what is good and beneficial and what is bad and harmful to arise. If our mind continues to be focussed on this life’s happiness, there will be no mental space for that wisdom or clarity of mind to arise. 
TAKING JOY IN YOUR DHARMA PRACTICE
Think about this evolution:
If we are able to maintain continually strong mindfulness of reversing our attraction to this life’s happiness, that will lead to a reduction in our conceptual thoughts, the busy mind that always thinks about our fears and worries. 
This will give us more mental space for the ability to discriminate between what is right and what is wrong to arise. 
When that ability is developed, this in turn will contribute to the further subsidence of all kinds of conceptualizations. 
With the increasing ability to discriminate between what is beneficial and what is not, the more we develop this wisdom, the easier it becomes for us to engage in what is virtuous, beneficial and useful. 
With greater wisdom, we will find it less and less difficult to engage in virtue. 
Furthermore, when we do engage in virtue, we feel happy doing so, thinking, “This is something I really want to do. I enjoy doing it!” This is the effect of developing such wisdom.  
If this is the case, we can safely say that without wisdom, there is no way for us to generate joyous effort. We don’t joyously persevere in our practice of virtue because we don’t have wisdom. In other words, if we really want to be enthusiastic about our practice of virtue, we need to have wisdom. 
What is the necessary condition for such wisdom to arise? We need to give it the space in which to arise. First, this has to come from the mindfulness of death and impermanence. This in turn leads to a reduction in our preoccupation with and attachment to this life’s happiness. This leads to more mental space for wisdom to arise. With wisdom comes joyous effort. This means that we take delight in and actually enjoy engaging in virtue. We will see the fruits of such practice. Obviously, this will lead to real satisfaction. Seeing that our practice is so wonderful, we will feel so happy doing it because we see the purpose of doing so and the benefits it bring us. 
If you really want to practise the Dharma, think about this. I think there is no other approach. First, we have to deal with our strong attachment to this life’s happiness and overcome that. Otherwise, there is no way to open the door to real Dharma practice. If we want to be a Dharma practitioner, this is a crucial point. We have to put effort into thinking about this. 
As I mentioned in the last lesson, the Kadampa masters had said that what distinguishes Dharma practice from non-Dharma practice is whether we are attached to this life or not. It doesn’t matter what we do or how we may appear externally. Whatever we do with the motivation that is mixed with looking for something in this life, then it is not Dharma at all. If it is not mixed in this way, then it is Dharma. Since we are trying to be a practitioner, we have to take this crucial step and be very mindful about this. 
With wisdom comes joyous effort. With joyous effort, one begins to see the fruits of one’s practice. When one puts in the correct effort by joyously persevering, of course the results will come. The more results we see, obviously we will feel happier and happier. When we feel real joy in our practice, I don’t think we will feel bored, tired or find it difficult to practise. Usually, we won’t find doing things that we enjoy difficult.  
But that doesn’t seem to be our experience. What is our experience? We get tired of practising the Dharma.  Internally, we are unhappy and we feel no joy. Externally, we are exhausted. We feel that whatever is related to the Dharma such as studying to be a burden. We feel that we are forced to do it. Is that not our experience? But why is it like that? We have to examine and honestly ask ourselves this question. 
This is the essence of what I have been trying to say in the last lesson and now. We don’t really enjoy the Dharma. It is as if we are forced to engage in Dharma practice. We feel it is a burden and we don’t enjoy doing it. At times, we may even hate doing it. We really have to ask ourselves honestly why we feel and think this way. 
Khen Rinpoche: So you must ask yourself, “Why, why, why, why is it like this?” Every morning, you should ask yourself, “Why, why, why, why?” 
Sometimes, we use the word ‘profound’ to describe certain Dharma practices. “Oh, this is very high Dharma. It is very profound!” The Dharma that benefits our mind is profound Dharma. No matter how profound a practice is said to be, if it doesn’t benefit our mind, then it is not profound for us. 
At our level, what is most useful for us is thinking about death and impermanence, which will help us to loosen our strong grasp on this life’s happiness. If we can loosen our mind even a little bit, it will lead to giving us the mental space to develop real refuge in our heart. We must feel that sense of refuge. Then for us, refuge becomes most profound, not tantra. 
Tantra is profound but since it is not beneficial for us at our present level, then it is not profound for us. For us, the practice of refuge is profound. So when it comes to determining the profundity of the Dharma, we should think about this in terms of whether it benefits our mind. If it benefits our mind, then that Dharma is profound. 
In the last lesson, I mentioned that to be a real Buddhist and a Dharma practitioner, we should work towards becoming a person who truly desires liberation from samsara. As such, at all times, we have to be mindful and gradually work towards reducing our attachment to this life’s happiness. On that basis, we then work to overcome our attachment to samsara itself. Without these practices, we cannot be someone who desires liberation. If we want to be a practitioner, we have to work towards developing this mindset all the time. 
Whether we are listening to the teachings, studying the Dharma, doing our daily prayers and recitations, doing circumambulations or prostrations and so forth, at the very minimum, we have to be someone who desires liberation.  
I would like to emphasize again that due to continually having the mindset of being strongly attached to this life’s happiness, we always get into trouble, creating all sorts of problems for ourselves, having many fears and worries and feeling great unhappiness. 
We should be constantly mindful and work at trying to overcome our preoccupation with and attachment to this life’s happiness. We have to work at counteracting that all the time. By consistently working at this, over time, this should lead to us having more mental space that will allow our wisdom that discriminates between right and wrong, what is beneficial and what is harmful, to arise. Having such wisdom, naturally we will take joy in virtue, doing whatever is necessary and beneficial. Once we have this joy, we will not feel any real difficulty whenever we engage in the Dharma. 
~~~~~~~~~~~
HOW GURU SHAKYAMUNI BUDDHA ACHIEVED ENLIGHTENMENT
I thought perhaps it may be useful to give you some idea of how our kind teacher and founder, Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, achieved enlightenment. There is an explanation according to sutra and there is an explanation according to tantra.
The assertions of the Hinayana tenets
First, we shall look at the views of the Great Exposition School (GES or the Vaibashikas) and Sutra School (SS) as to how our kind Guru Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment. It is said that in the past, many countless eons ago, first, he generated the mind of enlightenment, bodhicitta, in the presence of the Buddha called Shakya Thubchen, the Great Subduer or the Great Sage. He started on the Mahayana paths and accumulated the collections over an extremely long period of time, three countless great eons.
During the era of the Buddha Rinchen Tsugtor, the Jewel Crown Protrusion, he accumulated the collections in one countless great eon. Then he accumulated the collections for another countless great eon during the era of the Buddha called Namse. 
When we talk about our kind founder, Shakyamuni Buddha, accumulating the collections, this did not happen in this present fortunate eon. It happened many eons and eons ago. For example, he accumulated the collections for one countless great eon during the time of Buddha Namse but Buddha Namse was not a buddha of this fortunate eon. According to the GES, he accumulated the collections over a period of three countless great eons, mainly on the path of accumulation. 
We are in this fortunate eon where it is said that a thousand buddhas will descend. Among the thousand, three have already descended. Our kind Guru Shakyamuni Buddha was not the first but the fourth Buddha. So during these hundreds of eons when there were the first Buddha, the second Buddha and the third Buddha of this fortunate eon, the Buddha Shakyamuni-to-be was still accumulating the collections. This is according to the perspective of the GES. 
Prince Siddhartha, who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha, was born, grew up and engaged in the practice of extreme austerities. Finally, on the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the lunar calendar, Prince Siddhartha achieved enlightenment. 
Just before Prince Siddhartha became a buddha, he had sat down on the seat on which he was to become a buddha. He was on the path of accumulation at that time. Then, in one sitting, he progressed to the path of preparation, the path of seeing and the path of meditation and he achieved the path of no more learning, full enlightenment. So from the GES’s point of view, among the five Mahayana paths, four of them happened over a very short period of time in one sitting. 
It is commonly known that he did not teach for forty-nine days after achieving full enlightenment. Then on the forty-ninth day, the Buddha turned the Wheel of Dharma at Sarnath, India and taught the four noble truths. Most of the sub-schools of the GES asserted that other than this turning of the Wheel of Dharma, the Buddha did not turn any other Wheels of Dharma. According to the GES, the Buddha did not teach the Mahayana Dharma. 
At the age of eighty, the Buddha passed away into the parinirvana and he ceased to exist. His continuum was severed and the Buddha went out of existence. These are the assertions of the GES. 
The GES does not explain the Buddha’s form bodies in the way that the Mahayana tenets do. According to the GES, there is no such thing as a complete enjoyment body nor does the GES have the usual presentation of the supreme emanation body. The supreme emanation body can manifest in other worlds and perform the twelve deeds and so forth even if this world were to cease to exist. But the GES does not have this explanation of the supreme emanation body. To the GES, the Buddha died just like an ordinary person. When he died, he is finished. His continuum is severed. 
According to the GES, Prince Siddhartha was just an ordinary person like us. When he was born as Prince Siddhartha, he was on the path of accumulation. At the age of 35, he sat under the bodhi tree in Bodhgaya and in one sitting, he progressed through the path of preparation, the path of seeing, the path of meditation, the path of no more learning and manifested the state of full enlightenment and became a buddha. 
When he became a buddha, the Buddha was essentially the same person in the sense of having the same body as when he was Prince Siddhartha. According to the GES, the Buddha’s physical body was still true suffering.  Although it was true suffering, the Buddha was no longer Prince Siddhartha as he had transformed into the Buddha. What has been transformed? Not his body but his mind. Due to this mental transformation, even though he has the physical body that is true suffering, it doesn’t cause him any mental suffering. 
These are the general assertions of the Hinayana tenets as to who the Buddha is.  
The assertions of the Mahayana Paramitayana, the Causal Perfection Vehicle
The Mahayana tenets have different explanations of what the Buddha is. Even between the Mahayana tenets, different explanations are given.
According to the Mahayana Paramitayana, the Causal Perfection Vehicle:
When the person who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha was on the Mahayana path of accumulation and the Mahayana path of preparation,  he accumulated the collections of merit and wisdom over the first countless great eon. 
During the second countless great eon, he accumulated the collections while he was on the first to the seventh bodhisattva grounds (or bhumis). 
Then over the third countless great eon, he accumulated the collections while he was on the eighth, ninth and tenth bodhisattva grounds. 
In his very last existence, when he reached the end of the tenth ground, the tenth ground bodhisattva who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha was residing in Akanishta where he was surrounded by many buddhas. These buddhas told him that in order to achieve full enlightenment, he still had much to do. 
These buddhas then conferred on him the empowerment of the great light. He then newly achieved enlightenment in Akanishta with the complete enjoyment body that is adorned with the signs and exemplifications. These are the assertions of the Mahayana Paramitayana. 
Where is Akanishta?  According to the Paramitayana, the form realm is divided into 17 divisions. 
The form realms are divided into four concentrations. 
Each concentration has three divisions that are the abodes of ordinary beings, making a total of 12 divisions. 
Then there are five divisions that are for the superior beings or the arya pure lands. 
Therefore, the total is 17 divisions.  
Within the division for the superiors, the highest level is Akanishta. This is the highest place in the form realm. When we said the Buddha achieved enlightenment in Akanishta, we are not referring to this place as it is still included in samsara but this form realm pure land of Akanishta is used as the reference point for the Akanishta pure land where the tenth level bodhisattva who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment. We can only find the complete enjoyment body that displays neither birth nor death in this Akanishta pure land where you will also find only bodhisattva superiors and only the Mahayana doctrine is taught there. 
So, according to the Mahayana Paramitayana, Shakyamuni Buddha achieved enlightenment and abided in the aspect of the complete enjoyment body. This complete enjoyment body then becomes the basis for the emanation of the supreme emanation body. It is said that the Buddha then sent out the supreme emanation body that performs the twelve deeds. 
According to the Mahayana, the twelve deeds that were performed by Guru Shakyamuni Buddha start from the deed of entering the womb up to the deed of passing into parinirvana.  These deeds were not performed by an ordinary being. These deeds were performed by a buddha displaying the supreme emanation body that is emanated from the complete enjoyment Body. This means he is already a buddha. You can see that the Mahayana view of the twelve deeds and who the Buddha is are radically different from what is asserted by the Hinayana tenets.
According to Buddhist cosmology, our world is called Jambudvipa, the southern continent, but this is not the only southern continent that exists. There are 1,000 million southern continents in other world systems. Buddha Shakyamuni did not manifest such displays only on our particular southern continent. Buddha Shakyamuni did likewise on these other numberless southern continents. 
The emanation body works for sentient beings until the end of cyclic existence. Because the buddhas have perfected their great compassion, the buddhas work tirelessly and uninterruptedly for sentient beings. This is the explanation according to the Mahayana Paramitayana. 
The tantric perspective 
Buddhist tantra is divided into four classes: 
action tantra
performance tantra
yoga tantra
highest yoga tantra
According to the perspectives of action tantra and performance tantra, the manner in which Buddha Shakyamuni achieved enlightenment is the same as that explained by the Mahayana Paramitayana.
According to the perspective of yoga tantra, during his last existence when he was abiding in Akhanista pure land, the tenth ground bodhisattva who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha was absorbed in concentration. All the buddhas came from the ten directions invoking him and causing him to arise from his concentration. They told him, “Meditating in such a way will not enable you to achieve enlightenment.”
Then all these buddhas granted him the different initiations such as the crown initiation and so forth, causing him to go through the process of the five manifest enlightenments. He then achieved enlightenment. Therefore, from the perspective of yoga tantra, the tenth ground bodhisattva achieved enlightenment in the aspect of the complete enjoyment body. With this complete enjoyment body as the basis of emanation, the emanation body manifested in the aspect of Vairochana with four faces and so forth and was sent to the peak of Mount Meru where the Buddha first taught the yoga tantras. Only after that was an emanation sent to this southern continent to perform the twelve deeds. 
According to the Guhyasamaja Tantra, which is highest yoga tantra, the manner of achieving enlightenment is similar in that in his last existence while in Akanishta, he was given empowerments and then achieved enlightenment. 
According to the Guhyasamaja Tantra, in Akanishta, the buddhas bestowed upon the tenth ground bodhisattva who was to become Shakyamuni Buddha the wisdom initiation by means of the wisdom mother. On the basis of having received that empowerment, that tenth ground bodhisattva actualized the meaning clear light and from within that, he arose as the pure illusory body. 
After that, the buddhas conferred upon him the word initiation. Having received the word initiation, that tenth ground bodhisattva achieved enlightenment at dawn. Having achieved enlightenment in Akanishta with the complete enjoyment body as the basis of emanation, he sent forth the emanation body into this world and then performed the twelve deeds.
From this, we can see that there is a difference as to who was the person who performed the twelve deeds. 
According to the Hinayana tenets, the person who performed all those twelve deeds was an ordinary being. 
According to the Mahayana—be it the Paramitayana or the Vajrayana—the person who performed the twelve deeds was actually manifested by a buddha and was not an ordinary being.
Khen Rinpoche: I have given a chart. For those of you who really want to study, then take a copy. For those who do not really want to study, please don’t take it. There is no point. 
You have to understand that we are not having just a cursory look at the Buddha’s teachings in one or two sessions. This study program is a very long term project.  You have to think in terms of months and months and months. 
It is a progressive thing so you will need to build up your knowledge over time. If you really want to know what the Buddha’s teachings are, you have to put in the effort to learn and study and not just sit there. 
If you want to study, you have to make it a point not to miss class. Not only that. You have to read the materials and think about them on your own. You have to do many things and put in the effort. You have to sustain that effort over a period of time before you can come to know what exactly the Buddha’s teachings are. 
We are still at the beginning of this particular topic. Right from the beginning, you have to think, “I really want to study. I want to know as much as I can. I want to put in effort.” You must have this mindset from the beginning. 
If you don’t have this mindset from the beginning, thinking, “It doesn’t matter. I will just take it easy,” do you know what will happen? As we go through this topic, the subject is not going to become easier. It is only going to become tougher and tougher and more and more difficult. The amount of material will become more voluminous. 
So if you don’t have this idea right from the beginning—you don’t read, you don’t think, you don’t keep up with your readings—it is not going to work because you will be overwhelmed. 
When you are overwhelmed, things will become difficult and then you won’t feel like reading anymore. You will start to miss class. You won’t feel like coming to class. And then you will get depressed.
Khen Rinpoche: Will you get depressed? 
It is always the case that with every new module, there are always a lot of people in the beginning. You have to work hard.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.