Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L57FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:05.375923
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 57 				                                                   31 March 2018
Root text, p. 100—112. Reviewing the definition of the generation stage. Divisions of the generation stage. The four levels of practitioners. 
REVIEWING THE DEFINITION OF THE GENERATION STAGE
In the last session, we went through the definition of the generation stage. In the Principles of Buddhist Tantra:
Panchen Losang Chokyi Gyaltsen …
…
… and the intermediate state. (p. 100)
So, the generation stage is defined as “a yoga that matures the mental continuum for its resultant completion stage that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation but newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death, and the intermediate state.”

There was a discussion on whether it is necessary for a generation stage to newly investigate any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death and the intermediate state. 
The author of the text says that although this is stated as necessary by Panchen Losang Chokyi Gyaltsen in his definition, that refers only to the main generation stage. It is not necessary that the generation stage engages in meditation on any aspect related to birth, death or the intermediate state. 
In the definition, it is stated that it is necessary that such a generation stage “does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.” So, according to this definition, if it is a generation stage, then it
necessarily does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the
central channel due to meditation. 
However, if someone is on the generation stage, is it necessary that this person certainly does not have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel due to meditation? The answer is: No, it is not necessary. 
Khen Rinpoche: Do you see the difference between the first sentence and the second sentence? 
A person on the generation stage can have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. However, this may not be due to meditation. So, that is the difference. 
The point is that if it is a generation stage, then it definitely does not have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel due to meditation. However, on the generation stage, it is possible to have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. In other words, it can occur but this is not due to meditation on the generation stage. 
For example, there are sharp-facultied trainees of the generation stage who are able to practise the subtle yoga. Upon completing it, they are able to use the condition of an outer mudra or outer consort and by entering into union, such a practitioner can cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel 
and in this way generate the four joys. 
This person is on the generation stage. But when he generates such a path in his continuum, there is the question as whether this path is a generation stage path or a completion stage path. 
In Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lamp Illuminating the Five Levels of Guhyasamaja (also known as Illuminating Lamp), he says that there is a generation stage practitioner who has completed the subtle yoga of the generation stage. As a result, he is able to cause the winds to enter into the central channel. Then by entering into union with a consort, this practitioner causes the four joys to arise. Lama Tsongkhapa continues to say that the person who is able to accomplish this on the generation stage belongs to the generation stage. 
But how about the path in his continuum? Is this a completion stage path? By using the condition of an outer consort on the generation stage, this practitioner causes the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel and he generates the four joys. While this person is still on the generation stage, this path within his continuum generating these four joys can be considered a completion stage path. 
However, Ngawang Palden says that a person on the generation stage who is able to generate such a path is generating a path that belongs to the class of completion stage. So, instead of saying that it is a completion stage path, he simply says it belongs
to the class of completion stage.
Back to this definition. A generation stage is necessarily a yoga “that does not arise from causing the winds to enter, abide, and dissolve in the central channel due to meditation.” However, it is possible for (a practitioner on the) generation stage to have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel due to, for example, union with an external consort or due to vitality exertion. 
As for the third part of the definition that says, “newly investigates any aspect related to the three stages of birth, death and the intermediate state,” we spoke of this in the last session and we said that it is not necessary. The author, Ngawang Palden, says that it is not necessary that a generation stage investigates any aspect that is concordant with birth, death or the intermediate state. For example, we have the yoga of union with a knowledge consort or the meditation on the protection wheel. Even though these are examples of generation stage, they do not meditate on any aspect related to birth, death or the intermediate state.
With that, let us continue reading the text. 
DIVISIONS OF THE GENERATION STAGE
The generation stage is classified … subtle investigation (p. 106)
These are the divisions of the generation stage into the coarse generation stage and the subtle generation stage. 
The yoga of coarse single recall
First, the yoga of coarse single recall …
…
… up till the supreme-conqueror maṇḍala. (p. 107)
So, the first of this division is actually the coarse generation stage. The reason is given. It is because Lama Tsongkhapa’s Precious Bud of Final Resolution states, “It is not called single recall because it recalls a deity once or recalls just a single deity but because it recalls the deity alone or it recalls oneself and the deity as one.” In the name of the first yoga, we see the expression, ‘single recall’. This explanation says that ‘single recall’ does not mean recalling the deity once or recalling just a single deity. What then does it mean? It means recalling the deity alone or recalling oneself and the deity as one.
“Though in general it engages both subtle and coarse deity meditation, here it refers to deity yoga of the coarse supporting mandala and supported deities”: This means that in general, on the generation stage, one engages in both subtle and coarse deity meditation. Here, in the context of the coarse generation stage, it refers to the deity yoga of the coarse supporting mandala and supported deities. 
Then the citation ends by saying, “When you train in the generation stage, you first generate concentration possessing clear appearance of coarse objects up till the supreme-conqueror mandala.” Here, there is this mention of the supreme-conqueror mandala. This is one of the three concentrations. The first of these is the concentration of initial application or initial union. The second is the concentration of the supreme-conqueror mandala.
It seems here it is saying that you first generate the concentration possessing clear appearance of coarse objects up till the supreme-conqueror mandala. This means that the first concentration—the concentration of initial application or initial union— should be included here. 
The first of these two yogas—the yoga of coarse single recall is the coarse generation stage. How about the second one—the yoga of subtle investigation? 
The yoga of subtle investigation
The second is equivalent …
…
…  it is called subtle yoga. (p. 107—108)
In the same text, Precious Bud of Final Resolution, it states, “When you train in the generation stage, you train in conceptual yogas such as meditating on the mandala inside a subtle drop. Although conceptual or contrived yoga are general names for the generation stage, in this context it is called subtle yoga.” This is saying that when you have trained in the generation stage well, you can go on to train in the conceptual yoga such as meditating on the mandala inside the subtle drop, i.e., you can train in the subtle yoga. 
The expressions, ‘conceptual’ or ‘contrived yoga’ are the general names of the generation stage. But in this case, the ‘conceptual’ or ‘contrived yoga’ is also called the subtle yoga. This is because between the two stages of the generation stage, this subtle generation stage is the main generation stage. For that reason, the general names for the generation stage may also apply to subtle yoga. 
What it is saying is that the general names can apply to the particular instances. For example, the general name is mankind. Included within mankind are women. So, women is a particular instance or division but you can also refer to women as mankind. Similarly here, conceptual or contrived yoga is a general name. Subtle yoga is a particular division. You can also call subtle yoga by the general name, conceptual or contrived yoga. 
The point here is that the expression, conceptual or contrived yoga, refers to the generation stage. So, subtle yoga is a division of generation stage. However, it can also be referred to as conceptual or contrived yoga. Why? Because between the two types of generation stage, subtle yoga is the main generation stage. Therefore, the general name for generation stage can also be applied to subtle yoga. 
THE FOUR LEVELS OF PRACTITIONERS
Question: Do those training …
… 
… in a single session? (p. 108)
In the completion stage, one progresses to more advanced focal objects after one has attained stable meditation on the less advanced focal objects. For example:
One starts by meditating on the isolation of body. 
Once you are done with that and you have attained stable isolation of body, then you move on to the next stage, the isolation of speech. 
When you are done with that, you move on to the isolation of mind.
After that, it is the illusory body.
After that, clear light. 
After that, learner’s union
Then you move on to the union of no more learning. 
The question here is: Is the training in the generation stage like that in the completion stage where you meditate on something less advanced and after you have completed that, then you move on to something more advanced?  Is it like that or do you meditate on the entire sadhana from beginning to end in a single session?
Reply: There are four types of practitioners …
…
… perfect control over pristine wisdom (p. 109)
There are four different kinds of practitioners. What are their differences? The explanations will come. 
You must understand the different presentations of how long and in what way they meditate. 
Beginners
The first, a beginner, …
…
… are called beginners. (p. 109) 
Taking the example of the Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava sadhana, you meditate on the entire mandala and the deity until you have all those aspects in your mind. So those aspects should be visualized or focussed on. A beginner is able to visualize all these aspects of the mandala clearly but the practitioner can only do so in stages. If this person has to do it in a very short period of time, then that person is not able to do it. 
Having received an initiation, one can meditate on the sadhana, reading all the descriptions and then trying to visualize all the various aspects. If you are able, then you should use the long sadhana with all the details. You read the sadhana, think about it and visualize the supporting and supported mandala. By going through these steps, you would be able to arrive at a clear visualization that arises from your meditation. 
However, if you have to do this very quickly without this progressive procedure—i.e., you are required to just bring up this entire visualization of the supporting and supported mandala in a short instant of time, such as during the time of a finger snap—you are not able to do it, then this means that you are still a beginner. 
Khen Rinpoche: OK? So, you are still a beginner. Until you can do like that (snaps his finger), don’t think you are a very high practitioner. Once you can do like that—all the visualizations, all the deities, the entire mandala—then OK.  
2. Those attaining some pristine wisdom
Those attaining some pristine wisdom …
…
… Kṣitigarbha and so on. (p. 110)
This means that someone who has attained some pristine wisdom or exalted wisdom is able to have a clear visualization of the celestial mansion and all the coarse deities within it. For example, if you are meditating on the Guhyasamaja mandala, you are able to cause all the 32 deities of the Guhyasamaja mandala to appear clearly. Not only that, you are able to have all the hands and implements, even the eyes, ears and so forth appearing clearly in the short period of a finger snap. However, you are not yet able to do that for the deities of the sense sources or the sense bases. For example, Ksitigarbha is set at the eyes and so on. But you are not able to do that for these deities that are set at the various places of the deity’s body.  So, if you have this level of attainment, then you are at this stage of having attained some pristine wisdom. 
Someone who has attained this second level is able to cause all the celestial mansion and the mandalas to appear clearly within a short period of time. However, this person is not able to generate, for example, Kṣitigarbha at the eye sense power and so on within a short period of time, 
There is a difference …
…
… the deities of the bases, in stages. (p. 110)
Someone who is still a beginner has to visualize the entire supporting mandala and supported deities slowly and in stages. So, a beginner would read the sadhana and visualize the various aspects slowly and in stages. 
Someone who is on the second level who has attained some pristine wisdom does not need to do that. In just a very short instance of time, this person can cause all these coarse aspects to appear. But when it comes to the deities of the sense bases, the eyes
and so forth, then they have to do it slowly, in stages. 
So these two levels, the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom, belong solely to the generation stage. They are not on the completion stage. 
3. Those attaining partial control over pristine wisdom
Those attaining partial control …
…
… capable of attaining perfect control. (p. 111)
When does one reach this third stage? A person in a very short period of time, within the duration of a finger snap, is able to generate clear and stable appearance of the coarse deities. On top of that, even the subtle deities can be generated very clearly and in a stable way very quickly. One can see all the main and secondary limbs of even the subtle deities of the sense bases in a very short period of time up to but not including those capable of attaining perfect control. 
It is said that this person practices both the generation and completion stages. (p. 111)
This means that a person who has attained this third level can either belong to the generation stage or the completion stage. This person does not have to be just on the generation stage. This person can be on the completion stage. 
Moreover those who attain this level …
…
… do not need to perform the self-generation again. (p. 111)
A practitioner who is on the first two levels—either on the level of a beginner or on the level of those who have attained some pristine wisdom—need to distinguish between the meditative sessions and the post-meditative sessions. This is because for beginners, they have to meditate on the coarse deities slowly and in stages. They are not able to do it instantly.
For those on the second level, they need to generate clear stable appearance of the subtle deities, i.e., the deities of the sense basis in stages. Therefore, they need to have these meditative sessions that are separate from the post-meditative sessions. For example, they need to meditate in four sessions every day. 
However, once one has reached the third stage—those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom—then there is no such need. 
Previously, one has to meditate on the sadhana with some difficulty in order to cause the various visualizations to appear clearly. However, once one has reached the third stage, then simply by thinking, instantly, in this very short time, the entire mandala and all the deities appear clearly. There is no need to reflect on this many times. Just once and within this short instant of time, everything appears clearly. Once one has reached this stage, then there is no hardship, no matter how many initiations one receives and how much recitations one has to do. So, having generated such a realization of oneself as a deity, one does not need to perform the self-generation again. 
Therefore Mantric Stages states: … on the stage of completion. (p. 112)
After having completed the generation stage, then you can go on to meditate on the completion stage. 
4. Those attaining perfect control over pristine wisdom
It is said that some who attain partial control … reside on the higher levels of the completion stage. (p. 112)
As I mentioned earlier, those on the third stage who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom can belong to either the generation stage or the completion stage. 
What is stated here is that there are some who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom who are on the completion stage while those on the fourth level who have attained perfect control over pristine wisdom reside on the higher levels of the completion stage.
What are considered the higher levels of the completion stage? As I mentioned earlier, in the completion stage, first you have the isolation of body. Then the isolation of speech and the isolation of mind followed by the illusory body, clear light and union. The higher level of completion stage refers to having completed the final isolation of mind of the example clear light. Then you have attained the impure illusory body. This fourth stage is attained upon attaining the impure illusory body. 
This means that those who are on the third stage who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom can belong to the isolation of body, isolation of speech and isolation of mind. To reach this higher stage of the impure illusory body, they would have to attain perfect control over pristine wisdom. 
There are some explanations that say it is possible for this person who has attained perfect control over pristine wisdom to reside on the isolation of mind. However, this is not the widely accepted explanation. 
We have gone through the four levels of practitioners. They are:
the beginners
those who have attained some pristine wisdom 
those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom 
those who have attained perfect control over pristine wisdom 
Coarse generation stage
When one reaches the third stage and becomes one who has attained partial control over pristine wisdom, one is said to have attained stability in the coarse generation
stage. This is because, at the third stage, one is able to instantly generate clear stable appearance of the entire mandala of the coarse and subtle deities. So, upon attaining this third of the four levels, one is said to have attained stability in the coarse generation stage.
At the third stage, one has this ability to just instantly, in a short period of time, generate all the aspects of the mandala—the supporting and supported mandala—clearly. This is due to having attained stability in the coarse generation stage.
According to Khedrup Je, there is a slight difference between having attained stability in the coarse generation stage and having culminated or completed the coarse generation stage. For some masters, these two are the same. 
On the third level having attained partial control over pristine wisdom, one is able to generate all the coarse visualizations instantly. On top of that, even the subtle deities can all be generated clearly in a very short period of time. In addition, this person is able to just perform a single self-generation each day. It is said that this meditation can be maintained for four hours. In a single day of 24 hours, this person is able to maintain the meditation for 1/6 of a day. Since there are 24 hours in a day, 1/6 of 24 hours would be four hours. So having attained that, then one is said to have attained stability in the coarse generation stage. 
If one is able to sustain this meditation on the mandala for a month or even up to a year, then one is said to have completed or culminated the practice. 
Stability is attained when one is able to maintain this focus on the mandala for four hours. 
If one can maintain this focus on the mandala for a month or up to a year, then one has completed the coarse generation stage. 
Subtle generation stage
Up to this point, it is the coarse generation stage. After this, one moves on to the subtle generation stage. 
On the subtle generation stage, one generates bliss and places the entire mandala— the supporting and supported mandala—within a subtle drop the size of a mustard seed and meditates on it. 
If one is able to cause this visualization to appear clearly in a very short instant of time and to maintain that for 1/6 of a day, meaning four hours, then one is said to have attained stability in the subtle generation stage.
If one is able to meditate in this way for up to a month or even a year, then one is said to have culminated or completed the subtle generation stage. So, there is a distinction made between attaining stability in the subtle generation stage and having culminated the subtle generation stage. 
Question: Having completed the subtle generation stage, then one moves on to the completion stage?
Answer: After having completed the subtle generation stage, then you will move on to meditate on the completion stage. You would meditate so that you can cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. 
Question: If the generation stage and completion stage of Highest Yoga Tantra is applied to the five paths, the generation stage would be the Highest Yoga Tantra path of accumulation and the completion stage would be the Highest Yoga Tantra path of preparation onwards. Would I be correct to say that?
Answer: I think roughly it should be like that. The generation stage is cultivated on the path of accumulation. It seems like the rest of the five paths would correlate with the completion stage. But I cannot remember exactly in a very clear way. 
Khen Rinpoche: I think last time I gave one chart on this.
Student 1: It is stated like that. 
Khen Rinpoche: If it is stated like that then it must be like that. 
Question: When you first attain the completion stage, do you also attain the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness?
Answer: The answer is probably not. This is because in order to attain the completion stage, it is not necessary for one to have attained the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness. The reason is that it is said that it is possible for someone to meditate on the Cittamatra (Mind Only School) view or Svatantrika (Autonomy Middle Way School) view to practise the generation stage and enter the completion stage. This means that such a person would not have attained the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness. Therefore, it is not necessary for someone who has attained the completion stage to have attained the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness. 
What it boils down to is that you don’t need a realization of emptiness to attain the completion stage. The realization of emptiness is not required on the isolation of body, isolation of speech and isolation of mind. It is very clearly said in the text that those who hold the views of the MOS and the AMWS can attain the completion stage. Having practised the generation stage and having culminated that, one can move on to the practice of the completion stage. One then can cause the winds to enter, abide and dissolve in the central channel. At that point, one can cause the exalted wisdom or the pristine wisdom of white appearance to arise. Tantra has some uncommon techniques. 
For example, in the sutra system, there is the explanation of using the nine mental abidings or the nine mental states to achieve calm abiding or samatha. In the tantra system, there is a subtler way to achieve calm abiding and there is an uncommon technique of achieving that. In fact, this point will come up later in the text. At which point is calm abiding achieved? It is explained that it is attained on the third of the four levels. Those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom have attained calm abiding. 
Having completed the coarse generation stage, you will go on to meditate on the subtle drop. It is said that through doing that, you will definitely achieve calm abiding. The details will come later on but in brief, after having completed the coarse generation stage, you meditate on this subtle drop. You achieve calm abiding and you can also achieve special insight.
It is stated in the Principles of Grounds and Paths composed by Yangchen Gawai Lodrö that when you attain stability in the subtle generation stage, then you would attain calm abiding also. However, in this text by Ngawang Palden, it seems he is saying that even before you attain stability in the subtle generation stage, you can attain calm abiding. 
According to Ngawang Palden’s explanation, those who have attained the third stage—those who have attained partial control over pristine wisdom—can attain calm abiding.
Question: It says on page 111 of the root text that those who achieve the third level “need not distinguish meditative sessions from post-sessions.” May I then assume that for such a practitioner, the quality of mind is the same in the meditative session and the post-session? So this means that the collection of merit and exalted wisdom is the same whether one is in meditative session or the post-session? 
Answer: This is saying that prior to the third level of having attained partial control of the pristine wisdom, one has to meditate, for example, in four sessions. One has to make the effort to sustain this yoga by meditating on the sadhana. There is this difference between the meditative session and the post-session. 
But once you reach the third stage, there is no need to rely on the sadhana to meditate because simply by thinking about the mandala, you can cause all the coarse and subtle aspects to appear clearly. So there is no need to meditate on the sadhana specifically. 
In the sutra system, there is the explanation that during the session of meditative equipoise, you accumulate wisdom. After that, during post-meditation or subsequent attainment, you accumulate merit. However, this explanation does not apply in the tantra system. 
In the tantra system, you cultivate the clear appearance of being the deity and also cultivate divine pride. The whole mandala appears clearly to you and you also cultivate divine pride. What it means is that you accumulate merit and wisdom at the same time. There’s no need to separate the two accumulations. 
Now the accumulation of merit is mainly for the attainment of a buddha’s form body (rupakaya). This is true in sutra and tantra. In the context of tantra, one meditates on the deity’s body during the generation stage and one cultivates clear appearance and divine pride. This is the means of accumulating merit in the tantra system. Once you reach the third stage, then there is no distinction between the meditative session and the post-session. Therefore, the question of whether or not one accumulates merit becomes irrelevant.
Question: Would somebody on the third stage necessarily have attained calm abiding?
Answer: It is not necessary for a person who is on the third stage to have calm abiding. What I was saying just now was that such a person, having attained the third stage, will go on to cultivate calm abiding and special insight. At the beginning, upon attaining the third stage, this person does not need to have calm abiding yet.
Question: In the sutra explanation, when one attains the path of accumulation, one has attained calm abiding. In the tantra system, the path of accumulation correlates with the generation stage. Does it mean that a person on the generation stage already has calm abiding?
Answer: You need to think about this. The question you have to ask yourself is this: when we talk about these four levels of practitioners, the beginners and so forth, have they entered the generation stage? Do they have a generation stage path in their continua? 
If you look at the definition of the generation stage and you check the levels of the practitioners, probably, you would have to say that even the beginners on the first stage and those attaining some pristine wisdom on the second level have attained the generation stage, meaning they have some generation stage path in their continua. By checking the definition, one can conclude that the first level beginners and the second level—those who have attained some pristine wisdom—are on the generation stage. In their continua, there is the generation stage path. 
Beings on the generation stage are on the path of accumulation of tantra. However, they do not need to have calm abiding yet. Whether or not you can say that someone on the generation stage has attained the calm abiding described in the sutra system is something that needs to be examined. In the sutra system, they talk about calm abiding being the attainment of having passed through the nine mental abidings, having eliminated laxity, excitement and so on. So, it seems that this is only attained after having attained the third level of the four levels of practitioners. Perhaps, there is this uncommon presentation of calm abiding in tantra that is not the same as in the sutra system. 
In the teachings of Guntang Rinpoche, he says that calm abiding in the sutra system is only able to stop coarse conceptualization. The calm abiding described in the sutra system is not able to stop the subtle conceptualization. This means that when we talk about the attainment of calm abiding in tantra, for example by the practitioner on the third level, this means that that calm abiding is an extraordinarily powerful calm abiding. This is because this calm abiding is able to stop the subtle dualistic appearances. This means that the calm abiding talked about in tantra is different from the calm abiding in the sutra system. 
Guntang Rinpoche clearly talked about the power of calm abiding that is achieved through the tantric technique. It has this special power to stop the subtle dualistic appearances that the calm abiding achieved through the sutra technique does not have. On the first  and second of the four levels—on the levels of the beginners and those who have attained some pristine wisdom—one is able to focus on the deity’s body and place one’s mind on it. This means one has overcome coarse laxity for sure. However, this is not yet the attainment of the tantric calm abiding. What this means is that the sutra criteria of calm abiding are not the same as that of the tantra criteria.
Question: According to this definition of the generation stage, there is no mention of uncontrived bodhicitta. Also, the person who has attained the generation stage doesn’t have to have the calm abiding described in the sutra system. Does this mean that the person can attain the generation stage without uncontrived bodhicitta?
Answer: It seems uncontrived bodhicitta is a necessary condition. In order to enter the tantric path of accumulation, you need uncontrived bodhicitta. This means that someone who is on the generation stage definitely should have uncontrived bodhicitta. In order to enter the tantric path, definitely you must have entered a generation stage path. This means that you must have generated the tantric path of accumulation. This means you must have generated uncontrived bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: It is something like that. I am not sure so we can discuss next Saturday. Next week, we will read the part of the text that talks about when calm abiding is attained. If you have time, please read ahead even though you may not be able to understand everything. If you have read the text before you come to class, it will be helpful. It will be easier for you to understand the explanations.
Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 