Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L22VET.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:18.077331
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 22	 				                                            20 June 2017
Root text, p. 43—53. The siddhis—by means of lineage. Clarification of difficult points. Performance Tantra. How to become a suitable vessel. How to keep the vows and commitments purely. How to approximate the deity. Yoga with signs: Four external branches of recitation & four internal branches of recitation. Yoga without signs. Points of debate. How method and wisdom are united in tantra. The yoga severing the root of samsara.  
In Action Tantra, it’s said the accomplishment of the siddhis is very important. They make achieving enlightenment much quicker than in sutra. The siddhis are to be accomplished on the basis of having done the approximation of the deity well through the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation.  
Among all the siddhis, if one accomplishes the siddhi of life knowledge bearer, one achieves a very long life and in that very life, one achieves enlightenment. This is much quicker than the sutra path.
In Action Tantra, there are three lineages:
the tathagata lineage—the factor of purity of the body appearing as the deity
the lotus lineage—the factor of purity of speech appearing as the deity
the vajra lineage—the factor of purity of mind appearing as the deity
THE SIDDHIS—BY MEANS OF LINEAGE
How to establish the siddhis having achieved approximation
(5) By means of lineage
And:
Also each lineage … 
… 
… actions of pacification and so on. (p. 43)
These statements … explained by later scholars. (p. 43) 
There are further subdivisions within the three lineages—the tathagata lineage, the lotus lineage and the vajra lineage. 
The tathagata lineage  
These are some of the many subdivisions for the tathagata lineage:
the principal of the tathagata lineage 
the lord of the tathagata lineage 
the mother of the tathagata lineage
When we talk about the tathagata lineage in general, we are talking about the principal of the tathagata lineage. The principal of the tathagata lineage is the Tathagata, Buddha Shakyamuni.
The lord of the tathagata lineage is Manjushri.  Manjushri is also referred to sometimes as the king of the tathagata lineage. Whether it’s the lord or king of the tathagata lineage, I’m not sure why that’s the case. There’re tantras of the tathagata lineage.  Could it be that Manjushri is posited as the lord of the tathagata lineage because he turned the Wheel of Dharma of the tantras of the tathagata lineage?  I’m not sure whether we can make a connection between Manjushri being the one who upheld and spread the tantras of the tathagata lineage thus making him the lord of the tathagata lineage.
The mother of the tathagata lineage is Marici. 
If we were to expand further:
What are the deities that constitute the tathagata lineage?
What are the deities included in the lord of the tathagata lineage?
If you want to go into these further details, then that’s not very clear.
The lotus linege
The principal of the lotus lineage is Amitayus. 
The lord of the lotus lineage is Avalokiteshvara (or Chenrezig). 
The mother of the lotus lineage is Tara.
The vajra lineage
The principal of the vajra lineage is Buddha Akshobhya.  
The lord of the vajra lineage is Vajrapani.
The mother of the vajra lineage is Mamaki.
Usually we see Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara and Vajrapani depicted together forming a trinity. I guess mainly this is because they are the lords of the three lineages.
It’s said in the root text that each lineage has three siddhis, three actions and so forth.
Classification of difficult points 
One scholar says: …
…
… supreme buddhafiled called Gandavyuha. (p. 44)  
The point here is to dispel the objection or resolve the qualm. There’s a quotation from the General Classes of Tantra stating Action Tantra presents “no system of enlightenment other than that presented in the Perfection [Vehicle] system.” Yet, it’s also said that the tantric path is a quicker path than the Paramitayana path.  
Earlier on, it was said that in the practice of Action Tantra, you can accomplish various siddhis, one of which is the siddhi of the life knowledge bearer. This means you achieve the attainment of immortality, i.e., you have a very long life to achieve enlightenment. You’ve to say you can achieve enlightenment in one life. 
According to the sutric system, is it possible to achieve enlightenment in one lifetime?  You have to say, “No, that doesn’t exist.”  
What does it actually mean when you say, “One can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime”?  
Does the sentient being at the end of the continuum achieve enlightenment in one lifetime in the same basis?
Khen Rinpoche: Don’t be confused. You must be able to say, “Yes” or “No.” You’ve to say something. Then it works. Otherwise, I ask something and you keep quiet. I don’t know what I need to say.  
What do you think?  My question is: According to sutra, is it possible to achieve enlightenment in one lifetime? No? 
Then I say, “If that’s not possible, does the sentient being at the end of the continuum achieve enlightenment in the same basis? Doesn’t that individual achieve enlightenment in that very life? If that’s the case, then in sutra, there’s achieving enlightenment in one lifetime, isn’t it?”
It’s very simple. I don’t know why you’re confused.
What are you going to say if I were to say there’s enlightenment in one lifetime in sutra based on what I’ve just brought up?
Answer my question!
Student 1: In sutra, one cannot attain enlightenment within one lifetime.  
Khen Rinpoche: That’s clear. But I’m saying it’s possible. Just now, I gave an example. What’s the answer to that?
Student 1: In order to achieve enlightenment, you need three countless great eons. So that’s one of the lifetimes of the three countless great eons.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, in one lifetime, you can get enlightened!
Student 1: When we say, “attain enlightenment in one lifetime,” we mean from the moment you enter the path until you get enlightened, (this happens) in one lifetime.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to be quick (to catch) what she’s saying. She’s saying it’s not possible to get enlightened in one lifetime. That means after entering the path, it’s not possible to get enlightenment in one lifetime.  That’s the meaning of “It’s not possible to get enlightenment in one lifetime.” That’s what she’s saying. Is that correct? 
In Action Tantra, it’s said the individual can get enlightened in one lifetime by accomplishing the siddhi of life knowledge bearer, i.e., the siddhi of immortality. The manner of achieving enlightenment is no different from what’s presented in the Perfection Vehicle. This means it follows that individual will achieve enlightenment in Akanishta. 
Look at the way enlightenment is achieved in Action Tantra:
Somebody with a desire realm basis enters the path of Action Tantra by taking the initiation and generating bodhicitta. 
He then actualizes the yoga with signs and the yoga without signs.  
When he achieves the yoga without signs, he enters the path of preparation of Action Tantra. 
If he has accomplished the siddhi of immortality, within that lifetime, he achieves the path of seeing. This is because he has to achieve the path of seeing with a desire realm basis. 
After entering the path of seeing of Action Tantra, he progresses to enlightenment. 
All this is said to happen in that lifetime.
He enters the path of Action Tantra and achieves the path of seeing with the desire realm basis. By then, he would already have the siddhi of immortality. This means he will achieve enlightenment with the desire realm basis. 
The question here: Is there enlightenment in one lifetime on the basis of a desire realm basis?
If you accept that on the path of Action Tantra, one can achieve enlightenment, you will have to posit enlightenment is achieved with the desire realm basis.  If that’s the case, at the same time, if you were to say Action Tantra presents no system of enlightenment other than what is presented in the sutric path, then when you put these two together, you’ll have a contradiction. This is because in the sutric path, it’s said you achieve enlightenment in Akanishta. 
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what I’m trying to say?  If you understand me, then I’ll give you the answer but first, you’ve to understand what I’m saying.  If you don’t understand, then there’s no point in me giving the answer. 
This is the qualm. There seems to be a contradiction. How should we resolve this?
Khen Rinpoche: If you say something, then I’ll give the answer.  If I keep giving the answer, there’s no point as you don’t think at all. 
Do you understand my question, the qualm posed?  What are you going to say? 
OK. Let’s leave it there for the time being. You’ve to think about how we should resolve that qualm. The qualm is an apparent internal contradiction between saying one can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime in one body in Action Tantra versus the assertion of the sutric system that enlightenment is achieved in Akanishta.   
As for the path of Action Tantra, you know that there is absorption with recitation and absorption not reliant on recitation. If you’ve a rough idea of the mode of progress through these absorptions, seeing how they are methods for developing concentration, I think that’s enough. 
PERFORMANCE TANTRA 
How to progress on the path of performance tantra
This has four divisions: …
…
4. How to establish the siddhis 
How to become a suitable vessel
First, you become a vessel …
…  
… it is similar to action tantra. (p. 45) 
One receives an initiation into Performance Tantra whereby one’s empowered to meditate on the path of Performance Tantra. 
As for the initiations received, the root text says, “You must obtain the five knowledge empowerments since you are not permitted to practice if you obtain just the water and crown empowerments.” Apart from this distinction, it’s similar to Action Tantra. 
Why’s there this difference—the necessity of receiving all the five knowledge empowerments whereas in Action Tantra, it’s enough to receive the water and crown
Empowerments?  In Performance Tantra those two empowerments alone are not sufficient. On top of that, you’ve to receive the vajra, bell and name empowerments. Why is this the case? It’s something we can think about. I don’t have any answer now.
As for the next outline, “How to keep the vows and commitments purely,” this is similar to what was explained earlier in Action Tantra. You take the bodhisattva vows and have to guard against the 18 root downfalls and 46 secondary downfalls. 
How to keep the vows and commitments purely
Second, the root downfalls …
…
… abandoning the ten non-virtuous actions.
How to approximate the deity
The third … without signs (p. 46)
Yoga with signs
Yoga with signs …
…
… during mental recitation (p. 47)  
The yoga with signs in Performance Tantra consists of:
four external branches of recitation 
four internal branches of recitation 
Four external branches of recitation
The names of the four external branches of recitation are the same as Action Tantra: 
self basis
other basis
mind basis
sound basis
The self basis refers to oneself arising as the deity. Before one generates as a deity, one has to bring to mind the meaning of emptiness. One has to reflect on emptiness. 
You could start with a doubt tending towards the factual, a mind of doubt with emptiness as its object.  
Next, you’ve the correctly assuming consciousness, a better state of mind with regard to your understanding of emptiness. 
Ideally, it would be best if you could have the valid cognizer apprehending emptiness. 
Whatever it is, one meditates on emptiness by applying many reasons. There’re so many different proofs or reasons one can use to ascertain emptiness. For example, there the reason called the freedom from being one or different or one or many.  One comes to ascertain the meditator, the ‘I’ who’s meditating and the deity meditated upon do not exist inherently. These two are equal in the state of emptiness.
That mind ascertaining emptiness arises as the deity. One can do an instantaneous self-generation. In the context of Performance Tantra, there’s no specific mention of generating oneself as the deity via the six deities. In Action Tantra, the process of generating oneself as the deity is explained via the six deities. Here, in Performance Tantra, sometimes there’re references to instantaneous self-generation. 
In some texts, they also talk about generation through the three rituals or processes:
The mind ascertaining emptiness arises in the aspect of the seed syllable of the deity. 
The seed syllable transforms into the respective hand implements.
From the hand implements, one arises in the complete aspect of the deity. 
To make it easier, let’s have an illustration.
First, one meditates on the meaning of emptiness.
The mind that ascertains emptiness arises as a moon disc.
On top of that moon disc, in the middle, there’s a syllable Om golden in colour.
From this syllable Om, one does the visualization of emitting and re-absorbing light rays, accomplishing the two purposes of oneself and others. 
Light rays are emitted, making offerings to the buddhas and bodhisattvas
They are re-absorbed into the syllable Om. 
Then again light rays are emitted performing activities for the welfare of sentient beings. 
The light rays are again re-absorbed back into the syllable Om.
The syllable Om transforms into Vairochana.
One arises as Vairochana and generates clear appearance and divine pride. This is the self-basis.
Then one generates the front generation in the same aspect as one’s self- generation, i.e., one generates Vairochana in the space in front of oneself at a slightly higher level. (This is the other basis).
In the heart of the front generation, one visualizes a moon disc, which by nature is one’s own mind appearing in the aspect of the moon disc. This is the mind basis.
It’s not exactly clear in the root text but it seems to be saying one visualizes the mind basis as the syllable Om in the heart of the front generation. I’m not sure whether it means in the heart of oneself and the front generation or just the front generation. But if you look at the text, what it seems to be saying is “visualize in this heart.” In this context, “this” seems to be referring to the front generation.
On the moon disc in the heart of the front generation deity, you place the letters of the mantra to be recited. This is the sound basis.
I’m not sure whether at one’s own heart, one also places the moon disc and the letters of the mantra to be recited. I’m not sure whether that’s similar to Action Tantra. 
In the context of Action Tantra, it’s quite clear you visualize the moon disc and the mantra to be recited at the heart of yourself and the heart of the front generation. But here in Performance Tantra, it’s not clearly stated. 
After visualizing these four branches, you engage in recitation. I’m not sure whether recitation here is the same as explained in Action Tantra, i.e., the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra and the mantra recitation observing the sound of the mantra. I would think there’s the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra and the recitation observing the sound of the mantra because you’ve already visualized the mind basis and the sound basis, be they only in the heart of the front generation or in both hearts. The point is the mind basis and the sound basis are there. Anyway, I would think there’s the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra and the recitation observing the sound of the mantra. 
With regard to these two forms of recitation, there’re also the whispered recitation and mental recitation. 
The mode of the practice should be the same as Action Tantra: 
First, we need to have stable concentration focussing on the deity’s body.
Once that’s achieved, we move our attention to the recitation observing the form of the letters of the mantra. 
Then we move on to the recitation observing the sound of the mantra. 
First, we start with whispered recitation. 
Once that’s done well, by restraining vitality exertion, we engage in mental recitation. 
Four internal branches of recitation
The text I’m reading from says:
Bring the mind back to the meaning of emptiness, i.e., reflect on the meaning of emptiness. 
From within the state of emptiness, visualize the syllable Ah. It could be the syllable Ah or the long Ah as there’re different forms of Ah. 
Whatever Ah you choose, you arise as either Vairochana or Shakyamuni Buddha. Let’s say you generate yourself as Vairochana. This will be the self basis. 
Visualize an orb of light at the heart of yourself as the deity. In that orb of light in your heart, there is also a Vairochana. This small Vairocana at your heart is the other basis. 
In the heart of that small Vairochana is also an orb of light, i.e., a moon mandala. This is the mind basis. 
On that moon disc in the heart of the (small) Vairochana are the letters of the mantra you’re going to recite. This is the sound basis. 
When these four internal branches are completed, you engage in recitation. First is the whispered recitation and then through restraining vitality exertion, you engage in mental recitation. 
According to the text I’m reading from: 
When you engage in the four external branches of recitation, you recite the mantra of the deity 100,000 times. 
When you engage in the four internal branches of recitation, you recite the mantra of the deity 100,000 times.  
That is, you recite the mantra of the deity 100,000 times each for these two branches —100,000 times for the four external branches of recitation and 100,000 times for the four internal branches of recitation.  
There’s another text, which says you perform the approximation by reciting the mantra 300,000 times. How do you go about doing that? 
First, you start with the four external branches of recitation and accumulate 100,000 recitations of the mantra. 
Once you’ve done that, you stop and make offerings for one month. 
After you’ve finished making offerings for a month, you accumulate another 50,000 recitations with the four external branches of recitation. In total, you accumulate 150,000 recitations with the four external branches of repetition. 
Then you do the same with the four internal branches of recitation. 
First, you accumulate 100,000 recitations of the mantra. 
You stop and make offerings for a month. 
Then you finish off with 50,000 recitations based on the four internal branches of recitation. 
This is stated in the Vairochanabhisambodhi Tantra, a practice of Performance Tantra. There’s a statement in there with regard to reciting the mantra 300,000 times. 
With regard to the boundary for achieving calm abiding in Performance Tantra, I’ve not seen any clear indication of this unlike in Action Tantra where it’s clearly stated this is achieved when you achieve the concentration abiding in sound. 
Let’s say the mode of progress is similar to what we’ve discussed in our recent debate. 
You enter the path and by the end of the path of accumulation, you have the calm abiding observing emptiness. 
After that, you achieve the special insight observing emptiness. 
You then enter the path of preparation. 
After that, you progress on the path of seeing and so forth. 
According to the root text, the recitations of the four external branches and the four internal branches through which we engage in the whispered and mental recitations 
by restraining vitality exertion come under yoga with signs. 
Yoga without signs
Yoga without signs …
…
… alternating between analysis and placement. (p. 48)
The difference between the two yogas—yoga with signs and yoga without signs—is stated as follows: 
The meaning of yoga with signs …
…
… meditation on emptiness alone. (p. 49)
This is what Lama Tsongkhapa said in his Mantric Stages. But if you look at the passage, it seems to be saying yoga with signs doesn’t involve meditation on emptiness. We’ve to think about this. We cannot say that somebody who’s meditating on yoga with signs necessarily has not realized emptiness.
In Action Tantra, one generates the deity through the six deities. The first deity is the empty or ultimate deity that’s essentially a meditation on emptiness. In tantra, we say the apprehension aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness arises as the deity. In short, that wisdom, the mind ascertaining emptiness, arises as the deity. This is how you move from the empty deity to the sound deity and so forth. So there is this meditation on emptiness.
But this is what Lama Tsongkhapa said in his Mantric Stages. Can one say that a person who meditates on the yoga with signs doesn’t meditate on emptiness?
Khen Rinpoche: What are you going to say?
Points of debate
One scholar says: …
…
… will be influenced by it. (pp. 49—50)
Condensed Stages of the Path states: …
…
…  although it does not manifest. (p. 50)
How method and wisdom are united in tantra
This is how method and wisdom …
…
…  in a single awareness. (pp. 50—51)
Khen Rinpoche: Have you read what I’m reading now before coming to class? If you’ve read it, then it’s very easy to understand what I’m reading now.  
The author is citing Mantric Stages, which is an explanation of the meaning of method and wisdom conjoined inseparably in a single awareness. The answer’s in the root text. You should read this on your own. The answer’s clear.
Mantric Stages states: …
…
… inseparable union of method and wisdom. (p. 51) 
In essence, what this passage is saying is that during the resultant phase, the exalted body and mind of a buddha abide inseparably as one, an indivisible entity. Likewise, at the time of the path, in tantra, both the method and wisdom aspects of the path abide simultaneously and inseparably as one.
And: …
…
… wrong (modes of) distinction. (p. 52)
This is a very essential point to understand—why and how method and wisdom abide simultaneously and inseparably as one in a single awareness. This is a unique feature of tantra. You must get this point and understand it.
After that short discussion, to summarize:
The yoga severing the root of saṃsāra
Therefore, in this context, … 
… 
… concentration without signs. (pp. 52—53)
The author is clarifying you cannot distinguish yoga with signs and yoga without signs with just this reason, “If it’s conjoined with the meditation on emptiness, it’s yoga without signs. If it’s not conjoined with the meditation on emptiness, then it’s yoga with sign.” You cannot say that. 
The author, Ngawang Palden, cites Khedrup Je’s General Classes of Tantra. 
General Classes of Tantra states: …
…
… based on past advice. (p. 53)
General Classes of Tantra says the absorption with recitation alone cannot be the direct antidote severing the root of samsara. So the yoga with signs alone cannot do that. During the time of the yoga with signs, the ability to sever the root of samsara has yet to be formed. But when the power to sever the root of samsara comes into being, then you’ve the yoga without signs.
There’s no way to strike at the root of samsara without actualizing the special insight observing emptiness. Even if one has the calm abiding observing emptiness, that in itself cannot strike at the root of samsara. You need the wisdom induced by calm abiding observing emptiness. Therefore, you need special insight. Without special insight focusing on emptiness, you cannot even suppress the manifest afflictions.
As for the presentation according to the Perfection Vehicle, when the special insight focussing on emptiness is achieved, one enters the path of preparation from the heat level. From the heat level, one moves on to the peak level, forbearance level and the level of supreme mundane qualities. As he progresses through the four levels of the path of preparation, the yogi’s ability to suppress the manifest grasping at true existence increases. 
 1.32
In tantra, there’re two main meditations:
the meditation on the wheel of the deities, belonging to the side of appearance
the meditation on suchness, belonging to the side of emptiness
Although you meditate on both, the yoga with signs is the practice focussing primarily on meditating on the side of appearances, the wheel of the deities. I guess you can say the yoga with signs is the practice that focusses primarily on the meditation on the deity belonging to the side of appearances. With the deity as the basis, then you try to elicit clear appearance and divine pride. A practice focussing primarily on this is called the yoga with signs. 
The practice focussing primarily on the side of emptiness, meditating on 
The practice that focusses primarily on the side of the appearance meditating on the suchness of the deity is called the yoga without signs.
This is how you explain the earlier statement from Je Rinpoche’s Mantric Stages. In short:
The practice focussing on the side of appearances, meditating on the deity’s body is the yoga with signs. 
The practice focussing on the side of appearances, meditating on the suchness of the deity is the yoga without signs. You have to keep in mind that the yoga without signs starts when you’ve the special insight observing emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: That’s it. If you’ve a question, ask. 
You all have the text so you must read before coming to class. Try to read at least one or two pages. Then when I talk, it becomes very easy. Otherwise, if you’re reading the text for the first time, it’s more difficult.
Student 1: Before the path of seeing, there’s definitely dualistic appearances during both the yoga with sign as well as the yoga without signs. How does one differentiate dualistic appearances on these stages with “non-dual” profundity and clarity?
Khen Rinpoche: The “non-dual” in the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity refers to the mind realizing emptiness appearing clearly as the deity. The yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is a way of saying method and wisdom are found in one mind and are one entity. It’s the mind realizing emptiness appearing clearly as the deity. This yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity is the mind realizing emptiness, yet at the same time, the deity is appearing clearly to that mind.
Let’s say on the path of preparation, one is practicing this deity yoga. The deity is appearing to one. But as one progresses towards enlightenment, that appearance subsides. 
When the deity’s appearing to one’s mind, is there dualistic appearance? Yes. Because the deity’s body appears, you have to say there’s dualistic appearance. But is that appearance of the deity’s body always there? No. Such appearance will subside. For example, when one reaches the path of seeing, during the meditative equipoise directly perceiving emptiness, there’s no dualistic appearance.
We’re talking about the direct perception of emptiness. For that meditative equipoise, we’ve to say only the suchness of the deity appears and the deity itself does not appear. 
But this begets the question: Isn’t this particular wisdom of meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, yes or no?
Does the appearance of the deity appear to this meditative equipoise? 
If you say it doesn’t appear, then how does it become a yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity? There’s only profundity, no clarity!
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.