Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L29FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.594478
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson                                                                    29
   20 July 2017


Review.  Achieving enlightenment & accumulating the  collections  for  three
countless great eons. Root text: pp.79—86. Chapter Four: Grounds and  Paths.
How to posit the five paths and ten grounds for the three lower  classes  of
tantra. How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of action  tantra.  That
path of accumulation. The path of preparation. The path of seeing. The  path
of meditation. The path of no more learning. Assertions  in  the  root  text
vs. assertions by Sera Je College. Points of debate.  Shared  and  exclusive
tantric paths. Paths shared with the Perfection Vehicle.


REVIEW

As we have seen in the last lesson, if one is asked:
 • Is there the practice of taking desire as the path  in  the  three  lower
   classes of tantra? The answer is yes. The practice of  taking  desire  as
   the path acts as a  condition  to  induce  the  bliss  that  is  used  to
   ascertain emptiness.
 • Is there a blissful consciousness realizing emptiness in the three  lower
   classes of tantra? You will probably have to say yes too.
 •  Is  the  mind  of  great  bliss  realizing  emptiness  responsible   for
   progression through the grounds and paths in the three lower  classes  of
   tantra? The answer will probably be no.
 • What is it due to then? Essentially, it is due to  achieving  the  common
   siddhis. One progresses on the grounds  and  paths  in  the  three  lower
   classes of tantra on that basis.

This is a summary of the points we have looked at so far.

ACHIEVING ENLIGHTENMENT & ACCUMULATING THE COLLECTIONS FOR  THREE  COUNTLESS
GREAT EONS

Is  enlightenment  achieved  in  the  three  lower  classes  of  tantra   in
dependence on accumulating the collections for  many  eons?  The  answer  is
yes. It’s similar to the Perfection Vehicle in that you need  to  depend  on
the accumulation of the collections for a very long period of time in  order
to achieve enlightenment. If that’s the case, how is the path of  the  three
lower classes of tantra quicker than the Perfection  Vehicle?  How  are  you
going to answer this question?

This qualm will arise. To achieve enlightenment in the three  lower  classes
of tantra, one needs to depend on accumulating the  collections  for  up  to
three countless great eons. What is the difference then  between  the  three
lower classes of tantra and the Perfection Vehicle? If you  are  taking  the
same amount of time to achieve enlightenment, how is tantra a quicker path?

Khen Rinpoche: What are you going to say?

Student 1: One student mentioned before that the accumulation  of  merit  is
not dependent on  time  but  dependent  on  the  amount  of  merit  that  is
collected over three countless great eons. Maybe in the sutric vehicle,  you
literally have to collect merit over three countless great eons whereas  for
the three lower classes of tantra, due to the blessings of the  bodhisattvas
and the buddhas and the common siddhis, you can accumulate  far  more  merit
than a bodhisattva on the sutric path within the same amount of time.

Khen Rinpoche: Can you make your answer shorter? Why  are  the  three  lower
classes of tantra faster than the sutric path?

Student 1: Due to the blessings of the bodhisattvas and the buddhas and  the
common siddhis achieved in the three lower classes of tantra,  the  mind  is
more powerful.  Therefore, within a shorter period of time,  more  merit  is
accumulated.

Khen Rinpoche: You mean the time taken is shorter?

Student 1: Yes, the time taken is shorter.

Khen Rinpoche: Since you say you can accumulate merit in  a  shorter  period
of time, basically, you are saying you don’t need to depend on  accumulating
merit for such a long period of time. If that’s the case,  do  you  need  to
depend on accumulating the collections for three  countless  great  eons  in
Highest Yoga Tantra?

To accumulate the collections of the three countless  great  eons  does  not
necessitate having to do that over a period of three countless  great  eons.
If we say in Highest  Yoga  Tantra,  the  achievement  of  enlightenment  is
dependent on accumulating the  collections  of  the  three  countless  great
eons, what problem would there be?

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting what I’m saying? What are you going to say?

Student 2: Then there is no quick path to enlightenment. You have to  depend
on three countless great eons and you cannot achieve  enlightenment  in  one
lifetime.

Khen Rinpoche: What is your answer  to  the  question  about  the  speed  of
enlightenment in  the  three  lower  classes  of  tantra?  If  you  need  to
accumulate the collections of the three countless great eons  in  the  three
lower classes of tantra, then what is the difference between practising  the
three lower  classes  of  tantra  and  the  Perfection  Vehicle?  Aren’t  we
essentially doing the same thing?

The path of the three lower classes of tantra is not a  quick  path  because
to achieve enlightenment in the three lower classes of tantra, you  need  to
accumulate the collections of the three countless great eons.

Student 2:  Then you have to say  that  tantra  is  supposed  to  present  a
faster method because it’s a more subtle system  that  focusses  on  how  to
achieve the two bodies by depending on clear appearance and divine pride.

Khen Rinpoche: That’s correct but how does that  make  it  become  a  faster
path? The time is exactly the same.

Student 3:  I think for tantra, regardless of which class of tantra  we  are
talking about, the main  practice  is  still  the  yoga  of  profundity  and
clarity. Due to relying on this method, regardless of the class  of  tantra,
the practitioner has to meditate on  emptiness.  Although  both  the  sutric
path and the tantric path have to accumulate the  collections  of  merit  of
the three countless great eons, due to this difference in  method,  I  think
tantra will be faster.

Khen Rinpoche:  We say tantra is faster because of that. Again  I’m  asking:
In tantra, do you need to accumulate three countless great eons of merit  to
get enlightened or not?
The amount of merit is the same but time is not same.

Student 3: I think the time is not same.

Khen Rinpoche: Because?

Student 3: Because of the practice of the yoga of profundity and clarity.

Khen Rinpoche:  That’s the same as what Student 1 said.

After that, I asked the next question: For Highest Yoga Tantra, in order  to
get enlightened, do you need to create the  merit  of  the  three  countless
great eons or not?

Student 3: I think in terms of the amount of merit, the answer is yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Following logic, you have to say yes. At the end of the  day,
in order to get enlightened even in Highest Yoga Tantra, you need to  create
three countless great eons of merit. Would you have to say that or  not?  If
not, why not?

Student 4: I’m citing from the root text. “The Mantric  Stages  states:  The
feature of highest yoga tantra is that  it  quickly  produces  enlightenment
without relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for  countless  eons.”  (p.
77)

It is mainly  because  of  the  special  feature  of  generating  a  special
awareness that allows this to happen unlike the Perfection Vehicle  and  the
three lower classes of tantra.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, Je Rinpoche states in his Mantric Stages,  “The  feature
of highest yoga tantra is that it  quickly  produces  enlightenment  without
relying on accumulating merit and wisdom for countless eons.” He  is  saying
it’s the feature of Highest Yoga Tantra only that one  is  able  to  achieve
enlightenment in one brief lifetime in this degenerate age  without  needing
such a long period of time such as the three countless great eons.

There’s a big difference between the  three  lower  classes  of  tantra  and
Highest Yoga Tantra in that in the three lower classes of tantra, one  needs
to stay for a very long time over many eons to  accumulate  the  collections
whereas in Highest Yoga Tantra, it is possible to achieve  enlightenment  in
one brief lifetime of this degenerate age.

In the three lower classes of tantra, it’s  said  by  achieving  the  common
siddhis such as the  siddhi  of  immortality  or  the  siddhi  of  the  life
knowledge bearer, one is able to abide for  a  very  long  period  of  time.
During  that  time,  one  accumulates  the  collections  and  then  achieves
enlightenment. Whether that long period of time is  as  long  as  the  three
countless great eons or not is something for us to think  about.  The  point
is it becomes complicated when it’s said  in  the  three  lower  classes  of
tantra, one achieves enlightenment by accumulating the  collections  of  the
three countless great eons.

In the three lower classes of tantra, when we think about it, probably,  you
can say that one can achieve enlightenment in one lifetime.  As  to  whether
enlightenment can be achieved in one body in  the  three  lower  classes  of
tantra is again something we need to think about.

Why do we have to  think  about  this?  Because  it’s  said  the  manner  of
achieving enlightenment newly in  the  three  lower  classes  of  tantra  is
similar to the Perfection  Vehicle.  This  means  the  basis  for  achieving
enlightenment is the support of Akanishta.

Student 5: Can non-Buddhists  achieve  common  siddhis  such  as  flying  or
walking fast  through  meditation  and  achieving  calm  abiding?  How  does
killing people create more merit? For example, Milarepa must  have  achieved
some kind of concentration to be able to send a hailstorm to kill a  lot  of
people.  This happened even  before  he  practised  Buddhist  tantra,  i.e.,
before becoming a Buddhist, he already had certain powers.

Also, there is this part about being directly cared for and blessed  by  the
buddhas and great bodhisattvas. In what way is this  different  between  the
lower tantras and the sutric school? Isn’t everyone cared  for  and  blessed
by the buddhas and great bodhisattvas?

Khen Rinpoche: It is said all this happened after  one  enters  the  tantric
path. After entering the tantric path, by depending on the  absorption  with
recitation and the absorption not reliant on repetition, one  elicits  clear
appearance  and  divine  pride  to  the  point  when  one  sees  the   front
generation, one sees the front generation directly and clearly.  One  has  a
direct vision of the buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  and  receives  instructions
from them. On this basis, one then progresses on the paths.

It’s taught in the Perfection Vehicle when one achieves the  great  path  of
accumulation, i.e., when one achieves the meditative  stabilization  of  the
stream  of  doctrine,  the  bodhisattva  can  receive  teachings  from  holy
objects.
It’s also mentioned in the lam-rim literature that one’s lifespan cannot  be
extended.  i.e., one cannot add  on  to  one’s  lifespan  as  it  is  fixed.
Extending one’s lifespan by adding time to one’s lifespan is  not  mentioned
in the Perfection Vehicle. However, this is taught in tantra.  In  the  case
of the three lower classes of tantra, by depending on  the  absorption  with
recitation and the absorption not reliant on  recitation,  one  goes  on  to
achieve siddhis such as the siddhi of immortality,  the siddhi of  the  life
knowledge bearer. But as  to  how  this  siddhi  prolongs  life  is  another
question.

The teachings say by depending on the absorption  with  recitation  and  the
absorption not reliant on recitation, there will come a  time  when  one  is
able to directly perceive the buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  in  the  space  in
front of oneself as one meditates. With that, one progresses quickly on  the
path.

Student 6: In sutra, one achieves enlightenment within one lifetime  at  the
end of the continuum of  a  sentient  being  in  the  vajra-like  meditative
stabilization.  In  the  three  lower  classes  of  tantra,   one   achieves
enlightenment  within  one  lifetime   after   achieving   the   siddhi   of
immortality. Is there any meaning and purpose then to saying  that  one  can
achieve enlightenment in one lifetime in the three lower classes  of  tantra
because you can say the same for sutra?

Khen Rinpoche: We have to look at the measure of one  lifetime.  In  Highest
Yoga Tantra, one achieves enlightenment in the same  support  as  the  basis
upon which one receives the initiation.

In the teachings,  it  is  commonly  said  there  is  enlightenment  in  one
lifetime in the three lower classes of tantra. How is  that  achieved?  That
is achieved on the basis of a very long life  after  one  has  achieved  the
siddhi of immortality.

What we need to think about is  whether,  in  the  three  lower  classes  of
tantra, enlightenment is possible in the lifetime during which one  receives
the initiation? This is something to think about.  Can  one  conceive  of  a
situation whereby the individual receives  the  initiation  into  the  three
lower classes of tantra and in that  very  lifetime  achieves  the  path  of
preparation? Once that individual achieves the  path  of  preparation,  then
it’s possible to conceive that he achieves the  siddhi  of  immortality.  If
you were to accept  that,  won’t  this  mean  that  he’s  going  to  achieve
enlightenment in that lifetime?

In this situation,  does  this  individual  still  need  to  accumulate  the
collections of the three countless great eons or not? You have to say yes.

But does this individual need to abide for three  countless  great  eons  in
order to accumulate those collections?  Not necessarily. Then you are  going
to have a problem.

So there is enlightenment in one lifetime in  the  three  lower  classes  of
tantra. But is that the same as Highest Yoga Tantra? The answer is no.

In the three lower classes of tantra, there’s no enlightenment in one  brief
lifetime of this degenerate age. Rather, enlightenment is  achieved  with  a
very long life after one achieves the siddhi of immortality.
If you go back to the Perfection Vehicle,  is  there  enlightenment  in  one
lifetime or not? You have to say no decisively!

In the Perfection Vehicle,  after  entering  the  path,  you  don’t  achieve
enlightenment in the same lifetime. There is also no  mention  of  achieving
the siddhi of immortality. If that’s  the  case,  it’s  clear  there  is  no
enlightenment in one lifetime in the Perfection Vehicle.

Khen Rinpoche: Is that clear? I don’t know. I also don’t have a  very  clear
answer. There is also no clear answer in the text. Sometimes, it’s  good  to
discuss so when some ideas come up, we can compare them.

Student 6: Taking the position the collection of merit over three  countless
great eons takes that actual period of time and not a shorter  time  with  a
more powerful accumulation of merit, then for  a  person  who  achieves  the
siddhi of immortality, within that lifetime after receiving  the  initiation
and entering the three lower classes of tantra, the conclusion is that  from
entering the path to  achieving  the  path  of  preparation  is  within  one
lifetime.

This means the accumulation of the collections of the three countless  great
eons starts from the path of  preparation  all  the  way  to  enlightenment.
Unlike the  presentation  in  the  Perfection  Vehicle  where  the  path  of
accumulation takes half of one countless great  eon,  for  the  three  lower
classes of tantra, the path of accumulation is within one lifetime. This  is
the conclusion. The path of accumulation for  the  three  lower  classes  of
tantra takes less than one lifetime.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. It is within one lifetime.

Student 6: From then on, he will have that long life  over  three  countless
great eons, from the path of preparation  onwards  until  enlightenment  and
have to collect three countless great eons of merit.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Therefore,  accumulating  the  collections  of  the   three
countless great eons does not necessarily translate into having to  do  that
over a long period of time, right?

Student 6: The collection of merit over the path of accumulation  is  within
one lifetime. This is also the conclusion. This  means  you  can  accumulate
three countless great eons of merit within a much  shorter  period  of  time
but you accumulate  the  same  amount  of  merit  equivalent  to  the  merit
accumulated over three countless great eons. I don’t know  how  to  describe
it.

Khen Rinpoche: What do you mean?

Student 6: There are two differences between the  time  that  you  spend  to
collect and the equivalent of that  merit  you  accumulate  with  a  shorter
time. Both are the same in the sense of accumulating three  countless  great
eons of merit. One actually takes that period of time.  Another  possibility
is that it  takes  a  much  shorter  period  of  time.  Since  the  path  of
accumulation for the lower classes of tantra is within one lifetime, can  we
say the time needed to accumulate the three countless great  eons  of  merit
is at least (reduced) by half a countless great eon if you go by sutra.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t understand exactly (what  you  are  saying).  Anyway,
think about it.

CHAPTER FOUR: GROUNDS AND PATHS

      How to posit the five paths  and  ten  grounds  for  the  three  lower
      classes of tantra


      This has three parts:
      …
      … paths and ten grounds of yoga tantra (p. 79)


      How to posit the five paths and ten grounds of action tantra
      The path of accumulation


      First, the path of accumulation …
      …
      … at the limit of sound.” (p. 79)

After obtaining a pure initiation of Action Tantra, one enters into  tantra.
Then through practice comes the day one produces  the  uncontrived  thought,
“I will achieve enlightenment by  depending  on  Action  Tantra.”  When  one
produces this uncontrived bodhicitta—the special  bodhicitta  of  tantra  we
talked about in the earlier lessons— one enters the path of accumulation  of
Action Tantra. One enters the tantric path.

The entry into the tantric path, specifically the entry  into  the  path  of
Action  Tantra,  in  this  context  here,  is  producing  this   uncontrived
bodhicitta. Uncontrived means without effort. Just by bringing this  thought
to mind, the realization manifests without effort.

Is this possible without a stable mind? This is something  to  think  about.
Is it possible to manifest uncontrived bodhicitta without calm  abiding?  So
whether calm abiding is a necessary pre-requisite for entering  the  tantric
path is something we can think about.

“It extends up to but not including obtaining the special insight  realizing
emptiness derived from meditating on the concentration bestowing  liberation
at the end of sound.” This seems to be saying  the  concentration  bestowing
liberation at the end of sound exists on the path of accumulation.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it saying  that  or  not?  What  do  you  understand  from
reading this sentence?

In the  path  of  Action  Tantra,  we  talked  about  the  absorptions  with
recitation and not reliant on recitation. Under the absorption  not  reliant
on recitation, there are:
1. the absorption on fire
2. the absorption on sound
3. the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound

It is said calm abiding is achieved during the absorption on sound.

I think it will be OK to say after achieving calm abiding in Action  Tantra,
there could also be the practice of improving one’s dexterity  or  skill  in
absorption or concentration. It’s similar to what is  done  in  Yoga  Tantra
where there’s the practice of improving one’s  dexterity  in  absorption.  I
would  think  there’s  the  practice  of  increasing  one’s   dexterity   in
absorption also in Action  Tantra  after  achieving  calm  abiding  for  the
purpose of special insight.

After that, one achieves the special insight focussing on emptiness.

Based on the definition here on the Path  of  Accumulation,  there  are  two
things to think about:
1. Is the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound  necessarily
   a yoga without signs?
2. Does the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound  exist  on
   the path of accumulation?
With regard to the second question, by looking  at  the  definition  of  the
path of accumulation given here, the answer seems to be, “Yes!”

      The path of preparation


      The path of preparation … cultivating that absorption.” (p. 81)

Though there is no debate here, it’s  quite  clear  when  one  achieves  the
special insight focussing on emptiness, one  achieves  yoga  without  signs.
When yoga without signs is achieved, one achieves the path  of  preparation,
which extends to the point just before the direct perception of emptiness.

      The path of seeing


      The path of seeing … abandoned by the path of meditation.” (p. 81)

What is said about the path of seeing is similar to  what  we  know  in  the
Perfection Vehicle  in  that  on  the  path  of  seeing,  after  the  direct
realization of emptiness is generated, that acts  as  the  antidote  to  the
path of seeing abandonments. The definition says, “Up to but  not  including
the generation of  the  direct  antidote  to  the  coarsest  of  the  coarse
afflictive objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation.”

      The path of meditation


      The path of meditation …
      …
      … the path of action tantra.” (p. 82)


      The path of no-more learning


      The path of no-more learning … through this tantric path. (p.82)


ASSERTIONS OF THE ROOT TEXT VS. ASSERTIONS BY SERA JE COLLEGE

I don’t think we need to go through everything. What you see here is  a  bit
different from what we are used  to  because  it  is  the  assertions  of  a
different college. According to this text:
 • The first ground exists only on the path of seeing.
 • The second ground starts with generating the uninterrupted path  that  is
   the direct antidote to the coarsest of  the  coarse  path  of  meditation
   abandonments, i.e.,  the  second  ground  starts  only  on  the  path  of
   meditation.

If you follow these assertions and extend the reasoning to account  for  how
the  afflictions  are  abandoned,  when  are  the  three  small   afflictive
obscurations abandoned? The uninterrupted path of the eighth ground  is  the
direct antidote to these obscurations. According to  the  assertion  in  the
root text, when the bodhisattva is at the beginning of  the  eighth  ground,
he  still  has  not  abandoned  the  afflictive  obscurations  because   the
uninterrupted path that is the  direct  antidote  to  the  smallest  of  the
afflictive obscurations is only generated on the eighth ground.

This is different from what we are used to, i.e., the assertions of Sera  Je
College. According to the assertions  of  the  Sera  Je  College,  when  one
achieves the eighth ground, one enters the eighth ground  via  the  path  of
release, a state of abandonment  of  having  abandoned  all  the  afflictive
obscurations.

All the differences  come  about  because  in  the  assertions  of  Sera  Je
College, a part of the first ground is the path of meditation.  At  the  end
of the first ground, there is an  uninterrupted  path  that  is  the  direct
antidote to the first level of afflictive obscurations.  That  uninterrupted
path does not belong to the path of  seeing.  It  belongs  to  the  path  of
meditation. But according to assertions of this root text, the first  ground
belongs solely to the path of seeing.  This  is  why  we  have  a  different
starting point.

The reason for the assertions of  Sera  Je  College  is  this:  Gyaltsab  Je
mentioned in one of his commentaries to the Prajnaparamita that on the  path
of seeing, there are the 16 moments of knowledge  and  forbearance.  As  one
needs to accumulate the collections over many  eons  on  the  first  ground,
therefore there is  a  part  of  the  first  ground  that  is  the  path  of
meditation. Gyaltsab Je stated this clearly in one of  his  writings.  Based
on that, we have this particular assertion  there’s  a  part  of  the  first
ground that is the path of meditation.

The assertion of Sera Je College  is  that  when  one  achieves  the  eighth
ground, one enters the eighth  ground  through  the  path  of  release,  the
liberated path of having abandoned  all  the  afflictive  obscurations.  But
according to the assertion of the root text  here,  one  enters  the  eighth
ground via the uninterrupted path that is a direct antidote to the  smallest
of the afflictive obscurations. This means  one  enters  the  eighth  ground
without having abandoned all the afflictive obscurations.  But  there  is  a
statement in Je Rinpoche’s Stages of the Path that says  during  the  eighth
ground, the afflictions are eliminated or exhausted.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know whether you are getting something here. I’m  not
sure. Anyway, here we must compare what is said.

In Je Rinpoche’s commentary on emptiness, Illuminating the Intent,  he  said
the great and middling innate afflictive  obscurations  are  abandoned  from
the second to the seventh grounds. When do you start abandoning  the  innate
afflictive obscurations? Are they abandoned on the path of  seeing  or  not?
If they are not abandoned on the path of seeing, then when do you start  the
second ground? Because of this, we posit the path of meditation starts  only
from the second ground.

Student 5: Did you say something like the first ground, the path  of  seeing
and the uninterrupted path of meditation is a great length of time?

Khen Rinpoche: No. The point of that statement is the first ground is not  a
short time. The first ground exists for a very long time. The 16 moments  of
knowledge and forbearance is part of the  path  of  seeing.  If  that’s  the
case, then you have to accumulate merit for a long  time  during  the  first
ground. So on the first ground, part of that ground has to be  the  path  of
meditation as everything cannot be happening on the path of seeing.

Student 5: Yes, I understand but I think in  another  module,  it  was  said
that the path of seeing is very short. That’s why it is  (achieved  in)  the
same body. The basis for the path of seeing will be the same basis  for  the
path of meditation. That’s what I wanted to clarify.

Khen Rinpoche: Good. That qualm arises because of  the  assertion  that  the
support for newly realizing the path of seeing and the  path  of  meditation
has to be a desire realm support.
 • One enters the path of seeing through the uninterrupted path.
 • When one abandons the path of seeing abandonments, one achieves the  path
   of release of the path of seeing.
 •  One  then  enters  the  subsequent  attainment   and   accumulates   the
   collections.
 • Comes the time when one generates  the  direct  antidote  to  the  innate
   afflictions,  one  achieves  the  uninterrupted  path  of  the  path   of
   meditation.

In the  past,  we  said  the  support  for  newly  generating  the  path  of
meditation has to be a desire realm support because the  support  for  newly
generating the path of seeing has to be a desire realm support.

We say there is a person who has achieved the path of seeing and who  is  in
subsequent attainment. Why can’t that individual be in the form  realm?  Can
that individual who has achieved the subsequent attainment of  the  path  of
seeing get a form realm support or not? Can he  take  rebirth  in  the  form
realm or not?

In the past, we said that because the  time  was  so  short,  there  was  no
opportunity to take rebirth. But here, Gyaltsab Je’s quotation seems  to  be
saying the first ground is very long. Will the person who is  in  subsequent
attainment on the first ground die? Can he take rebirth in the form realm?

If you were to say that he won’t die, how are you going to account  for  him
not dying? If we say he will die, then there is nothing  to  stop  him  from
going to the form realm. If you say he can take rebirth in the  form  realm,
you will have no choice but to say he will have to come back (to the  desire
realm) again in order to newly generate the path of  meditation  because  he
has not generated the path of meditation yet. Then  what  is  the  point  of
going (to the form realm) in the first place?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. I think it’s not easy. It is  like  chess.  You
must know how to play the game. Otherwise, you will be confused.

      This must be asserted …
      …
      … established by logic. (p. 83)

Anyway, what you see in the root text here with regard to  the  presentation
of the paths and grounds is slightly different from what we are used to.  If
we stick with what we are used to, then it’s  clear.  There  are  just  some
slight differences. Otherwise, you have to know:
 • how the path of seeing abandonments are abandoned
 • how the path of meditation abandonments are abandoned
 • how on the eighth ground and the tenth ground, there are  different  ways
   of positing the numbers of uninterrupted paths and so forth.

There is one additional uninterrupted path on the  pure  grounds.  Where  is
it—on the eighth or the tenth ground?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: The eighth? That means the big is  divided  into  the  coarse
and subtle.

In short, the  manner  of  positing  the  five  paths  and  ten  grounds  in
Performance and Yoga Tantra is similar.

      Points of debate
      Shared and exclusive tantric paths


      One says: …
      …
      … the ten grounds of these tantras. (p. 85)


      That is unacceptable … not logically necessary. (p. 85)


Khen Rinpoche: What does the  author  mean  by  “not  logically  necessary,”
i.e., no per-
vasion? Explain the meaning of that.

    • If it is the path of accumulation of Action Tantra, it is  necessarily
      a tantric path.
    • If that is the case, the question here is: Is the love, compassion and
      bodhicitta in such a person a tantric path or not? Is the tantric path
      necessarily an unshared tantric path? The answer is no.  Just  because
      it is a tantric path  doesn’t  mean  it  is  necessarily  an  unshared
      tantric path.
    • Are the love, compassion and bodhicitta in the continuum of someone on
      the Action Tantra path of  accumulation  shared  with  the  Perfection
      Vehicle path? The answer is yes.


      Paths shared with the Perfection Vehicle


      Again this scholar says: …  shared Perfection Vehicle paths. (p.86)

 • The question is: Are the love, compassion and bodhicitta in the continuum
   of such a person on the Action Tantra path of accumulation  a  Perfection
   Vehicle path or not?  The author  says,  “No,  they  are  not  Perfection
   Vehicle path.”
 • Somebody objects to his answer by saying, “It  is  a  Perfection  Vehicle
   path because it is a shared Perfection Vehicle path.”
 • The author replies, “No pervasion.”

      Reply: That is not logically necessary … this is similar. (p. 86)

 • Are all the pristine awarenesses (or exalted knowers) or the paths in the
   continuum of  somebody  who  has  achieved  the  Action  Tantra  path  of
   accumulation tantric paths or not? The answer  is,  “Yes,  they  are  all
   tantric paths.”
 • Are the love, compassion and bodhicitta in the continuum of such a person
   who has achieved the Action Tantra path of accumulation a tantric path or
   not? The answer is decisively, yes.
 • Is this a Perfection Vehicle path or not? The answer is no, they are  not
   Perfection Vehicle paths.

Essentially, the author is saying that the tantric path and  the  Perfection
Vehicle path are mutually exclusive, based on this text.

If we were to say that the love, compassion and bodhicitta in the  continuum
of someone who has achieved the path of accumulation of Action Tantra  is  a
tantric path and also a Perfection Vehicle path, what will be the problem?

Student 5: During the module on Ornament of Clear Realizations, it was  said
this realization of renunciation in the continuum of a Mahayana  bodhisattva
was actually a Hinayana path. If that is the case, can’t we  say  that  this
love and compassion on the path of accumulation of Action Tantra is  also  a
Perfection Vehicle path?

Khen Rinpoche: Based on the assertions of some colleges, we say that in  the
continuum of a bodhisattva, there is also a Hinayana  path.  But  there  are
people who do not agree with that.

Student 5: So, it is OK to say the love and compassion in a  person  on  the
Action Tantra path of accumulation, in  that  practitioner  of  the  tantric
path, is a Perfection Vehicle path?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, you can say that. I am not sure whether  it  is  exactly
the same or not. I don’t know whether there is any problem if  you  were  to
say that. I will think about it.

I am just saying  the  text  is  saying  they  are  not  the  same  but  are
different.

I think I will give some questions for  the  next  Sunday  class  discussion
because at that time, there were people who requested for the  questions  to
be given two weeks beforehand. They must have some reason  for  making  this
request. So, make sure you do something within these two weeks. Think  about
the questions.

QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION ON SUNDAY, 30 JULY 2017

1. (a) It is said the four classes of Buddhist tantra are differentiated  by
   the manner in which desire is taken as the path. How is that so?
   (b) What is the meaning of “taking desire as the path”?
2. How does one meditate on the path that is concordant with the  aspect  of
   the four complete purities of the results?
3. Please describe the process of the absorption  with  recitation  and  the
   absorption not reliant on recitation.
4. What are the four external branches of recitation and the  four  internal
   branches of recitation in Performance Tantra?
5. (a) Please provide the citations from Mantric  Stages  that  explain  the
   importance  and  need  for  method  and  wisdom  to  be  found   in   one
   consciousness.
   (b)  How is this mind that has both method and wisdom fused in one entity
   a substantial cause for the dharmakaya and the rupakaya?
6. (a) In tantra, is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness a yoga of  non-
   dual profundity and clarity?
   (b) If yes, how does this mind act as the substantial cause for the  form
   body?
7. In Yoga Tantra, what are:
    • the four seals that are the bases of purification
    • the four seals of the purifying path
    • the four seals of the result
8. What is the yoga of the subtle hand implement or  hand  symbols  in  Yoga
   Tantra?
9. When is calm abiding achieved in Yoga Tantra?

Khen Rinpoche: The purpose of some of the questions here are for  discussion
but also for the purpose of getting you to revise materials.  So,  as  such,
please describe the whole process  of  meditating  on  the  absorption  with
recitation and the absorption not reliant  on  recitation.  This  is  a  big
area. The question is for you to  develop  familiarity  with  the  different
meditations involved in these two absorptions.

Now you have two weeks. Look at the questions as the basis and then look  at
the  material  to  develop  familiarity  with  them.  Whatever   you   don’t
understand from your studies, if you have any qualms, you should write  them
down. They become the basis of discussion. Without them, there is  no  basis
for discussion. Discussion is only viable if you have something to  discuss.
First, you must have something to work with.  Therefore,  you  must  prepare
beforehand.  You  must  read  and  then  if  there  is  anything  you  don’t
understand or you have qualms about, these are the things you bring  to  the
discussion. Then the discussion will be fruitful.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.






[pic]


                         Source: Master’s Program, Istituto Lama Tzong Khapa




