Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L63FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:03.926565
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 63 				                                                        12 May 2018
Cultivating clear appearance. Cultivating divine pride. Q & A. Root text, p. 123—129. Points of debate: When is calm abiding attained? Is meditation of emptiness required during the three concentrations. Why is yoga realizing emptiness superior in tantra?  
CULTIVATING CLEAR APPEARANCE
As mentioned previously, there are many levels to the meditation on the generation stage. As you recite the sadhana, you should reflect on what is stated in the sadhana. This is very important. We can also read through the sadhana quite quickly and before we reach the point of the mantra recitation, we can try to see if we can cause the entire supported and supporting mandala to appear clearly to the mind. 
In terms of the visualization, you can visualize yourself as the three-tiered being:  
Basically, there is the letter Hum, the concentration being, at your heart.
You, yourself, is visualized as Vajrabhairava.
Then there are the charnel grounds and the mountain of fire. Everything in the mandala is there. 
You can also check this visualization by withdrawing inwards from the mountain of fire to the charnel grounds and so on until you come to the letter Hum at your heart. If you can train in that way, it will be beneficial.  
Using your mental consciousness
As I explained previously, when you try to cultivate clear appearance of the mandala and the deities, you should cultivate this appearance through your mental consciousness, not your sense consciousness. Even though your eyes may be wide open when you are cultivating clear appearance, the mandala and the deities should appear clearly to your mental consciousness. When you meditate on the generation stage, you have to meditate on this clear appearance appearing through your mental consciousness. 
When you train in the generation stage, in the beginning, it is very important for you to train in the clear appearance of being the deity. When you are able to cause this clear appearance to appear to your mental consciousness, this appearance is even clearer than the appearance that can appear through the eye consciousness. When you have this clear appearance, then you are able to effectively put a stop to the appearances of ordinariness. 
CULTIVATING DIVINE PRIDE
However, the cultivation of clear appearance is not the main practice here. The main practice is actually the cultivation of divine pride. The cultivation of clear appearance is actually a branch of the cultivation of divine pride because in order for this main practice of divine pride to be effective, you need to first cultivate clear appearance. 
Identifying the ‘I’ that is the basis for divine pride
When you cultivate divine pride, there is a basis for cultivating that divine pride. It is very important for you to be able to identify what this ‘I’ that is the basis of cultivating divine pride is. 
Different scholars have different assertions when it comes to identifying this ‘I’ that is the basis for cultivating divine pride. But you need to have your own understanding regarding what this is. Then on that basis, you can reflect on the different assertions of the various scholars. 
There is this sense of an ordinary ‘I’ that appears to our mind. If something good happens, we have the sense of ‘I’. When something bad happens, we can also have this sense of ‘I’. So there is an ‘I’ that is imputed in dependence on the ordinary aggregates that are the bases of imputation. 
Is this ‘I’ that is imputed in dependence on the ordinary aggregates, the bases of imputation, the basis for generating the deity? Is this the ‘I’ that is being generated as the deity? Well, the answer is no. 
You have to think about why this is the case. We have the ordinary five aggregates— the ordinary form aggregate and so on. Before we generate ourselves as a deity, we purify everything into emptiness. At that time, all ordinary or conventional appearances vanish. Regardless of the deity you are generating yourself as, in the beginning, it is important for you to purify everything into emptiness including this  sense of ‘I’. You also purify the aggregates into emptiness. All appearances to your mental consciousness vanish. 
But this isn’t sufficient. On top of that, you have to reflect on the meaning generality of emptiness. You have to think about the emptiness of inherent existence. So, it is necessary for you to reflect on that and have some understanding of the emptiness of inherent existence. In this state where all appearances have been withdrawn, you have to reflect on the emptiness of inherent existence and understand emptiness. 
On top of that, you have to be aware that this very mind understanding emptiness is the basis for you to cause the body of the deity to appear.  
So, first of all, you have to purify everything into emptiness. Everything—the aggregates, you, yourself—is all empty. Then you have to know that this isn’t non-existent. It is not the absence of existence but rather, the absence of inherent existence. This mind is the basis for generating the body of the deity. You have to think that the body of the deity appears clearly. 
First, you have this clear appearance of the deity that appears clearly to your mental consciousness. Then you impute the ‘I’ upon this clear appearance of the body of the deity. It is on the basis of this clear appearance of the body of the deity that you have this ‘I’ that is the basis for you to cultivate divine pride, thinking, “I am the deity!” 
So, first, you need to have this clear appearance of being the deity. Then your mind realizing emptiness is the basis for accomplishing divine pride because it is on the basis of this clear appearance that you generate this thought of ‘I’. You impute this ‘I’. At that point, you should think, “I am the actual deity of the resultant time.” It is in this sense that clear appearance is said to assist the cultivation of divine pride. 
During the session, you want to cultivate this clear appearance of the entire mandala. On that basis, you cultivate divine pride. You have to put effort into the cultivation of clear appearance and divine pride in this way during the actual session. Therefore, you need to cultivate a very stable mental consciousness that is able to hold the supported and supporting mandala. You have to familiarize yourself with this appearance again and again until you achieve clear appearance. In dependence on clear appearance, you cultivate divine pride. 
You have to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride without coming under the influence of laxity and excitement. It is important for you to have mindfulness and introspection all the time so that you do not have the danger of coming under the influence of laxity and excitement. Without letting your mindfulness and introspection deteriorate, you try to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride during the actual sessions. 
The body of this deity should appear clearly to your mental consciousness. When that occurs, you think ‘I’ in relation to this appearance and you can generate divine pride. Eventually, clear appearance and divine pride will occur naturally without much effort during the generation stage. 
So, by familiarizing yourself with clear appearance and divine pride over a long period of time, you will be able to overcome the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness during the generation stage. When your mind is very stable with these cultivations, naturally, you will be able to overcome the appearance of ordinariness. This is the purpose of meditating on the generation stage. By cultivating clear appearance and divine pride, you are able to overcome the appearances of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness.
At this stage, it does not mean that you have actually transformed into the deity. There is no actual change. On the generation stage, all these occur at the level of imagination or visualization. On the generation stage, you meditate by using your imagination. Basically, what you meditate on occurs through your mind thinking about it. So the appearances are fabricated by your own mind. 
The achievement of the actual body of the deity occurs on the completion stage. For example, if you attain the illusory body, then you have attained a fully-fledged deity’s body. This is what you should think about. 
Previously, we have said that the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appears as the deity. What is meant by that? It is the mind realizing emptiness that appears as the deity. That appearance then is the basis for you to impute the ‘I’ and cultivate divine pride. 
There are also scholars who talked about how one meditates on the ‘I’ on the basis of the five aggregates. 
You should have some thoughts about what we have been discussing:
What does it mean when we say, “the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appears as a deity”? 
What does it mean to say, “I am generated as a deity”? 
When you cultivate divine pride, what is the basis for cultivating that divine pride?
In the beginning, you must have a basis for you to understand these points. You must have some understanding with regard to what these points are all about. If you don’t understand anything at all, then when questions are asked, you become confused. 
Q & A
Question: This apprehended aspect of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as a deity occurs during the generation stage, at an imaginary level. So, it is not happening in reality. Yet, we hear of the high level yogi on the generation stage, when he is out of session, he is able to visualize the mandala above his head. Rain does not fall down on him. He does not get wet due to his visualized mandala. Is there an actual mandala there? Likewise, is there an actual staircase to heaven or bridge across the water?
Answer: In those examples, there is actually no fully-fledged deity’s body or mandala being generated. The bridges, staircase and so on appear through the power of meditative stabilization. 
Question: What is the substantial cause of the appearance of the deity? Is it the wind of the mind or is it the mind realizing emptiness?
Answer: As explained earlier on, you have to think about this question. How is the deity generated during the generation stage? You have this mind realizing emptiness and that serves as the basis for generating the deity. This occurs on the level of imagination. There is no actual generation. During the generation stage, no actual deity body is produced. 
The question then arises. There is this deity appearing to the mind. What is the substantial cause of this deity that appears to the mind?  This deity that appears to the mental consciousness is not an actual deity. However, there is a meaning generality of the deity that appears. You have to think what is its substantial cause? 
Khen Rinpoche: Do you have any idea?
This point is debatable. Here, as I have said before, you have to hold this fact in your mind when you meditate on the generation stage—the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness is generated as a deity or it appears as a deity. 
Question: There is the explanation that the clear appearance of the deity is the basis for us to impute the ‘I’ during the generation stage. What is the relationship between this basis of clear appearance and the imputed ‘I’? It cannot be a basis of designation because the actual deity has not been established. Can we say that it is like the immediate proceeding condition and based on that, we impute the ‘I’?
Answer: Then again, you have to have this basis of understanding—the fact that you know when this ordinary ‘I’ appears to the mind, it is on the basis of the appearance of the ordinary aggregates. Without that, then there is no imputation of the ‘I’. 
You purify everything into emptiness. You purify the five ordinary aggregates and the ordinary ‘I’ into emptiness through your imagination. Then you withdraw all the appearances that occur to the mental consciousness. When the ordinary aggregates and the ordinary ‘I’ have been withdrawn, there is no basis for cultivating divine pride.  So, in order for you to have a basis for cultivating divine pride, you need the basis of imputation to appear clearly. What is this basis? This basis is actually the mind realizing emptiness, gradually appearing as the body of the deity. This is the basis for cultivating divine pride. 
When the body of the deity appears clearly to your mental consciousness through using your imagination, then you can naturally impute ‘I’, thinking, “I am the actual Vajrabhairava.” In that way, divine pride arises easily. 
On the generation stage, this occurs at the level of imagination. But by familiarizing with this repeatedly, gradually, you will be able to cause this very subtle clear light mind to manifest. This mind is used for realizing emptiness. So, when this mind manifests, you use it to realize emptiness. This very subtle mind realizing emptiness then arises as the deity’s body. This mind serves as the cooperative condition for the illusory body. At the same time, you have the very subtle wind. This very subtle wind then serves as the substantial cause for the illusory body. This very subtle wind is actually the mount of the very subtle mind. 
When you actually achieve the illusory body, there is a cooperative condition and substantial cause. You should know what these are. The illusory body being a form has the very subtle wind as its substantial cause. 
Question: Khen Rinpoche mentioned in one of the classes that, from the tantric perspective, the adherence to ordinariness and the appearance of ordinariness are the afflictive obscuration and knowledge obscuration respectively. On the tantric paths and grounds, when are these two obscurations abandoned? 
Why I ask because of your question about how to eliminate the appearance of ordinariness and adherence to ordinariness on the generation stage. It doesn’t look like these are going to be eliminated on the generation stage. Furthermore, the generation stage is a coarse mind. It would not be an eternal mind, right? It would have ended. I wonder why we would even talk about eliminating the adherence to ordinariness and appearance of ordinariness at the generation stage. 
Answer: We did talked about the adherence to ordinariness being an afflictive obscuration and the appearance of ordinariness being a knowledge obscuration. 
The tantric afflictive obscuration that is the adherence to ordinariness is abandoned when one reaches the fourth stage called the meaning clear light or the actual clear light. This fourth stage actual meaning clear light serves as the direct antidote to the tantric afflictive obscuration. When you attain the pure illusory body, you have eliminated the tantric afflictive obscuration.
The appearance of ordinariness that is a knowledge obscuration is abandoned only when you attain the buddha ground. 
We do not say that on the generation stage, you can abandon the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. What we do say is that because you have stable clear appearance and divine pride, therefore, the adherence to ordinariness and the appearance of ordinariness cannot manifest. In that way, you put a stop to them but we don’t say that they are abandoned. 
Question: I have a question regarding divine pride. It was said that the cultivation of divine pride is to overcome the adherence to ordinariness. Can Khen Rinpoche explain a bit more on how divine pride overcomes ordinariness especially during post meditative session?  
The second part of my question is that while listening to an earlier question and your answer, I assume that divine pride is about remembering emptiness. Since we have no realization and in our everyday life we are supposed to have the clear appearance and divine pride of a deity, at times when our conduct is substandard, how do we reconcile that?  
Answer: It is difficult for people like us. Even during the actual session, it is difficult for us to have divine pride. In order for you to have divine pride during post-meditation, between the sessions or during the session breaks, you need to have a certain degree of experience of divine pride during the actual session. You need to have a certain degree of experience of putting a stop to the adherence to ordinariness. 
You have to train in four sessions on a daily basis with each session lasting three to four hours. Even if you are able to generate clear appearance and divine pride during the actual session, it is not necessarily the case that during the breaks, you will be able to put a stop to the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness. It is not easy. 
If you were to ask, “How can I have divine pride between the sessions, i.e., during the session breaks?” the answer is that you need to have some genuine experience during the actual session. If you have this actual experience during the actual session, then after you are released from the actual session and enter the session breaks, because the sense consciousnesses are stronger during that time, the appearance of ordinariness and the adherence to ordinariness will also be stronger. How do you counteract them? 
Even if you have a certain degree of divine pride during the actual session, it is not necessarily the case that you will have that during the session breaks. Precisely because of this, there is this advice that you have to be attentive during the post-meditation period. In other words, you have to be very mindful so that you can remember that whatever appears, it appears as the deity’s body and so on. After the actual session:
Whatever external forms that appear to you should be thought of immediately as the deity’s body. If a sentient being appears to you, immediately, you have to cultivate clear appearance and think, “This is the actual deity.”  
Whatever sound you hear should be thought of immediately as being the deity’s mantra.
Whenever you have a thought, you should think that this is the exalted wisdom of bliss and emptiness.
These are the different pieces of advice for you to practise during the session breaks. Indeed, it will be more difficult for you to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride during the session breaks. There is the advice that you have to rely upon mindfulness and introspection. You do that. When you enter the actual session again, you also have to cultivate clear appearance and divine pride again. 
In the texts, there is this description:
Whatever appears is empty. 
Whatever is empty is bliss.
Whatever is bliss is the sport or the play of the deity.  
It is taught that you have to train in thinking that whatever is empty is the sport or the play of bliss. Whatever is empty is bliss. All that appears is a sport or play of that. This is something for you to think about. 
Question: With regard to clear appearance and divine pride, supposing a person really has clear appearance of the whole world as a pure land and every being as a deity. A person on the path of accumulation would have uncontrived bodhicitta and uncontrived renunciation. How does he apprehend samsara and suffering? Does these two actually even appear to such a person? Would they appear as pure or impure? How would he generate compassion for the deities?
Khen Rinpoche: Repeat your question. I didn’t concentrate on what you are asking. My tea is too delicious. It is very powerful. What I’m saying is that my mind is already in there. I don’t hear what you say. When you meditate on the deity, it is also like that. Whatever you see doesn’t bother you as your mind is into the deity. 
I told you before. My mother would be looking at the TV. Her mind is totally into that when she is looking at the TV. Sometimes, for one or two hours, she is sitting there. Some kind of Hindi serial from India—not Korean!
Every Sunday, there are some shows. She is very focussed. I’m very surprised because she doesn’t really understand much Hindi, but surprisingly, she understands everything! By looking at the actions, the opening of the mouths, she knows all the stories. 
So, every Sunday, they have these shows. When the time comes, she will be there. She is very focussed. Whatever people say, even when they walk in front of her, she doesn’t notice. Her mind is like that. Even if people shout, also she doesn’t hear. Her mind is concentrated there. 
(Student repeats question). 
Khen Rinpoche: Does somebody have an answer? While I’m thinking, maybe someone can answer? Whose mind is very quick? My mind is not so quick. Maybe Sze Gee, you have an answer?
Sze Gee: You know they are not actual deities. It is just imagination. Even though they appear as deities, it is just one’s imagination. In reality, they are still suffering sentient beings. So, you can still generate compassion for them.
Question: In relation to this question, Khen Rinpoche had actually replied before with regard to clear appearance that we should see everybody, all the inhabitants of the environment, as emanation bodies. Then this question arises: if everyone is an emanation body and the emanation body functions to benefit sentient beings, if there are no sentient beings, then it is as if everyone is like the supplier but there are no customers? 
Khen Rinpoche: You are worried there will be no business? 
Student A: I worry that one’s compassion will degenerate.
Student B: My thinking is that it is not possible for you not to see suffering because it is said that the tantric afflictions are supposed to be only purified at the fourth stage meaning clear light. I think suffering would always appear to you. So it is possible to generate compassion still. 
Khen Rinpoche: This is what I think. You need to have some degree of understanding of emptiness. All phenomena are empty of inherent existence. So, both sentient beings and the buddhas are all empty of ultimate existence. From that point of view, they are equal. 
But, of course, conventionally, they are not equal because the buddhas are enlightened and sentient beings are not enlightened. However, whether they are buddhas or sentient beings, they do not exist ultimately. 
Conventionally, sentient beings exist. Conventionally, buddhas exist. But ultimately, sentient beings do not exist. Ultimately, buddhas do not exist.
Ultimately, there are no mistakes. Ultimately, there is no virtue and there is no non-virtue. But conventionally, there is virtuous karma and there is non-virtuous karma. 
Sentient beings do exist. They experience and are tormented by suffering. They are merely imputed, and they exist in mere name. We cannot say that they do not exist. However, when you look for them, you cannot find them. But when you look, ultimately, you cannot find them. When you look for them, where are they? When you look for this imputed object, i.e., the suffering sentient beings who are tormented by suffering, you cannot find them. But you cannot conclude that sentient beings do not exist. 
Even though you cannot find the imputed object when you look for it, you must be able to posit its existence. How do these sentient beings exist? They are merely imputed by your mind. There is nothing else other than that. They are merely imputed by your mind. You must be able to posit a merely imputed ‘I’ that accumulate virtuous karma and non-virtuous karma. Through such reflection, you will be able to arrive at a presentation of this ‘I’ that is merely imputed by conception. When you look for this imputed object, the ‘I’, among your aggregates, you are not able to find it. Then you conclude that this inherently existent ‘I’ does not exist. This is slightly easier. 
If you want to go on to understand how this ‘I’ that is merely imputed by conception is able to accumulate karma and so on, then this is more difficult. 
When we say that sentient beings tormented by suffering do not exist by way of their own entity, i.e., they are merely imputed by conception, this does not mean that they are merely fabricated by conception. It does not mean that sentient beings are just fabricated by your thoughts. 
If you are able to understand that, then you should know that such sentient beings who are merely imputed by conception are able to perform functions conventionally. With that understanding, you would have an understanding of emptiness and dependent arising. Based on that understanding, you will arrive at this understanding of how sentient beings do not exist by way of their own entity and yet they can accumulate karma. They can experience karma. 
When you arrive at that understanding, then you will generate this extraordinary compassion for sentient beings. These sentient beings are tormented by suffering. Even though they do not exist by way of their own entity, yet they suffer and experience suffering. So, conventionally, there are sentient beings tormented by suffering. Even though you may imagine that they are all deities and so on, it is not that there is no suffering. It is not the case that there is no sentient being tormented by suffering. 
There are also times when we just hold ordinary pride. For example, when we engage in the Vajrasattva meditation and mantra recitation, we exercise ordinary pride. 
We have to think about what it means for something to be established through being merely imputed by conception. If you don’t understand this properly, then your understanding can be mistaken. 
We say that all phenomena are merely imputed and that all phenomena exist in mere name. You have to think about what this means. When reflecting, you should ask, “Does the phenomenon—it can be anything, say, a sentient being—exist the way it appears to my mind?” 
If you analyze with reasoning, you will be able to see that it does not exist in the way it appears to your mind. Even though it may appear very vividly, if you analyze with reasoning, you would be able to see clearly that it does not exist in that way. If you investigate in this way, in the end, you will know that there is nothing that you can point to as a sentient being. Knowing that such a sentient being does not exist through your investigation, you know that a sentient being is merely imputed by name. It is merely imputed by conception. From the state of emptiness, you know that this sentient being that appears exists in mere name. From the state of emptiness, the sentient being who is tormented by suffering appears. 
You must understand that this is the way a sentient being who is tormented by suffering exists. It is merely imputed by name. It is merely imputed by conception. There is nothing more you can posit with respect to its existence. It does not exist by way of its own character. How does it exist? It exists by mere name, by being merely imputed by conception.
For this appearance of a sentient being to appear to your mind, you know that it exists as merely imputed by name. It exists as merely imputed by conception. With this understanding of emptiness, then you have the accumulation of exalted wisdom because when you look for it, you cannot find it. Immediately, this sentient being that is merely imputed by conception, merely existing in name, arises in your mind. It is a fact that it is merely imputed. With that, you will be able to accumulate the collection of wisdom.
Another question that you need to think about is this. Before you impute a sentient being tormented by suffering, does such a sentient being exist? This is a difficult question. Before you impute a sentient being, does this sentient being exist imputedly? Does it exist in mere name? 
If you understand what I have previously said about sentient beings being imputedly existent, existing in mere name, then it is not difficult for you to answer this question.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you get what I am saying? I don’t think so because I don’t get it myself! (Laughs).  This is about emptiness. 
When something does not exist by way of its own entity, since it does exist, it has to exist in mere name. It cannot transcend that. You have to understand that it is merely imputed in name. If you think, “This means that if I impute, it exists. If I don’t impute, then it doesn’t exist” then your understanding is not correct.
What do we mean when we say that something is merely imputed in name? It means that it doesn’t exist by way of its own entity. So, whether you impute sentient beings or you don’t impute sentient beings, sentient beings still exist. 
Khen Rinpoche: OK? Are you getting it? You need to think more.
This is a difficult point because if you were to think of something that is imputed by name, then before the imputation, does this phenomenon exist or not? This is a difficult question.
If you were to think, “Before I impute, it does not exist. When I impute, then it comes into existence,” then this would mean that before you impute, that phenomenon does not exist.
How do you understand this expression, ‘something is imputed in name’? If your understanding is this, “This means that if I impute, then it exists. If I posit it by name, then it exists. If I don’t posit, then it doesn’t exist.” this means that before you impute, that phenomenon does not exist.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes or no?
In fact, whether you impute or you don’t impute, that phenomenon has already been established. If your understanding is that before you posit it by name, it does not exist, you have to think if that understanding is correct.
Khen Rinpoche: Is that correct or not? She (referring to Sze Gee) asked me for an example. I said in emptiness, there is no example! Think about that. I thought to complete the generation stage today.
Points of debate
When is calm abiding attained?
One scholar says: … when it is newly obtained. (p. 123) 
This explanation comes from Yangchen Gawai Lodrö in his text on the paths and grounds of tantra. He says that when you complete the subtle generation stage, you will attain calm abiding. As we have analyzed in the previous session, when you attain the third level—the level of those who have attained some control over pristine wisdom—you may not have attained it.
There is an explanation by certain scholars that when you complete the subtle generation stage, you attain calm abiding. The reply by Ngawang Palden is that this statement does not teach the point at which calm abiding is newly attained. Ngawang Palden’s own position is that you don’t have to complete the subtle generation stage in order to attain calm abiding, because in his explanation after you have completed the coarse generation stage, you engage in meditating on the subtle drop. With that, you can go on to attain calm abiding. 
Understand the method …
…
… Yangchen Gawai Lodrö. (p.123)
This explanation …
…
… Khedrup Rinpoche’s thought. (p.123)
The explanations of:
attaining stability in the coarse generation stage  
completing the coarse generation stage 
attaining stability in the subtle generation stage  
completing the subtle generation stage 
have been done earlier. 
Still, there is a basis …
…
… are clearly differentiated. (p.124) 
Previously, we have seen different criteria posited for attaining stability and for completion.  
To attain stability means to be able to meditate for four hours 
To complete means to be able to meditate for as long as you wish, for a month, for a year and so on. 
However, Ngawang Palden is saying that according to Lama Tsongkhapa’s Mantric Stages, it seems like attaining stability and attaining completion are not differentiated. They seem to be the same.
Is meditation on emptiness required during the three concentrations?
Here one says: …
…
… subsumed within clear light.  (p. 124—125)
Reply: That is not logically necessary …
… 
… must be cultivated. (p. 125)
Mantric Stages states:…
…
… the opinion of Jnanapada. (p. 125—126)
Indeed in the first stage …
…
… the supporting mandala and supported deities. (p. 126)
The essential meaning is as follows: 
The long sadhana is divided into what are called the three concentrations. As listed on page 125 of the text, the three concentrations are:
(1) the concentration of initial application or initial union 
(2) the concentration of the supreme-conqueror mandala 
(3) the concentration of the supreme-conqueror activities
At the bottom of page 124, there is this person who thinks that the three concentrations do not need the cultivation of emptiness. He is saying, “You meditate on emptiness in only a few places. For example, in the beginning, when you purify everything into emptiness, then you meditate on emptiness. Then at one point, you absorb everything into clear light.  You also meditate on emptiness there.  Those are the exceptions.  The three concentrations do not entail the cultivation of emptiness because you meditate on the deities.  There is no explanation that you have to meditate on emptiness.”
The description given here is based on the Guhyasamaja sadhana.  This is because before you meditate on the deities, there is the purification through pristine wisdom and you meditate on emptiness before you generate the deity.
On top of page 125, “special resolution subsumed within clear light” refers to this point in the Guhyasamaja sadhana where you have already generated the celestial mansion or the inestimable mansion of the deity. After you have generated yourself as the deity, Guhyasamaja, then 32 deities are visualized at different parts of your body. These deities are gradually absorbed into emptiness. At that point, it is said that you meditate on emptiness. This person says that besides those exceptions during the three concentrations, you do not need to cultivate emptiness.
In the middle of page 125, the reply is that it is not logically necessary because in the context of three concentrations, you do meditate on what is called the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. This reply is basically saying that you need to meditate on emptiness throughout all the three concentrations because while you are focussed on the deities, you have to ascertain their emptiness. As the source for this position, the author cites Lama Tsongkhapa’s Mantric Stages.
Why is yoga realizing emptiness superior in tantra? 
The profound, clear, nondual yoga …
…
… one in nature. (p. 126—127)
The Ocean of Siddhis of the Generation Stage states:
…
… its non-inherent existence). (p. 127)
And:
The mind ascertaining non-inherent existence …
…
… say, a sprout. (p. 128)
The etymology of the generation stage, …
…
…  in other texts. (p. 128—129)
I have explained the meaning of these passages previously. The essence is that when the apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appears as the deity:
from the perspective of appearance, there is the appearance of the deity’s body. Through that, you are able to complete the accumulation of merit. 
from the perspective of ascertainment, there is the ascertainment of emptiness. Through that, you are able to complete the accumulation of pristine wisdom. 
These two are combined in a single mind. Due to this combination in a single mind, you will be able to complete both the collection of merit and exalted wisdom.
At the bottom of page 126, this is why it is said this is “more powerful than the path realizing emptiness in the Perfection Vehicle because in tantra method and wisdom are one in nature.” 
The essential meaning is that regardless of the deity you are meditating on, you should always ascertain its emptiness. This is because by doing so, you are cultivating the antidote to the conception of true existence. This becomes very powerful for eliminating the conception of true existence.
In the Perfection Vehicle, there is a clear distinction between meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment. It is said that during subsequent attainment, after you arise from meditative equipoise, you meditate on love, compassion, practise the six perfections, patience and so on. Such an explanation does not appear in the context of tantra.
This is essentially related to the question that was asked earlier. It is not taught in this context that during subsequent attainment, you meditate on compassion. It doesn’t say that you accumulate merit by meditating on compassion specifically. 
The explanation of the accumulation of merit occurs in context of meditating on the circle of mandala deities. Whether suffering sentient beings appear or not does not seem to be so significant here. The need for this compassion is in fact ever present. In fact, when you begin, you say, “For the sake of all sentient beings, I will quickly, quickly attain full enlightenment” and so on.  Usually, it is stated that you meditate on compassion, the mind of enlightenment and so on in order to complete your accumulation of merit. But in the context of tantra, there is no specific explanation that during subsequent attainment, you should meditate on compassion in order to accumulate merit.  Rather the accumulation of merit is easily completed through the practice of deity yoga. 
You need to think about the following questions in relation to practising deity yoga in the context of tantra: how does that practice enhance your love and compassion and cause the completion of your accumulation of merit?
In the context of cultivating divine pride as explained earlier, the basis for cultivating divine pride is a pure object, i.e., an object having pure attributes. You meditate on the deity’s body and then based on that, you cultivate the thought, “I am the actual deity of the resultant time.” We use what is called an object having pure attributes. This means that from the state of emptiness, you generate this appearance of the deity and you cultivate the clear appearance of the deity. On that basis, you cultivate divine pride.
You should think about how this works. Different scholars have different opinions. Their explanation is that the five aggregates are generated as the deity. You have to think about whether or not this is correct. What if you generate divine pride on the basis of your ordinary ‘I’? On the basis of the ordinary ‘I’, the ordinary aggregates, you generate the deity. Is this acceptable? Is this correct? Some scholars say, “Yes, it is fine to meditate in that way.” Some scholars say, “No, that is not alright.” This is something that you have to think about. There is a lot of discussion on this point but we don’t have to go into it. 
In essence, you generate this deity from the mind realizing emptiness. The apprehended aspect of the mind realizing emptiness appears as the body of the deity. Try your best to meditate on emptiness before that. Then from the state of emptiness, the deity’s body is generated. I think it is good if you can meditate like that. 
From the state of emptiness, this mind realizing emptiness arises as the deity’s body. You have to try to maintain this appearance clearly. But don’t just have this clear appearance. You also need to understand that this appearance does not exist inherently. Together with that appearance, you need to have this understanding of emptiness. 
That’s it for the generation stage. In the next session, we will begin the completion stage.
Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel 
Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 