Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L65 FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:20.497110
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 65 				                                                          9 June 2018
Review of last lesson. Root text, p. 138—145. Definite enumeration and definitive order of the five levels. 
Question: It’s said that during lunar or solar eclipses, the central channels in our body are more conducive (for practice) and relaxed. During this period of time, we are advised to do our practice and our meditation. How does one detect the flow of winds in the channels during these eclipses?
Answer: I’m not very clear about what you are asking. If you observe, you can see that from the first day of the lunar month until the fifteenth day of the lunar month, the moon waxes and then, it becomes bigger and bigger. On the fifteenth day of the lunar month, you get the full moon—the complete round moon. 
During these stages, there are changes in our environment. One example is the waves of the ocean. On the fifteenth day, you can see that the waves are bigger. 
Have you noticed that before? You must go to the beach every night! Watch for two weeks from the first till the fifteenth day. 
On the fifteenth day, you will observe that the waves are bigger than usual. So, with these changes in the time of the calendar, we can perceive changes in the environment. Based on that, we can say that there are changes within our body as well. 
Khen Rinpoche: In that case, maybe you have to sleep for the whole night in the moonlight on the fifteenth day. Then you may notice the difference. Most of the time, we are inside the house and are covered by everything. The moonlight doesn’t get to shine on your body. Maybe you go to the mountains where there is moonlight. Maybe then you may feel the difference. Your channels or wind movement ... I’m not sure. I have no idea. This thought came to my mind. If it has an effect on the ocean, then why not on our body? I think there should be some effect from the lunar cycles. Definitely! But I’m not sure how much is the effect on our body system. I’m not really sure but there should be some effect. 
Based on these observations, perhaps we can speculate that the power of the winds becoming stronger as we move towards the fifteenth day of the lunar month. 
His Holiness the Dalai Lama has commented that it can be observed that there is a difference in the flow of winds in the left and right nostrils on these special days. Usually the winds in our left and right nostrils are not balanced. One is stronger than the other. However, during lunar and solar eclipses, or on the auspicious days in the calendar, the winds in these two nostrils become balanced and equal. You can investigate this phenomenon of the winds in the two nostrils becoming balanced and equal. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know much about this in detail. Just now she asked what kind of experience it is. My idea is to go to the mountains and with the moonlight, sit there the whole night and meditate! Then you may have some different feelings. I’m not sure. You need some moonlight.
Question: Is the Chinese system of the flow of qi (energy) similar to the winds in the Tibetan system?
Answer: They are the same thing. We employ the same thing. 
~~~~~~~~~~
We have arrived at the section in the text that discusses the completion stage. 
Prior to the completion stage, there is the generation stage. During the generation stage, you do not have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel through the force of meditation. However, on the completion stage, you have the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel through the force of meditation. 
In the previous session, we considered the situation where one has completed the subtle generation stage and one also has this phenomenon of the winds entering, abiding and dissolving in the central channel. This occurs, for example, due to entering into union with an external consort. When this occurs, is this considered a completion stage or not? This is something that we investigated in the previous session. It will be difficult for us to say that is a completion stage. Most scholars would say this belongs to the class of the completion stage rather than say that it is a completion stage.
REVIEW OF LAST LESSON
The meaning of each classification
This has two parts:
1. The enumeration and definitive order of the five levels*
2. The meaning of each (p.138)
Sze Gee: The word, definite, should actually be applied to enumeration so it should read as, “The definite enumeration and definitive order of the five levels.”

As has been mentioned previously, when we look at the generation stage, there are the coarse generation stage and the subtle generation stage.
Classification of the stages of the completion stage
For the completion stage, we have the five levels according to the classification of Nagarjuna. These five levels of the completion stage are:
isolation of speech 
isolation of mind
illusory body
clear light 
union
You should bear in mind this classification. 
If we want to count in terms of the six stages of the completion stage, all we have to do is to add the isolation of body. In other words, the six stages of the completion stage are:
isolation of body 
isolation of speech 
isolation of mind
illusory body 
clear light
union. 
You must make sure that these stages are clear in your mind. Whether we have five stages or six stages, their meanings are the same. If you don’t remember these stages, then it will be difficult for you to follow, so you must remember these stages.
It is also possible to enumerate the stages of completion stage in terms of four stages in which case you can leave out the isolation of speech. In other the words, the four stages of the completion stage are:
isolation of mind
illusory body 
clear light 
union. 
It is also useful for you to be able to correlate these stages of the completion stage of tantra with the grounds and paths.
Correlating the stages to the grounds and paths
The generation stage correlates with the path of accumulation. 
If you already have a good understanding of the grounds and paths as presented in the sutra system, then when you correlate the stages in tantra to the grounds and paths of sutra, the correlation makes sense. If you don’t have any familiarity with the sutra presentation, then this correlation will not be very helpful. 
Moving up to the path of preparation, there are four stages—heat, peak, forbearance and supreme mundane qualities. We can also correlate these stages with the stages of tantra. 
The isolation of body corresponds to the heat level of the path of preparation. 
The isolation of speech corresponds to the peak level of the path of preparation.
The isolation of mind corresponds to the forbearance level of the path of preparation.   
The illusory body corresponds to the supreme mundane qualities level of the path of preparation.  
The fourth level, the actual clear light or meaning clear light corresponds to the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing. So, when you initially attain the path of seeing, you have the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. The meaning clear light corresponds to this uninterrupted path of the path of seeing. 
Then moving on to union, first, let us talk about the union of abandonment. Here, you have the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations. The union of abandonment corresponds to the liberated path or the path of release of the path of seeing. This union of abandonment refers to the union of the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations and the illusory body. This stage of union of abandonment belongs to the learner’s union and is an ordinary union. 
After you have abandoned the afflictive obscurations, you still need to meditate on the clear light for the sake of abandoning the knowledge obscurations or obscurations to omniscience.  When you attain the uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to the knowledge obscurations, then you attain the union of realization. Therefore the union of realization refers to the union of the actual clear light or meaning clear light and the illusory body.
After you have abandoned the knowledge obscurations, you attain what is called the non-learner’s union or the union of no-more-learning. This union refers to the union of body and mind. With the attainment of this non-learner’s union, you have this union of body and mind. It is said that wherever the mind pervades, the body also pervades. In sutra, we have this explanation of the Buddha pervading everywhere. There is nowhere where there is no Buddha. With this proclamation in sutra, you find its profound meaning by relying on the explanations given in tantra.
In order for you to attain this state of non-learner’s union—where the body and mind are unified—you also need to have such a unified body and mind during the learner’s stage. The union of realization in the learner’s union is where you have the union of the body and mind. During learner’s union, you have this union of realization whereby the illusory body and the mind of actual clear light are one entity. The ability to have such a union of body and mind during the union of realization can be attributed to the fact that all sentient beings have this very subtle wind and very subtle mind that are inseparable.
We say that all sentient beings are pervaded by having buddha nature or buddha lineage. This means that naturally each and every sentient being has the potential to transform into the form body and the Dharma body of a buddha. Why is it that naturally all sentient beings have this potential? It is because we have this inseparable very subtle wind and very subtle mind. 
You should remember these points and have these ideas in mind as we go through the text. That will make it easier for you to understand the text. 
Khen Rinpoche: I think it should be quite easy to understand the text now. If you understand what I’m saying now, when I read the text, then there is nothing to explain. But we go through one more time in case there are those who don’t understand. 
DEFINITE ENUMERATION AND DEFINITIVE ORDER OF THE FIVE LEVELS
The definite enumeration and definitive order of the five levels
First you require … not included here. (p. 139)
We require various paths to establish the final goal. What is the final goal here? It refers to the non-learner’s union or the union of no-more-learning. 
The uncommon paths refer to the generation stage and completion stage that we are discussing here. 
What are the common paths? The common paths are the paths that are presented in the Perfection Vehicle—renunciation, bodhicitta and the correct view. 
You need these paths “to establish the final goal, but you do not require any other path not included here.” 
Establishing non-learner’s union 
To establish non-learner’s union …
…
… pure illusory body. (p. 139)
What is meant by the general Highest Yoga Tantras? These are the tantra of Guhyasamaja, the tantras of Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava and the Heruka or Chakrasaṃvara tantra. They have different names and different ways of imputing but the procedures are the same. This is what is meant by the general Highest Yoga Tantras.
What is excluded from here is the Kalachakra tantra. In the Kalachakra tantra, the stages of attaining the non-learner’s union are slightly different so, it is distinct from the other general tantras.
 As stated here, if you want to attain non-learner’s union—the union in which the enlightened body and mind are unified—then first, you need to attain the learner’s union that combines both the actual clear light and the pure illusory body. The learner’s union here specifically refers to the union of realization where you want to attain this union whereby the body and mind are indivisible. 
Establishing learner’s union
To establish the learner’s union … it is impossible to obtain such a union. (p. 139)
In other words, to establish the union of realization, you must first establish the pure illusory body. 
Obtaining mere union
To obtain a mere union … necessarily attained simultaneously. (p. 139)
As has been explained before, when you first meditate on the meaning clear light, you generate the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. Immediately after that, you attain the pure illusory body. This is why it is said that “the pure illusory body and ordinary union are necessarily obtained simultaneously.” 
The “mere union” mentioned in the beginning of this passage refers to ordinary union. Between the two—main union and ordinary union—this is the ordinary union. This union of abandonment is such that you do not need to establish first the pure illusory body. Why? Because “the pure illusory body and ordinary union are necessarily obtained simultaneously.” As mentioned before, attaining the pure illusory body, attaining ordinary union and attaining the union of abandonment are the same. 

But after this, you still need to continue to meditate on the meaning clear light in order to abandon the knowledge obscurations or obscurations to omniscience. When you realize this clear light once again, then you attain the union of realization. What this means is that in order to attain the union of realization, you have to first attain the pure illusory body. However, to attain mere union, you do not first need to attain the pure illusory body. Why? Because the pure illusory body and mere union are attained simultaneously. 
If you read the text slowly and carefully, you will understand what is being explained here because the explanation is quite clear. So to obtain mere union, you do not first need to attain the pure illusory body. Why? This is because the pure illusory body and mere union or ordinary union are attained at the same time. 
It is very important for you to read the text before you come to class. You have to go through the text and then develop some kind of understanding regarding what is explained in the text. Then you come to class, listen to the explanations and check if your understanding agrees with the explanations. This is something for you to check and to consider. So, it is very important for you to read and to develop your own understanding. Whether that understanding is correct or incorrect is not so crucial in the sense that you are still a student. You are still studying. But you have to form some kind of understanding, whether it is correct or incorrect. Then you come to class and check your understanding against the explanations given. In case you find that there is some discrepancies, then you can discuss and find out what is correct. You need to develop this interest in studying the text and reading the text before you come to class. Then when you come to class, you are able to listen to the explanations of the teacher. You can check whether your understanding is correct. You have a basis for reflection.
If you can verify that your own understanding agrees with the teacher’s explanations, then you will have a very stable understanding. You will not forget easily what has been explained and what you have understood. In this way, very stable and very firm imprints will be deposited in your mind. 
If you fail to do this, i.e., you don’t do any preparation before you come to class, you may listen to the explanations but you will not be able to retain them. They don’t make any impressions on your mind. You will forget everything tomorrow. You can do this but I wonder if you can really deposit the beneficial imprints on your mind. So, if you are to carry on like this, life after life after life, it is questionable whether there is any stable benefit. 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? I don't know. Don’t forget! Now when you finish class, you forget everything.
The point is that it is very important for you to make an effort. If you are able to make an effort, then that is the way to go. If you can’t make an effort, then there’s nothing to be done.  
Khen Rinpoche: If you can’t (make the effort), then nothing can be done. But if you can make the effort, then that is the way to go.
Obtaining the pure illusory body
To obtain the pure illusory body …
…
… the mount of actual clear light. (p. 139—140)
Here, it is stated that in order to obtain the pure illusory body, you must first establish the actual clear light. Recall the explanation we went through just now. We said that this actual clear light or meaning clear light is the uninterrupted path that serves as the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. After this meaning clear light has been attained, you will attain the pure illusory body. Therefore, in order to obtain the pure illusory body, you must first establish the meaning clear light. 
In the sutric explanation, we say that first you have the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing. Then you attain the path of release or the liberated path of the path of seeing, i.e., first comes the uninterrupted path followed by the path of release. Similarly here, first, you attain the meaning clear light. Then you attain the pure illusory body. 
What is the substantial cause of this pure illusory body? As stated at the top of page 140, it is “the extremely subtle fundamental wind that is the mount of the actual clear light.” The substantial cause has to be something that comes before, i.e., precedes the pure illusory body. So, what is this substantial cause? It is “the extremely subtle fundamental wind that is the mount of actual clear light.” This has to come before the pure illusory body. From this reason, we are able to understand that in order to obtain the pure illusory body, we must first obtain the actual clear light. 
Obtaining the actual clear light
To obtain actual clear light … the illusory body of the third level. (p. 140) 
For if either of those two …
…
… cannot be abandoned by other paths. (p. 140-141)  
What is this actual clear light? It is as we have explained before. 
The mind has various levels. There are coarse minds and subtle minds. You have a very subtle mind that newly directly realizes emptiness. Such a mind then acts as the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations. This very mind is the actual clear light or meaning clear light. Such a meaning clear light is a very powerful mind that has extraordinary power. So, compared to the realization of emptiness in the sutra system, this meaning clear light is far more powerful. 
In the sutra system, you have to abandon the afflictive obscurations in stages, from the first ground up to the eighth ground. However, this meaning clear light in the tantra system is able to destroy all the afflictive obscurations alone. 
“Such obscurations cannot be abandoned by other paths” means that the paths in the sutra system do not have the power to abandon the obscurations that can be abandoned by the meaning clear light. This meaning clear light can abandon the very subtle obscurations. 
As we have explained before, in the context of tantra, the afflictive obscurations are the adherence to or the conception of ordinariness. This powerful mind, the meaning clear light, can abandon these very subtle obscurations. On top of that, it is able to do so very quickly. So, without having to do this over a long time in stages as in the sutra system, it can abandon these very subtle obscurations very quickly. This indicates the extraordinary power of the meaning clear light. 
It is stated in the middle of page 140, 
To obtain actual clear light … the illusory body of the third level.  
So, it is not going to be easy to attain such a powerful meaning clear light. In order to do that, as stated here, you need to “first establish the accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons.”  Alternatively, you have to establish the impure illusory body, i.e., the illusory body of the third level.  In other words, you need to have this fully-fledged deity body. If you do not have this achievement, then you do not have the capacity to abandon the afflictive obscurations. 
In this explanation here, why is this alternative given? Why is it necessary to have these two possibilities? This has to do with the way Buddha Shakyamuni attained buddhahood. He entered the path of accumulation, went on to the path of preparation and then traversed the ten grounds. On the tenth ground, he realized there was no way to attain buddhahood except by entering tantra.  He did not have to go through the coarse and subtle generation stages nor did he have to go through the isolation of body, the isolation of speech and the isolation of mind.  He did not have to attain the impure illusory body. Rather, he entered directly the fourth stage of meaning clear light.  Therefore, to provide for his circumstances, there is this explanation of the accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons or its equivalent, the illusory body of the third level.  
It is clearly stated in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Clear Lamp of the Five Stages that Buddha Shakyamuni, in order to attain buddhahood, did not have to pass through the isolation of body, the isolation of speech and the isolation of mind as well as the third stage of the illusory body.  Rather, his entry point was the fourth stage of the clear light.  
You have to realize the significance of positing the third and fourth stages among the five stages. 
The third stage illusory body refers to the impure illusory body.  
The fourth stage, the meaning clear light, has to be the uninterrupted path that is the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations.  
This explanation on page 140 is saying that if you do not have either of these two:
the accumulation of merit and wisdom for three countless eons or,
its equivalent, the illusory body of the third level, the impure illusory body,
then there is no way for you to attain the meaning clear light.  
Obtaining the (impure) illusory body
To obtain the illusory body … equivalent completion-stage practice. (p. 141)
Sze Gee: This phrase, “due to such meditation on the completion stage,” should be shifted down to later. So this sentence (in the next part of the text) should read as follows:
For if you do not first dissolve all karmic winds in the indestructible drop at the heart according to the stages of death due to such meditation on the completion stage, you cannot obtain an illusory body conforming precisely with the intermediate state.  (p. 141) 
So, to obtain the illusory body of the third level, i.e., to obtain the impure illusory body, you must first establish the actual mental isolation or isolation of mind or an equivalent completion stage practice.  This means that if you do not attain the actual mental isolation, then you must attain something that is equally powerful—“an equivalent completion-stage practice.” In that way, you will be able to attain the impure illusory body.  
Why is it that an alternative is provided here?  Besides referring to the actual mental isolation, it mentions, “or equivalent completion-stage practice.” This is probably because the expression, ‘mental isolation’ (or isolation of mind) is used in the Guhyasamaja tantra.  However, this expression is not used in the Yamantaka or Vajrabhairava tantra. In the Vajrabhairava tantra, there is a description of what is called the yoga of commitment.  “An equivalent completion-stage practice” can refer to, for example, this yoga of commitment in the Yamantaka practice.  

As explained before, when you practise the bringing of death, the intermediate stage and rebirth as the paths of the three buddha bodies, you have to visualize these absorptions or dissolutions.  
When the coarse mind absorbs, you have the white attainment, the red increase and black near-attainment. 
In order for the clear light mind to manifest, the winds have to absorb into the central channel.  
Then the clear light mind manifests. During this clear light of death, the winds dissolve into the indestructible drop at the heart in the central channel. 
When you arise from this clear light of death, you enter the bardo or the intermediate stage.
The achievement of the ordinary intermediate stage is similar to the attainment of the impure illusory body.  If you want to attain the impure illusory body, you have to meditate and cause the winds to enter the indestructible drop.  If you are not able to do that, basically there is no way for you to attain the impure illusory body conforming to the intermediate stage. 
This means that if you want to attain an illusory body conforming precisely to the intermediate stage, you have to dissolve all the winds into the indestructible drop at the heart according to the stages of death through the force of such meditation on the completion stage.  This means that you have to be able to dissolve all the winds in the indestructible drop through the force of such meditation.  
Obtaining actual mental isolation
Where do you do that? You do that during mental isolation or isolation of mind.  This means that without attaining the mental isolation or its equivalent completion-stage practice, you will not attain the impure illusory body.  
To obtain actual mental isolation …
…
…  or an equivalent practice. (p. 142) 
For you cannot generate …
…
… by such a completion-stage practice. (p. 143)
If you want to attain this actual mental isolation—the metaphoric clear light or example clear light—you have to be able to absorb all the winds into the indestructible drop at the heart.  In order to do that, you have to completely release the channel knots at the heart.  Without doing so, you will not be able to attain this dissolution of the winds into the indestructible drop.  
Establishing verbal isolation
In order to attain this actual mental isolation, you have to first establish the verbal isolation or isolation of speech through what is called vajra repetition or vajra recitation.  
This is because the central channel is such that at the heart, the left and right channels have three knots each, giving a total of six knots.  When these channel knots are released at the heart, then it is possible for the winds to go to the indestructible drop. In order to loosen these six knots—three knots each from the left and right channels—you have to perform vajra repetition.  This is why it is said that in order to attain the isolation of mind, you must first establish the isolation of speech. The point is by performing the vajra repetition of the isolation of speech, you are able to loosen these channel knots at the heart. By doing so, the winds can then enter the central channel.   
You have to do this practice of vajra repetition of the isolation of speech in order to loosen those knots “or an equivalent practice.” What would be an equivalent practice?  In the practice of Yamantaka, this would correspond to what is called the yoga of speech.  There are no explanations of the isolation of body, the isolation of speech and the isolation of the mind. However, the yoga of speech is explained, so this would be the equivalent practice. 
Establishing actual physical isolation
To completely loosen …
…
… a completion-stage practice of similar type. (p. 143)
For it is more difficult …
…
…  gather them at the heart. (p. 144)
Why is it easier to loosen the channel knots at other places? At the crown, there are only two knots—one from the left channel, one from the right channel.  Similarly, at the secret place, there are also two knots—one each from the left and right channels.  It is more difficult to loosen the channel knots at the heart where there are six knots altogether. Therefore, before verbal isolation, you should first establish physical isolation because it is easier to loosen the knots at that time. In physical isolation, you loosen the upper knots and the lower knots.  Once you have done that, it is easier to loosen the knots at the heart.
Cultivating the coarse and subtle generation stages
To fully generate …
…
…  complete comprehension of the completion stage… (p. 144)
If you want to fully generate such a completion stages in your mental continuum, you have to first cultivate the subtle generation stage.  
In order to cultivate the subtle generation stage, you need to first cultivate the coarse generation stage in four sessions.   
You can see that in order to practise the completion stage, you must first have very stable clear appearance and divine pride of being the deity where your body is visualized as being in the nature of light.  It is on the basis of this visualization that you can visualize all the channels within your body.  You certainly do not do this visualization of the channels on the basis of visualizing this ordinary body that you have.  You have to have clear appearance of being the deity and the divine pride of being the deity, where your body is in the nature of light. In this body of light, you then visualize and meditate on the channels. 
… and you must obtain … protect the commitments and vows. (p. 145)
To fulfil the definition …
…
…  the two bodhicittas and their branches. (p. 145) 
Sze Gee: Here you need to change the translation a bit. It is a bit problematic. 
(The text says: 
Practices that enhance, and such practices that are exemplified by external vitality exertion, are understood to be fixed in number for all paths, and fixed in their order. )
(It should read as follows:) 
Practices that enhance, and such practices are exemplified by external vitality exertion.  All paths are understood to be fixed in number and fixed in their order.  (p. 145)
Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel 
Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 