Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L52 FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.530595
================================================================================


Transcript of teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on 6 March 2018[1]

Lesson 52


Advice from the Mani Kabum. Am I really practising the Dharma?  Guru
devotion. Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way. (This class was
conducted in English by Khen Rinpoche himself).


Today, I am trying to teach myself, with my words, in my way. Anyway, last
Tuesday, at the last minute, Venerable Gyurme had submitted his resignation
as a translator with immediate effect. Last minute, he resigned. He has
been translating for 14, 15, 16 years. So, whatever it is, he has resigned,
not to translate.

So, for the time being, for the next one or two classes, I thought  to  give
a simple talk. I don’t think I can go into  deep  teachings  on  tantra  for
(the next) few classes. Slowly, we will find a translator so be patient  for
the time being. Anyway, this is  our  last  module  and  it’s  almost  done.
Anything can happen in this world so just be patient.

Actually, I don’t know what to teach. You people know everything!

ADVICE FROM THE MANI KABUM

There is (a text called) the Mani Kabum written by Guru  Rinpoche.  I’m  not
exactly sure. There is one very simple advice there. I have  mentioned  this
in some other classes.

(Khen Rinpoche recites the quotation in Tibetan).

I read in Tibetan. Then I will translate myself! You won’t  know  whether  I
translate correctly or not.

Not to waste your body
There are a few verses on how not to waste your body, speech  and  mind.  It
says that (in order) not to  waste  your  body,  generate  yourself  as  the
Compassionate Buddha and avoid ordinary appearance.

It’s a very simple practice but it is very, very profound  advice.  We  have
this body. How can we make this body useful?  We have been talking  so  much
about tantra—visualizing yourself as the Compassionate Buddha. We’ve  learnt
on how to generate ourselves  as  the  deity,  according  to  kriya  tantra,
through the six levels. Here, the advice pertains to that kind of  practice.


      Not to waste your body—visualize yourself as the deity all the time.

Not to waste your speech
      Not to waste your speech—recite Om Mani Padme  Hung.  Don’t  see  your
      speech
      as ordinary.


That helps you not to gossip and create negative karma. In  this  way,  your
speech will not be wasted. This means it becomes meaningful.  This  is  very
good advice.

We listen and we talk so much. But we don’t really  think  much  during  our
practice. So,
for these few classes, I will try to talk as simply as possible.  The  point
is to listen well and then put effort into the practice. This  is  something
we are all lacking in. We are  not  lacking  in  understanding  anything.  I
don’t think that is the case.  What  we  are  lacking  in  is  putting  (our
understanding) into practice. We must remember that. So whenever  you  talk,
don’t gossip so much. This is very powerful advice.

I remember one of my teachers, who has become the  Ganden  Tripa.  Normally,
he doesn’t talk much except for the Dharma. One of his teachers had  advised
him, “Always watch your speech and don’t gossip.”  He  remembered  that  all
the time. He doesn’t gossip. Instead, he is always chanting,  doing  prayers
or talking about the Dharma. So, he doesn’t create negative karma.

This is very useful. So, we can put in some effort to always recite Om  Mani
Padme Hung and don’t just talk.

Not to waste your mind
Then the last verse:

      Not to waste your mind—do not let your mind fall under the control  of
      the delusions.

Most of the time, our mind is wasted. Useless. Nno meaning. Almost no  point
to having a mind, always letting it be controlled by the  negative  emotions
such as anger, attachment, pride and jealousy. From morning  to  night,  our
mind is carried away by  all  these  negative  emotions.  So,  that  is  the
meaning of wasting your mind. The advice here is not to  let  your  mind  be
controlled by the negative emotions.

Here, the advice is that when the negative  emotion  arises,  look  at  that
negative emotion and let it dissolve  into  the  mind.  All  these  negative
emotions come from the mind and are the play of the  mind.  Recognize  that.
Only look at the negative emotion but do not follow  the  negative  emotion.
Just look at the reality of the negative emotion. It doesn’t  last  long  in
your mind and sooner or later, somehow, it will subside  and  dissolve  into
the mind itself.

One can understand this in many different ways. Look at the reality  of  the
negative emotion. It comes from causes and conditions. It just  appears  but
it does not truly exists. Once you  meditate  on  its  reality—the  ultimate
nature of the delusional mind—it will dissolve  into  emptiness.  You  don’t
really see the negative  emotion  there.  It  dissolves  into  emptiness  by
itself. I think it can be understood in that  way.  So,  this  is  something
very useful (to remember) whenever a negative emotion arises.

The problem is that when the negative emotion arises, we  try  to  look  for
the reason—why, why, why, what, what, what—and then we follow  the  negative
emotion.
It then continues and becomes stronger and deeper.

Here, you look at the reality of the negative emotion, the  ultimate  nature
of this delusion. If you meditate well, it dissolves into  emptiness.  Since
it comes from the mind, so it dissolves back into the nature  of  the  mind.
It doesn’t bother your mind so much. You recognize the negative emotion  and
just let it  go.  So,  this  is  the  way  to  make  your  mind  useful  and
meaningful.

This is extremely important as we all have  negative  emotions  arising  all
the time. It is very important not to carry the negative  emotions  in  your
mind. When you follow them, then there is no end to them.  If  there  is  an
end, then that’s wonderful but there is no end. You keep  on  carrying  them
and they become stronger and stronger. The point here is  to  meditate  like
that. It really helps. If you practise like that,  then  your  delusions  or
attachment will be subdued or  pacified.  One  will  recover  from  whatever
sickness one has. Any spirit harms will also be pacified.

Then you will have some kind of inner experience arise in  the  mind.  Also,
there is the external sign.  One  doesn’t  have  so  much  craving  such  as
drinking and eating. All these will be  subdued.  Some  people  feel  hungry
even after eating. (Less craving) is  helpful  as  it  stops  rebirth  as  a
hungry ghost and leaves imprints to achieve Buddha’s nirmanakaya body.

This is a simple practice. You  don’t  need  to  do  too  much.  Every  day,
visualize yourself as a deity and then recite Om Mani Padme Hung to  control
your mind.

In Tibetan, the Mani Kabum I think comes in two volumes with so  many  small
pieces of advice. I think it was written by Guru Rinpoche or  it  came  from
Chenrezig. It consists of two books with short and  helpful  advice.  It  is
good to study it extensively. However, we need some kind of practice.

I had talked about this verse from the Diamond Cutter Sutra  before  at  the
beginning of the class.

      A star, a visual aberration, the flame of a lamp,
      An illusion, a drop of dew or a bubble,
      A dream, a flash of lightning, a cloud,
      See conditioned things as such.


What I am trying to do here is not so much to teach  but  to  give  a  small
talk. At the same time, listen and try to get it  into  your  mind.  Not  so
much writing (notes) tonight. Try to focus your mind with full attention.  I
try to make it as clear as possible and at the same time touch your mind.

What is this verse saying? What is the use  of  this  verse?  What  are  its
benefits?

As much as possible try to listen with full attention. You  really  need  to
motivate yourself to listen to the Dharma.

AM I REALLY PRACTISING THE DHARMA?

The big question is this: What are you looking for? We practise  the  Dharma
but look deeply within and question yourself:
 • Do I really practise the Dharma?
 • What does it really mean to practise the Dharma?
 • Am I different from those who are not practising  Dharma,  the  so-called
   non-Buddhists?
It is a big question to ask oneself. It is  extremely  important  to  always
think about this:
 • Am I less attached than other people?
 • Do I have less anger than other people?
 • Do I have less pride than other people?

As a practitioner, compare yourself with those who  are  not  practitioners.
It is good to make that comparison. If it doesn’t make any difference,  then
what is (Dharma practice) for?

You always need to ask yourself this. This includes  myself.  Without  that,
nothing changes.

I have been teaching here for almost 19 to 20 years. It is a  long  time.  I
don’t think it is lack of understanding. You people have  enough  knowledge.
In the next one or two classes, I will try my best to  encourage  you  in  a
short way. It is very important (to ask yourself this).

We are all like that. We just see some kind of temporary happiness. We  just
look at this life and maybe a little bit  of  the  next  life.  We  are  not
really thinking so much about liberation. We don’t see our problem.  Samsara
is suffering but we don’t really see  that.  We  still  believe  samsara  is
pleasure. Deep down, we don’t really seek to renounce  this  samsaric  life,
especially the bodily  pleasures.  We  just  cling  on  to  that  one  after
another. This is one of the biggest challenges. This is  something  that  we
need to think deeply about.

Therefore, in the beginning, the Buddha taught the first of the  four  noble
truths— true suffering. Without understanding  that,  I  think  it  is  very
difficult to practise and to call oneself a  Dharma  practitioner.  This  is
something we all need to focus on and to understand. It’s not easy.  But  we
must understand that. This is one of the key points.

When we look deep down, we are just working for survival in  this  life  day
to day. We are not much of a Dharma practitioner. We just  hope  to  survive
and pass through this life and live a little  bit  longer.  We  always  say,
“May I live long to practise the Dharma,” but I don’t  know  how  true  that
is.
What I’m trying to say is ask ourselves.  Today  is  asking  oneself.  Don’t
think I am talking but think that the Buddha is talking.  It  will  be  more
effective for the mind like that. What I see is that.  In  order  to  change
the mind really requires some kind of faith. Then any kind  of  advice  will
become very effective and will hit right at the heart to effect change.

GURU DEVOTION

In the lam-rim, at the very beginning, it talks  about  guru  devotion.  The
great master Gyalwa Ensapa advised that any  kind  of  realization,  big  or
small, depends on guru devotion. How much devotion do you have?
 • If you have small devotion, you get a small realization.
 • If you have great devotion, you get a great realization.
 • If you have middling devotion, you get a middling realization.

So, the advice is that the guru is the source  of  all  attainments.  Always
see the qualities of the guru and never  think  of  him  from  the  negative
side. Make this stable decision and due to that, “May I be able to  complete
my wish.” Whatever decision you make, may it be completed.  This  is  advice
from Gyalwa Ensapa who was a great master like Milarepa  in  attaining  full
enlightenment in one lifetime. That was his practice  and  his  realization.
This is something we need to understand. We all know the lam-rim and at  the
beginning of the lam-rim, it talks about guru devotion. We need to  see  the
point.

Don’t misunderstand that you have to be devoted  to  me.  That  is  not  the
point. I’m talking about the advice from Gyalwa  Ensapa.  His  practice  was
like that. Analyze and think about whether it is useful or not.

For myself, it is like this. When  you  have  so  much  devotion  towards  a
particular guru, then you will listen to the guru wholeheartedly.  Any  kind
of advice (from the guru) becomes extremely powerful in changing your  mind.
But if you don’t have that kind  of  devotion,  it  is  just  like  learning
normal education in school. You just  listen  but  the  heart  doesn’t  move
much. “I know. I know. I know.” But it is only at that level.

So, it’s important to recognize that you need to put in the  effort  if  you
really want to change for the better. This is  important  advice  from  this
great master.

This is my simple story. When I was young, around 14 or 15,  I  was  in  the
monastery. I had become a monk at the age of 12. I stayed for two  to  three
years at Kopan Monastery. At that time, we didn’t have many  good  teachers.
I just studied but I didn’t speak Tibetan then. I was  there  for  three  or
four years.

My older brother always asked me questions when I went to his  home  in  the
town. Sometimes, he listened to the Tibetan news and he didn’t  get  one  or
two words. As he himself didn’t speak Tibetan, he asked  me  some  of  these
Tibetan words. I still remembered he asked me the word, gyal  sa.  It  means
kingdom. I said that I didn’t know as I really didn’t know at that time.

He said, “You’ve been in the monastery for two to three years and you  don’t
know
these words. What are you doing there?” He suggested it would be better  for
me to go to a normal school to study instead of studying  at  the  monastery
as it seemed like I didn’t know anything!

Also, my English was not good. I didn’t know  Nepali.  I  also  didn’t  know
much Tibetan. Sometimes, he asked me to read a Tibetan letter. I  would  try
to read as he couldn’t read it. My parents won’t say much as  they  are  not
educated. My older brother was a graduate.  But  the  parents  didn’t  think
much. Only my brother encouraged me to go to school.

So, at the age of around 15, I  almost  left  the  monastery  for  no  other
reason except that my brother asked me to go to school. I explained to  Lama
Lhundrup what my brother had said, that it would be better for me to  go  to
school.
He said, “If you go to school, there is nothing much there. It’s  better  to
stay in the monastery. Even chanting Om Mani Padme Hung in the monastery  is
more beneficial than going to a normal school.” That was the advice he  gave
me.

Somehow, I didn’t have the feeling of  going  out  (of  the  monastery).  As
advised by Lama Lhundrup, I stayed at the monastery. He gave a  very  simple
advice—chanting Om Mani Padme Hung.  And just through that, I am  here  now.
What I mean to say is that a very simple piece of  advice  can  change  your
entire life. I was 15 years old then and I  didn’t  know  much  Dharma.  But
somehow whatever the  reason  may  be,  I  was  convinced  to  stay  in  the
monastery.

At one time, (Lama Zopa) Rinpoche went to see Serkong Dorje Chang,  a  great
master, who lived in Nepal. When we were young, we used to go on  pilgrimage
to Swayambhunath in a group. Rinpoche would ask us to  go  and  see  Serkong
Dorje Chang. At that time, he was quite old. He looked skinny and he  didn’t
really talk much. He didn’t really come out of his room. We  would  just  go
to his room and offer khata. That’s all.

I think he was a great yogi. Rinpoche said that he took  him  as  a  teacher
because  Rinpoche  asked  Serkong  Dorje  Chang  one  question  about   guru
devotion—what is the
measure of having guru devotion?

Serkong Dorje Chang replied to Rinpoche, “If your guru asked you to eat  his
kaka, immediately, you would rush out and eat it like a dog. Yum, yum,  yum!
It would be yummy, like eating chocolate.”

This was the only advice from Serkong Dorje Chang. From  then  on,  Rinpoche
took him as his guru. He received no other teachings but Rinpoche said  that
this was a great advice. So, from just one advice, he took him as his  guru.
This is what Rinpoche mentioned in his teachings.

Why am I telling you all this? You  must  have  pure  view.  Otherwise,  you
won’t be able to eat (the kaka).

When I went to India in the 1980s for the very first time, I went to  Ganden
monastery
with Lama Lhundrup.

Four of us monks went to His Holiness’ teachings at Ganden monastery.  After
the teachings, people were allowed to visit His Holiness’  room  and  toilet
to offer khata. One of the monks who went with me went  to  the  toilet.  He
put his hand in the toilet bowl, collected some water from there  and  drank
it. He took it as a blessing. I think he must have great devotion.

Depending on how pure your mind is, then this is what you can do. In  Tibet,
when the guru pees,  people  would  hold  a  bottle  waiting  for  the  pee.
Drinking pee is no problem. In Nepal, they drink their own pee  as  part  of
pee therapy to cure some sicknesses.

The point is it depends on how much faith and devotion there  is.  Then  the
advice is more effective for the mind and to the practice. This  is  one  of
the important points if you really want to practise and you really  want  to
change.

NAGARJUNA’S FUNDAMENTAL WISDOM OF THE MIDDLE WAY

There is a verse in Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Wisdom of the  Middle  Way.  The
first  sentence  asks,  “What  is  liberation?”  The  verse  goes  on:   “By
extinguishing actions and afflictive emotions, there is  liberation,”  i.e.,
liberation means freedom from karma and delusions. When you  have  no  karma
and no delusions, then at that time, you achieve liberation.

How is karma created? How does  the  delusion  arise?  Whenever  we  see  an
object  as  good,  bad,  nice  or  not   nice,   in   reality,   all   these
qualities—beauty, ugliness, good, bad, nice, not nice—depend on the mind.

Depending on what kind of mind you have, then (it affects what) you see.  It
does not come so much from (the side of) the object. It is  from  the  (side
of the) subject or the mind because we have accumulated  the  karma  to  see
beautiful, not beautiful, ugly, unpleasant or pleasant. We are able  to  see
that because of karma. It is just the appearance to  the  mind.  Reality  is
like that. What you see is just from the (side of the) subject,  i.e.,  your
mind. In reality, it is like that.

But what we see and what we believe are different. When you  see  beauty  or
ugliness or perceive an enemy, you don’t see this subjectively. You  see  it
objectively (i.e., it is
coming from the side of the object). You see that.

(Seeing in that way) is a  problem  but  it  is  not  the  biggest  problem.
Immediately, when you see (the object) objectively,  you  believe  in  that.
You never notice  (that  it  exists)  subjectively.  But  in  reality,  (the
object) exists subjectively, not objectively. But we don’t see that. We  see
it as existing objectively and it has nothing to do with the mind.

We see that and believe in that objectivity 100%.  Only  believing  in  that
way is also not too bad. Such belief is what we call ignorance.  In  a  very
simple way, ignorance is about believing (the object) exists  from  its  own
side. It exists objectively and it has nothing to do  with  the  mind.  That
belief is ignorance and that is the root of the problem. Rinpoche called  it
the king of the delusions or the king of maras. This is the basis.  So,  you
must understand this when you say ignorance is the root of the problem.

Because of that, you think everything is the object. Your mind plays on  the
object. When you buy a house, you decorate it by putting in  this  and  that
to make it nicer. Based on that, your  mind  decorates  or  superimposes  so
many things on the object. Then you believe it, “Oh, this is so  beautiful.”
You have so many invalid reasons but you believe  they  are  valid  reasons.
But in reality they are invalid reasons.

It is very interesting to see how our mind plays with so  much  logic.  When
you think about these things,  there  is  so  much  logic  and  never-ending
thoughts to make that object beautiful. Once  you  believe  in  the  object,
your mind plays with it so much.  On  that  basis,  you  decorate  it  (even
further) so that you see (the object) to be much more beautiful compared  to
other people.

In the very beginning, it’s not much. It’s like an empty  house  that’s  not
so beautiful. But after you have decorated it, the house becomes  beautiful.
The object is like this when you see it. When the object becomes  beautiful,
attachment arises and it becomes stronger. Because of  that,  all  sorts  of
karma are created.  All  the  actions  you  do  just  to  get  that  object.
Believing so much in it, strong attachment rises.  This is  how  you  create
karma.

In order to achieve the object, you do all sorts of actions such as  harming
others. You accumulate so much negative karma. Because of your belief,  your
goal is to get that object. You see everything  about  the  object  existing
objectively. Because you believe that, you see such a beautiful object.

In order to get it, you put in all your effort to try to get it, “If  I  get
this object, it will give me peace. This will give me happiness. This is  my
life.” Because of that, you put in every effort to achieve it. Then you  get
the object and pleasure develops.

When the object changes, your happiness and  pleasure  also  change  because
you are depending on and believing in the object  100%.  In  the  beginning,
you never thought the object will change. Also, you never  thought  that  it
will bring you suffering in your life but sooner or later, it will show  its
own reality.

Slowly, you will recognize that and slowly, you will see  the  problem.  The
object does not satisfy your mind. It cannot satisfy you  100%  and  it  did
not fulfil your wishes. That is the reality. You fully understand  that  but
again you forget. So  again,  the  same  problem  arises  with  a  different
object. You are just changing to a different object.  Then  the  exact  same
kind of process happens—(the object) appears, (you) believe  (in  it),  your
mind making up so much and again, so much effort to get  it.  Therefore,  we
never wake up from our hallucination. Sometimes, we may understand a  little
bit but again, we totally forget.

We have been doing all this. You don’t have  to  think  so  much  about  the
past. Just look
at your present life. We live like that from morning to night.

The big question  is:  How  to  achieve  liberation?  When  will  I  achieve
liberation? This is something to meditate on all the time in order  to  wake
up!

Rinpoche gave an example of an insect going  around  a  bowl.  There  is  an
opening but the insect doesn’t know how to come out. The  insect  just  goes
round and round. It cannot see the opening so  it  just  circles  round  and
round. It cannot come out and it  finally  dies  in  there.  Rinpoche  says,
“Exactly like that, one is chasing one object after another object.  We  die
and take another rebirth again. Then the same thing happens.” I  don’t  know
how long we are going to circle there.

Seriously, how much do you think about this  question?  One  after  another,
following the hallucination  and  creating  karma  with  almost  no  end  to
samsara in sight. We are doing exactly that. Then there is  almost  no  hope
for liberation. Therefore, if you really want to practise Dharma,  you  need
to think seriously about not following this kind of habit. It  is  the  same
thing when you talk about attachment.

Look at other negative emotions like anger, anger  towards  the  enemy.  The
enemy does exist conventionally. Due to causes  and  conditions,  the  enemy
appears in your mind. You label him as an enemy but it’s just an  appearance
to your own mind due to karma. He doesn’t exist in your mind.

The enemy appears and you believe  the  enemy  will  harm  you.  Again,  you
believe all this objectively, “The enemy is over  there.”  You  believe  the
enemy is there 100%. You never think your mind made this up.

Then your mind thinks in many different ways. Even the way the person  looks
at you, how the person dresses or walks—everything appears negative to  your
mind! “All this is directed at me.”  There  is  so  much  negativity.  Anger
arises because of this negative way of decorating. Then you  go  deeper  and
you think that once you destroy the object, then  that’s  it.  You  feel  OK
with that because that’s your belief. But even if you were to  destroy  this
enemy, that’s not the end. Another enemy  will  appear  due  to  causes  and
conditions. It is never ending. If  your  mind  is  like  that,  you  cannot
control when the enemy or some unpleasantness or whatever appears. You  have
to  destroy  all  these  objects.  Then  you  will  be  happy.  But   that’s
impossible.

There is a quotation from Shantideva’s  text.  I  don’t  have  it  here.  If
thorns cover the universe, you will not be able to find  enough  leather  to
cover all these thorns in order to protect your  feet.  It’s  not  possible.
The best answer is to walk by putting on a pair of  leather  shoes  on  your
feet.

It is just like when you want to destroy the enemy.  That’s  impossible  but
that’s what you believe due to causes and conditions. As long  as  our  mind
is under the control of the negative emotions, then the  enemy  will  always
be there.

It is the same as the example. When you don’t have  that  kind  of  negative
emotion, no object will come from your negative mind, from your karma.  When
you understand this and is able to subdue your  mind,  then  in  that  mind,
there is no enemy. It doesn’t call (the object) an enemy because  you  won’t
have this kind of mind. It is like the bodhisattvas who have the  bodhicitta
mind. In their view, there is no enemy.

Whoever you consider to be an  enemy,  for  the  bodhisattvas,  they  become
great friends. The enemy is very dear to  them.  They  never  see  an  enemy
because the enemy is so kind, (enabling) them to practise. Their  minds  see
things differently.

The point is what kind of mind do we have?  Because of karma,  (the  object)
appears, on top of that, we believe so much. Then not only  that.  Our  mind
places so many different qualities on the object. They  are  not  in  accord
with reality. It is just our mind hallucinating. We  are  hallucinating  but
we don’t know that. This is how the negative emotion grows and then  creates
karma to take rebirth.

Think logically about this. If the pleasant or  unpleasant  (object)  exists
objectively (i.e., from the side of the object) and it  has  nothing  to  do
with your mind, then whatever you see as pleasant  or  unpleasant,  all  the
hundreds of other people will see the (same thing)  from  the  side  of  the
object.

If ten or twenty people were to see the same object, then  they  would  have
to see exactly the same thing. The logic is there. If  the  pleasant  object
exists objectively and it has nothing to do with your  mind,  then  hundreds
of other people will see the (object in  the)  same  (way)  because  it  has
nothing to do with their mind.  Then  this  pleasant  object  has  to  exist
inherently. The unpleasant object will  also  be  like  that  if  it  exists
objectively from its own side. It will be inherently  existent.   Therefore,
when ten people see the unpleasant object, they will see the same  level  of
unpleasantness in the object. Everybody have to see  that.  But  that’s  not
true.

You have to use this kind of logic to meditate with so  then  you  can  have
some idea that that’s not true. If everybody sees but some can  see  it  and
others can’t, why?  So this means it depends on the  subject.  Depending  on
the kind of mind you have, then that is the kind of thing you can see.

It’s really important to sit down and meditate like that.  This  gives  your
mind a different perspective. The way you used to live is not right.  Buddha
said that you should think in this way. That’s the  Buddha  advice.  Try  it
and be mindful in this way.  (Then you can decide) whether it is helpful  or
not to think in this way? If you were  to  think  and  be  mindful  in  this
way—“(the way I see the object) is due to my mind. It does not have so  much
to do with the object. My mind is decorating (the object) but  this  is  not
the reality”—then even if you don’t have any realization, then whatever  you
are doing—walking, sitting, talking,  eating  or  shopping—it  will  make  a
difference in your life.

Your anger will be reduced. Attachment will be  reduced.  Jealousy  will  be
reduced. Pride will be reduced. If you are just a little  mindful  of  that,
it will make a difference. If we are not mindful of that and never think  on
this side and instead, always thinking only from the  side  of  the  object,
this becomes a big problem. In a bigger way, you end up  circling  endlessly
in samsara.
But if you are mindful in another way, i.e., always  being  aware  from  the
side of the subject—that your own mental  creation  is  like  an  illusion—I
think, relatively speaking, your negative emotions will  be  less  powerful.
In this way, you don’t create karma. The point  is  that  you  don’t  create
karma. When your attachment or anger is not powerful, then you don’t  create
karma. It is mentioned in the lam-rim that in order  to  create  karma,  the
negative emotion has to be strong. When your negative emotion is very  weak,
then it doesn’t create karma. It’s also good to understand that as  much  as
possible.

You really, really have to think about that.  If  you  don’t  think  deeply,
then nothing
much can be done. How serious is this—the way we used to live? From  morning
to night, we live believing everything (exists) objectively, having  nothing
to do with our mind. It is 100% from the side of the object.  We  live  like
that. Then you look in the longer term, (remaining  in)  samsara.  When  you
take rebirth, you don’t have freedom. It is impossible to achieve  what  you
want.  We don’t have freedom to choose what we want in the  future.  Because
of the power of karma and delusions, we take all sorts of  rebirths.  It  is
impossible to wake up. Then you can imagine. You take rebirth in  the  lower
realms as animals, hungry ghosts, hell beings.

You don’t see them but just imagine the animal realm. You take rebirth  once
in the animal realm. How that is possible. Even as human  beings,  we  learn
so much. We hear so much. Yet we still believe  like  that.  As  an  animal,
they will never  understand  no  matter  how  much  you  talk  about  things
existing subjectively and objectively. You can explain this  sort  of  thing
for eons but they will have no idea. It is impossible (for them) to get  the
idea. As an animal, one has no mind to practise the  Dharma.  One  can  only
get worse and worse. How then to achieve liberation? It is impossible.

Therefore, we have to think about this precious  human  rebirth.  Especially
at this time when the Buddha’s teachings happened, you  are  still  able  to
hear the Dharma, you are still able to meet  the  teacher,  you  still  have
Dharma friends and you still have some kind  of  intelligence.  If  somebody
were to explain, (you  can  understand),  “Alright,  alright.  I  should  do
that.” At least we have this kind of intelligence.

If you don’t practise this  very  moment,  then  when?  That’s  another  big
question! This is all about the lam-rim. I think we have the homework to  do
the lam-rim meditation. It’s already done? I am not sure how  you  meditate.
I think maybe it was just to get the marks. I am joking.

But you really need to think about this. That is  why  in  the  lam-rim,  it
talks about the precious human rebirth. Our human rebirth  is  so  precious.
You have to recognize that by  sitting  down  and  thinking.  Sit  down  and
think. If you don’t do it now, then when can you do it?

There is no certainty  of  how  long  you  will  live.  One  year?  Can  you
guarantee you can live for one year? There is no  guarantee.  Even  for  six
months, there is no guarantee. Even for one month, there  is  no  guarantee.
But in reality, we never believe that.

We are always believing we will live long. We never think about reality.  We
believe in
this wrong concept. Wrong belief and not true! There is no  guarantee.  Life
has no certainty. Anytime, any moment, next year,  next  month,  next  week,
next day.

If you think deeply,  you  need  to  remind  yourself  that  you  have  this
opportunity. Then you must practise the Dharma. So always be  mindful  about
that. (The focus should) not be so much on teaching, talking and  listening.


We should sit down and remind ourselves  that  whatever  time  we  have,  we
should try to meditate. We should be mindful about that in our  daily  life.
Whatever you do, walking, sitting,  cooking  and  especially  when  you  are
doing prayers, always be mindful about that.

If you live like that, then you will create less negative  karma.  If  there
is less negative karma and you create more virtuous  karma,  then  there  is
some hope to achieve a precious human rebirth again in the future. When  you
leave so much imprint in this life, then there is some  hope.  Then  in  the
next life and from life to life, slowly,  slowly,  there  is  some  hope  of
achieving liberation.

Nagarjuna said that one creates so much negative karma through ignorance  by
seeing, believing and then decorating on top of that. Anger  and  attachment
become stronger.  Then you create karma. From karma and delusion, one  takes
rebirth in samsara. How then to  be  free?  Is  it  even  possible  to  free
oneself from this?  Nagarjuna’s  answer:  “It  is  possible.  When  you  see
emptiness, then you are able to free yourself  from  this  problem  and  not
circle in samsara.”

Without understanding emptiness, regardless of  whatever  kind  of  practice
you do, it is impossible to free yourself from samsara.  Even  if  you  have
bodhicitta, even if you have renunciation, no matter  how  much  you  study,
how much you meditate, how many retreats you do, at the end of the  day,  if
you don’t have the realization  of  emptiness,  it  is  impossible  to  free
yourself from the ocean of samsara.

Even the six perfections like generosity, morality, patience,  concentration
and so on. All these five perfections without wisdom, they are almost of  no
use in terms of achieving liberation. With wisdom, the five perfections  are
like being blind. One cannot achieve liberation.

So in order to achieve liberation, you must realize emptiness. Again,  there
is a big question. Why  do  you  need  to  do  this?  In  order  to  achieve
liberation, why do you need the understanding of  emptiness?   Again,  going
back to the beginning of the teaching—the understanding of  how  samsara  is
created by ignorance. There is ignorance so samsara  exists.  So,  one  must
remove this ignorance. If  we  don’t  remove  the  root  of  the  delusions,
ignorance, then it is impossible to achieve liberation.

In order to remove ignorance, you have to understand what ignorance  is.  As
I mentioned before, it is the belief in true existence, existence  from  its
own side. Through logic, you investigate whether (the  object)  exists  from
its own side or not. Using logic and different reasons, you  prove  this  in
your mind—getting some kind of
understanding through logic that  (the  object)  doesn’t  exist  objectively
from its own side.

When you reach this conclusion, you  shake  up  ignorance  because  you  see
things differently now. Slowly, when you understand, you  realize  and  then
you enter the five paths—the path of accumulation, the path of  preparation,
the path of seeing, the path of meditation, the path  of  no-more  learning.
You meditate gradually like that.

At the beginning of the path of accumulation and the  path  of  preparation,
you will still have  dualistic  appearance.  You  still  have  the  grasping
whereby you create karma. Once you see emptiness  directly,  then  when  you
meditate, you don’t really see that anymore. You  just  see  emptiness.  You
don’t see  anything  else.  You  see  emptiness  only.  You  don’t  see  any
conventional objects during the meditative equipoise when you see  emptiness
directly. When you realize emptiness directly, then your wisdom will  become
extremely powerful. Ignorance becomes very weak and has  no  power.  As  the
wisdom is extremely powerful, then ignorance has no power to  create  karma.
Then you are on the way to liberation—when you don’t accumulate karma.

Therefore, seeing emptiness is extremely important to cutting  the  root  of
samsara. To be  free  from  samsara,  you  must  have  this  realization  of
emptiness. Gradually meditating like that, slowly,  you  achieve  the  first
ground up to the eighth ground on the bodhisattva  path.  You  are  able  to
remove the root of samsara. Ignorance is totally  removed.  You  don’t  have
the normal grasping at the appearance of  true  existence.  You  don’t  have
that grasping at all.

On the eighth, ninth and tenth grounds, you will still have  the  appearance
of true existence. It is still appears but you don’t really grasp at it  any
more. Only the subtle imprint of the ignorance is there. Due  to  that,  you
will still have some kind of appearance of true existence appearing  to  the
mind but you don’t grasp at that.

Then you can meditate slowly on the eighth,  ninth  and  tenth  grounds  and
after that, you are able to abandon even the appearance of  true  existence.
You are able to abandon it. Once you have  abandoned  that,  you  are  fully
enlightened. You are able to see the two truths—the ultimate truth  and  the
conventional truth directly at the same time. Within  meditative  equipoise,
you are able to help numberless sentient beings at that time.  So,  you  can
manifest and you are able to help numberless sentient beings  when  you  are
fully enlightened. You are  able  to  fulfil  all  the  wishes  of  sentient
beings.

I am saying how important it is that you realize emptiness. So, you now  get
some idea about that.

Next Thursday, I will talk about  these  verses  about  the  stars….  I  did
mention before but maybe I talk a little bit,  then  we  meditate  a  little
bit. That is the idea for one or two classes.

Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan,
Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Note: The teachings on March 6, 8 and 13 are general teachings by Khen
Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi that are open to all students and are NOT part of
Module 10 of the Second Basic Program.

