Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L14FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.583160
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 14	 				                                            23 May 2017
Root text (pp. 29—34). Review—The six deities. Wisdom of profundity & clarity. The self in self-generation. The front generation. Restraint through vitality exertion. The four branches of recitation. Repetition observing the forms of the letters—Repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front. Homework. 
Khen Rinpoche: I noticed in the last few classes, the microphone wasn’t clear enough. This is why I’ve told Benny and Xiao Chiang (names of students) to take charge of the microphone. Somebody have to be in charge of it. In the past few classes, the microphone’s not good enough. I don’t know who’s responsible for the microphone. This is why I told Benny and Xiao Chiang to learn from whoever knows how to fix it. 
This is a necessity. People come all the way from afar to attend classes. From the side of the centre, we should have good facilities. People put in time and effort to come here, so at the very least, we should make the microphone clear. It’s not just one time. It’s happened many times before. I mentioned this once before. 
I just want to say a few words. From my side, I put in my full effort to teach.  I do that. For myself, I’ve no regrets. I do my readings. How well I present is a different issue but I’m not wasting your time. I’m not wasting my time.  Everybody needs to put in effort. 
I don’t consider myself sharp-facultied.  I consider myself dull-facultied.  When you hear someone is dull-facultied, it’s always bad. It’s not like that.  I learn slowly. I’m not a fast learner. I’m a very slow learner. I learn word by word. So you don’t have to be discouraged.  
As for whether this is a waste of time or not, it’s up to the individual. It depends on how you think.  Even if you learn one word, that’s meaningful.  You come all the way here from your home to learn the Dharma. That’s virtuous. You come here to see holy objects. That’s virtuous too. You sit here for two hours to listen to something that’s virtuous.  After that, you learn. Of course, that’s even more virtuous.  So never think you’re wasting your time here. 
It’s the teacher’s job. Sometimes, I’ve to preach a little bit. But I’m not going to preach too much. You’re big enough to understand. Sometimes, when I ask questions, you don’t answer. So I preach a little bit but not too much. You’re not kids. You’re all grownups.  Try and put in your effort, OK? 
I put in my full effort to teach. I’ve no regrets. It’s with everybody’s support that makes this class successful. Bring more students here and don’t be discouraged. We all need this. Energy is important for developing the centre, developing the society. All this is needed.   
We all need to work together to make the centre successful, not just the teacher doing everything. That’s not possible. I’m sorry about this. Sometimes, I’ve to say these things. If you’re dull-facultied, don’t worry about it. If you think you’re wasting your time, I don’t think so. You’re not wasting your time. So don’t worry about that either.  
Every teacher teaches differently. I had six teachers. All my six teachers teach me in different ways. Of course, from my side, I try my best.  I consider that to be my job.  
~~~~~~~~~~
How to approximate the deity while keeping the commitments
The third has two parts: … 
… not reliant on recitation (p. 29)
Absorption with recitation
You generate yourself … 
…
… combining restraint with vitality exertion. (pp. 29—30) 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m just reading the root text. I’m not reading the commentary. 
REVIEW—THE SIX DEITIES  
The first deity is the empty deity. That’s meditating on how oneself and the deity that’s to be meditated on are equal in being empty of existing inherently.  Deity yoga always starts with the meditation on emptiness. 
The second deity is the sound deity. One starts with meditating on the moon disc, the manifestation of one’s mind realizing emptiness. The main meditation that constitutes the sound deity is focussing on the sound of the mantra of the deity that one’s meditating on resonating in space.
The third deity is the letter deity. The sound of the mantra of the deity that one’s meditating on is resonating in space. The sound descends and takes the form of the syllables of the mantra. These settle on the moon disc. If you look at many of the Action Tantra practices, you’ll find it is described in the sadhana that you meditate on the moon disc on top of which are the syllables of the mantra of the deity.
The fourth deity is the form deity.  This is how it starts: 
Imagine light rays radiating in the ten directions from the syllables of the mantra on the moon disc. 
These light rays touch all sentient beings and purify them.
These light rays are then withdrawn back into the syllables. 
Again, light rays are emitted from the syllables. At the tips of these light rays are offering goddesses who make offerings to all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
After that, the light rays are again withdrawn back into the syllables of the mantra. The mantra becomes even more magnificent than before. 
Then the complete transformation occurs. One arises as the deity and takes on the form of whatever deity one is meditating on, such as Chenrezig or Tara.
Generating the body of the deity in its complete form is the form deity.  
The fifth deity is the seal (or mudra) deity or the mudra deity. 
As I have said before, Action Tantra is divided into three lineages:
the tathagata lineage
the lotus lineage 
the vajra lineage
Depending on the lineage of the deity that is being meditated on, you perform the appropriate hand gesture (or mudra).  Normally, you’ll touch the appropriate hand gesture of the lineage to the five places of the body. If you’re doing the practice of Chenrezig, you do the hand gesture of the lotus lineage and touch the five places of the body, starting with: 
the heart 
the forehead
the throat
the right shoulder
the left shoulder
(A student requested Ven. Gyurme to speak at a slower pace). 
Khen Rinpoche: In the last two classes, people asked me whether I could ask Venerable Gyurme to translate slowly.  People requested me to do this.  I told them, “Don’t ask me.  You can ask Venerable directly.”  I speak Tibetan slowly but you won’t understand. If it’s too fast, anybody’s free to ask Venerable to slow down in a respectful way. There’s no harm in doing so. 
If I’m not good enough to teach, please tell me so directly. I’m open to that. This is my job. Venerable Gyurme’s job is to translate. If it’s too fast, please make the request respectfully.  Anybody can do that.  
Sometimes, I repeat myself over and over again. One of my teachers repeated one of the topics ten times.  From my past experience, this is the teacher that I appreciated the most.  I remembered every single word now because of those repetitions. Maybe, some people may find the repetitions boring, but there’s a reason for me to repeat.  I mentioned before some people are dull-facultied and they learn slowly. 
Also with regard to your readings, you may have read already but you need to read again. There is no harm in reading again.  
Anything that has to do with these classes, if you want to improve something, please discuss them in class, not on the phone or in Facebook. There’s no point in making this public.  Just talk here. Make it meaningful. If you’ve a very good reason, you can post anywhere, but mostly I don’t see any benefit. So anything to do with the class, please discuss it here. 
(With regard to the translation), I wanted to say that two or three people couldn’t catch up. When they asked me, I advised them to ask (Ven. Gyurme) directly. Anybody’s welcome (to make such requests) but please do so with respect. That’s important.
If you’re meditating on the lotus lineage, you’ve to perform the lotus mudra by cupping your hands together. (Khen Rinpoche demonstrated this together with the hand mudras for the tathagata and vajra lineages). 
The sixth deity is the sign deity, i.e., meditating on clear appearance and cultivating divine pride.  In Action Tantra, you generate yourself as the deity. This is usually done through the six steps called the six deities. This culminates in the sign deity where you meditate on clear appearance and generate divine pride.
WISDOM OF PROFUNDITY & CLARITY
In the three lower classes of tantra, you’ll not find the words, ‘wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness (or voidness)’ (found in Highest Yoga Tantra). Rather, you’ll find the term, the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity.
Profundity refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
Clarity refers to appearing clearly as the deity, i.e., the clear appearance of the deity’s body. 
These are non-dual and are found in one consciousness. 
The apprehension factor of wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity
One should understand the meaning of the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. This is an uncommon feature of tantra.
At the beginning of generating any deity, the meditation on emptiness is very important. That’s why here in Action Tantra, you start with the empty (or ultimate) deity. You need to have some kind of understanding of emptiness. This is the foundation or basis from which the deity’s generated.
As we saw earlier, the four classes of tantra are differentiated by the manner in which attachment is utilized as the path. By utilizing attachment as the path, great bliss arises. As the blissful consciousness arises, many of the coarser levels of consciousness become dormant, i.e., non-manifest, and dissolve. 
When the coarser levels of consciousness dissolve, i.e., become dormant or non- manifest, then the subtler level of consciousness manifests. One uses that to ascertain emptiness. This feature is the very heart or essence of tantra. 
This is called taking attachment as the path but whether you can understand that in the literal sense—taking it to mean that attachment doesn’t become an object of abandonment, but instead it somehow changes its entity into a path—I don’t think that’s really the case.
As to the meaning of taking attachment as the path, this is most clearly explained in Highest Yoga Tantra. Through using attachment, the coarser levels of consciousness dissolve, leaving only the extremely subtle consciousness to manifest. One then causes that mind to transform into the path, i.e., uses that mind to ascertain emptiness.  This’s what I think is the meaning behind, ‘taking attachment as the path.’  It means using the extremely subtle mind to ascertain emptiness. 
You imagine that extremely subtle mind ascertaining emptiness taking on the aspect of and becoming the deity. This is what’s meant by the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as a deity.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting some idea of what I’m talking about here?  Whether you know everything I am saying or not doesn’t matter, but you must catch the essence of what I’m talking about here.  
You hear these terms—yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity, taking attachment as the path, the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. You need to have an idea of what they mean. 
THE SELF IN SELF-GENERATION
Suppose somebody were to say to you, “Although you say you’re practising self-generation, it’s not you becoming the deity. Rather, it’s your mind realizing emptiness becoming the deity so you didn’t become the deity.” What are you going to say? 
The wisdom realizing emptiness is not the self. How then are you going to explain self-generation? In the practice of self-generation, how does the self become the deity?
Student 1: Self-generation as a deity is a mental activity. We do the self-generation using the visualizations and develop divine pride of the particular deity.  
Khen Rinpoche: You need to think about my question: In self-generation, the ‘self’ means you, isn’t it? You become the deity. 
What do you posit to be the self that’s generated as the deity?
We talked about the apprehension factor of the wisdom realizing emptiness appearing as the deity. This is clear. But when you talk about self-generation, what’s the ‘I’ that’s generated as the deity? You cannot posit the ordinary ‘I’ as the ordinary ‘I’ cannot arise as the deity.
So, you see, it’s not so straightforward. You’ve to think about it and discuss it. What are you going to posit to be the ‘I’ or self that’s generated as the deity?
Here, the practice of the sign deity refers to the meditation of the clear appearance of oneself as the deity and by identifying oneself as the deity, one cultivates divine pride. It’s called the sign deity not because this meditation is accompanied with the signs of dualistic appearance, i.e., the signs of true existence. Rather, the sign here refers to the appearance of the body of the deity.
You can refer to a specific practice, such as the Chenrezig’s Nyung Nay sadhana. It makes it easier to relate to these six deities that we’ve just discussed. The point is that whatever we’ve heard or read in the text, we should be able to connect them to our practice. 
We do the Nyung Nay practice in the centre. Those of you who engage in that should compare what you see in the sadhana and what you’ve heard in class. Then you can make the connection between the two.
Absorption with recitation
You generate yourself … 
…
… combining restraint with vitality exertion. (pp. 29—30) 
(Referring to the above quotation from the root text) “…making offerings and so forth,” the “so forth” here includes making praises to the deity.
THE FRONT GENERATION
When you generate the front generation, you also begin with the empty or ultimate deity. First, you meditate on the emptiness of the mandala that’s the basis of the completion of the front generation. When you generate the front generation, it’s not as if there’s something autonomous arising in front of you, appearing out of nowhere. Rather, the front generation is established with a part of the meditator’s mind, i.e., your own mind.
The point is that on the outset you meditate on the emptiness of the mandala. Let’s say you’re doing the practice of Chenrezig. From within the state of emptiness, you’ve already generated yourself as the deity. From your heart, you emanate the white syllable, Bhrum that becomes the basis of accomplishment of the inestimable (or celestial) mansion. This syllable Bhrum that becomes the inestimable mansion is essentially an expression of your own wisdom realizing emptiness. It’s your own mind ascertaining emptiness that takes on the aspect of the syllable Bhrum and the inestimable mansion. The point is that the inestimable mansion arises from one part of the meditator’s mind. 
Next, you generate the front generation commitment being. 
After that, you invite the wisdom beings and they absorb into the commitment being. 
Again, you invite the initiation (or empowering) deities. They confer initiation on the front generation and through the overflow of the nectar, Chenrezig’s crown is seal-impressed with the principal Amitabha.  
This is followed by the practices of making extensive offerings and praises to Chenrezig and so forth.
Here, we’re talking about the practice of generating the front generation. This involves meditating on the commitment being, inviting the wisdom beings and so forth. But in order to make offerings to the front generation, it’s not necessary to generate the commitment being. You can just invite the wisdom beings to abide in the mandala. After you’ve done that, you make offerings to them. 
In Action Tantra, we make offerings with the recitation of certain offering mantras. You also have to perform the appropriate hand gestures. When you make offerings, the offerings have to be very clean, pure and appealing. 
The practices of the lower tantras emphasize the practice of cleanliness. One has to rely on pure white foods, and one has to wash or bathe daily. 
RESTRAINT through VITALITY EXERTION
Vitality exertion
The meaning of vitality exertion … 
…
… without letting them disperse externally. (pp. 33—34) 
Vitality refers to the winds or energies that circulate through the doors of the senses and so on. 
Exertion, in one explanation, is being aware of the distractions when the mind is diverted to some other objects.
Another explanation of vitality exertion:
Vitality refers to the winds. 
Exertion refers to the movements through the sense doors and so forth. 
The idea of winds or energies is a very important concept in tantra. The wind is likened to a healthy person who is able to walk but is blind unfortunately.  The wind’s able to move but the wind itself does not have the capacity to illuminate objects, i.e., it doesn’t have the capacity to be aware of or to realize objects. 
The mind’s likened to somebody who’s crippled and cannot walk but nevertheless is able to see. So the mind’s like a person who’s able to see but is unable to walk. It has the capacity to illuminate objects, i.e., to perceive or realize objects.
The meaning of vitality exertion is most profound and clear in Highest Yoga Tantra. Generally, when we talk about vitality exertion or the winds and the mind, the mind is dependent on the winds.  Wherever the winds go, the mind goes with them. It makes a difference if one’s able to restrain the movement of the wind energies because where the winds are, that is where the mind will be. 
The meaning of “restraint through vitality exertion” is retaining the winds internally without letting them disperse. This will be covered later. Essentially, one does the restraint at the level of the navel. 
The root text says that one then engages in the practice of mantra recitation by “reciting mantras without deteriorating the four branches through combining restraint with vitality exertion.” (p. 30) 
THE FOUR BRANCHES OF RECITATION
The four branches are:
the self basis 
the other basis 
the mind basis 
the sound basis
Khen Rinpoche: I think you all have the handout. These are old notes from the last cycle of Basic Program. This is an example of the chart but I want you to make your own chart after listening to the teachings so that it works for you. You learn better that way but for now, at least, there’s a chart.  You can see the six deities in the chart with the four-branched repetition. 
The self basis is yourself generated as the deity. The self basis refers to the deity you’ve risen into. The self basis is the self-generation. 
The other basis is the front generation that has been generated together with the inestimable mansion.
The mind basis refers to your own mind in the aspect of a moon disc. You place the moon disc in in your heart as the self-generation and in the heart of the front generation. 
The sound basis is placing the mantra garland of the mantra that is to be recited on the moon disc in your heart as the self-generation and in the heart of the front generation. 
These are the four bases. You are supposed to concentrate on these without any distraction. As the root text say, you are supposed to engage in recitation "without deteriorating the four branches” of recitation. So first, you have to meditate well on these four branches. On that basis, you engage in the mantra repetition.
There are two ways of performing the repetition of the mantra in dependence on the four branches:
Repetition observing the form of the letters 
Repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front 
Repetition observing the form of the letters at one’s own heart 
Repetition observing the sound of the mantra. 
We’re now at the concentration with repetition. With regard to the kind of repetition, you repeat the mantra first, by focussing on the letters of the syllables of the mantra. Then you repeat the mantra by focussing on the sound of the mantra.
REPETITION OBSERVING THE FORM OF THE LETTERS
Repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front
There are three objects of observation:
the deity in front
the moon disc in the heart of the deity
the mantra garland in the heart of the deity
Whispered (or verbal repetition)
As for the manner of repetition while observing these three objects, there is the whispered, i.e., verbal repetition, and the mental repetition. 
When you are engaged in the verbal repetition of the mantra: 
You shouldn’t recite loudly.  
You shouldn’t recite too softly.
You shouldn’t recite too quickly. 
You shouldn’t recite too slowly. 
You shouldn’t omit or add syllables to the mantra.  
The repetition shouldn’t be interrupted by talking. 
You shouldn’t recite the mantra with a distracted mind. 
In other words, the repetition should be done with full attention, focussing on the objects of observation. In this case, there are three.
The purpose of this practice is to lead the individual ultimately towards gaining a stable concentration, i.e., calm abiding, special insight and the abandonment of the two obscurations. As such, if you were to recite the mantra loudly, in a noisy fashion or with a totally distracted mind, these are obstacles to achieving the primary goal of attaining calm abiding.
Even if we’re to set aside the goal of developing concentration, when you recite the mantra loudly, you cause a host of other problems, interferences and so forth. If you recite the mantra too loudly, even if you’re not meditating, people around you who’re meditating will be disturbed. So the mantra shouldn’t be recited too loudly. Loudly here means that people can hear what you’re reciting. 
Mantras shouldn’t be recited too softly either to the point where you cannot even hear what you’re reciting. You’ve to recite the mantra in such a way that others cannot figure out what you’re reciting. Yet you must be able to hear what you’re reciting. 
Khen Rinpoche: I noticed in the Vajrayogini retreat in Bali, some of the retreatants were very loud!
There are also instructions on instances where you cannot count the mantras you’ve accumulated. Let’s say, half way through a mala, suddenly, you were to yawn, sneeze, cough or break wind. Then whatever mantras you have recited cannot be counted. 
The point is that we’re trying to develop concentration here. Usually when the mind is distracted, such things happen. They distract you from your repetition. So you have to start again when you lose your focus on the objects of observation. The idea of starting again is to give you a chance to generate a renewed sense of determination to carry on, do better and not allow yourself to be distracted.
Mental repetition 
Here, the practice of restraint through the vitality exertion comes into play.
The mental repetition is done while holding the winds at the navel. 
There are winds in the upper and lower parts of the body.  
You bring the winds in the upper part of the body down to the navel.
Likewise, you bring the winds at the lower part of the body up to the navel. 
Once the winds are brought to the navel, you attempt to hold them at the navel. 
Within the state of holding the winds at the navel, you engage in the mental recitation.
Without some familiarization, you’ll have difficulty in holding the winds at the navel for a long time. By holding the winds there, if the winds can abide at the navel, the mind is also able to abide easily. The point is that you hold the winds at the navel for as long as you can. When you cannot continue anymore, you let the winds go. Once you release the winds, you then engage in the whispered repetition.
So that’s the repetition observing the form of the letters at the heart of the deity in front. There are two types of repetition:
whispered repetition
mental repetition
Q & A
Student 1: Could you please repeat the explanation on the mental repetition? How is the mantra involved in this? Are we doing something with our mind, looking at the mantra?
Khen Rinpoche: We are talking about the repetition while observing the forms of the letters at the heart of the deity in front. The objects of observation are:
the deity’s body 
the moon disc, the mind basis, at the heart of the deity 
the mantra garland in the heart of the deity
These are the three objects of observation. While focussing on these three without distraction, you are supposed to engage in repetition, be it the whispered repetition or the mental repetition. You are supposed to recite the mantra either verbally or mentally.
Student 2: Is there any difference in the terms, an initiation and an empowerment? 
Because in the root text, empowerment is used and in class, sometimes, initiation is used. I wonder if the two terms can be used interchangeably and whether they mean the same thing. 
Khen Rinpoche: In Tibetan, it is wang and it is translated as initiation or empowerment.
Student 2: When you talked about the empowerments related to Action Tantra, there was mention of the flower garland initiation. I don’t know whether that is part of the initiation, because it was said that there were only two main initiations in Action Tantra, the water initiation and the crown initiation.  I’m just wondering does the flower garland initiation only happen in Action Tantra?
Khen Rinpoche: No. Other tantras also have this initiation.
Student 2: The root text mentions the final empowerment of the ritual objects. Khen Rinpoche did not talk about this. I wondered what that may be. 
Khen Rinpoche: In some Action Tantra initiations such as the Chenrezig initiation, after the water and the crown initiations, at the end, you’ll find there’s a ritual of bestowing the seven possessions of a wheel-turning king, the precious wheel and jewel and so forth.
Sometimes, there’s also some kind of symbolic giving of the Action Tantra text to the disciple. There isn’t a vajra master initiation in Action Tantra. Since the disciple has received the initiation, what that symbolizes is like granting permission for the disciple to teach the path of Action Tantra in the future. 
Student 2: Khen Rinpoche had emphasized the importance of studying and knowing what is going on during an initiation. But only now are we studying the tantric teachings in detail after we have already taken many initiations. For instance, people who’re allowed to come to this class must already have had a Highest Yoga Tantra initiation. 
At least for Action Tantra, before you step into tantra, you can read some books like Introduction to Tantra or read up on the bodhisattva vows. But if you’re going to take tantric vows, you would have no idea what those vows are beforehand. Half the time, we don’t know what’s going on in the initiation, yet we must be initiated before we can take tantric teachings.
Khen Rinpoche: It’s one of the easiest thing to receive an initiation You understand what I am saying? To receive an initiation you don’t need to study anything. This is what I’m saying. 
For example, the person who’s giving you the initiation holds up the crown. When he makes the gesture of putting it on your head and says, “Now you imagine that the crown’s put on your head. In the future, you’ll achieve such and such and you’ll attain such and such.” Then you just think, “Yes, I’ve received the initiation” and feel very happy. That’s it. You’ve received the initiation! It’s as simple as that.
When you’ve the idea, “Yes, I’ve received this initiation” and feel good in that you’ve achieved something, then you’ve received the initiation.
Initiations work like that. That’s it. You don’t have to know what the five dhyani buddhas are and so forth. Simple as that. You don’t think it’s like that? It all works like that so far. The point is that at that time, you should really think that you’ve received the initiation and generate some happy feeling in the mind. Then you would have received the initiation and left an imprint in your mind. 
Then after that, you study. That’s it. If you want more details, you study. Of course when you study, you know more. You’ll meditate better. Again, you can take different types of initiations. 
So there are many different levels to an initiation. It’s not just one level. 
One of the highest forms of receiving an initiation is that just by receiving the initiation, then the realization of the path is born in the mind. This is the highest form of receiving an initiation. 
For example, if you’re to attend an Action Tantra initiation, when the crown is placed on your head, just like that, suddenly, you develop the yoga of non-dual profundity and clarity. Then you enter the tantric path. That’s really receiving an initiation!
So don’t worry. When you take an initiation, if you think you’ve received the initiation … There are different levels of having received an initiation.  But when the guru is talking and you’ve fallen sleep, then nothing goes inside. Then there’s no initiation! 
HOMEWORK
Questions to think about:
In order to enter the tantric path do you first have to enter the sutric path?
Does the person who enters the Highest Yoga Tantra path need the realization of emptiness or not? 
Khen Rinpoche: In the next class, when I ask, you must be able to say something supported with reasons.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.