Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L45FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:15.793012
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 45	 				                                  28 September 2017
Review—The dissolution process. Meditating on emptiness. Six-Session Guru Yoga practice. 
REVIEW—THE DISSOLUTION PROCESS
We have looked at the signs of dissolution in the recent classes. There are eight internal signs of dissolution. As for the external signs of dissolution, they occur in the first four stages:
The earth element dissolves into the water element. 
The water element dissolves into the fire element. 
The fire element dissolves into the wind element. 
The wind element dissolves into the consciousness.
These are the signs of dissolution that are said to happen at the time of death. I think it is important to know these signs of dissolution. 
When one is doing one’s daily recitations, in the appropriate sections, it is good to remember these signs of dissolution. At least, one should bring them to mind for a couple of minutes. If one were to do that, it will benefit the mind. For example, when you are doing your daily recitation of the Vajrabhairava self-generation rite, at the time of taking death as the path of the dharmakaya, your visualization should be as follows:
It starts with the dissolution of the environment and its inhabitants into light. This in turn dissolves into oneself as Vajrabhairava. 
Oneself as Vajrabhairava dissolves into light and absorbs into the syllable Hum at the heart. 
The syllable Hum gradually dissolves upwards into the top of the horizontal line called the head of the Ha, and then into the crescent, the drop and the nada.
The nada becomes smaller and smaller, finally becoming non-observable.
Everything dissolves into emptiness.
There are both internal and external signs of dissolution. You should be able to correlate these signs of dissolution with the relevant stages of dissolution. At each stage of dissolution, imagine strongly that you are experiencing those signs as if they are the actual signs although here, this practice is done at the level of imagination.
As the stages of dissolution proceed, imagine the mind becoming increasingly subtle as appearances withdraw, culminating in the mind of appearance, increase and so forth. 
Finally, imagine that the mind of clear light manifests. By then all appearances have dissolved. What is left is just the appearance of vacuity. 
MEDITATING ON EMPTINESS
At the time when you imagine the clear light is manifest, it is important to meditate on emptiness. With regard to meditating on emptiness, although in the long self-generation rite of Vajrabhairava, there are words to describe the meditation, it is not absolutely necessary that you have to meditate by relying on those words. Essentially, you can use any verses dealing with emptiness that you find beneficial. There are so many verses for you to choose from. You can choose whatever you find is beneficial. The idea is to meditate on and arrive at an understanding of emptiness. 
For example, we can take the line from the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, “Form is empty. Emptiness is form.” Instead of using form as the subject, you can use the ‘I’, the self; “The ‘I’ is empty. Emptiness is the ‘I’.” 
When you are at the stage where all appearances have already been withdrawn, nothing else appears except vacuity. At that level of imagination, think that is the mind of clear light, i.e., the extremely subtle wind-mind that is the basis of designation of the ‘I’. When all appearances have withdrawn, other than this extremely subtle wind-mind, there is nothing else you can point to and posit as the basis of designation of the ‘I’. The ‘I’ that is designated in dependence upon that basis of designation will also be subtle. 
Although this is at the level of imagination, at that time when all appearances have withdrawn and we think that the clear light is manifest, there is an ‘I’ that takes that clear light as an object. In terms of what is appearing, nothing else appears except for that vacuity. There is an ‘I’ that takes that extremely subtle mind—to which vacuity appears—as an object. You have to investigate the ultimate nature of that ‘I’. Even that ‘I’ does not exist inherently. 
There is a verse from Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland that is very effective and useful. 
The person is not earth, not water, 
Not fire, not wind, not space,
Not consciousness, and not all of them.
What person is there other than these?
The ‘I’, the person, is none of these elements individually nor is it all six of them together. Yet apart from these elements, you will not be able to point to an ‘I’. What is the ‘I’? It is a bit easier if you look for the ‘I in such a way. Obviously, the person is not the element of earth, fire, water or wind. Nor is it the consciousness or all of these six. But you will not be able to find an ‘I’ apart from these six either. 
How does the ‘I’ exist?
This is just the first step to discovering the ‘I’ does not exist. You cannot find the ‘I’, yet the ‘I’ exists. How does it exist? It does not exist from its own side. It exists as being dependently designated. It is easy to see that the ‘I’ is not the body, neither the elements, but I think it is difficult to see how the ‘I’ is not the consciousness. That’s difficult. This is why with the exception of the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS), most of the other schools assert that the ‘I’ can be found. 
When you look for their illustrations of the ‘I’, they will point to some aspect of the mind or mental consciousness. However, for the CMWS, it is clear and not difficult for them to explain how the ‘I’ is not the mental consciousness. 
We start with the coarse consciousnesses. It is clear the ‘I’ is not the sense consciousnesses. It is not the mental consciousness as well. Let us take the sleeping state as an example. At the time of sleep, none of the consciousnesses are manifest and in operation. When they are not in operation, if the ‘I’ is the mental consciousness, it follows then the ‘I’ does not exist. But that cannot be. Who is sleeping? “I am sleeping.” So there is an ‘I’ who is sleeping. So, it is clear that the ‘I’ is not the coarser levels of consciousnesses.
Is the ‘I’ then the subtle level of consciousness or not? If it is, how do we account for people saying, “This is my mind.” or “This is the mind of appearance in my continuum. This is the mind of increase in my continuum. This is the mind of near-attainment in my continuum. This is my clear light.” If you say, “This is mine,” obviously, the ‘I’ is not that which is “mine.” 
If you talk about the subtlest levels of mind, if the ‘I’ is the extremely subtle mind, i.e.  the mind of death, then why do you say, “This is my clear light of death. This is my mind of death.” The fact there is the mind of clear light belonging to this ‘I’, this shows that the ‘I’ is not the clear light. The ‘I’ cannot be that which is yours. This shows clearly that if you were to look for the ‘I’, it cannot be found. 
It is clear that even the extremely subtle mind is not the ‘I’, yet the ‘I’ exists. It exists as being dependently designated in relation to this extremely subtle mind, which in this context, is the basis of designation. Other than that, it does not exist from its own side. You can identify this ‘I’ that is designated in dependence upon this extremely subtle mind as the resultant dharmakaya.
The very essence of taking death as the path for the dharmakaya in the practice of the generation stage is to imagine that through the stages of dissolution, the extremely subtle mind, the mind of clear light, manifests. Then place your mind on emptiness, i.e., reflect and meditate on emptiness. This is the essence. The verses I mentioned are just examples. If you find verses that work for you, then you meditate on them. 
Student 1: The ‘I’ takes the most subtle mind as its object, I understand that ‘I’ is a non-associated compositional factor, which is not a consciousness. How is something that is not a consciousness able to take something as its object? 
Khen Rinpoche: Just because it’s an object, it does not mean that it must necessarily be possessed by the consciousness. For example, does sound possess an object or not? 
For example, the word ‘pillar’ refers to something. That very thing that is referred to is the object that is possessed by sound. 
Isn’t it OK to say the person realizes an object? The reason we say that the person realizes an object is because the mind possessed by the person realizes the object. For that reason, we say that the person realizes the object. There is nothing wrong with saying that. 
Student 1: Just now you said the ‘I’ that exists realizes the object. The explanation is because the ‘I’ arise in dependence on the mind. So, actually it is the mind that realizes its object. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because the mind realizes an object, therefore, we say that the ‘I’ realizes the object. There is no other reason for saying that the ‘I’ realizes an object, right?
Student 1: Therefore, the most subtle mind realizes itself.
Khen Rinpoche: So what is the problem? If you think about it, when you look for the ‘I’, it’s a very interesting exercise. The legs are moving and because of that activity, we say, “I am walking.” There is no other reason. 
The body is lying down and the mind is asleep. Then we say, “I am sleeping.” There is no other reason, right? Why do we say, “I am old”? Because the aggregates are old. Why do you say, “I am young”? Because the aggregates are relatively young. There is no other reason. So other than for that reason, if you look for that ‘I’, it cannot be found. 
I am saying that I am old. I am not talking about you. If I were to say that you are old, then you may not be so happy. I am old. 
Other than that, what other reason is there? Naturally, people may wonder, “Therefore, I am the body.” Is the body the ‘I’?  That has to be analyzed. Is the ‘I’ the body and/or mind?
The body is the ‘I’?  Why not? You need to think about this. 
Meditating on, studying and understanding emptiness is a very important exercise. It is one thing to say the words but we have to see for ourselves why the ‘I’ is not the body and why the ‘I’ is not the mind as well. On the basis of saying that, the conclusion is to lead the mind to the understanding that it is nothing other than that which is merely designated in dependence upon the body and mind, the bases of designation. It does not exist other than that. That is how it exists. If you look for it, you cannot find it. You have to move your mind in the direction of realizing that the ‘I’ is that which is merely designated in dependence on that.
This doesn’t mean that it feels like there is nothing there.  How can it be that there is just nothingness? Obviously, the ‘I’ exists. That is in our experience and is common sense. You cannot deny it. In our experience, the ‘I’ exists. 
So now, the question is, “How does it exist?” When you look for it, you cannot find it. It is not the body. It is not the mind. Nor is it the both of them. Yet you cannot deny its existence. There is no alternative left whatsoever other than for it to exist in mere name, as something that is dependently designated upon the body and mind. There is no other alternative. This is the conclusion we have to arrive at one day. 
This is something we really have to think about every day, “How does the ‘I’ exist?” Ultimately, it exists in mere name, as something that’s merely designated in dependence upon the basis of designation. 
Weakening the afflictions
The meditation on emptiness is really important. If we do this meditation, it is really helpful. Definitely, it helps in stopping the afflictions from arising quickly. Even when they do arise, they will not be as strong as they could be. That is the effect if we work on thinking hard and well about emptiness. 
Of the many illustrations posited as antidotes in the practice of compassion, the meditation on emptiness is said to be the most powerful. There’s a reason why that is the case. If a person has some familiarity built up over time thinking about and meditating on emptiness, for that person, I think his afflictions will not arise as strongly and maybe, not as frequently. As such, the negativities accumulated by that person will also not be as strong. 
In the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge, when it talks about the causes of afflictions, it is explained that, in the first place, afflictions arise due to the imprints of those afflictions.  Then one meets with the object that acts as a condition for the affliction to arise. But this is not necessarily so. There is also incorrect mental attention, an unrealistic projection when viewing the object in question. When these conditions come together, then afflictions such as anger, attachment, pride, jealousy, negative competitiveness and so on will manifest. 
Due to the power of karma, when we meet an object, it means there is a consciousness that meets with the object. Whatever appears to the consciousness always appears as truly existent regardless of whether the object is seen as pleasant or unpleasant. That leads to anger or attachment. Due to the power of karma, certain objects will appear beautiful to us while they may appear ugly or unpleasant to others. 
If you look at the evolution of that experience—the perceiving mind meeting with the object in question—whatever object appears to our mind necessarily appears as truly existent whether it be truly pleasant or truly unpleasant. That is a given.  It comes automatically. There are some objects, for whatever reason, they just appear to us to be bad or unpleasant. Just meeting with that object brings about unhappiness. We just don’t like it. Not only is there such an (unpleasant) appearance, it is also appears to be truly existent. 
Due to our karma, when we meet with the object, we perceive it to be good or bad.  That appearance is not only just pleasant or unpleasant. It is a truly existent pleasant or truly existent unpleasant object. In the initial moments of that cognition, be it a liking for or dislike of that object, the strength of that response is not as strong as it can be if we were to persist in that experience by letting the mind carry on. There is something there but the initial experience is not as strong as it will be when incorrect mental attention comes into play. That is what we call exaggeration or projection. We think this and that, reinforcing our belief that the object is really attractive. It appears to be so appealing. As we believe and project this to be so more and more, then our attachment towards the object increases, becoming stronger and stronger. 
It is the same thing with anger. Due to karma, when the mind meets the object, it appears as unpleasant. Right from the very beginning, you just don’t like it. Not only does it appear as unpleasant, it appears to be truly unpleasant from its own side. Then the mind really believes in and assents to this appearance. Then exaggeration follows. We call this incorrect mental attention. It is as if it is giving reasons to support one’s anger. This makes one’s anger stronger. 
Recognising our mental processes
What I am saying is something that I don’t think you have not heard of or do not know. The point is that you have to think about this every day and look at your own experience and think about how your mind works. You see how it is like this in your experience. This incorrect mental attention that we call projection or exaggeration seems to be finding reasons to support our attachment and anger. We find many reasons and justifications to validate our attachment and anger. Our anger is justified! Our attachment is definitely correct! We reach a point where our attachment and anger is so definite and stable that nothing can change our mind because we have thought about it. This is how it works. It becomes very difficult to change our mind, our conclusion and belief. 
Isn’t this the reality if we were to look at the evolution of our mental processes—how one leads to the other? Our mental projection exaggerates. We find all the reasons and justifications. It is like checking on oneself, saying that’s the thing and then proving to oneself that’s the thing! In the end, one concludes the object is pleasant or unpleasant. Essentially, we are making up and ending with our own conclusion. 
If we look at the evolution of this process, it’s clear that it’s habituation. Once we reach our conclusion, we never think that we are the ones who made up the conclusion.  We think, “Actually, it’s coming from the side of the object. This object is really good. That is not decided by me. It has nothing to do with my mind.” The pleasant object is completely coming from the side of the object. 
It is exactly the same thing with regard to the enemy or the unpleasant object. Actually, we are the one who created the enemy in the first place but we forget that we are the one who reached that conclusion. We think it is coming completely from the side of the object and we believe this is how it appears. We made up the concept but once we made that decision, we forget that we are the one who made the decision in the first place! We believe it’s completely coming from the side of the object. When the mind is thinking in that specific way in relation to the object, as long as it thinks that way, then there is no room to consider an alternative view with regard to the object. 
Let’s say we are thinking about a bad person. When the mind is in that mode, the mind thinks that the person is one hundred percent bad from her own side. When that mind is manifesting, there is no opportunity whatsoever to think anything else of the person. Even if there is something good about that person, the mind will not entertain such thoughts. This means when such a mind is manifesting, for that time, we are not able to discriminate. We lose the ability to differentiate between what is good and bad and what is right and wrong. 
That is how we lead our lives—by habituation and in automatic mode. Whether we are talking about what we consider unpleasant or pleasant, our loved ones, friends on our side, people who are not on our side, enemies who don’t like us and so forth, our view is very firm in our mind. We have already decided long ago. Then every day we reinforce it by finding reasons, “Yes, it is like that!” Day after day, it is like that. 
This is the reality for all of us. Everybody is the same. We never ever think that the problem could lie with us. In fact, we think, “I am good. I am right,” i.e., basically, we claim all the positives. We have already made up our minds and we live by our decision. We stick to this principle, thinking we are right. This is our meditation, i.e., familiarizing ourselves with this. Every day is normal and passes automatically. Not only have we meditated in this way, we brought our meditation to culmination, realizing that it’s true. We accept that this is our life. This is how things should be. Therefore, we don’t think anything needs to be done or changed. This is how it should be. We are all like that. We don’t see the need to change at all. This is why we don’t put in the effort to change because in the first place, we don’t see the need. Look at our own experience. We find it so difficult to change because of habit. It is very difficult. 
In the first place, without even talking about this life, we have all these imprints and habituation cultivated since beginningless lifetimes. We have to contend with them in the first place. But it’s not just that. When we come into this life, we don’t do anything about these imprints. In fact, we reinforce them. 
In the first place, it is already almost near impossible (to overcome those imprints), but we make it even more impossible for ourselves by carrying on as we do in this life. We are always reinforcing the imprints and not doing anything to destroy them. Obviously, that will make things even more difficult because they are part of us and we think that it’s just human nature (to behave the way we do). So, what is the big deal? Why should it be so surprising? We don’t see that it is a big deal to have so much desire, attachment or anger because to us, that’s just human nature and what it means to be human. So, what’s the problem? Why do we need to make such a big fuss over them and recognize that they are faults we need to change? This is human nature. We also use this as another reason to reinforce those bad habits, making them even stronger. “This is how it should be! I am just an ordinary being. This is how I should behave. What do you expect?” This is what we say as we justify our bad habits. 
First, I think it’s so difficult for us to accept we have issues we need to address. We don’t even see the problem at an intellectual level, seeing that it is a problem and it is suffering. If we don’t accept that there’s a problem, how do we change in the first place? 
When we meet with the object, in those initial moments, whether it is an unpleasant object or a pleasant object, relatively speaking, any destructive emotion or affliction that may arise is still not so strong. But if we let that affliction continue unabated, it will become stronger. 
But if we are habituated to thinking about or meditating on emptiness, by thinking about the meaning of emptiness over and over again, in  those moments when an affliction is arising, there is the appearance of an object, be it good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant. It’s not saying that there is nothing pleasant about a pleasant object. But there is also an aspect of that pleasant object appearing as truly existent from its own side. That is the aspect that’s not true. We are not negating the pleasant aspect of the object but we are targeting at its false aspect—the appearance of its pleasantness as being truly existent. 
Applying mindfulness & vigilance
So, we apply mindfulness, reminding ourselves that someone who has meditated on and has some understanding of emptiness will be able to recognize that (the pleasant object) does not exist in the way it appears to us. There is no true existence. This is helpful. At least, it will stop the mind from continuously engaging with the object in an unrealistic way with many unrealistic projections. And at the very least, it stops the negative projections from increasing. 
So, mindfulness and vigilance become very important. To be mindful and vigilant mean to be able to recognize as soon as an affliction arises, so that we are able to avert it at the beginning, i.e., we are able to nip it in the bud. When an affliction arises, at least in the back of our mind, we know something is coming up. Only if we are able to recognize this, will we be able to do something. If we apply an antidote promptly, when the affliction has just arisen and is still relatively weak, then there is some chance of stopping it from getting stronger. In fact, we may even weaken it if we catch its arising as soon as possible. 
One problem is not catching the affliction in time. This is the difficult thing as we are not even aware that the affliction has arisen. That’s the problem. We must catch it as soon as it arises. The sooner we catch it, the sooner we will be able to apply the antidote. The sooner we are able to apply the antidote, the easier it will be to deal with it, especially when it is still at the brewing stage. If we cultivate the habit of being aware when our afflictions arise, developing this habit over time, once we become habituated with doing this, then there is some real hope for our life to change. We will find ourselves transforming for the better. By acquiring this habit of being mindful and vigilant, I think we will be able to start to see some positive changes in the actions of our body, speech and mind.  
It is clear from our experience that at times, we know something bad is going on but because it has gone to a stage where it has become uncontrollable, the point of no return,  there is nothing we can do about it. As the exaggeration, what we call incorrect mental attention, becomes stronger and stronger, the affliction leading to either attachment or anger becomes very strong. This is when karma is accumulated. With this strong state of mind, whatever we do with our body and speech will create and accumulate karma. This shows that strong incorrect mental attention can manifest physically and verbally in the form of harsh speech or violent physical behaviour. Then the karma accumulated will also be very strong.
We start from seeing the mental evolution—how it builds up. There is the appearance of true existence that is the basis for incorrect mental attention. That leads to strong emotion. This leads to strong negative action and we accumulate karma. It’s not that we don’t know any of this. Although this is all mentioned in the lam-rim, this is our life story. Maybe all of us lead our lives like that. It’s just natural, just habituation and it just goes on and on. When we are angry or do something nasty, we just think, “That’s me. Take it or leave it. This is my character. This is my nature. What do you want me to do?” Then we accumulate negativity, harming ourselves and then harming others. When we reach such a point, we can say that there’s no hope. There’s no room for change. It is difficult to change because it has become like second nature. Our habituation is so deeply ingrained as part of our nature. Then it is very difficult to change. We cannot be changed. 
But in the first place, why are people even at that stage? It is because of not having applied the antidote in the first place. That is why they are so habituated. That is why the afflictions are very strong. It is said that there is almost no way of changing. You can try many things but it is quite difficult. What do you expect? When the mind is already like that, even if one were to study the Dharma in that state for 20, 30 years, nothing will change. How could there be change when change is no longer possible? 
So, it’s up to the individual. We have to analyze and think about things for ourselves. Whether we have been studying and practising the Dharma for 10, 20 or even 30 years, everyone is different. Whatever the specified time, we have to see over that time whether we are getting better. Only we know ourselves. We should only check ourselves. 
Let’s check, “Am I a better person today than I was 10 or 20 years ago? Is this a better version of me compared to the person I was before meeting the Dharma?” Did we become worse or did we become better? We have to check ourselves and see internally how our mind evolves, how it leads to exaggeration and certain afflictions. We have to look inward and discover for ourselves whether this is true or not.  If we discover something that needs to be fixed, then we try to fix it by applying the antidote. 
It’s not that all of us here don’t know the Dharma. We have heard so many teachings. We have heard the teachings on the lam-rim thousands of times. This is just my exaggeration but the point is that you have heard those teachings so many times. 
We just need to check ourselves and do some self-discovery. Then based on what you have discovered, ask yourself, “Based on what I have been doing with my life so far, where will I go after I die? Am I really going to get a good rebirth or a bad rebirth?” 
But before you can even ask that question—“Based on what I have been doing so far, am I going to get a good rebirth or bad rebirth?”—in the first place, do you really believe there is rebirth or not? I am not talking about casually saying, “Yes, I believe (there is rebirth).” Such belief that is not founded on either reasoning or ascertainment is not going to cut it. 
If you what to see some real change (in yourself), it is important to gain an understanding of reincarnation, not just, “Yes. (Reincarnation) exists because I feel it is like this and that.” There have to be a real ascertainment based on correct reasoning. It shouldn’t be just mere belief. It is said that we should develop this ascertainment with certainty and conviction.
After generating the conviction that comes from correct reasoning—that we have to take rebirth—there are only two counters for rebirth: the counter that leads to the happy realms and the counter that leads to the lower realms.
Are we likely to get a good rebirth or a bad rebirth? If we were to go to the lower realms,
can we tolerate it? This question as to whether we can tolerate the lower realms or not doesn’t really work unless there is the deeply seated conviction that there are future lives and there is reincarnation. 
When we talk about believing in rebirth, we are not talking about rebirth in general. At the end of the day, we are talking about ourselves. Do we have this feeling, “When I die, I will be going somewhere that is going to be my next life?” We are talking about this belief. If we are born in one of the inopportune states such as the hell realms, if we really think about it, it is very difficult to see how it is possible to get out once we are in such a state. It is very difficult to fit the mind. We need to have some conviction about this. This is not just at an intellectual level. If we really get some feeling for how there is a next life, since we know ourselves well, then based on (what we have been doing with) our life, our character, our karma and putting all of them together, we will understand we are heading for the lower realms.
For example, if we were to be reborn in the hell realms—and we are talking about this not just at an intellectual level—then real fear arises. If fear does arise, then maybe there is hope we can change for the better as that fear will really motivate us to change. But generally speaking, this is difficult for any one of us. For us, there is always the danger that our Dharma studies are just for knowledge. It is something to be learnt. Therefore, we really need to pay some attention to this—that the Dharma is something to be practised.  
Back to the understanding of the meditation on emptiness. This is said to be the supreme antidote to afflictions and our negative karma if we understand and meditate on emptiness every time. In the context of what we have been talking about so far, at the level of imagination, we do the death dissolution, culminating in thinking that the clear light manifests. The point is that at the time of meditating on emptiness, we analyze and then get rid of the (negative) habit. Gradually, we build up this (positive) habit. Then over time, we will be able to make our afflictions weaker and stop them from becoming stronger. We end up by accumulating less karma. 
At the same time, the meditation on emptiness is said to be the supreme antidote to purifying the negativities. Particularly for those who have received the tantric vows, if a day passes without at least meditating, reflecting or bringing to mind the meaning of selflessness, either coarse or subtle, then a root downfall may happen. 
SIX-SESSION GURU YOGA
I am asked this one question from many people, “Can I just do all my six sessions (of the
Six-Session Guru Yoga) in one shot in the morning?” 
Personally, I think this is OK—I am not exactly sure—provided you are able to live your life adhering to the meaning of the Six-Session Guru Yoga throughout the entire day. 
Observing or guarding the tantric vows involves guarding against and having to do many things. The purpose of the Six- session Guru Yoga is to remind us and for us to recollect what that training is. That is why (it is recited) three times during the day and three times at night. The idea is to remind ourselves during the day and then during the night. So, if you are able to keep up such mindfulness and maintain the practice, then why not? If you are living in the meaning of Six-Session Guru Yoga and it is always in your mind, then there is no need even to recite the prayer. 
Actually, the idea of the Six-Session Guru Yoga is that you are supposed to be reminded every now and then. If you divide the 24 hours of the day into six parts, actually, every four hours, you are supposed to engage in the practice. This means you have to give up sleep! Even if you are able to do that every four hours, at our level, even that is insufficient and is a too little for us! 
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 