Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L46FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.897692
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe  Chonyi  on  Grounds  and
Paths of Secret Mantra

Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric  Tradition:  The  Principles  of  the
Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret  Classes  of  Tantra  by  Ngawang
Palden.

The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is  included  in
the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap  Rinpoche,
translated  and  edited  by  Ian   Coghlan   and   Voula   Zarpani,   Wisdom
Publications, 2011.

The main headings from the book are quoted, indented  and  in  italics,  for
overall structure.

Lesson                                                                    46
    3 October 2017


The dissolution process. The intermediate state.


THE DISSOLUTION PROCESS

The basis dharmakaya is the mind of death. The coarser levels of  winds  and
consciousnesses have  to  dissolve  before  the  mind  of  clear  light  can
manifest. During the stages of  dissolution,  it’s  said  the  person  who’s
dying  experiences  different  signs  internally.  There  are  eight   signs
altogether. We have talked about them over the last few lessons.

What are the benefits of knowing the signs of dissolution? We can  put  what
we have learnt into  practice  when  we  recite  the  self-generation  rite,
especially  during  the  practice  of  taking  death  as  the  path  of  the
dharmakaya. During this practice, we imagine that  through  the  dissolution
of the various elements, we experience the signs of the dissolution.

What is the benefit of doing the practice of taking death  as  the  path  of
the dharmakaya?
 • This practice is a cause for actualizing the path of clear light.
 • It also  places  the  potential  or  imprint  to  achieve  the  resultant
   dharmakaya in the future.

After learning the stages and signs of dissolution and so forth, we can  put
this information to use at the time of reciting the self-generation rite  or
the practice of the Six-Session Guru Yoga. At least, this  will  fulfil  the
purpose of receiving the wang when we enter tantra.

The dissolution starts with the earth  element  dissolving  into  the  water
element, the
water element dissolving into the fire element, the fire element  dissolving
into the wind  element  and  then  the  wind  element  dissolving  into  the
consciousness.

When the wind element dissolves into the consciousness, have all  the  winds
(or energies) of the body completely dissolved?  No!

Have the consciousnesses completely dissolved? No!

At the time of the wind element dissolving into the  consciousness,  the  80
indicative conceptions will dissolve. Even after they have  dissolved,  this
doesn’t mean that there aren’t any other levels of consciousness  that  have
not dissolved. When the wind element dissolves into the  consciousness,  the
coarser energies or the winds all dissolve. Since they  are  the  mounts  of
the coarser levels of consciousness, the  coarser  levels  of  consciousness
also dissolve at that time.

Only after the coarser levels of the winds (energies)  have  dissolved  will
the subtler levels of  the  winds  manifest.  Likewise,  after  the  coarser
levels of consciousness have dissolved, the subtler levels of  consciousness
will manifest, starting with the mind of appearance, proceeding  on  to  the
minds of increase and near-attainment and  then  culminating  in  the  clear
light.

If we divide the mind into the coarse and subtle, the  coarse  includes  all
the minds up  to  the  80  indicative  conceptions.  The  subtle  levels  of
consciousness will consist of the mind of appearance, the mind of  increase,
the mind of near-attainment and the clear light.

How do the subtle minds gradually  manifest?   Starting  with  the  mind  of
appearance, the mind of increase,  the  mind  of  near-attainment  and  then
culminating in the mind of clear light, the latter mind is subtler than  the
former. Likewise, the winds also become increasingly subtle.

It is said that as the mind becomes increasingly  subtle,  it  also  becomes
clearer.  Starting from the mind of appearance and going all the way to  the
clear light, dualistic appearances increasingly subside to  the  point  when
the mind of clear light manifests,  nothing  else  appears  except  vacuity.
There is no conventional appearance  whatsoever.  There  is  nothing  except
this appearance of vacuity. It is said that this experience  is  similar  to
the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. This is why the mind  of  death  is
called the clear light of death.  Is it an actual clear  light?  No,  it  is
not.  Nevertheless, it’s given the name, clear light.

What appears to the clear  light  of  death?   Vacuity!  The  appearance  of
vacuity is accompanied by the appearance of true existence,  i.e.,  it  does
not appear as not truly existent. As  such,  dualistic  appearance  has  not
completely subsided.

The mind of  death  is  called  the  clear  light  mind  mainly  because  of
subsidence of coarse  dualistic  appearance.  Nothing  else  appears  except
vacuity.  Because of that, it
is given the name,  clear light.

For the person who has meditated on emptiness while alive, then through  the
force of familiarity, if at the time of death that  individual  is  able  to
ascertain emptiness with the extremely subtle  mind  of  clear  light,  that
mind then becomes the actual mind of clear light.  Of the two—the  objective
clear light and the subjective clear light—you can say this (mind  of  clear
light) is the real subjective clear  light.  The  object  realized  by  this
extremely subtle mind is emptiness. As such,  it  is  called  the  objective
clear light.

When the  extremely  subtle  mind  of  clear  light  ascertaining  emptiness
transforms into the entity of  direct  perception,  that  mind  becomes  the
meaning clear light, the antidote to the afflictive obscurations.

It is said that if the clear light of death can  be  transformed  into  that
realization of emptiness, from then on, there is no more rebirth  in  cyclic
existence. However, if that doesn’t happen, one will have  to  take  rebirth
again. This is how it is explained for somebody who enters tantra  from  the
onset.

THE INTERMEDIATE STATE

After the clear light of death, the intermediate state is  established.  The
intermediate state is also the given the name, the basis enjoyment body.

There are two types of illusory bodies:
 • the impure illusory body
 • the pure illusory body
These two illusory bodies are the path time enjoyment bodies.

The actual enjoyment body is the resultant enjoyment body  that  is  adorned
with the major signs and exemplifications.

There is no certainty with regard  to  the  length  of  time  an  individual
remains in the clear light of death. It could be three  days.  It  could  be
more or it could be less. It could be a week or it could be a month.  It  is
a custom in many Buddhist communities that  upon  dying,  the  body  is  not
cremated right away. Usually that’s done after three days or  more.   During
this time, prayers will be recited for the deceased. The point is  that  you
never know whether the consciousness is still residing in the body  or  not.
If that is the case and the  body  of  the  person  is  cremated  while  the
consciousness is still in the body, it will cause problems for that  person.
Although it is not certain ordinary folks will stay for three days, this  is
what the text says. Ordinary folks can stay for up to three days.

The extremely wind-mind abides inside the indestructible drop at the  heart.
It doesn’t matter how many days the extremely subtle  mind  resides  in  the
body. Comes the time when the extremely subtle wind  in  the  indestructible
drop is stirred, this is the condition for the indestructible  drop—made  up
of the subtle white and red bodhicittas—to split. That’s the time  when  the
extremely subtle mind leaves the body. This is death and when we  can  truly
say that the person has died.

Simultaneous with  the  exiting  of  the  extremely  subtle  mind  from  the
indestructible
drop is the establishment of the intermediate state.

What  are  the  signs  when  the  consciousness   exits   the   body?    The
indestructible drop at the heart  has  split  so  the  red  portion  of  the
drop—the essence of red bodhicitta—moves up and exits through the nose.  The
white portion—the essence of white bodhicitta—exits  from  the  tip  of  the
secret place.

It is said that this happens for most people as these  are  signs  that  the
consciousness has left the body.  However,  there  are  exceptions.  If  the
person has been sick for a long time or the vital essence in  the  body  has
deteriorated, leaving the body emaciated and weak, then one may not be  able
to observe such signs. Otherwise, it is said that this will happen  to  most
people—the red bodhicitta exiting from the nose  and  the  white  bodhicitta
from the secret place.

There have been many accounts of individuals who are able to remain in  this
state for three weeks. During that time, the body remains fresh and  doesn’t
decompose. It’s really amazing and strange. But comes the time when the  red
and white bodhicittas exit from the body, right away,  the  body  decomposes
and starts to smell.

One also hears of accounts  of  how,  even  after  the  person  has  stopped
breathing for quite a long while, somehow, there are  signs  that  parts  of
the body have moved. For example, the  position  of  the  hand  moves  (even
after the person) has stopped breathing for a long time.

Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure whether he moved by himself  or  was  moved  by
others.

Even to this day, such phenomena still happen to some  individuals.  For  as
long as the consciousness is still in the body, the person is dying  but  is
not dead. During that time, the body  will  still  remain  fresh,  i.e.,  it
doesn’t decompose.

 • The extremely subtle wind that is the mount of the extremely subtle  mind
   of the clear light of death is the substantial cause for the intermediate
   state body.
 • The extremely subtle  mind  acts  as  a  cooperative  condition  for  the
   establishment of the intermediate state body.

The intermediate state being
There are a few characteristics that intermediate state beings possess.  One
is its aspect. It is said  that  the  intermediate  state  being  will  look
similar in aspect to the type of being he is going to be born as.  The  type
of being here means the  general  category  of  beings  such  as  humans  or
animals.

The body of the intermediate state being is not made up of flesh and  blood.
It is an energy body and is established separately  from  its  old  physical
body. Once the intermediate state  is  established,  the  karmic  connection
with  the  previous  physical  body  is  completely  severed.  There  is  no
connection whatsoever any more.

The intermediate state is established when one arises from the  clear  light
of death.
The very first consciousness of the intermediate state being is the mind  of
near- attainment. So when one arises from the  clear  light  of  death,  the
mind of black near- attainment comes into being and  simultaneous  with  the
arising of that mind, the intermediate state comes into being.

The eight signs of dissolution experienced at the  time  of  death  are  the
eight signs of evolution.  Then  when  the  intermediate  state  comes  into
existence, the eight signs of the reverse process take place.

Of the different types of  birth,  the  establishment  of  the  intermediate
state is a miraculous birth in that the intermediate  state  being  is  born
with  complete  sense  powers  and  full  faculties.  For  example,  if  the
intermediate state being is going to be born as a human, he has  the  aspect
of a human possessing limbs and so forth.

Then the mind of that intermediate state being becomes increasingly  coarse.
The mind of near-attainment is followed by the mind  of  red  increase.  The
mind becomes coarser yet. From the mind of red increase comes  the  mind  of
white appearance. From that, the 80 indicative  conceptions  arise  followed
by the signs associated with the dissolution of the elements.

Although we don’t talk about the intermediate state being having the  coarse
elements such as the earth element, water element and so  forth,  the  signs
associated with their   dissolution will still arise. From the  mind  of  80
indicative conceptions arise the visions of the flame of  the  butter  lamp,
fire flies, smoke and finally ending with the mirage, in the reverse order.

It is said that this intermediate state being is very  busy  looking  for  a
place to take rebirth. The intermediate state beings can only  enjoy  smells
as they don’t eat or drink.  Therefore, they are also referred to as  smell-
eaters. They also experience different kinds of appearances.

How do we know that the  intermediate  state  exists?  In  the  texts,  they
usually use the dream experience as an example. It  is  said  when  we  fall
asleep, a similitude of the eight signs occur. They  do  arise  though  they
happen quickly and are very brief in duration.

The dream body
It’s said there’s a  clear  light  of  sleep.  The  dream  body  comes  into
existence after arising from the clear  light  of  sleep.  This  dream  body
moves around and does things. At the time of  waking  up  from  sleep,  this
dream body dissolves back into the extremely subtle wind-mind. I don’t  know
whether the dream body happens to everybody  or  not  but  you  do  hear  of
people travelling and doing things with their dream bodies during  sleep.  I
don’t know whether we can see a dream body or not.

Khen Rinpoche: I have heard many stories like that. During sleep, the  dream
body goes to Lhasa, Tibet and comes back. There are many stories like  that.
But I don’t know whether everybody has this dream body. When you dream,  you
can go to many places but is your dream body really going  there  or  is  it
only just a dream? Does anybody have
a better idea as to whether we have a dream body or not?

The dream body is being used as an example to help us get  an  idea  of  the
intermediate state. In the first place, what do we posit to be  or  identify
as a dream body?

Khen Rinpoche: I’m not sure. Sometimes, interesting things happen  when  you
dream. Sometimes, I have a dream I cannot  fly  like  this.  (Khen  Rinpoche
gestures flying backwards). But I can fly very high up. When I wake  up,  my
heels are so painful. I never had that before. I don’t know whether this  is
related to my dream body or not. I really have no idea.

When you dream, does your dream body really go out or not? My  question  is:
When you dream, is it just a dream or do you have a dream body  that  flies?
I’m not sure.

The teachings tell us that the dream body exists. But  personally,  I  don’t
think that if it is a dream, it necessarily involves  a  dream  body  moving
about outside of our body. I guess it is just an appearance to our mind.  In
fact, a dream is a mistaken appearance. It  is  just  a  projection  of  our
mind.

Yet you cannot say that the dream body doesn’t exist. You do  hear  accounts
of people travelling in their dreams and the teachings  tell  us  the  dream
body exists. But it doesn’t mean that every single  dream  entails  a  dream
body. If there is a dream body, maybe the dream  body  dissolves  back  into
the clear light of sleep and gradually, the individual wakes up.

The body of the intermediate state being is  an  energy  body  and  is  very
subtle. It is like a mental body  but  it  is  not  the  mental  body  of  a
bodhisattva.

This  intermediate  state  being’s  body  cannot  be  obstructed   by   most
phenomena. There is only one thing that can obstruct the intermediate  being
and that is the mother’s womb.

Through  the  force  of  karma,  all  intermediate  state   beings   possess
miraculous powers.  They can go anywhere they like. Just by having the  mere
thought of a place, the intermediate state being arrives there instantly.

So these are some of the features  or  characteristics  of  an  intermediate
state being:
 • It possesses the miraculous  ability  to  travel  anywhere  through  mere
   thought.
 • It cannot be obstructed by most things except for the womb of the  future
   mother.
 • It subsists on smells alone.

If one is going to be reborn as a  human  being,  first,  one  achieves  the
intermediate state of a human being. Then one goes on to be reborn.  If  one
is going to the lower realms, one achieves the  intermediate  state  of  the
lower realms, for example, the intermediate state of a hell being.


Reversal of intermediate state?
There is a discussion on whether the intermediate  state  can  be  reversed,
i.e., changed.  There are two views regarding this.

Vasubandhu in  his  Treasury  of  Manifest  Knowledge  says  that  once  the
intermediate state  is  established,  it  cannot  be  changed.  If  one  has
achieved the intermediate state of a human, then it is guaranteed  one  will
be born as a human. If one has achieved the intermediate  state  of  a  hell
being, then definitely, one is going to be born as a hell-being.

I think his assertion is based on this. First, there  is  the  statement  in
the sutras that says the ripening of karma cannot be  changed  or  reversed.
If you think about it,  once  the  karmic  imprint  has  been  nourished  by
craving and grasping to the point of no return, the projected  results  will
be actualized. If the projected result has  already  been  established,  how
can one reverse or change that?

It is said that one remains in the intermediate state for up to 49 days.  If
loved ones were to  do  all  kinds  of  virtuous  activities  and  pujas  to
accumulate merit and dedicate to the deceased during the  49  days,  then  a
qualm arises. If the intermediate state cannot be changed, then what is  the
point of doing all this?

If you were to tell Vasubandhu that there’s then no need  to  do  all  these
virtuous  activities  and  pujas  to  accumulate  merit  for  the  deceased,
Vasubandhu has his own answer to that: No, it will not  be  meaningless.  It
may not change the fact that the deceased  is  going  to  the  hell  realms,
because once the intermediate state of the hell being has been  established,
there is no way out and going to the hell realms is certain. But while  that
person is in the hell realms, he will  experience  less  suffering  and  his
stay in the hell realms will be shorter. Sooner or later, he  will  be  born
as a human or a god. So, those  activities  are  not  meaningless.  This  is
Vasubandhu’s position.

His brother, Asanga begs to differ. In his Compendium of  Knowledge,  Asanga
said that even though the intermediate state has  come  into  existence,  it
can still be reversed and changed. He said that if very strong and  powerful
virtue is created within the 49 days, it can change the intermediate  state.
So it is not meaningless but in fact it is important and  good  to  do.  So,
what is it that can change the intermediate state? It is strong virtue!

There is a prevalent custom among the Tibetans and Buddhists living  in  the
Himalayan region to engage in a lot of practices when somebody passes  away.
I think it comes down to this belief that  the  intermediate  state  can  be
changed if strong virtue is created. So, people try to do  strong  practices
(for the deceased) for 49 days. Some also offer  sur  without  a  break  for
those 49 days as intermediate state beings can’t  eat  or  drink.  The  only
thing that intermediate state beings can enjoy is sur.

The intermediate state  being  remains  in  the  intermediate  state  for  a
maximum  period  of  49  days.  Upon  reaching  the  seventh  day,  if   the
intermediate state being has not taken rebirth,  he  will  undergo  a  small
death. If by the next seventh day (i.e., on the 14th day), he has not  taken
rebirth, then he undergoes another death. So, one can
die in the intermediate state up to a maximum of seven times.

It is also common for Tibetans and Buddhists living in the Himalayan  region
to do more practices and make more offerings and so  forth  on  the  seventh
day. Even if they are  not  able  to  do  something  every  day,  they  will
definitely do something on the seventh day, 14th day, 21st day and so  forth
till the 49th day.

As long as the conditions for rebirth are complete, rebirth will happen.  It
is not as if one has to stay for a minimum of one week in  the  intermediate
state. Only then can one take rebirth. No, it is not like that. As  soon  as
the  conditions  come  together,  rebirth  can  happen  even  maybe   almost
immediately after the intermediate state has been established. It very  much
depends on whether the conditions are there or not.

The intermediate state being has to die before  he  can  take  rebirth.   So
when that intermediate state being dies, he will  experience  the  signs  of
dissolution of the forward process starting from the vision  of  the  mirage
and so forth.

When the white and red bodhicittas exit from the upper  and  lower  openings
of the body, the intermediate state is established.  When  the  intermediate
state is established, all connection with the former physical body that  was
its basis is completely  severed.  In  many  texts,  it  is  said  that  the
intermediate state being can see its former body but  it  doesn’t  have  any
attachment to it and it doesn’t regard it to be “my body.” Neither  does  it
have the wish to re-enter that body.

This is mentioned in Asanga’s text, Yogacarabhumi, but an exception to  this
is mentioned in another  text.  The  exception  is  when  a  person  has  an
untimely death and the karma to live has not been completely exhausted.  Due
to the force of some strong condition, although it  is  not  mentioned  what
this strong condition is, the intermediate  state  being  can  re-enter  its
former body. The text says this is mentioned in some Mahayana sutras but  it
doesn’t say which sutra.

Khen Rinpoche: So, I don’t know which Mahayana sutra (this is mentioned).  I
need to find out.

Some scholars  also  say  that  the  intermediate  state  beings  see  their
relatives while they are in the intermediate state. They can  see  what  the
relatives  are  up  to  such  as  engaging  in  practices.  Sometimes,   the
intermediate state beings will join the relatives
and rejoice. Because of that, they accumulate some merit as well.  They  can
see us but we cannot see them. It is said that they will  also  talk  to  us
but we cannot hear them.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed  by  Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Alison
Wong, Rachel Tan and Lau
Geok Chin; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


