Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L55FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:19.871738
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 55 				                                                           17 March 2018
Motivation—the small scope, the medium scope and the great scope. Why you need tantra to attain buddhahood.  Meditating on the death process. Need to practice Highest Yoga Tantra. About empowerments. 
MOTIVATION 
Regardless of whether we are listening to the Dharma or explaining the Dharma, we need to generate a pure motivation in the beginning. Please generate the motivation of wanting to achieve the highest state of full enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings. With that motivation, think that you are going to listen to the Dharma. 
Among the six realms of beings, it is very clear that we have been born as human beings. Among the many human beings, we have been reborn in a situation where there are buddhas and we are able to meet the Buddha’s teachings and we are able to practise the Buddha’s teachings. So, we should think that we are very fortunate. Having been born as human beings, what should we do with this life? Is it sufficient for us to simply use our existence to seek the happiness and wellbeing of this life? What is Dharma? What does it mean for us to engage in Dharma? These are questions that we should ask ourselves and we should seek answers to these questions. We have to ask ourselves those questions and try to find their answers. 
The small scope
It’s not sufficient for us to simply seek the happiness of this life. What is the reason? Why is it insufficient for us to simply strive for this life’s wellbeing? If you think about it, you will realize that we do not simply want happiness for this life alone. We want happiness for the next life, the life after that and so on. So, since we want happiness for all our lifetimes to come, it makes sense for us to make the effort to achieve the happiness of our other lifetimes as well. 
If you are able to reflect on the points above, then you are reflecting on the small scope of the lam-rim; in other words, the path of the being of small capacity in the stages of the path to enlightenment. 
In the small scope of the lam-rim, we are taught the various methods we should engage in in order to be reborn in the upper realms as a human being or god. For example, there is the practice of going for refuge to the Three Jewels. There is the explanation of karma and its results and so on. So, based on those reflections, we are able to understand that it’s not sufficient simply to strive for the happiness of this life alone. It’s necessary for us to think about how we can attain good rebirths in the future. 
It’s not that we do not want a good rebirth in the future. We definitely want a good rebirth in the future. This is because if we do not have a good rebirth in the upper realm, then it will be very difficult for us to practise the Dharma. Just imagine if you are reborn in the lower realms. It will be very difficult to practise the Dharma there. So, even though a good rebirth in samsara is not our final goal, it is a desirable goal. We do want a good rebirth in the upper realm. 
The medium scope
However, even if we are reborn in the upper realm in our next life, we will not be free from the three types of suffering. We will not be free from birth, aging, sickness and death. This is clear. We should strive to become free from suffering. We need to be free from the three kinds of suffering, especially the suffering of compounded pervasive suffering. This is because if we do not become free from the root of suffering, then there is no way we can become free from suffering. Therefore, it is not sufficient for us to simply aim for a good rebirth. We have to aim to become completely free from all suffering. 
It is in this context that the teachings of the medium scope become relevant. So, these are the teachings of the path of the being of medium capacity. In the medium scope, we find explanations of the presentation of the four noble truths as well as the twelve links of dependent arising. We are able to understand how we circle within samsara from those presentations. 
We need to identify that the root of cyclic existence is the conception of self. The conception of self is not something that’s in the nature of our mind. It is an erroneous state of mind and it can be eliminated by our cultivating of the true paths. By generating the wisdom realizing selflessness, we are able to apply the antidote to the conception of self, thus reducing and eliminating it. In that way, we are able to attain the true cessation of suffering. So, reflecting on these points, we should generate this conviction that such a true cessation of suffering exists.
Based on a correct understanding of the four noble truths, you are able to appreciate the existence of the true cessation of suffering or liberation. Since we are able to generate this wisdom realizing selflessness, we are able to attain liberation from samsara. So, thinking about these points, we should generate this determination wanting to make the effort to attain liberation. It’s on this basis that we are able to generate the courage that we can attain liberation from samsara. If we are Dharma practitioners, then we should be able to bring such thoughts to our mind. If we are not able to think about liberation and so on, then it’s difficult for us to qualify as Dharma practitioners. 
The attainment of a good rebirth in the upper realm as a human or a god is not a unique teaching of Buddhism. The small scope of the path can be found in most other religions. However, the teachings of the four noble truths that explain how we can attain liberation and how we can attain everlasting freedom from suffering is a unique feature of Buddhism that is not found in other religions. Therefore, the reflection on the medium scope of the path involves arriving at this understanding that it’s possible to attain liberation, “Liberation exists and I can attain liberation from samsara.” 
The great scope
However, this is still not sufficient. This is because we have been sustained by kind mother sentient beings. If we attain liberation ourselves and leave them behind, then they will still be tormented by suffering. So, we should think, “It’s not enough for me to simply attain liberation from suffering myself. I must generate the mind of enlightenment. I must attain the state of buddhahood in which all faults have been eliminated and all excellent qualities have been fully developed.” We should generate this thought of wanting to attain the highest enlightenment for our kind mother sentient beings. This then is the context of the great scope of the lam-rim.
We should ask ourselves, “What’s wrong with just attaining the mind of liberation? If I can attain liberation in which all suffering has been extinguished, what is wrong with that? Why is that insufficient?” We have to think in terms of our welfare and others’ welfare. If we simply attain our own liberation from samsara, we will not have completed our own purpose or our own welfare. If that is the case, then there is no way we can accomplish others’ purpose and there is no way we can fully accomplish the welfare of others. 
When one attains liberation from samsara, one severs or cuts the root of cyclic existence and one has completely removed the ignorance that is the conception of self. The hearers and solitary realizers (shravakas and pratyekabuddhas) who have attained the state of foe destroyer have attained such an abandonment of the conception of self. However, they are not able to understand fully the dispositions, mentality and faculties of all sentient beings. Because of that, they are not able to fully benefit sentient beings. 
Such hearer and solitary realizer foe destroyers still have knowledge obscurations or the obscuration to knowledge. That is why they are not able to fully understand the dispositions and mentalities of sentient beings. This due to the knowledge obscurations, the latencies or imprints of the conception of self and so on. Because of having such obscurations, they are not able to perfectly accomplish the welfare of sentient beings. Understanding this, we should resolve to enter the Mahayana, the Great Vehicle. By gradually making progress through the ten grounds (the bodhisattva bhumis), you will be able to eliminate all the obscurations including the imprints of the conception of self or the imprints of the afflictions and so on. By removing all knowledge obscurations, we will be able to attain the state of omniscience that is the nature of the four buddha bodies. 
WHY YOU NEED TANTRA TO ATTAIN BUDDHAHOOD 
In the sutra system, we find such a presentation of the paths of the three scopes— the paths of the beings of three capacities—and these paths will eventually lead to the state of buddhahood, that is, the nature of the four buddha bodies. 
In the four tenets, we find that in the explanations in the Hinayana tenets (the Hinayana philosophical systems) of the Vabhashikas (the Great Exposition School, GES) and the Sautrantika (the Sutra School, SS) we will not find presentations of the attainment of buddhahood that has the nature of the four buddha bodies. 
However, in the Mahayana tenets—namely, the Cittamatra (the Mind Only School, MOS), the Svatantrika (the Autonomy Middle Way School, AMWS) and the Prasangika (the Consequence Middle Way School, CMWS)—we find detailed explanations of this buddhahood in which the four buddha bodies are attained.
So, in the sutra system, we say that in dependence on the Paramitayana (the system of the perfections), there is a presentation of how buddhahood can be attained. Given that that is the case, then what does tantra have to offer on top of what is already available in the Paramitayana? 
The Paramitayana claims to be able to lead one to buddhahood. However, we understand that it’s not sufficient to merely rely on the Paramitayana (the Sutra Vehicle). Why is it necessary then to rely on tantra in order to attain buddhahood? Although the sutra system claims to have the means for us to attain buddhahood, but in reality, the sutra paths are not sufficient for us to attain buddhahood. 
If we were to ask, “Is it possible to attain buddhahood by relying on the sutra paths?” 
the answer is, “No. It’s not possible,” according to the tantra system. So, you must understand the reasons for tantra. Because if you fail to understand why tantra is distinct and necessary, then this discussion of tantra will not be relevant to you. 
In the sutra presentation, one has to alternate meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment in order to accumulate the collections of merit and wisdom. Moreover, one has to accumulate the two collections over a long time, over many eons. 
In tantra, there is this explanation of method that enables one to attain buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body. Such explanations are not found in the sutra system. In tantra, we find explanations of how to attain buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body without having to rely on a long period of time lasting three countless great eons.
Length of practice required 
You may think, “What’s the problem with taking three countless great eons? What is the hurry? Why do I need to attain enlightenment quickly?” The reason is that if we take a long time to attain buddhahood, during that time, sentient beings will continue to be tormented by suffering. So, thinking about how you want to be able to help them as quickly as possible, you can make this determination to attain enlightenment as quickly as you can. This gives you extraordinary courage. You generate this extraordinary mind of enlightenment thinking, “May I attain enlightenment quickly, quickly.”
By reflecting on the reasons above, we should think there is no choice but to attain enlightenment as quickly as possible in this lifetime because we cannot bear the suffering of sentient beings. So, there is this sense of not being able to stand the fact that sentient beings will suffer for a long time. 
Attaining the truth body and the form body
To attain buddhahood, we need to attain the Dharma body (truth body) and the form body. In the sutra system:
the uncommon cause of attaining the dharmakaya (truth body) is the mind realizing emptiness or selflessness. 
the cause for attaining the rupakaya (form body) is the method of compassion, bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment and so on. Included within the causes for attaining the form body are the practices of generosity, ethics, patience and joyous effort.
We find such a presentation of the causes of the two buddha bodies in the sutra system.
Therefore, in terms of the bases, the paths and the results:
the bases are the two truths 
the paths  are method and wisdom and
the results are the two buddha bodies.
According to the Paramitayana (the Perfection Vehicle or the sutra system), by generating true paths, the mind directly realizing emptiness, you will be able to achieve the dharma body (dharmakaya). Then there is an explanation of how you can achieve the form body (rupakaya) through methods such as compassion and so on. 
So, we need to ask ourselves:
Is it possible that we can attain the two buddha bodies by relying on such causes? 
Is it sufficient for us to practise these causes and attain the two buddha bodies? 
~The coarse mind vs. the subtle mind
It’s said that through such means, we will not be able to create the substantial causes of the two bodies. For example, in the sutra vehicle, it is explained that you can attain buddhahood by relying upon the coarse mind. There is no explanation of the need for the subtle mind in order to attain buddhahood. However, in the tantra system, we see an uncommon presentation of the subtle level of mind. In tantra, you find detailed explanations of very subtle minds that are not explained in the sutra system. 
In the sutra system, we see presentations of what are called the five sense primary consciousnesses, the six kinds of operating consciousnesses and so on. But there are no subtler minds than those minds. 
However, with respect to the mental consciousness, mainly the subtle levels are explained in tantra. In tantra, we find three levels of consciousnesses explained as:
the coarse mind 
the subtle mind
the very subtle mind
As examples of the coarse minds, we have the three poisons—attachment, aversion and ignorance. According to the sutra system, when the coarse minds have stopped, then a person is considered to be dead. Death has arrived. However, according to tantra, even after such a coarse mind has stopped, the person has not died. This is because there are subtler mental consciousnesses that exist, for example, white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment. 
The minds of the five sense primary consciousnesses, such as the afflictions of attachment, aversion and ignorance, are coarse minds. 
There are also minds such as white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment that are temporal (or occasional) minds. In other words, these minds are not primordial minds.  Such temporal minds are not everlasting minds in the sense that they are not stable and do not last in a continuous way. 
From the point of view of tantra, the mind realizing emptiness that is explained in the sutra system to be the substantial cause of the dharmakaya cannot have that ability because this mind realizing emptiness is an adventitious (or occasional mind). In order to serve as the substantial cause of the dharmakaya, you need a different kind of mind, a mind of a similar type that can continue on to become the dharmakaya. Therefore, the mind realizing emptiness as explained in the sutra system cannot serve as the substantial cause of the dharmakaya. 
By using the Perfection Vehicle, you can directly realize emptiness. This mind directly realizing emptiness will enable you to traverse the ten grounds. In other words, you will be able to reach the tenth ground, overcome the three poisons and also be able to overcome the coarse dualistic appearances. However, such a coarse mind directly realizing emptiness cannot abandon the subtle dualistic appearances. Even though you may have familiarized yourself with such a direct realization of emptiness for a long time, you would not be able to counteract the subtle dualistic minds of the white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment. 
Therefore, with the Perfection Vehicle alone, no matter how powerful it is, it can only
abandon the coarse dualistic appearances. It is not able to abandon subtle dualistic
appearances. You must understand that the Perfection Vehicle alone is not enough for you to attain buddhahood.  
If you think about it, the reasoning is quite clear. Because we are relying upon a coarse mind directly realizing emptiness, it can only abandon coarse afflictions and the coarse dualistic appearances. It cannot abandon the subtle ones. A mind such as a mental consciousness that is coarse and adventitious cannot serve as the mind of a similar type that will go on to become the mind of a buddha. So, if you think about the explanations in sutra carefully, you will see that the explanations of the mind directly realizing emptiness serving as a substantial cause for the dharmakaya are awkward.  In order to create the uncommon substantial cause of the dharmakaya, you need to look into the detailed explanations provided by tantra. 
We have spoken about the coarse minds and we have spoken about the subtle minds, such as the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment. 
~The clear light mind is a primordial mind
There is a very subtle level of mind that is called the clear light mind. For example, there is a clear light mind of death. Such a mind manifests after the minds of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment. This very subtle mind of clear light is called the primordial mind. Such a mind is:
clear and knowing
will never discontinue
is an everlasting mind 
will always exist
has no beginning and no end 
Such a very subtle mind that exists continuously is of a similar type to its previous instance. We have to use such a mind to realize emptiness because with such a very subtle mind realizing emptiness, it will be able to counteract the subtle minds of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment. Therefore, such a mind to realize emptiness will be able to overcome the subtle minds that cannot be abandoned otherwise. This primordial mind existing in an everlasting way can realize emptiness. Then the continuity of a similar type will gradually become the substantial cause of the dharmakaya. This is exactly the mind that will become a buddha’s mind, the dharmakaya. Such explanations are found in tantra. 
This is the essence of what I want to convey to you. We have to apply reasoning to understand why tantra is necessary. We have to ask ourselves the question, “What is the substantial cause of the dharmakaya?”
This substantial cause has to be a consciousness. 
It has to be a very subtle mind.
It has to be a mind that exists continuously, not just occasionally
It should be a mind that is able to last forever. 
For this reason, we need to posit such a primordial clear light mind as the substantial cause of the dharmakaya. Since such an explanation is not found outside of tantra, this is why we need tantra. You need to have a good and high quality explanation of what the uncommon substantial cause of the dharmakaya is.
~The illusory body
Having discussed the substantial cause of the dharmakaya, how about the substantial cause of the rupakaya (form body)? 
In the sutra system, it is explained that the factor of method serves as the substantial cause of the form body. So, by practising compassion, bodhicitta and so on, you are able to create the causes of the form body. However, we need to bear in mind that the form body appears as form and factors such as compassion and bodhicitta are consciousnesses. How can a consciousness serve as a substantial cause of a form?
In the sutra explanations, we find the presentation of the arya’s body that is of the nature of mind serving as the substantial cause of a buddha’s form body. However, such a mental body or a body of the nature of mind is caused by the levels of latencies or imprints of ignorance. How can something that has such causes serve as the substantial cause of a buddha’s form body? 
Therefore, the sutra explanations that bodhicitta can serve as a substantial cause of the form body or the mental body, i.e., the body that is in the nature of the mind, can serve as the cause of a form body are unacceptable. It is difficult for bodhicitta and such a mental body to be the substantial causes of a buddha’s form body. 
So, what is the uncommon presentation in tantra? 
They say that the uncommon cause of a buddha’s form body is the illusory body that accords in aspect with the buddha’s body. In other words, the mind directly realizing emptiness is the cause, arising in the aspect of the deity’s body. Through such cultivation, one can develop a fully-fledged illusory body, which is a continuity of a similar type becoming a buddha’s form body. 
On the generation stage, one is simply imagining or visualizing a buddha’s body. However, when one reaches the completion stage, then one is able to actually accomplish the illusory body. This illusory body then is what will become the buddha’s form body. Therefore, in tantra, you find this unshared presentation of how to attain the rupakaya. 
The explanation of the path as being method and wisdom is still relevant and sufficient. In this case, wisdom will be the very subtle clear light mind directly realizing emptiness. Abiding with such a mind is the illusory body. Then the illusory body is posited as the method. 
Every living being has this very subtle body and mind that is with him/her all the time. It exists continuously in an everlasting way, continuing on to the buddha ground. This very subtle mind is accompanied by this very subtle wind called the life- bearing wind. Such a very subtle body and mind exists within each and every sentient being and they last through the buddha grounds. With that serving as the basis, if we engage in practice, then we would be able to achieve the clear light mind and the illusory body even while on the path. This means that we would be able to achieve what is called the learners’ union of clear light and illusory body on the path. 
This is the presentation of the union of method and wisdom in which method and wisdom are inseparable or indivisible. Therefore, in tantra, you find this very good quality explanation of how the illusory body can serve as the substantial cause of the form body of a buddha. Similarly, you can find good quality explanations of how there is this uncommon cause of the dharmakaya in tantra. Therefore, these detailed fine explanations are offered in tantra. 
We were saying how in tantra we find good explanations of how the illusory body and clear light mind serve as the substantial causes of the two buddha bodies. You must understand this essential point that it is not enough to rely simply on the sutra path. It is necessary to enter the tantra path in order to attain buddhahood. One of the reasons is that with a very coarse mind, you cannot abandon the subtle dualistic appearances of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment. In order to abandon them, you need a very subtle mind realizing emptiness. If you are able to cause the clear light mind to realize emptiness directly, it will be able to abandon such subtle dualistic appearances.
In tantra, there is the explanation of how you can generate method and wisdom in an indivisible manner within one mind. Even though in sutra, you have the explanation of method and wisdom, you are not able to generate both of them inseparably within a single mind. In tantra, you are able to generate such indivisible method and wisdom within a mind that is called indivisible bliss and emptiness. So this exalted wisdom is a very subtle mind that is in the nature of bliss. At the same time, it realizes emptiness. So you are able to combine method and wisdom indivisibly within such a very subtle exalted wisdom. Therefore, with such a mind, you cause the appearance of the aspect of a deity. Therefore, in the practice of tantra, there is this generation of the mind in the aspect of the deity’s body. 
In the four classes of tantra, we have:
Action Tantra 
Performance Tantra 
Yoga Tantra 
Highest Yoga Tantra. 
The three lower classes of tantra do not have as thorough an explanation as can be found in Highest Yoga Tantra. In the three lower classes of tantra, we find explanations of attaining buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body. However, those presentations are different from Highest Yoga Tantra. This is because in the lower tantras, in order to attain enlightenment in a single lifetime, they rely upon long life practices whereby they can remain for eons. In that way, they are able to attain buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body. However, in Highest Yoga Tantra, when it is said that one can attain buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body, it refers to being able to attain buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body during this degenerate age. 
In the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra, we want to make use of the clear light of death. We want to generate that into the nature of a path. So, instead of letting it be an ordinary clear light of death, through our practice, we try to generate it into the nature of the realization of emptiness. In this way we are able to transform it into the nature of the path. Through such practice, we will be able eventually to attain what is called the final example clear light. Using such clear light, when you pass into the intermediate state in the bardo, we will be able to arise as the illusory body. So instead of having an ordinary intermediate state, we have this intermediate state where we arise as the illusory body. Once we attain that, we can go on to attain buddhahood. 
So, by manifesting clear light, we use it to accomplish the illusory body and on that basis we attain buddhahood. So, this is the uncommon feature of tantra. Especially the technique for accomplishing the illusory body is uncommon in tantra. That is the essence of the generation stage. Through these practices, you want to transform ordinary death, intermediate state and rebirth. Then you try to bring death, intermediate state and rebirth to the path as the three buddha bodies. If you are able to practise these meditations, then this means that you will be able to actualize this clear light as explained. 
MEDITATING ON THE DEATH PROCESS 
In the previous classes, I have already explained how the elements will dissolve during the death process. Similarly, the consciousness will also dissolve or absorb. In the meditation, you imagine or visualize arriving at the clear light state. At that point you should place yourself in meditative equipoise realizing emptiness. 
Through such meditation and practice, when death actually arises, you will be able to meditate on emptiness when the clear light of death manifests. If you have done very consistent and good quality practice, then what will happen is that when the clear light of death manifests, you will be able to meditate on emptiness using that mind very easily. So, that is the purpose of us meditating on the generation stage.
For example, at the time of death, your four elements will become weaker in terms of their potential. We must bear in mind that our body is accomplished due to our karma. We have these four elements in our bodies. When the karma for that body becomes weakened and exhausted, similarly, the potential of those elements also become reduced. We have various kinds of appearances due to our karma. When that karma diminishes, then those corresponding appearances will also diminish and they will eventually vanish. 
In the beginning, the earth element weakens. The capacity of the earth element is reduced. As the result, we receive certain kinds of visions as explained previously. With the dissolution of the earth element, it is said that we receive the appearance of a mirage.
The essential point for you to understand here is that the various kinds of appearances we have are due to karma. When that karma weakens and becomes
extinguished, similarly, those appearances will also diminish and vanish. 
If you are able to feel interested in these explanations, then you should practise the generation stage as explained in the previous classes. For example, you visualize going through the death process, imagining what happens when the earth element dissolves and so on. The benefit of doing this practice—bringing such images to mind and meditating on them—is that when death actually arises, you will be able to recognize what is happening. You are able to remember this meditation that you have been practising. You will be able to exercise vigilance. This means that you will not feel afraid and your mind will not be disturbed. That is the benefit of doing the practice.
As our karma for certain appearance diminishes, those appearances will diminish. So, this is something you have to bear in mind. When you undergo the death process and if you are able to recall the presentation of karma, if you are able to recall the presentation of emptiness and so on, then that will be very useful. By relying on mindfulness and vigilance, there’s hope that you are able to realize emptiness easily using the clear light of death. 
However, this is not something that’s easy to achieve and it’s certainly not something that comes about through just some kind of overnight practice. You need to familiarize with the meditation again and again while you are well and alive, not just when you are about to die. When you are well and alive, you have to practise again and again until your meditation becomes very stable. In that way, you can have the hope that at the time of death, you are able to realize emptiness easily and your mind will be undisturbed.
If you don’t practise, then what will happen is that at the time of death, you will experience fear and worry. You may receive all kinds of disturbing visions and your mind becomes very unpeaceful. With such a state of mind, when the clear light of death manifests, there will be little chance that you will be able to meditate on emptiness. If that’s the case, then your death will become just an ordinary death.
If you have an ordinary death, then you will have just an ordinary intermediate state. Powerlessly, without any control, you enter the intermediate state. Once that happens, you will take an ordinary rebirth and again you will be reborn into samsara. Again, you have to experience endless sufferings.
If you practise well, then you are able to realize emptiness with the very subtle mind of clear light. Once you are able to do that, you will not have to enter an ordinary intermediate state. Instead, you will be able to accomplish the illusory body. Once you are able to do that, there is hope of attaining buddhahood in a single lifetime in the same body.
The important point that you have to take away from this whole discussion is that it is insufficient to practise the sutra path alone. This is because the path to buddhahood should enable you to abandon the subtle dualistic appearances. With the sutra path, you are not able to abandon the subtle dualistic appearances. 
NEED TO PRACTISE HIGHEST YOGA TANTRA 
What you need is a very subtle mind realizing emptiness and this technique is explained in Highest Yoga Tantra. This method is not available in the sutra presentation. It is not available even in the three lower tantras. You definitely need Highest Yoga Tantra.  If you are able to understand this structure of the tantra path, then you are very fortunate. It is said that anyone who is able to form such an understanding will easily complete the accumulation of merit. 
We have completed the study of the three lower tantras so now we are in the section on Highest Yoga Tantra. It will take several months—two months, three months or however long we take—but we will go through the Highest Yoga Tantra explanation and I will give the commentary on it.
Khen Rinpoche: Teaching the commentary until enlightenment is reached! 
Question: According to the explanation we have just heard, one realizes the illusory body during the intermediate state. Can we accomplish the illusory body while we are alive?
Answer: It is possible for one to achieve the illusory body while one is alive. There is a presentation of how you can practise the path and actualize the illusory body before death. While you are alive, it is possible to accomplish the illusory body. This presentation will be covered later on when I explain the completion stage. You will get a clearer idea of how this can be attained.
You should bear in mind the reasons as to why:
Highest Yoga Tantra is so powerful
it is indispensable for us to practise Highest Yoga Tantra
ABOUT EMPOWERMENTS
In order to enter the practice of tantra, you need to receive an initiation or empowerment. In other words, if you have received an initiation, this means that you have entered tantra. However, this does not mean that you have entered a tantric path. In other to enter a tantric path, you need to have generated a tantric path in your continuum. For example, if you have generated the generation stage in your continuum, then you are said to have entered the tantric path.
In order to practise tantra, you need to receive a tantric initiation. This tantric initiation is referred to as a ripening cause. The ripening cause of this tantric initiation (or empowerment) involves various procedures. For example, there is the cleansing of the body, speech and mind.  Then you are empowered or authorized to meditate on the generation stage and the completion stage. Also, latencies are deposited so that you are able to attain the four buddha bodies in the future. 
The four empowerments are the usual four empowerments that we talked about:
the vase empowerment 
the secret empowerment 
the wisdom empowerment 
the word empowerment 
The function of the vase empowerment is to cleanse the trainee of the stains of the three doors of the body, speech and mind. 
With the next two empowerments—the secret empowerment and the wisdom empowerment—the trainee is empowered or authorized to meditate on the generation stage and completion stage. 
In dependence on the fourth empowerment—the word empowerment—the latencies of the four bodies are placed upon the continuum of the trainee. 
That is the purpose of receiving the four empowerments. By completing receiving these four empowerments, you are able to cultivate the tantric path. Also you are empowered to cultivate the paths and these paths are called the liberating paths—the paths that act to liberate. These are the generation stage and the completion stage. Finally, through the practice of the paths of the generation stage and the completion stage, you will be able to attain the result of liberation. You are becoming empowered with respect to the result. 
In order to attain the result of final union, the non-learner’s union or the union of no more learning, you need to rely on the generation stage and the completion stage.  So those stages are the liberating causes.  
In order to engage in these liberating causes, first, you need to have the ripening cause. That involves receiving an initiation.  This is why in the beginning, first, you need to receive an initiation or empowerment. When you think about this word, “initiation” or “empowerment,” what it does is that it empowers you to engage in the hearing, contemplation and meditation of the tantric path.  Therefore, one needs to receive the full-fledged empowerment from a qualified vajra acharya or vajra master. 
You need to enter the mandala to receive the empowerment. 
In the beginning, there is the vase empowerment.  You obtain such a vase empowerment by entering any of these mandalas—such as the painted cloth mandala, coloured sand mandala, body mandala or the meditative absorption mandala. Usually the painted cloth mandala or the coloured sand mandala is used.  So by entering either of these mandalas, one receives the vase empowerment.  
The second empowerment is called the secret empowerment. You obtain this by entering the relative bodhicitta mandala or the conventional bodhicitta mandala.  
The third empowerment, the wisdom empowerment, is obtained in the bhaga mandala (or the lotus mandala). 
The fourth empowerment, the word empowerment, is obtained in the ultimate bodhicitta mandala.  
In Highest Yoga Tantra, you will find the presentation of these four empowerments.  
Within the vase empowerment, there are other initiations. In other words, you can enumerate within the vase empowerment six empowerments, nine empowerments, eleven empowerments and so on.  With the vase empowerment, you able to purify the stains of the body and you become empowered to meditate on the generation stage. That is between the generation stage and the completion stage, you deposit latencies to be able to obtain the emanation body or the nirmanakaya in the future. 
What are the vase initiations? I shall talk about them in terms of the six empowerments: 
the water empowerment of Akshobhya
the crown empowerment of Ratnasambhava
the vajra empowerment of Amitabha 
the bell empowerment of Amoghasiddhi 
the name empowerment of Vairochana.  
the empowerment of the  vajra master (vajra Acharya)
These are the six vase empowerments.  
In the next class, I will explain in greater detail what these six vase empowerments are.  For example, how would you attain the water empowerment of Akshobhya?  What is the nature of the empowerment?  How do you attain the empowerment?  In this way, we will discuss the practice of the generation stage. 
You should pay attention to this topic of the empowerments because we attend empowerments and we say we have obtained the empowerment.  But what are you supposed to think during an empowerment?  What is the nature of the empowerment? You have to understand all these points. 
With such an understanding, then you will be able to attend an empowerment and then single-pointedly receive the empowerment in a pure way. Therefore, you should take an interest in this matter. It is important for you to develop a good understanding of what an initiation is all about.  With that kind of correct understanding, you will be able to receive an initiation with mindfulness and vigilance. In that way, you will be able to deposit very special imprints or latencies within your continuum and you will be able to effectively purify the seeds. Such latencies and purification will enable you to continue to practise tantra in your future lifetimes.  Through doing this properly, there is hope that you will be able to engage in tantra in the future. Therefore, there is great benefit in understanding this and studying this topic properly.    
Interpreted by Toh Sze Gee; Transcribing team: Phuah Soon Ek, Lau Geok Chin, Alison Wong, Rachel Tan, Aki Yeo, Julia Koh and Vivien Ng; edited by Cecilia Tsong. 