Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Tantra/BP2 M10 L19FINAL.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:04.012488
================================================================================

Transcript of the teachings by Khen Rinpoche Geshe Chonyi on Grounds and Paths of Secret Mantra 
Root Text: Illumination of the Tantric Tradition: The Principles of the Grounds and Paths of the Four Great Secret Classes of Tantra by Ngawang Palden.
The root text, translated by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, is included in the course book: Principles of Buddhist Tantra, by Kirti Tsenshap Rinpoche, translated and edited by Ian Coghlan and Voula Zarpani, Wisdom Publications, 2011.
The main headings from the book are quoted, indented and in italics, for overall structure. 
Lesson 19	 				                                           8 June    2017
Review. Discussing the homework questions. Entry into the different paths—the foundation for further discussion. Bodhicitta is the only door for entering the Mahayana. Training in the path shared with the person of medium capacity.   Training in the path shared with the person of small capacity. Giving up attachment to this life. “May my mind become the Dharma. The Dharma to become the path and the path to be free of obstacles.” Mind generation in sutra and tantra. Entering tantra vs. entering the tantric path. 
In the path of Action Tantra, as we’ve seen, in order to practice an approximation of the deity properly, this begins with a good meditation on the six deities. After you’ve arisen as the deity, you then engage in the four-branched recitation. We’ve covered all this already. You should read those sections, think about them and develop familiarity with the material. In the future, when you do an approximation retreat on, for example, Chenrezig, this material will be relevant to your retreat. You can meditate and put it into practice. 
REVIEW
Absorption with recitation
There are two absorptions—the absorption with recitation and the absorption not reliant on recitation. 
When you are engaged in the absorption with recitation, you have to do so without any distraction. You have to know the stages of engaging in the recitation. Essentially, there are two forms of recitation, culminating in the recitation observing the sound of the mantra. 
Leaving the session & the three recognitions
As you leave the session after your practice, the stages of leaving the session is a reversal of and backward progression through the stages of meditation. We’ve already talked about this. You should also acquaint yourself with that process. It’s said the time in-between sessions is very important. The teachings tell us that it’s very important to conduct ourselves during this time without being separated from the three recognitions. 
Absorption not reliant on recitation
After one has finished the absorption with recitation, one doesn’t stop there. There’s still more to be meditated on. One moves on to the absorption not reliant on recitation of which there are three: 
absorption on fire
absorption on sound
absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound
According to our root text, calm abiding is achieved upon the culmination of the absorption on sound. 
After calm abiding is achieved, one alternates between placement (or stabilizing) meditation and analysis. 
Comes the time when the union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness is attained, one enters the path of preparation. That’s also when one achieves the absorption that bestows freedom at the limit of sound. That’s when the yoga without signs comes into being.
DISCUSSING THE HOMEWORK QUESTIONS
You’ll not find any clear or definite answer in the text to the questions that were raised. I’m going to offer my view and opinion on this. I’m not saying that whatever I’m going to say is definitely the case. I’m just going to offer you the opinion I’ve formed after giving them some thought. With regard to a definite answer, you’ll not be able to find it in any particular text. Nor do I have any person that I can verify (my answer) with. I can only offer you my opinion. 
Khen Rinpoche: Now listen with your full attention. There can be a lot of mistakes. You must listen with your full concentration. Otherwise you won’t find the mistakes. 
Entry into the different paths—the foundation for further discussion 
At the beginning of this module, I’ve already shared with you the differences between the Hinayana and the Mahayana. From our discussions, by now you should be clear that prior to entering the Mahayana path, you do not have to enter the Hinayana path first. There’s nothing difficult about this. This is very straightforward. You’ll always find clear statements about this in the texts. 
In the teachings, we talk about those of definite Mahayana lineage, i.e., those who enter the Mahayana path from the onset without entering any other paths prior to that.
The Mahayana is divided into two: 
the Causal Perfection Vehicle 
the Resultant Vajra Vehicle 
I’ve shared this with you. I’ve also shared with you these two are not differentiated by view but by the factor of method. What constitutes method?  In the context of tantra, essentially, the special method is the special techniques or causes for achieving the form body. As such, you have the Resultant Vajra (or Mantra) Vehicle.
In order to enter the tantric path, must one first enter the path of the Causal Perfection Vehicle? The answer is also clear. No, it’s not necessary. 
There are four classes of tantra that are differentiated by the manner in which attachment is taken as the path. I’ve already talked about this. 
Since there’re four classes of Buddhist tantra, if you’re asked—“Is it necessary to have entered the paths of the three lower classes of tantra before entering the path of Highest Yoga Tantra?”—if you think about it, the answer is also clear. No, you don’t need to enter the paths of the three lower classes of tantra in order to enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra. There are people with the tantric lineage who enter the path of Highest Yoga Tantra from the onset. What’s clear is that while there’re people who enter the Highest Yoga Tantra path from the onset, there’re also others who enter the paths of the lower classes of tantra from the beginning. 
What I’ve said so far is all stated clearly in the texts. There’s no dispute about these points. You need to be certain of them and hold them as the bases upon which you can then engage in further discussions. If you don’t even have this knowledge as the basis, when you attempt to analyze or discuss, what are you doing? You may end up with “Yes” and “No” answers but you are actually getting nothing because you don’t have any foundation that you can work from. So, first, you need to have a solid basis.
Khen Rinpoche: So is your foundation stable now or not? There’s nothing much to discuss regarding what I’ve said. You must remember those points. All the scholars say the same thing. So you have to understand them. Then after that, discussion comes. 
Bodhicitta is the only door for entering the Mahayana
In the teachings, it’s clear that one can enter the tantric path without first having to enter the sutric path. 
In the lam-rim literature, you’ll find the discussion on the door to the Mahayana. If one were to enter the Mahayana, what’s the entrance? 
It’s mentioned in the lam-rim that there are only two divisions of the Mahayana—the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajra Vehicle. Other than these, there are no other Mahayana vehicles. The Mahayana is necessarily either one of these two vehicles. Furthermore, whether you enter the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajra Vehicle, the door is only bodhicitta.
If one has the Mahayana mind generation, one becomes a Mahayanist and one enters the Mahayana path. No matter what other qualities you may have, even if you have the wisdom realizing emptiness, that doesn’t constitute the door into the Mahayana. 
In the Lamrim Chenmo, if you look at how the outlines are arranged with regard to generating bodhicitta through the sevenfold cause and effect instructions, they single out compassion to be its root. In the sevenfold cause and effect instructions, the steps prior to generating compassion start from:
recognizing all sentient beings as your mother
remembering their kindness 
wishing to repay their kindness 
affectionate love
All these are posited to be the causes of compassion. 
The two steps that come after compassion (5), starting with the wholehearted resolve (6) and the mind generation (bodhicitta) (7), are posited to be the effects of compassion. So you see how the outline is arranged with the focus on compassion itself.
In the usual presentation of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions, traditionally, they start from number one and end with number seven. They’re arranged in that order. If you look at how Lama Tsongkhapa arranged the outline to that section, he places compassion as the central theme. The steps prior to it are posited as the causes and the steps after that are posited as the effects of compassion. 
I’m not going to go through all the details since we’ve already covered this when we looked at Lama Tsongkhapa’s Middle Length Lam-rim. For those who are really interested, this is just to give you an idea so that you can go back and check the relevant sections of the text.  
There’s an emphasis on the importance of compassion, making compassion the central theme. There’s the explanation of how compassion is important at the beginning, important in the middle and important at the end.
What’s the door then into the Mahayana? It’s when the bodhicitta that is induced by love and compassion arises in the mind. That’s when one enters the Mahayana. Without bodhicitta, one’s not a suitable vessel for the practice of the Causal Perfection Vehicle. 
Training in the path shared with the person of medium capacity
If that’s the case, how is it possible for one to be a suitable vessel for Secret Mantra if one does not have bodhicitta? Before one can even try to start on the techniques for generating bodhicitta, one must have trained the mind already in the path that’s shared with the person of medium capacity. Why is this the case? If we cannot even feel that we are tormented by the different sufferings of samsara and are disenchanted with our own situation in samsara, how is it possible to generate compassion when we think of other sentient beings in samsara? That’s impossible!
In order to generate great compassion, the root of bodhicitta, first, we must have renounced our own samsara. We must be repulsed by our own suffering in samsara and have the attitude of wanting to be free of it. Without that, there’s no way we can develop the wish for others to be free from samsara. Therefore, prior to even training the mind in bodhicitta, one must have already trained the mind in the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity. 
Among the practices of a person of medium capacity, one is directed to think of the suffering of cyclic existence to the point of generating revulsion towards any samsaric happiness. One has no interest whatsoever in anything to do with samsara—its so-called pleasures, happinesses and enjoyments. One trains the mind to recognize that they are all worthless and pointless. One has no attachment to them whatsoever. This is necessary. Otherwise, how is it possible to develop the wish for liberation? Without this sense of revulsion and disinterest in anything to do with samsara, it doesn’t matter what one meditates on or practices. None of those activities will become the cause for liberation from samsara. If they don’t become a cause for liberation from samsara, how can they be a cause for achieving enlightenment? 
There’s a saying in the teachings, “May my mind become the Dharma, the Dharma to become the path and the path to be free of obstacles.” When we say, “the Dharma to become the path,” it means that may whatever we do become the cause for liberation. 
Training in the path shared with the person of small capacity
But even before one can meditate and have realizations of the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, one must have trained the mind well in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity. 
What’s the essence of the attitude that’s the result of training in the path that’s shared with the person of small capacity? It’s the thought, “If I don’t practise the Dharma, I’m definitely going to be reborn in the lower realms. Once I’m in the lower realms, how is it impossible to bear with the sufferings there?” One feels this from the depths of one’s heart. The end result is that the mind is moved, “Oh my goodness, I’m really in trouble!” This is the attitude that must arise. Without it, there’s no way to practise the other paths such as the path shared with the person of medium capacity. There’s no hope of that happening. Needless to say, there’s no need to talk about the Mahayana path in that case. 
What kind of refuge does a person of small capacity have? Refuge is a mind and an attitude. When a person reflects on the suffering of the lower realms and understands that he’s going there, he will be terrified and fearful. That fear moves him to seek refuge in and entrust himself to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha with the belief that the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha can protect him. When one has that kind of mind, then one has the refuge of a person of small capacity. 
At the very least, this is the kind of refuge that we should possess. It’s the real fear combined with a wholehearted conviction in the ability of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha to protect us from that fear. Whether we call it the lowest or minimum level or the entry level of refuge, we should at least have this level of refuge. 
But if you think about this, even for us, it’s doubtful whether we have this minimal level of refuge. This is the end result of having trained the mind in the path that is shared with the person of small capacity. This is the very minimal, entry-level practice and so-called experience or realization that we must produce in our mind. 
If you were to tell someone who doesn’t even have this attitude—“You are supposed to give up and not be attached to the happiness of humans and gods”—that’s useless and a complete waste of time. It’s something that’s impossible for him to even consider. 
Therefore, before we can even train our mind in the path that’s shared with the person of medium capacity, first, we must train our mind in and actualize the path that’s shared with the person of small capacity. You have to know why this has to be the case. What’s the reason? It’s not that you don’t know this. I think you should know this by now. Sometimes, there’s great benefit to revisiting these topics again. 
Giving up attachment to this life
In the process of training and actualizing the path, we have to give up our attachment to this life. Our entire energy now is directed to the happiness of this life. This life’s more important than anything else. It’s our top priority and we put all our effort and energy into it. When our attitude is still like this, the happiness of this life becomes the main driving force behind everything we do. If that’s the case, then it doesn’t matter what practices or studies we do. They don’t matter. Forget about those practices. They’ll never become the cause for enlightenment. Setting aside enlightenment, they can’t even become a cause for liberation.
We can also forget about liberation. As long as we’ve attachment to this life, it’s highly questionable whether those so-called practices that we do will actually become causes for our good rebirth. We’ve to know that there’s a reason and purpose behind what we’re told in the teachings. If we’re attached to this life, then it doesn’t matter what we do, none of it will become a cause for even a good rebirth. We’ve to see and understand why this is pointed out and why this is so. 
Back to the saying: “May my mind become the Dharma, the Dharma to become the path and the path to be free of obstacles.”  
“May my mind become the Dharma”
“May my mind become the Dharma” means that the mind should be free of attachment to this life. Instead of being attached to this life, in everything you do, you’re primarily interested only in your next life, not this life. When your worldview is transformed and what drives you every day is your genuine concern for your next life, then your mind has become the Dharma. 
The very word for Dharma in Tibetan is chö, which has the connotation of changing or transforming for the better. If the mind has transformed from primarily focussing on the happiness of this life to seeking mainly the happiness of future lives, then your mind has become the Dharma as it’s transformed for the better. 
But if the mind hasn’t transformed in this way, then it doesn’t matter what you do— reciting daily prayers and mantras, circumambulations, prostrations and so forth—it’s difficult for those practices to change the mind because the mind hasn’t changed from one of attachment to this life to one seeking happiness in the next life. 
If the mind has transformed for the better, then one’s practising the Dharma, the mind has become the Dharma. Whether it’s the path of the person of small capacity, medium capacity or great capacity, they are all Dharma. If the mind is being transformed in any of those ways, then the mind has become the Dharma. That’s the point. I’m not saying you shouldn’t circumambulate, do prostrations or your prayers.  But there’s a purpose behind those practices and you must know what it means to practise the Dharma. 
All of us have to think about this for ourselves. We have to ask ourselves the question: If our mind hasn’t changed, why hasn’t it changed? 
We may be studying a lot, but if we don’t see the mind changing in the way that’s mentioned in the lam-rim, then maybe it’s not the fault of our studies. 
Could it then be the fault of our practice, i.e., due to not doing this or that recitation, or not doing this or that practice? But if we also do many recitations and many prayers, and in spite of our studies and numerous practices, if the mind still hasn’t changed in the way that’s mentioned in the lam-rim, obviously something must be missing. That’s why change is not happening. So then we have to sit down and analyze why this is so. 
The answer’s already given to us in the lam-rim where it says it all boils down to our attachment to this life. We’re unable to give up our attachment to this life. That’s why the mind hasn’t changed at all.  All the problems come from that. That’s the answer given to us. We have to check for ourselves whether that’s true or not. 
If we bother to think and analyze, it becomes clearer and clearer this is really the case. Then we see for ourselves where the problem lies. We can start acting on it. Then slowly over time, our practices will show some effect and slowly, we start on the path that is shared with the person of small capacity.
We’ve taken on all these huge commitments—the bodhisattva vows and the tantric vows. But we’re not able to keep them properly or purely. Why? If you analyze it, again it comes back to our attachment to this life. Therefore, we don’t have the path that’s shared with the person of small capacity. 
“The Dharma to become the path”
“The Dharma to become the path” relates to the path that’s shared with the person of medium capacity. 
“The path to be free of obstacles” 
“The path to be free of obstacles” refers to generating uncontrived bodhicitta. Having trained the mind in the practices of a person of great capacity, when one actualizes uncontrived bodhicitta, one’s activities will not be influenced by self-cherishing whatsoever. Everything one does will be for others. For such an individual, his path will be free of obstacles. 
As such, I think that’s how you can relate the practices of the person of small, medium and great capacity to the saying, “May the mind become the Dharma, the Dharma to become the path and the path to be free of obstacles.”
If you were to look at the arrangement in any lam-rim text, it always starts with the path that’s shared with the person of small capacity, followed by the path that’s shared with the person of medium capacity and finally, the path of the person of great capacity. After that, the last two perfections—the training in calm abiding and special insight—are singled out for additional attention. Then after that, as the Foundation of All Good Qualities says, “Having become a pure vessel by training in the general (i.e., the shared) path,/ Please bless me to enter/ The holy gateway of the fortunate ones:/ The supreme vajra vehicle.” 
Based on the structure of this presentation in the lam-rim, then I asked you this question: Going by that structure, does it mean that we have to actualize bodhicitta, calm abiding and special insight to entering tantra? 
Khen Rinpoche: I am coming back to the question. 
You have bodhicitta. You have calm abiding focussing on emptiness. You have special insight focussing on emptiness. These are all explained prior to entering the tantric path, at least in the lam-rim presentation. Bodhicitta, calm abiding focussing on emptiness and special insight focussing on emptiness are paths that are shared with tantra. As such, they are explained prior to the presentation of tantra. But do they necessarily have to be actualized prior to entering the tantric path?  You’ve to answer, “Not necessarily.” 
We know that entry into the path of preparation is marked by the attainment of the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness.  It’s clear that one needn’t attain the path of preparation before entering tantra.  
Mind generation in sutra and tantra
Now, let’s look at the mind generation (bodhicitta) that’s essentially the aspiration to accomplish the welfare of others and the aspiration for complete enlightenment.  The mind that possesses these two aspirations, that main mind is called bodhicitta.  That’s what mind generation (bodhicitta) is.  This leads to the question: Is there any difference in the bodhicitta of sutra and tantra?  
Another question: Is there a difference in the refuge that is practised in tantra and the refuge that is practised in the Causal Perfection Vehicle? 
What exactly is the entity of the mind generation?  Whether it’s sutra or tantra, it’s essentially an aspiration to accomplish the welfare of others, and the aspiration for full enlightenment.  Bodhicitta is nothing less, nothing more than that.  So it doesn’t matter whether we are talking about the bodhicitta in Mahayana sutra or Mahayana tantra, the bodhicitta we are talking about is that. 
According to Khedrup Sangye Yeshe, he said, “There’s a difference in the mind generation of sutra and tantra. There isn’t a difference in terms of their superiority or inferiority but you have to posit these two separately.”  
He said that there’s a difference in the mind generation of Mahayana sutra and Mahayana tantra. So what’s the difference?  It lies in the power or strength of that attitude.  
In Mahayana sutra, one cultivates the intention to achieve full enlightenment to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings with the thought, “No matter how long it takes for me to achieve enlightenment, no matter how much hardship I’ve to bear, I will do it!”
In Mahayana tantra, that individual also has the aspiration to achieve enlightenment in order to accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings. From his own side, he’s willing to undertake whatever hardship necessary no matter how long it takes. But at the same time, he’s unable to bear that sentient beings have to wait so long and that they will have to suffer. This bodhisattva cannot delay for even a day his enlightenment because sentient beings will have to suffer for one more day.  
So, from that perspective, while the entity (or nature) of the mind generation in Mahayana sutra and Mahayana tantra is the same, there’s this huge difference in the strength or power of that mind. Due to this power, perhaps we can then account for why Khedrup Sangye Yeshe said there’s a difference in the mind generation in sutra and tantra.  This is just my opinion. 
Entering tantra vs. entering the tantric path
There’s also a lot of discussion and debate as to whether entering tantra and entering the tantric path means the same thing. There are many scholars who said that entering tantra and entering the tantric path are not necessarily the same thing. What I’ve explained so far is based on the position that there is a difference between entering tantra and entering the tantric path.
If one takes an initiation and actually receives it, perhaps you can say that’s the meaning of entering tantra. I’ve said this in one of the earlier lessons—your presence at an initiation doesn’t necessarily mean that you’ve actually received the initiation. But if you’ve actually taken the initiation and received it properly, perhaps, you can say that that’s a measure or criteria of entering tantra.
What’s the essential purpose for taking and actually receiving an initiation?  At the end of the day, the purpose of taking and receiving an initiation is that one’s empowered to meditate on tantra for the purpose of achieving enlightenment for others.
Lama Tsongkhapa said, “Having become a pure vessel by training in the general path.” Here I take the “general path” to refer to the shared path that’s shared with the person of great capacity. That’s the reason why earlier on I brought up the topic of great compassion, highlighting how Lama Tsongkhapa arranged the outline in the section on training the mind in bodhicitta through the sevenfold cause and effect instructions.  In essence, what I am trying to say is that you need great compassion. If you have great compassion, being in the shared path that is shared with the person of great capacity, you are then a suitable vessel to enter tantra. This is what I think. Prior to entering the tantric path, definitely you must have great compassion.
An individual who has this great compassion coupled with having the disposition (or imprints) for tantra, the great compassion and also the wholehearted resolve in the mind of this person will be much more powerful. Wholehearted resolve is taking on personal responsibility but here, there’s an additional element of taking on the responsibility to do it oneself now, in this life.  If you’re talking about Highest Yoga Tantra, it’s the thought, “I must achieve enlightenment in this life, in this body!” So that’s the additional element to the wholehearted resolve.  
For somebody who’s of definite tantric lineage, i.e., who is definite to enter Secret Mantra from the onset, this person has already received the initiation and then generates great compassion. On the basis of that, he generates the wholehearted resolve induced by his great compassion. That wholehearted resolve then induces the generation of special bodhicitta, the bodhicitta of Secret Mantra. When that special bodhicitta arises in his mind, simultaneously, he enters the tantric path.
The person who enters the tantric path from the onset, with regard to the bodhicitta that this individual generates, he’s thinking, “I am going to achieve enlightenment as quickly as possible by meditating on the four complete purities of the result from now on.”  I think there’s an element here. He takes the initiation and reaches the point where he has great compassion followed by the wholehearted resolve, taking the personal responsibility to achieve enlightenment as quickly as possible. Then he generates special bodhicitta. This bodhicitta has this element, “I am going to achieve enlightenment by manifesting the four complete purities of the result by practising right now.  With that, I’m going to achieve my goal.” With this uncontrived special bodhicitta in his mind, he enters the tantric path.  This is what I think.
There’s also another reason why I cited Lama Tsongkhapa’s lam-rim. There’s a sentence in there that says, “It doesn’t matter whether you enter the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Secret Mantra Vehicle. The door is only bodhicitta.” It’s clear then that the only door to the Mahayana, whether it’s the Causal Perfection Vehicle or the Resultant Vajra Vehicle, is bodhicitta. Nobody disputes that.
The other thing is that in order to enter the tantric path, one need not enter the Causal Perfection Vehicle beforehand. That’s also clear. When you put these two together, I’ve offered my opinion as to how one who is of definite tantric lineage enters the tantric path from the onset. 
There’s still another complicated issue with regard to calm abiding. Do you need calm 
abiding to enter the path? 
This is something that needs to be analyzed. It’s an assertion in the textbook of Sera Je College that you need calm abiding to enter the path. I don’t think this assertion is shared by the other colleges in the Gelug tradition. While there’re scriptures that can be cited as the authority for such an assertion, what we have to focus on is this: “Why is there this assertion in the first place? What’s the reasoning behind this assertion?” 
According to the position of the textbook of Sera Je College, you need calm abiding to generate uncontrived bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: We can talk about that next time. Just one question related to what I’ve said so far. 
Student 1: The person who enters the tantric path has exceptionally strong bodhicitta.  How does that person cultivate the six perfections while doing the approximation on the deity?
Khen Rinpoche: In tantra, you do not find an extensive explanation of the practice of the perfections such as the perfection of generosity that’s found in sutra. 
Then why is there such an extensive explanation of the practices of generosity and so forth in sutra? If you think about it, in sutra, what’s posited to be the cause of the form body? It’s essentially the practices of the perfection of generosity and so forth that’s related to the collection of merit. 
In tantra, what’s posited to be the main cause of the form body?  It’s the factor of method. In tantra, method means the meditation on deity yoga. Since that’s the main cause of the form body, there isn’t an extensive explanation of the perfections as found in sutra. 
But there’s no real contradiction here. The meditator is not always in session. During those times in-between sessions, there are always opportunities to practise generosity. He also has to guard his ethical discipline anyway. There’s the practice of patience and so forth.
Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.